Tens of thousands of vaccine volunteers have been praised for giving up about two million hours of their time to help with the rollout of Covid jabs throughout 2021. A woman who translated crucial health messages into Punjabi to reach more communities is among more than 100,000 people who donated their time to the vaccine effort in the past year. More than 132m coronavirus jabs were given last year in the largest vaccine campaign in British history. More than 90% of people in the UK over the age of 12 have now had their first dose of a Covid-19 jab and 82.4% have had their second. After the emergence of the Omicron variant triggered an acceleration of the rollout over the festive season, more than 1.6 million people received their booster dose in the final week of 2021, bringing the total number of boosted adults in the UK to nearly 34 million, including three in four eligible adults in England. NHS England said volunteers working alongside healthcare staff had particularly helped during the ramped-up supply of jabs and boosters in December. The health service launched a recruitment drive to speed up the distribution of jabs and so far 17,500 people have registered their interest in paid vaccination roles, NHS England said. A further 48,000 people have registered as steward volunteers through the NHS Volunteer Responders programme in just over a month, of which more than 10,000 have already deployed. Working alongside the NHS, St John Ambulance has seen 17,000 people come forward to do shifts as volunteer vaccinators. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the success of the vaccination programme was “astounding and a true reflection of the fantastic work of our NHS and its volunteers. I want to thank each and every one of them”. NHS England’s chief executive, Amanda Pritchard, said the efforts of volunteers would “undoubtedly help to save many more lives”. She said: “Alongside NHS staff, our selfless volunteers have worked tirelessly to protect the nation – in football stadiums, shopping centres, Christmas markets and countless other vaccination sites up and down the country. “I want to give my personal thanks to everyone who has given up their time to help us beat record after record – continuing to make the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme the biggest and most successful in health service history.” Boris Johnson set the target of offering all eligible adults the chance to get their booster jabs by the end of January, but after the emergence of Omicron he brought forward the deadline to the new year. Millions of people queued at about 3,000 vaccination centres, and on 18 December NHS England administered a record 830,000 jabs in a single day. Jaz Kaur Bangerh, from Leeds, has been promoting messages about the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine in ethnic minority communities, including translating information into Punjabi. “Volunteering for the vaccination programme, I have helped people to fill in forms, guided them to the right place and answered any questions, especially if they were a bit anxious in the early days, when there was a lot of information out there.” John Hardman, who has volunteered at jab sites in the capital including Wembley stadium and the Science Museum, said he “can’t recommend it [volunteering] enough”. “There are lots of opportunities to support locally, even if just for a few sessions.” NHS England said people interested in getting involved can search NHS vaccine team online.A motorist was caught driving while distracted nine times in the past four years, new figures reveal, with road safety campaigners calling for repeat offenders to have their licences revoked. The person, who has not been identified, was among 932 British drivers convicted for the offence more than once over that period. Twenty-seven drivers were caught between three and five times, 904 were caught twice and 90,057 were caught once, according to the figures obtained by the PA Media news agency. The statistics, released by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) in response to a freedom of information request, are a snapshot of the number of CU80 offences on driving records on 13 November. A CU80 offence is defined as a “breach of requirements as to control of the vehicle, such as using a mobile phone”, comes with three to six penalty points and must stay on a driving record for four years from the date of the offence. Jason Wakeford, the head of campaigns at road safety charity Brake, said: “It’s alarming to see repeat offenders, who have had ample opportunity to change their behaviour, still on the roads and putting other people at risk. “We believe that drivers who regularly disregard the law should have their licences revoked. This would help save lives, prevent needless injuries, and send a clear signal that driving is a privilege and not a right.” The RAC road safety spokesperson Simon Williams said: “Sadly, these figures demonstrate that far too many drivers are still breaking the law and putting others on the road needlessly at risk. Worryingly, the RAC’s research shows that a quarter of drivers are still making or receiving calls with a handheld phone while driving, and incredibly a small but sizeable proportion even admit to filming videos or playing games at the wheel.” If a driver accrues 12 or more points within three years, they can be disqualified. But courts have discretion to allow offenders to keep driving if they are able to prove extenuating circumstances, including when a ban would cause extreme financial hardship. The DVLA said just 506 of the 90,989 motorists with the CU80 endorsements on their record were disqualified as a result. It has not been revealed whether the person with nine CU80s was among those banned. Under current UK laws, drivers are banned from texting or making a phone call with a handheld device, other than in an emergency. Tougher rules prohibiting people from taking photos or videos, scrolling through playlists or playing games on their phones when driving will be introduced this year.The Unite union is demanding the government sets clear targets for the use of UK-produced steel in the HS2 rail project, after it emerged that the Department for Transport currently has none in place. Responding to two written questions in parliament posted by Labour MPs in December, the transport minister Andrew Stephenson admitted there is “no formal target” for the use of UK steel in its construction. Despite cuts to the original plan, HS2 is still a major part of the UK’s £96bn integrated rail plan and will be the largest building project in Europe, requiring millions of tonnes of steel to build the tracks, stations and tunnels. Unite said the UK’s exit from the European Union should have made it easier for the government to ensure that British products were used in infrastructure projects. More than 33,000 people are employed in 1,100 steel businesses across the UK. Questions over HS2’s sourcing came in October after it emerged that the French firm Sendin had supplied the project with more than 2,000 tonnes of steel. At the time HS2 said its contractor had approached all suitable alternative UK suppliers, but none could provide the necessary product in time. HS2 said 97% of all businesses the project has worked with throughout its supply chains were British. “The government must immediately develop clear targets on UK steel usage on publicly funded construction projects,” said the Unite general secretary, Sharon Graham. “In the case of HS2, UK producers should have a paramount place in producing steel for the project. Surely that is economic common sense? This failure of the government’s procurement policies will be challenged by my union. You could not make it up,” Graham said. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “HS2 is a once in a generation investment in the UK’s transport infrastructure and we expect it to have a lasting impact on jobs, skills and businesses here in the UK. “The government and HS2 Ltd have engaged extensively with the British steel industry over the last five years to ensure that it is in the best possible position to compete for contracts.” Last week, the Guardian revealed that the UK steel industry was braced for an immediate slump in trade after the EU and the US reached an agreement to remove tariffs on a quota of steel and aluminium imported from the bloc to the US from 1 January. Tariffs will remain on all UK steel and aluminium exports after the UK government talks failed to secure a matching breakthrough.Scott Morrison has resisted calls to make rapid antigen tests (RATs) free across the country as he insists the health system can manage the “very different virus” of the Omicron variant. Despite growing pressure to provide free tests more widely – including to vulnerable and low-income groups – the prime minister said subsidised tests would remain limited to people who were close contacts with symptoms. “We’re now in a stage of the pandemic where you can’t just make everything free,” Morrison told Channel 7’s Sunrise program on Monday. “When someone tells you they want to make something free, someone’s always going to pay for it, and it’s going to be you.” However, he said the government was finalising arrangements to provide concessional access to the tests with costs split 50-50 with the states. He also said that the government’s policy on subsidised tests sent a clear message to the private market that “they can now go and stock their shelves with confidence that they won’t be undercut by the government.” The Pharmacy Guild and the Australian Medical Association have both criticised the federal government’s handling of the switch to rapid antigen testing as Australians struggle to access the take-home kits from the private market. Last Thursday, national cabinet agreed to change the testing regime for close and casual contacts, switching to a reliance on rapid antigen tests as the country’s PCR testing centres became overwhelmed by demand. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, criticised the government for failing to secure enough RATs, accusing Morrison of again offering “too little too late”. “This has been an example of something that has characterised Scott Morrison’s prime ministership. He identifies a problem only after it becomes a crisis, and then he doesn’t act. He just seems to blame someone else,” Albanese said at a press conference in Newcastle on Monday. “The government has told people to not go and get tested, but to test themselves with a rapid antigen test that isn’t available, and that isn’t affordable. This is a public policy failure the likes of which we haven’t seen in this country before.” He said that at the “very least”, tests should be made freely available to people who could not afford them. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the government was in the process of securing more RATs and 100m would come into Australia over the next two months. He criticised Labor for suggesting the tests should be freely available. “If there were an unconstrained flow of completely unpriced products – so if there was an infinite supply to an infinite number of people, then, of course, that demand couldn’t be met,” Hunt said. “The common sense of providing an infinite supply of free goods somehow has been lost in this discussion.” He said it would be up to the states to decide if they wanted to forgo GST revenue on the sale of the rapid antigen tests, as had occurred with women’s sanitary products. New South Wales recorded 20,794 new Covid cases on Monday, with Victoria recording 8,577 and Queensland 4,249. Experts warned the health system faced being overwhelmed, but Morrison also urged people not to focus on case numbers. “The key point I think we’ve all got to come to terms with is we’ve gear-changed with Omicron,” he later told Channel 9. “So the requirements for testing, the requirements for isolation, all of these things have changed because Omicron we now know is about 75% less virulent, less severe than the Delta variant.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “So we’re now dealing with a very different virus and so we’ve really got to change the way we think about it, and that’s why talking about case numbers now is really not the point.” He said lockdowns were in the past, rising case numbers were part of the “new phase of the pandemic” and those in hospital were most likely to be unvaccinated or infected with the Delta strain.Thanks for joining us for today’s live Covid blog. We have set up a new page where you can find all the latest coronavirus developments here. US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin said he had tested positive for Covid-19 and had mild symptoms on Sunday, Reuters reports. Austin is said to retain all authorities while he quarantines at home for the next five days. In a statement, Austin said he requested a test earlier on Sunday after having symptoms while at home on vacation. He said he last met President Joe Biden on Tuesday, 21 December, more than a week before he started experiencing symptoms. Here is a summary of developments today: In England masks are returning to secondary school classrooms as Omicron continues to spread across the country. A further 137,583 new cases of Covid-19 and 73 deaths reported in England and Wales. The government has told headteachers in England to start preparing for staff shortages by using support staff as fill-in teachers, combining classes or using hybrid learning. France has put the United States on its Covid-19 travel “red list”, meaning unvaccinated people coming into the country will have to quarantine for 10 days. France announced an easing of Covid restrictions from Monday. Fully vaccinated people in France who test positive will now only have to isolate for seven days, and can leave quarantine after five days if they show a negative test. The country also reported 58,432 new confirmed coronavirus cases in a 24-hour period - a record seven-day average for new Covid cases. Dutch police dispersed anti-lockdown protesters in Amsterdam on Sunday. India reported 27,553 new Covid-19 infections over the past 24 hours and Covid-19 deaths rose by 284. Israel is to offer a fourth dose of the Covid-19 vaccine for the over-60s and medical staff. The country reported 4,206 new daily Covid infections marking a 195% increase over the past week. Twitter has permanently suspended the account of US Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene after the Republican repeatedly violated its policy on Covid misinformation. Wintry weather and the coronavirus pandemic caused more than 2,300 US flights and more than 3,900 worldwide to be cancelled. South Africa has recorded 4,379 new identified coronavirus cases with 30 deaths. The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci said the US has been seeing almost a “vertical increase” of new Covid cases adding he’s concerned the Omicron variant is causing “major disruption” on essential services. Dr Fauci, said hospitalisation figures form a better guide to the severity of the Omicron coronavirus variant than the traditional case-count of new infections. Argentine football star Lionel Messi was one of four Paris Saint-Germain players to test positive for coronavirus, the club announced shortly before a French Cup match. US federal health officials are looking to add a negative test along with its five-day isolation restrictions for asymptomatic Americans with Covid, the White House’s top medical adviser said Sunday. Dr Anthony Fauci said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is now considering including the negative test as part of its guidance after getting significant “pushback” on its updated recommendations last week, the Associated Press reports. Under that 27 December guidance, isolation restrictions for people infected with Covid-19 were shortened from 10 days to five days if they are no longer feeling symptoms or running a fever. After that period, they are asked to spend the following five days wearing a mask when around others. The guidelines have since received criticism from many health professionals for not specifying a negative antigen test as a requirement for leaving isolation. Fauci said: There has been some concern about why we don’t ask people at that five-day period to get tested,” Fauci said. “Looking at it again, there may be an option in that, that testing could be a part of that, and I think we’re going to be hearing more about that in the next day or so from the CDC.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog to kick off the new year. I’ll share some Covid numbers out of Australia which is where I will be reporting to you from. NSW has recorded 20,794 new Covid cases with 1,204 people in hospital, a jump from 1,066 yesterday. Victoria recorded 8,577 new Covid cases and three deaths. Hospitalisations have also slightly risen to 491 people in hospital. Prime minister Scott Morrison has stressed Australia’s health systems are more than equipped to handle a rising number of Omicron infections. Morrison has urged people not to solely focus on case numbers, despite infections exploding in states and territories in recent days. However, he said levels of Covid-19 patients being treated in intensive care and on ventilators remained stable following the rise in cases. “It’s important that with the rising case numbers, we see that the severeness of this illness is already being shown to be around 75% less than what we saw with Delta,” Morrison told the Seven Network on Monday. “Rising case numbers is part of the Omicron period, it’s part of the new phase of the pandemic we’re in.” The BBC reports that Israel’s top health adviser has said the surge in Omicron cases could see the country reach Covid herd immunity, However, Nachmann Ash insisted he wanted to see herd immunity achieved via vaccinations instead. “The price of herd immunity is very many infections, and that may end up happening. The numbers need to be high to reach herd immunity, it’s something that is possible,” he explained. “But we don’t want to reach it by means of infections, we want it to happen as a result of many people vaccinating.” Meanwhile, Salman Zarka, head of the health ministry’s coronavirus taskforce, warned that herd immunity was not guaranteed. Mr Zarka told the Ynet news website: “We have to be very cautious with this particularly in light of our experience over the past two years in which we saw people who have recovered be re-infected.” Brazil registered 28 Covid-19 deaths on Sunday and 1,721 additional cases, according to data released by the nation’s Health Ministry, reports Reuters. It has now recorded a total of 619,133 coronavirus deaths and 22,293,228 confirmed cases. The numbers do not reflect data from six states and the federal district on Sunday. Following a hacker attack on December 10, some of the health ministry’s databases have been offline which has affected the monitoring of the pandemic. In absolute terms, Brazil has the world’s third-highest death toll behind the United States and Russia, and is third in the number of people infected after the United States and India. Israel has reported 4,206 new Covid infections over the past 24 hours, authorities said. This marks a 195% increase over the past week, Agence France-Presse reports. Prime Minister Naftali Bennett warned that cases could surge to around “50,000 cases per day soon”, urging all adults and children to get vaccinated. More than four million people out of Israel’s population of 9.2 million have received three shots of the coronavirus vaccine. A total of almost 1.4 million cases of Covid infection, including 8,244 deaths, have been officially recorded in Israel. An update to our story on the Amsterdam protest against Covid-19 lockdown measures and vaccinations (see 13.36). At least 30 people were detained after scuffles, during which four officers were injured, police said in a statement. Reuters reports: Public gatherings of more than two people are prohibited under restrictions imposed by the Netherlands in an effort to prevent the Omicron variant of the coronavirus overwhelming an already strained healthcare system. The protesters, who mostly did not wear masks or abide by social distancing rules, ignored an order not to hold a march and walked along a main thoroughfare, playing music and holding yellow umbrellas in a sign of opposition to government measures. The Netherlands went into a sudden lockdown on December 19, with the government ordering the closure of all but essential stores, as well as restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places until at least January 14. Wintry weather and the coronavirus pandemic frustrated US travellers as return flights from holidays were cancelled or delayed in the first days of the new year. By early afternoon on Sunday, more than 2,300 US flights and more than 3,900 worldwide had been canceled, according to tracking service FlightAware. That followed Saturday cancellations of more than 2,700 US flights and more than 4,700 worldwide. The single-day US toll on Saturday was the highest since just before Christmas, when airlines began blaming staffing shortages on increasing Covid-19 infections among crews. The New York Times reports that Twitter has permanently suspended the account of US Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene after the Republican repeatedly violated its policy on Covid misinformation. Her tweets included unfounded allegations that vaccines didn’t work and killed people. According to the publication: “Twitter said that Ms Greene had a fifth ‘strike’, which meant that her account will not be restored.” France has reported 58,432 new confirmed coronavirus cases in a 24-hour period, a figure much lower than the previous four days when daily additional infections were over 200,000, reports Reuters. However, the seven-day moving average of new cases in France, which smoothes out daily reporting irregularities, reached a new all-time high of 162,041 – jumping almost fivefold in a month. It says on days following a public holiday – as New Year’s Day was – new reported cases tend to dip, so the sharp drop does not necessarily indicate a change of trend. The UK’s education secretary has said face-to-face teaching will continue and remain “the norm” as he outlined a series of Covid measures for schools. Nadhim Zahawi outlined the measures in a Twitter thread. He said secondary pupils will have to wear masks in classrooms and will be able to access on-site coronavirus tests at school. A further 7,000 air purifiers are promised, to add to the 1,000 already announced, alongside 350,000 CO2 monitors. He has also called upon former and retired teachers to return to bring additional support with a “Blitz” spirit. Read our full story here: Israel will offer a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccine to people over 60 and to medical staff, Reuters reports. Naftali Bennett, the prime minister, made the announcement on Sunday amid a surge in Omicron variant infections, saying the country’s top medical officer had approved the shot. “The Omicron wave is here and we must protect ourselves,” Bennett told a news conference. Israel on Thursday authorised a fourth Covid vaccine for those with weakened immunity, becoming one of the first countries to do so. Goldman Sachs Group is encouraging its eligible US staff to work from home until January 18, a company spokesperson said. Goldman has followed a number of its rivals in altering return-to-office plans as the Omicron variant spreads, Reuters reports. Its offices will continue to remain open with previously announced Covid-19 safety measures, the spokesperson added. These include: a vaccine requirement; booster requirement for all eligible populations effective February 1; bi-weekly testing effective from January 10, and mandatory masks. Goldman was among the Wall Street banks pushing hard to bring staff back into offices. It had also held out and tried to keep most staff working in the offices through the Omicron variant’s surge. JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co, which was also among those pushing staff to work in its offices, told workers last week they could work from home for the first two weeks of January. However, in a memo to employees it said that all staff are expected to return to offices no later than February 1. In an editorial, The Guardian reflects on whether we can learn lessons from Covid in preparation for the next pandemic. Though at times it can feel hard to believe – especially in recent weeks, perhaps – this pandemic will not last forever. With more than 5 million dead and huge economic and social costs, its toll has been immense, and unnecessarily so. Secrecy in China, complacency in Europe, reckless and callous rightwing populism in the US and Brazil, and the inequity in vaccine distribution have all contributed. Yet if we learn its lessons, we will be better prepared next time. For there will be a next time South Africa has recorded 4,379 new identified coronavirus cases with 30 deaths. Shadow Commons leader Thangam Debbonaire said the time for making Covid contingency plans was “weeks ago” and singles out the delay in tackling ventilation provisions. She told Times Radio: It was really galling to hear Boris Johnson over the weekend talk about contingency plans. The time for contingency plans should have been weeks ago, the time for putting in ventilation.” The impact of staff absences driven by the rise of Omicron variant is being felt by many essential services, including the care sector. Cumbria-based care firm Bellcare, which has been short of staff for a while, says demand is so high for care services that there’s enough work for at least another 40 people. Ian Wilson, director of Bellcare, told the BBC he worries about the impact of the variant on staff numbers. The amount of people requiring care in the first place means that you generally run off your feet. As soon as you start losing staff it gets really, really awkward,” he said. We may be in a position as a care sector where not everybody’s going to get the care they need. That’s the unfortunate truth and that’s obviously a major worry. The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci said the US has been seeing almost a “vertical increase” of new Covid cases, now averaging 400,000 cases a day, with hospitalisations also up, reports the Associated Press. We are definitely in the middle of a very severe surge and uptick in cases,” he said. “The acceleration of cases that we’ve seen is unprecedented, gone well beyond anything we’ve seen before.” Fauci said he’s concerned that the omicron variant is causing “major disruption” on essential services. When I say major disruption, you’re certainly going to see stresses on the system and the system being people with any kind of jobs ... particularly with critical jobs to keep society functioning normally,” he said. We already know that there are reports from fire departments, from police departments in different cities that 10, 20, 25 and sometimes 30% of the people are ill. And that’s something that we need to be concerned about because we want to make sure that we don’t have such an impact on society that there really is a disruption. I hope that doesn’t happen. An update on our earlier story (see 14.17) there were more than 3,800 flights cancelled around the world on Sunday, more than half of them US flights, reports Reuters. The flights cancelled by early evening GMT on Sunday included more than 2,200 entering, departing from or within the United States, according to the tracking website FlightAware.com. Globally, more than 8,800 flights were delayed. Among the airlines with most cancellations were SkyWest and SouthWest, each having over 400 cancellations, FlightAware showed. As Covid-19 case numbers have continued to rise following the arrival of the Omicron variant alongside the easing of restrictions in Australia, the focus has begun to turn to the positivity testing rate. In New South Wales, where the rise in cases has been steepest, the infection rate as a proportion of the population is now one of the highest in the world. By New Year’s Eve the rate of infection was about 2.59 per 1,000 people, higher than the United States. As cases have risen, so too has the positivity rate, which by Sunday had reached 20% in NSW. Other states have also experienced a steady increase in the ratio of positive cases. In Tasmania it reached 26% on Sunday, Victoria’s was 14.8% and Queensland’s 10.5%. So what is the positivity rate? And what does it tell us about the spread of the virus as evidence of Omicron’s milder severity continues to mount and governments try to shift the focus away from case numbers? Full report here Sally Cutler, professor in Medical Microbiology at the University of East London has criticised the Government’s reaction to protecting education during the pandemic. She told LBC: It’s been painfully slow and the ventilation has been talked about for a long time. And they’ve got the units but they still haven’t been deployed to the schools. They should have been fitting those over the period of closure during Christmas, and instead no they’re still working out how people are going to apply for them, which is ridiculous. But that’s the situation, unfortunately. Sophie Black looks at how the pandemic has affected our friendship groups and social lives. Pruning is usually a technique applied to roses in winter, but more recently the gardening term has been cropping up whenever sociologists talk about our social lives. People have been pruning friends. Confined to our homes, or separated by borders, with too much time gifted to us in isolation, and new ways to communicate online, experts say we’ve unwittingly – or in some cases very deliberately – socially distanced ourselves out of a social life. Some say the silver lining is that we’ve been cured of Fomo, others say it heralds a widening of the already growing loneliness gap. So has everyone Marie Kondoed their mates, and what does this mean for the future of friendship? The Press Association reports: A total of 51,771,547 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by January 1, Government figures show. This is a rise of 71 on the previous day but only Northern Ireland has reported new statistics. Data for England, Scotland, and Wales will be updated after the holidays. Richard Luscombe writes: The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, has joined a growing body of experts who say hospitalisation figures form a better guide to the severity of the Omicron coronavirus variant than the traditional case-count of new infections. Referring to the Omicron surge in the US as a “tsunami”, Fauci also cautioned the public not to be fooled by preliminary data suggesting the variant lacks the severity of earlier Covid-19 variants, such as Delta. “You have a virus that looks like it might be less severe, at least from data we’ve gathered from South Africa, the UK and even some from preliminary data from here in the US,” he told CNN’s State of the Union. The full report is here. A further 137,583 new cases of Covid-19 in England and Wales were reported today, compared with 162,572 cases in England on Saturday, according to government data. There were 73 deaths within 28 days of a positive test in England and Wales, a drop on the 154 reported in England on Saturday. The government said data for Scotland and Northern Ireland would be updated after the New Year holiday. You can read the full report here. The government has told head teachers in England to start preparing for staff shortages by using support staff as fill-in teachers, combining classes or using hybrid learning, with some classes taught remotely and some face-to-face. In an email sent to schools on Sunday, the department for education (DfE) advised them to deal with staff shortages by combining classes into larger groups. The DfE advised: You may wish to use existing teaching, temporary and support staff more flexibly where required to ensure your setting remains open, whilst ensuring that you continue to have appropriate support in place for pupils with [special education needs and disabilities]. As pupils do not need to be kept in consistent groups, you may wish to consider combining classes. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, told school leaders in an open letter posted on Sunday that staff absences would be a “possible challenge” in keeping students in classrooms. He said: If operational challenges caused by workforce shortages in your setting make delivery of face-to-face teaching impossible, I would encourage you to consider ways to implement a flexible approach to learning. Flexible delivery involves utilising all your available teaching and non-teaching workforce to maximise on-site education for as many pupils as possible while you flexibly deliver provision either on-site or remotely to some pupils. As a new term is set to start for schools across the UK and the government announces masks will return for secondary pupils in England’s classrooms, we take a look at the potential impact of Omicron on children. How prevalent is Covid among children? According to case data for the week to 27 December 2021 – which is based on infections picked up by testing – rates are currently highest among young adults. However, rates per 100,000 people are also high among children, at 1,126.5 for those aged 10 to 14, and 836.2 for those aged five to nine. Further insights come from the latest data from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, revealing that in the week ending 23 December infection levels in England were highest among those aged two to Year 6 and those aged 25 to 34, at about one in 15 people for both groups. An estimated one in 20 of secondary school-aged children to Year 11 in England had Covid in the same week, compared with one in 45 of those aged 50 to 69 and one in 100 of those aged 70 and over. Read more here: Sri Lanka is facing a deepening financial and humanitarian crisis with fears it could go bankrupt in 2022 as inflation rises to record levels, food prices rocket and its coffers run dry. The meltdown faced by the government, led by the strongman president Gotabaya Rajapaksa, is in part caused by the immediate impact of the Covid crisis and the loss of tourism but is compounded by high government spending and tax cuts eroding state revenues, vast debt repayments to China and foreign exchange reserves at their lowest levels in a decade. Inflation has meanwhile been spurred by the government printing money to pay off domestic loans and foreign bonds. The World Bank estimates 500,000 people have fallen below the poverty line since the beginning of the pandemic, the equivalent of five years’ progress in fighting poverty. Inflation hit a record high of 11.1% in November and escalating prices have left those who were previously well off struggling to feed their families, while basic goods are now unaffordable for many. After Rajapaksa declared Sri Lanka to be in an economic emergency, the military was given power to ensure essential items, including rice and sugar, were sold at set government prices – but it has done little to ease people’s woes. Read the full story by my colleagues Minoli Soysa and Hannah Ellis-Petersen here: Anthony Fauci, the top infectious disease expert in the US, said there was still a danger of a surge in hospitalisation due to a large number of coronavirus cases even as early data suggests the Omicron Covid-19 variant is less severe. Fauci said in an interview on Sunday with CNN: The only difficulty is that if you have so many many cases, even if the rate of hospitalisation is lower with Omicron than it is with Delta, there is still the danger that you will have a surging of hospitalisations that might stress the healthcare system. The head of one of England’s biggest academy trusts has said that while enforcing masks in classrooms is “not optimum”, it’s “better than working at home” for children. Speaking to Sky News, Rev Steve Chalke, founder of Oasis Community Learning, said: We all know the impact of children being out of school, the impact on their lives, their life chances, their homes, their parents ability to get out and work etc, etc, so it’s not ideal but it’s better than not being in school. We can’t afford lost days of schooling for these children and we know from reports in the media, the tragic cases in the media, that children being left on their own is not good for them, its not good for society. He added his trust had bought 150,000 masks for pupils and had prepared for the possibility of returning to online learning from home with the purchase of an iPad for every student. He said 10% of staff had been off work after testing positive for coronavirus or with other illnesses before Christmas, and staffing was still “the biggest unknown”. However, he said the Department for Education had supplied enough tests for the school. “For schools, the DfE have done a great job and we have all the testing kits that we need,” he said. “Of course every child needs to be tested before they return to school so we’ve got staggered start dates.” France has put the United States on its Covid-19 travel “red list”, meaning unvaccinated people coming into the country will have to quarantine for 10 days. The rules will not change for fully vaccinated people coming into France from the US, they still have to show proof of a negative test before boarding their flight. The move puts the US, where new infections are topping 300,000 a day due to the Omicron variant, on the same list as countries such as Russia, Afghanistan, Belarus and Serbia. France is also grappling with record levels of new infections, with 200,000 cases reported daily over the last four days. Health minister Ed Argar has said the UK government is “doing the responsible and sensible thing” by asking the public sector to prepare for a worst-case scenario of up to a quarter of staff off work. It comes as the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) warned that cutting the Covid-19 isolation period to five days would be “counterproductive”, and could actually exacerbate staffing shortages. In a blog published on Saturday it said: “In some settings, such as hospitals, it could actually worsen staff shortages if it led to more people being infected.” This comes as public sector leaders have been asked to prepare for a worst-case scenario of up to a quarter of staff off work as coronavirus continues to sweep across the country. The Cabinet Office said on Saturday that, so far, disruption caused by Omicron had been controlled in “most parts of the public sector”. But it said leaders had been asked to test plans against 10%, 20% and 25% workforce absence rates. Argar told Times Radio this was a “responsible” move from the government: “What you’re talking about there is government doing the responsible and sensible thing of preparing for a range of contingencies, making sure that it considers all possible eventualities, even those that are at the very high end of the scale.” On whether he thought such absence levels were likely to eventuate, Argar said: “I think we model a range of scenarios up to things we think are highly unlikely, but you still do it because that’s what a responsible government does in preparing for all eventualities.” Pressed on the prospect of cutting the isolation period to five days, Argar said the government had not yet received scientific advice to that effect: The clinical advice or scientific advice we have is around (moving) it from 10, as we have done, to seven days. We haven’t received scientific advice that it should go lower than that, and we will follow the scientific advice. I can entirely understand trusts and others wanting to use whatever levers they have to try to manage and reduce those staff absences but in something like this around the self-isolation period... it’s right that we follow scientific advice and we haven’t had scientific advice to cut that at this point. The Omicron variant has shown the need for a permanent short-time working scheme in the UK to protect jobs during periods of economic turbulence, writes Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the Trades Union Congress. After cutting off furlough prematurely in the autumn, the government watched as Omicron hammered our arts, hospitality and aviation sectors in the run-up to Christmas. While the chancellor’s 11-hour rescue package for pubs, restaurants and theatres will help some, serious damage has already been done to pay packets and to livelihoods. We need to end this stop-start approach to managing our economy. Businesses and working families shouldn’t be put through an emotional rollercoaster every time the pandemic flares up. They need financial certainty and stability so that when better times return our economy can bounce back fast. More than 3,000 flights were cancelled around the world on Sunday, more than half of them US flights, adding to a week of travel disruption due to adverse weather and the surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant. Over 3,300 flights had been cancelled by noon GMT on Sunday, including over 1,900 entering, departing from or within the US, according to a running tally on the tracking website FlightAware.com. The Christmas and New Year holidays are typically a peak time for air travel, but the rapid spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant has led to a sharp increase in Covid-19 infections, forcing airlines to cancel flights as pilots and crew quarantine. Transportation agencies across the US were also suspending or reducing services due to coronavirus-related staff shortages. US authorities registered at least 346,869 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, according to a Reuters tally. The US death toll from Covid-19 rose by at least 377 to 828,562. US airline cabin crew, pilots and support staff were reluctant to work overtime during the holiday travel season, despite offers of hefty financial incentives. Many workers feared contracting Covid-19 and did not welcome the prospect of dealing with unruly passengers, some airline unions said. In the months preceding the holidays, airlines were wooing employees to ensure solid staffing, after furloughing or laying off thousands over the last 18 months as the pandemic hobbled the industry. Bulgaria has detected its first 12 cases of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, the country’s chief health inspector, Angel Kunchev, has said. “We have confirmed the new variant in samples from 12 people,” Kunchev told reporters. “From now on we can expect a faster spread of the infection. Omicron will gradually become the dominant variant as it has already happened in many European Union countries.” Kunchev said the infected nine men and three women, mainly from the capital Sofia, were experiencing mild symptoms and none was hospitalised. Bulgaria’s health authorities will meet on Tuesday to discuss whether additional measures would be needed to curb the spread of the new variant. Kunchev said Bulgaria has already taken the most important step, offering a one-off cash bonus of 75 levs ($43.62) to pensioners who opt to get vaccinated or get a booster dose in the EU’s least vaccinated member state. Bulgaria has also shortened the period for a booster to three months after a full vaccination cycle. “Neither of the people infected with Omicron has had a booster dose. We continue to think that a full inoculation plus a booster provides a high level of protection,” Kunchev said. On Sunday, Bulgaria registered some 1,076 new cases. Riot police with batons and shields tried to break up a crowd of several thousand who had gathered in the Dutch capital on Sunday to protest against Covid-19 lockdown measures and vaccinations. Amsterdam mayor Femke Halsema issued an emergency ordinance, empowering police to clear the central Museum Square, after the protesters violated a ban on holding public gatherings during the latest wave of coronavirus infections, Reuters reports. The protesters, who mostly did not wear masks and broke social distancing rules, also ignored an order not to hold a march and walked along a main thoroughfare, playing music and holding yellow umbrellas in a sign of opposition to the government measures. The Netherlands went into a sudden lockdown on 19 December, with the government ordering the closure of all but essential stores, as well as restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places until at least 14 January. Public gatherings of more than two people are prohibited under the current set of restrictions. Like other European countries, the Netherlands imposed the measures in an effort to prevent a fresh wave of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus that could overwhelm an already strained healthcare system. Doctors specialising in children’s health have welcomed the government’s new measures to help keep schools in England open by reducing the risk of Covid spreading there. The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (RCPCH) believes the move, including requiring mask-wearing in classrooms when term resumes next week, will help realise what it regards as a key principle, namely that “the best thing for children and young people is for schools to be the last places to close and the first places to open”. Dr Camilla Kingdon, president of the royal college of paediatrics and child health (RCPCH) said: Early evidence is telling us that Omicron is no further risk to children and young people than other previous Covid-19 variants. Schools are vital to the broader wellbeing of children and young people, providing social interaction and recreational activities as well as a range of services from vaccinations to mental health and wellbeing support. As such, we welcome the government’s commitment to the underlining principle of keeping schools open, and for keeping the health and wellbeing of children and young people front of mind when policymaking on the return to school. School unions, though, are much less supportive, as the Guardian’s education editor Richard Adams reported earlier. Kingdon added: Any national or local interventions in schools should always be supported by good evidence, be entirely proportionate and adequately resourced to support continuing education for children and young people. Last-minute moves to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid in schools, colleges and universities in England will not be enough to avoid disruption or stop large-scale absences among staff and students, unions and school leaders have warned. The Department for Education announced that masks should be worn indoors in education setting in England, including in classrooms, libraries and corridors, from the start of the new term until the end of January. It also said it had ordered 7,000 air purification units for nurseries, schools and colleges, “for areas where quick fixes to improve ventilation are not possible, such as being able to open a window”. But the units will not be delivered until next month. School staff unions, which have repeatedly called for additional measures, criticised the government for failing to take action earlier as Covid infections rose rapidly among students and staff. “An increase in the use of face coverings and better ventilation are welcome but should have been in place before Christmas to have slowed the infection in schools,” said Jon Richard, Unison’s assistant general secretary. Data from the Office for National Statistics show that school-age children have been among the most likely to be infected, with more than one in 20 primary-age children and one in 35 secondary-age children testing positive for Covid in December. Read more here: Daily coronavirus cases in Saudi Arabia have climbed above 1,000 for the first time since August, while daily infections in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) haven crossed the 2,500-level. Authorities in the two Gulf Arab states did not break down the cases by Covid-19 variant. Both countries confirmed their first known case of the Omicron variant in early December. Saudi Arabia, the largest Gulf state with a population of around 30 million, on Sunday registered 1,024 new coronavirus infections and one death. Daily cases had fallen below 100 in September. Neighbouring UAE, a tourism and commercial hub now marking its peak tourism season and hosting a world fair, announced 2,600 new coronavirus cases and three deaths. Daily infections in the UAE rose above 2,000 on Dec. 29, after having fallen below 100 in October. The UAE said on Saturday it would ban non-vaccinated citizens from traveling abroad from Jan. 10 and that fully vaccinated citizens would also require a booster shot to be eligible to travel. The latest daily Covid figures are still below a peak of nearly 4,000 hit in the UAE last January when visitors flocked to the country, and a record of over 4,700 in Saudi Arabia in June 2020, according to Reuters data. The Kuwaiti embassy in the UK has encouraged its citizens to leave the country due to a “significant and unprecedented” increase in Omicron cases there, the Gulf country’s state news agency reported on Sunday. The daily number of new COVID-19 infections across Britain rose to a record 189,846 on Friday, far higher than during previous peaks. The UK government is being urged to make sure enough Covid-19 tests are available for schoolchildren and staff. Currently, the Department for Education recommends children and fully vaccinated adults who have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive for coronavirus perform lateral flow tests twice a week. But health secretary Sajid Javid last week said ministers expect a need to “constrain” supply for a fortnight amid surging demand. General concerns over supply issues have prompted calls from the Labour Party and a headteachers’ union for the government to make sure the tests are available for schools. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders’ union NAHT, said: The difficulties the public have had in accessing lateral flow tests over the past few weeks has made many people nervous that they will not be available when needed for school staff and pupils. If lateral flow tests are to be critical to enabling pupils and staff to return to school quickly then there must be a ready supply available for schools as they go back in January and throughout the term. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said: I think there are two things, though, that the government can and should be doing. The first is on testing. Pupils should be testing twice a week. There’s lots of evidence to suggest that hasn’t been happening properly. So the message for government is get the tests in place, make sure pupils are able to test twice a week. And my message to parents and pupils is ‘do take the tests’ because the big challenge this month is going to be keeping pupils learning, avoiding mass absences, and of course making sure that staff are well enough to attend school as well. According to Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), there are currently no concerns over the supply of lateral flow tests to schools. He said: With regards to the availability of lateral flow test kits, schools and colleges are able to order them through an online ordering system, and were advised to place orders before the Christmas holidays if more kits were needed for the start of term. These orders are due to be delivered in the week commencing January 3, and we have not been notified by the government of any issues affecting supply. The department for education has been contacted for comment. Boris Johnson has instructed ministers to come up with “robust contingency plans” for workplace absences as it emerged that the government is concerned about the impact record numbers of daily Covid infections could have on businesses in the coming weeks. The Cabinet Office confirmed that, despite the accelerated booster programme, public sector leaders have been asked to prepare for a worst case scenario that would see up to a quarter of workers being off work due to high Covid levels in the population. The department claimed that, so far, disruption caused by Omicron has been controlled in “most parts of the public sector”, but acknowledged that public sector leaders have been asked to play through “worst case scenarios” of 10%, 20% and 25% workforce absence rates, PA reported. Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, is chairing “regular meetings” with ministers to assess how workforces, supply chains and schools are affected as the Omicron Covid variant is sweeping across the country. The department admitted businesses and public services could face further disruption in coming weeks and that Johnson has tasked ministers to test contingency plans and explore solutions that are hoped to save their relevant sectors from bottleneck scenarios caused by a temporarily significantly diminished workforce. The news comes after the Daily Telegraph reported that the government’s work-from-home guidance in England could remain in place for most of January. Barclay said: “As people return to work following the Christmas break, the high transmissibility levels of Omicron mean business and public services will face disruption in the coming weeks, particularly from higher than normal staff absence. “We have been working through the Christmas period to prepare where possible for this, with all departments liaising closely with public and private sector leaders who are best placed to operationally manage their workforces. The best way to combat Omicron is to get boosted and I encourage anyone who is eligible to get boosted now.” Read the full story here: As the US is seeing record numbers of daily coronavirus cases driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, public health authorities nationwide have said that teens and younger adults are helping fuel this increase. The uptick in Covid-19 among the under-50s coincides with a surge in cases among young children – and a troubling increase in paediatric hospitalisations. The US seven-day average for paediatric hospitalisations increased 58%, to 334, between 21 December and 27 December. The increase in hospitalisations for all age groups was about 19%. Less than 25% of US children are vaccinated, Reuters reported. In Los Angeles county, adults between 18 and 49 accounted for more than 70% of the coronavirus cases recorded between 22 December and 28 December, according to the Los Angeles Times. The case rate per 100,000 people has surged most quickly in that age range. The county saw more than 27,000 new cases on 31 December, dramatically surpassing the winter 2021 daily case average of 16,000. About 25% of all coronaviruses tests in Los Angeles county are positive, according to the newspaper. Broken down further, data show that infection rates in persons from 18 to 29 are more than eight times higher than one month ago. With adults in their 30s and 40s, there are six times as many cases. Barbara Ferrer, the county’s public health director, said: Many of the people in this age group are important members of our labor force … and these are also folks that are very likely to be out and about for recreation. Often this age group doesn’t experience the worst consequences of increased transmission,” Ferrer continued. “And sometimes that’s made it more difficult for individuals to stay attentive to the need to be vigilant about adhering to all of the public health safety measures. Read the full story here: Here’s a useful thread from Bethan Staton, a reporter for the Financial Times on what the government could be planning regarding remote learning: Rolling out ventilation units to schools will involve a number of practical issues, an academic has said. Professor Mark Mon-Williams, of the University of Leeds, which is leading a trial of air cleaning equipment in 30 schools in Bradford, told BBC News: There are a number of different issues, such as does the room have enough plug sockets, how many units are you going to put in classrooms? There are other issues, such as delivering the units and cleaning the filters that are present in these systems. There are a number of different practical issues that really need to be understood in order for the rollout to be effective. He added: The more units you put in the lower the cost, but the cost is still substantial so the question is this - is this the best investment to make? Williams, who said his university’s trial aims to provide evidence so that policy decisions can be made, added: Ventilation is an incredibly powerful tool but not all schools are able to ventilate adequately and, of course, a number of our schools are positioned in areas of very poor air quality so opening up windows may produce other adverse consequences. Ventilation is a fantastic tool but the question is, can we supplement that with these other air cleaning technologies? The Omicron coronavirus variant could ease pressure on the German health system if it turns out to produce milder illness, even though infections are rising, the head of the country’s association of senior hospital doctors (VLK) said on Sunday. VLK President Michael Weber said coronavirus would no longer be a threat to the health system if Omicron became as dominant in Germany as it is in South Africa, Britain or Denmark and if the infections are as predominantly mild as there, Reuters reports. Weber told the Welt am Sonntag newspaper: There is a realistic probability that the pandemic will also become endemic in this country. As Omicron spreads in Germany, daily infections have been rising again in recent days after falling steadily in December, and the number of beds occupied in intensive care wards has also ticked up. Health Minister Karl Lauterbach has also expressed optimism that Omicron seems to be less dangerous than previous variants, but he noted that it still posed a risk to older people who are not vaccinated. Lauterbach told Bild am Sonntag newspaper: The first vaccination drastically reduces the risk of death after only 14 days. I appeal to people: Get vaccinated! On Sunday, Germany reported 12,515 new infections, with the seven-day incidence per 100,000 people rising to 222.7 from 220.3 the previous day. Another 46 people died, bringing the death toll in the pandemic to 112,155. Lauterbach also said wearing face masks remained important. The viral load of those infected with Omicron is lower, which is why masks are more effective. Everyone should wear masks when meeting other people. There may be differing reactions over the UK government’s decision to ask older students to wear face coverings in class again, a union leader has said. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, told BBC News: “I don’t think that anybody is going to be hanging out the bunting at the thought of that. There are all kinds of reasons why you wouldn’t want face coverings. Parents quite legitimately in England might be saying ‘well, if my child was going to school in Wales, Northern Ireland or Scotland - what’s so different? Why are they wearing face coverings there if it is seen as helpful?’ Secondly, if this is a short-term fix, as the Government says, and one of a number of different measures including ventilation and moving Ofsted to the sidelines – if that is going to do what we all want and keep young people in their school or in college then that will, I think, be a price worth paying. A surge of Omicron infections could see Israel reaching herd immunity, the country’s top health official said on Sunday as daily cases continued to climb. Worldwide infections have hit a record high, with an average of just over a million cases detected a day between 24 and 30 December, according to Reuters data. Deaths, however, have not risen in kind, bringing hope the new variant is less lethal. Until late December, Israel managed to stave off Omicron to some degree but with infection rates now gaining pace, daily cases are expected to reach record highs in the coming three weeks. This could result in herd immunity, said director-general of the health ministry, Nachman Ash. Ash told 103FM Radio: The cost will be a great many infections. The numbers will have to be very high in order to reach herd immunity. This is possible but we don’t want to reach it by means of infections, we want it to happen as a result of many people vaccinating. Herd immunity is the point at which a population is protected from a virus, either through vaccination or by people having developed antibodies by contracting the disease. Around 60% of Israel’s 9.4 million population are fully vaccinated – almost all with Pfizer /BioNTech’S vaccine – according to the health ministry, which means they have either received three doses or have had their second dose recently. But hundreds of thousands of those eligible for a third inoculation have so far not taken it. Around 1.3 million coronavirus cases have been documented in Israel since the start of the pandemic. But between two to four million people may well be infected by the end of January when the Omicron wave could subside, according to Eran Segal, data scientist at the Weizmann Institute of Science and an adviser to the government. Head of the health ministry’s coronavirus taskforce, Salman Zarka, said herd immunity was far from guaranteed. Zarka told Ynet TV: We have to be very cautious with this particularly in light of our experience over the past two years in which we saw people who have recovered (from coronavirus) be re-infected. There was a distinctive moment, at the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, that neatly encapsulated the mistakes and confusion of Britain’s early efforts to tackle the disease, says Mark Woolhouse. At a No 10 briefing in March 2020, cabinet minister Michael Gove warned the virus did not discriminate. “Everyone is at risk,” he announced. And nothing could be further from the truth, argues Woolhouse, an expert on infectious diseases at Edinburgh University. I am afraid Gove’s statement was simply not true. In fact, this is a very discriminatory virus. Some people are much more at risk from it than others. People over 75 are an astonishing 10,000 times more at risk than those who are under 15. And it was this failure to understand the wide variations in individual responses to Covid-19 that led to Britain’s flawed responses to the disease’s appearance, he argues – errors that included the imposition of a long-lasting, national lockdown. This is a strategy that Woolhouse – one of the country’s leading epidemiologists – describes as morally wrong and highly damaging in his forthcoming book, The Year the World Went Mad: A Scientific Memoir. He said: We did serious harm to our children and young adults who were robbed of their education, jobs and normal existence, as well as suffering damage to their future prospects, while they were left to inherit a record-breaking mountain of public debt. All this to protect the NHS from a disease that is a far, far greater threat to the elderly, frail and infirm than to the young and healthy. We were mesmerised by the once-in-a-century scale of the emergency and succeeded only in making a crisis even worse. In short, we panicked. This was an epidemic crying out for a precision public health approach and it got the opposite. Read more here: Dr Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union (NEU), has disagreed with concerns about possible negative mental health effects of making masks compulsory in secondary schools. Responding to a suggestion by Robert Halfon, chair of the House of Commons Education Select Committee – who said he worried about the “negative impact” on young people’s mental wellbeing – she told Times Radio she wanted to see evidence of such claims. She said: Robert Halfon says it has a significant mental health effect. So I would really want to see the study that shows that. We have mask-wearing in secondary schools in Wales and Scotland, and I don’t think that it is causing a huge problem. Secondary school pupils wear masks in corridors and hallways and surely, Robert Halfon has been, you know, campaigning hard, quite rightly, to keep schools open. Schools are crowded buildings. Even in secondary only just under half the pupils have been vaccinated. And we know that mask-wearing does have an effect of suppressing transmission. The UK’s Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said the “big challenge” for 2022 would be building the infrastructure to “live well” with Covid in order to avoid going in and out of lockdowns “like the Hokey Cokey”. He told Sky News: The big challenge for 2022 is how we put in place the infrastructure to make sure that we can live well with Covid without having to go in and out of lockdowns or other restrictions like the Hokey Cokey. I understand why people are tired of that. So that means testing, I think, in particular... and getting the vaccine rollout continuing. So if you haven’t had your first, second or booster jab, do it now. It really is the best tool, the best defence, we have against this virus. Streeting said he would rather have masks worn in classrooms than children out of school. Asked about the government’s decision to ask older students to wear face coverings in class again, he told Sky News: I think in terms of schools, if the choice is between having masks at schools or children missing schools in huge numbers, of course we want to keep pupils learning. That’s got to be the priority. I think there are two things, though, that the government can and should be doing. The first is on testing. Pupils should be testing twice a week. There’s lots of evidence to suggest that hasn’t been happening properly. So the message for government is get the tests in place, make sure pupils are able to test twice a week. And my message to parents and pupils is ‘do take the tests’ because the big challenge this month is going to be keeping pupils learning, avoiding mass absences, and of course making sure that staff are well enough to attend school as well. New Covid-19 cases in the locked-down Chinese city of Xi’an fell to their lowest in a week, health officials said Sunday, as residents face their eleventh day under strict home confinement. China has followed a “zero Covid” approach involving tight border restrictions and swift, targeted lockdowns since the virus first surfaced in a central city in late 2019 – but this strategy has been put under pressure in recent weeks with a number of local outbreaks and cases remaining stubbornly high, AFP reports. There were 122 fresh infections reported Sunday in the historic northern city - the lowest since December 25, and down from 174 on Saturday. Zhang Canyou, from China’s disease control agency, told state broadcaster CCTV that after several rounds of testing in Xi’an and the impact of the lockdown, they had started to see “some positive changes”. We will also make some adjustments to the prevention and control measures in a timely way. However, there are 16 patients in a “severe” condition, according to the National Health Commission. While low compared to numbers elsewhere, new infections in recent days have reached a high not seen in China since March 2020. Since December 9 there have been more than 1,500 cases of the Delta strain reported in Xi’an, and health officials said at a press conference on Saturday that two patients are in a critical condition. China has not recorded any deaths from Covid-19 since January 2021. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said the UK government must “get its act together” on Covid testing supply. He told Sky News: The government does need to get its act together on the supply of testing. And I think the health secretary needs to explain why it was that only three weeks ago he told me in the House of Commons that availability of tests wasn’t a problem. And yet now it so clearly is. Robert Halfon, chairman of the House of Commons Education Select Committee, said he is worried about a possible negative impact of making masks compulsory for children in secondary schools. Speaking on Times Radio, the Conservative MP said: I do worry about the mask policy. The children’s minister came to my committee and said there was very limited evidence as to the efficacy of masks in educational settings. Jonathan Van-Tam, hugely respected, the deputy chief medical officer, said that they could be quite inhibitory to the natural expressions of learning in children, the national Children’s Deaf Society has tweeted out their big reservations about mask policy, and what I worry about is the effect that masks have on children’s wellbeing, mental health and anxiety, and we already know that lockdown was a huge spike in children’s mental health problems. He added: So what I’d like the government to do is set out why they’re doing this, set out the evidence in the House of Commons. I think there will be a statement on Tuesday, but I do worry masks in schools will have a negative impact. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said the UK government’s plan to boost ventilation in schools goes “nowhere near” far enough. He told Sky News: They’ve made an announcement today that they’re going to send out 7,000 air purifiers to schools across the country. I mean, that’s only one in four schools across England, so nowhere near enough. And I’m not clear from what the government said whether this is one system per school, or one air purifier per school – because obviously (there’s) a big difference between the two. And again, I’m afraid it looks a little bit like a rushed last-minute announcement to give the appearance of doing something on a big issue where they should have taken action a lot sooner. So I think the government’s got a lot more to do on ventilation in schools as well, as a key defence, a key mitigation, against the virus. Desperate residents in China’s western Xi’an city are running out of food after they were barred from grocery shopping in a fierce lockdown. In the southern province of Guangxi, people who broke Covid laws were recently publicly shamed by being paraded through the streets in Hazmat suits with placards round their necks. The rest of the world is learning, slowly and with some difficulty, to live with Covid-19, but in China, authorities are doubling down on their “zero-Covid” policy: trying to stamp out the disease whenever it appears, and at any cost. A single case in a border town led to 200,000 people being locked down late last month. A key aspect of the policy is border closures. Few people are allowed in or out of China, and those who do enter the country face up three weeks of government-enforced quarantine. Some other countries locked the world out for over a year in a bid to lock out the pandemic. But in 2022, Beijing is treading an increasingly solitary path. A combination of mass vaccination, social pressure and highly transmissible new variants has persuaded other once “zero-Covid” countries – including Australia, New Zealand and Singapore – to begin slowly opening up again to the world. Inside China, some senior scientists and officials have also taken the political risk of calling for similar reopening, in recognition of a world where it seems Covid will become endemic. Gao Fu, head of the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, suggested recently that the country could be ready when vaccination rates pass 85%, perhaps early in 2022. Others have joined scientists abroad, warning that even Beijing’s autocratic powers and popular support for lockdowns and other control measures may not be enough to keep highly transmissible new variants out. “China will have great difficulty with Omicron and a zero Covid policy,” Tulio Oliveira, director of South Africa’s Centre for Epidemic Response and Innovation, said on Twitter. He is part of the team that first alerted the World Health Organisation to the new variant. They may need to join the rest of the world with mitigation strategies. China should not punish its public health officials or citizens or foreigns because (of) a more transmissible variant. Read more here: India reported 27,553 new Covid-19 infections over the past 24 hours, as infections of the Omicron variant continued to rise, data from the health ministry showed on Sunday. Covid-19 deaths rose by 284, taking the total death toll to 481,770, according to the health ministry, Reuters reports. India has recorded a total of 34.88 million infections of the virus. A growing body of evidence indicates that the Omicron Covid variant is more likely to infect the throat than the lungs, which scientists believe may explain why it appears to be more infectious but less deadly than other versions of the virus. Six studies – four published since Christmas Eve – have found that Omicron does not damage people’s lungs as much as the Delta and other previous variants of Covid. The studies have yet to be peer-reviewed by other scientists. Deenan Pillay, professor of virology at University College London, said: The result of all the mutations that make Omicron different from previous variants is that it may have altered its ability to infect different sorts of cells. In essence, it looks to be more able to infect the upper respiratory tract – cells in the throat. So it would multiply in cells there more readily than in cells deep in the lung. This is really preliminary but the studies point in the same direction. If the virus produces more cells in the throat, that makes it more transmissible, which would help to explain the rapid spread of Omicron. A virus that is good at infecting lung tissue, on the other hand, will be potentially more dangerous but less transmissible. Read the full story here: The Labour leader Keir Starmer told the Observer that the government’s failure to shore up supplies of tests in response to Omicron’s emergence in November was “unforgivable”. Starmer said parents should be testing their children at least twice a week to ensure they did not spread the disease to the older and more vulnerable, and it was up to government to ensure that tests were available for them to do so. The Labour leader said: Schools return next week, and in the past this has seen Covid spreading among children, who then take it home to their families. As cases begin to rise in the more vulnerable age groups, so does concern for our elderly population. The government’s failure to prepare means it must now prioritise those who most urgently require tests, until it can get supply back to levels of demand. Labour’s priorities, he said, would be protecting learning, the vulnerable and our emergency services and critical infrastructure. “Schools must stay open, because children have missed out on too much learning already. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, welcomed the advice on mask wearing. Face coverings are already advised in communal areas for pupils in year 7 and above. Pupils are accustomed to their use and we are sure the reintroduction of face coverings in classrooms is something that schools and colleges will take in their stride. Earlier last year secondary school pupils in England were asked to wear masks in classrooms at a high point of infections though this was dropped when they slowed in the spring. Before last night’s announcement, some secondary schools were already taking unilateral action, writing to parents saying masks would have to be worn in classrooms as part of efforts to avoid school closures. In another sign of heightened concern, payouts worth hundreds of pounds are being offered to encourage ex-teachers to sign up to a government-inspired campaign to provide cover to schools hit by high levels of absences. Supply agencies are promising cash or shopping vouchers for anyone who successfully “refers a friend”. Agencies are publicising the “call to arms” with online adverts offering minimum pay rates of about £130 a day. Read more on this story from my colleagues Toby Helm, Robin McKie and Julie Henry: France announced an easing of Covid restrictions from Monday, as governments across the world face tough choices between controlling the virus and keeping economies open. Coronavirus cases have surged globally in recent weeks, fuelled by the emergence of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, and the pandemic dampened New Year’s celebrations yet again. Europe crossed 100 million known cases on Saturday. Fully vaccinated people in France who test positive will now only have to isolate for seven days, and can leave quarantine after five days if they show a negative test. The change in rules should allow a “benefit-risk balance aimed at ensuring the virus is controlled while maintaining socio-economic life”, the French health ministry said. French authorities followed other countries such as the United States, which this week cut the isolation period to prevent disruptions in industries for lack of staff. Olivier Veran, the French health minister, told newspaper le Journal du Dimanche published on Sunday: This isolation could be lifted after five days in case of a negative test. Those who are not vaccinated will have to self-isolate for 10 days, with a possibility to come out of isolation after seven days under the same terms. Masks are returning to classrooms as Omicron continues to spread across the country ahead of children going back to school next week, which experts say could trigger a huge spike in cases. The moves come after a health boss warned the “next few days are crucial” in the fight to reduce the impact of the highly transmissible coronavirus variant, as NHS staff work “flat out”. Education Secretary Nadhim Zahawi acknowledged the variant “presents challenges”, but said the government is taking steps to “bolster our support for schools” in an effort to minimise disruption when students return to their desks after the Christmas break. Face coverings will return for secondary school pupils in England’s classrooms – having already been recommended in communal areas for older students and staff. But the supply of 7,000 new air purifiers for areas of schools where good ventilation is difficult has been branded “completely inadequate” by NEU teaching union joint general secretary Dr Mary Bousted, PA reports. Bousted said that with “over 300,000 classrooms in England they (the government) have failed to provide an effective solution”. Education committee chairman Robert Halfon said mask-wearing would have a “significant impact on children’s wellbeing”. In comments in the Sunday Telegraph, the Tory MP said: The government needs to supply the evidence. If masks are not required in offices or restaurants, why are we getting young kids to put them on?A British DJ who triggered New Zealand’s first Omicron scare after breaking home isolation rules will not be prosecuted for the time being, authorities say. “The Ministry of Health does not plan to refer this case to the police at this stage,” the ministry said in a statement, adding that it “needs to balance the deterrence effect from any potential prosecution with enabling an environment that does not discourage future cases from assisting with the public health response to Covid-19”. Robert Etheridge, also known as DJ Dimension, arrived in New Zealand on 16 December and spent seven days in one of the country’s managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) facilities, where he returned three negative Covid test results, Stuff reported. After leaving MIQ he was required to spend three days in home isolation but did not wait to receive a negative day-nine test – as also required – before entering the community. According to the ministry, he visited a series of venues in Auckland over two days including nightclubs, a shopping precinct and restaurants before receiving a positive test result on 27 December and being returned to MIQ. Etheridge, who had been due to play at the Rhythm and Alps festival near Wanaka last week, apologised to “those who I have inadvertently put at risk as a result of my misunderstandings”. “I realise the gravity of the situation and I am deeply regretful to those who have been impacted.” In an earlier statement he said: “After completing my 10-day isolation, and of the understanding that I had completed my quarantine, I entered the community. To my shock and enormous concern, I unexpectedly received a positive test on day 12, two days after my isolation period had ended.” His case triggered outrage in New Zealand, which has frequently been praised for its pandemic response and which only recently lifted lockdown restrictions on Auckland, its largest city, after a Delta outbreak. Despite identifying dozens of close contacts, the ministry said on Monday that none had so far tested positive for the virus. Covid cases are currently trending downwards in New Zealand, with just 27 new community cases announced on Monday and 24 at the border.Queensland’s chief health officer has said “all of us are going to be exposed” to Covid-19 in the coming weeks, as concerns mount about increasing case numbers in the state’s remote Indigenous communities. Outbreaks of the Omicron variant have now taken hold in Cherbourg and Palm Island, which both have relatively low vaccination rates compared with the wider population. In Cherbourg, about 250km north-west of Brisbane, there were 90 confirmed cases on Monday, mainly among younger people. Two are in hospital and one is in intensive care. The vaccination rate in Cherbourg is below 60%. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Health officials said there was one confirmed case on Palm Island, though local reports suggest there are at least six more. Only 44% of people on Palm Island have received two doses of a Covid vaccine and health teams will go door to door later this week in an attempt to lift the rate. Queensland reported 4,249 new Covid cases in the 24 hours to 7pm on Sunday. The state also reported a suspected Covid death, the first of the new outbreak and only the eighth in Queensland since the onset of the pandemic. The chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said the man in his late 30s died suddenly in his Gold Coast home overnight. The state coroner is investigating the circumstances. Gerrard said the rapid spread of the Omicron variant was likely to continue and peak at “very large numbers” in late January or early February. Of more than 20,000 active cases in Queensland, only 10 people were in intensive care on Monday and only one of those required a ventilator. “We are expecting in the next few weeks very substantial numbers of people are going to be infected. I think we just have to assume that all of us are going to be exposed in the next few weeks,” Gerrard said. “The Omicron strain is so different. The modelling is very difficult to interpret. All I can say is that we can expect very large numbers of cases and in the majority of cases, the vast majority of cases, the symptoms will be mild. So clearly the vaccine is working.” Gerrard said the outbreak on Palm Island was “not surprising”. “It’s going to spread there as it has elsewhere,” he said. The Palm Island mayor, Mislam Sam, told the ABC the mood on the island was tense. “I’ve been out checking on everyone … getting out there and just allaying some fears that might be growing in the community,” he said. “We’ve got a high population with serious underlying health issues, so no doubt it’s going to be stressing and depressing for most of my community. “We always forecast that one case could turn to 100 overnight because of how closely connected our community is and the level of overcrowding in houses.” Asked what the government was doing to help vulnerable people in overcrowded homes in Indigenous communities, the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said those people should get vaccinated. “What we’re doing is telling people to go and get vaccinated. We have … given every Queenslander in this state the opportunity to get vaccinated,” she said. “Unfortunately, there has been some negative social media posts going around that have had a negative impact [on vaccination rates] in our Indigenous communities. “I’m now urging people in those Indigenous communities to ignore those social media posts and immediately go and get your vaccination.” Palaszczuk announced the state had secured 18m rapid antigen tests that would be supplied free to some people, including identified close contacts, at public testing centres.Obtaining rapid antigen tests over the next two weeks is likely to remain “bumpy” across Australia as supply chain issues cause shortages and price spikes. Distributing the tests is something “still being worked out with the government”, the Pharmacy Guild of Australia has said. The guild’s national president, Trent Twomey, said price rises were “coming from distributors and manufacturers who are paying extra to get stock to Australia, even chartering jets to get supplies here. Those costs are being passed on.” • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said “the national shortage is due in part to the fact that the government’s pivot from PCR tests being the main testing regimen to RATs becoming the main one was done without warning so pharmacies could not order stock in preparation for the rush”. Twomey said customers can expect more tests to be available by mid-January, but that the situation would remain “bumpy” in the meantime. This comes as the Queensland government said it has secured 18m new rapid antigen tests, 12m of which will be for home testing and 6m for use in the hospital system. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the tests will arrive in “smaller numbers” in the short term, with a “large volume expected in late January”. “Global demand for the test kits is significant and securing this supply will support new national protocols for close contacts and frontline workforces,” she tweeted. Palaszczuk said the tests would be distributed for free at testing sites to close contacts and Covid positive patients, unlike in Victoria and New South Wales, where there is still confusion as to how the tests will be distributed. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said on Friday that “vulnerable and disadvantaged communities” will have priority access to the 50m tests his government has ordered, but could not provide further details. In Victoria, the health minister, Martin Foley, said residents can expect more rapid antigen tests to be made available in the “coming days”, after the government announced it had secured 34m kits in late December. “We await the vagaries of the international air freight industry, but our expectation is in the coming days of this week, the first initial arrival of those rapid antigen tests will begin to arrive,” he said. Foley said the state government was “working” on the distribution model for the tests, mentioning the need to get the kits to vulnerable Victorians, but did not provide any details on how that would work. “Clearly, until such a time as we get really significant consistent supplies across both government-provided services and other services, they will be in short supply,” he said. Foley said he believed the distribution of the tests will be discussed at the national cabinet meeting on Wednesday. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced earlier on Monday that the tests would not be made free, but the federal government was working on concessional arrangements, split 50-50 with the states. The federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, defended the government’s approach to the distribution of the tests, saying the government had already paid $2.5bn for free PCR tests. “We can’t make every product for free. What we do is provide it to those most vulnerable in those settings and particularly the aged care system, and working through the public health orders to meet the costs with the states on a 50-50 basis,” he said on ABC News Breakfast. “Significant amounts of rapid antigen tests are making their way to Australia.”Something about the sticky floors of the dingy nightclub Gemma Moore was at on the New South Wales central coast gave her the sense she was about to get sick. “It was a good night, but I just really didn’t feel comfortable being out,” Moore said. “There weren’t any QR codes and the staff weren’t wearing masks. And I remember thinking: someone in here has Covid.” A few days later, the 28-year-old care worker’s hunch proved correct when she, her boyfriend and her housemate all showed symptoms and tested positive to Covid. “It took me ages to believe it was Covid,” Moore said. “I couldn’t wrap my head around it. I had had a negative rapid antigen test and it all had felt so far away. “I also really didn’t want to have it, because that meant the people I saw in the last two days, my clients, were exposed and I was really worried about them.” From the moment they received their PCR results, the three went into isolation, joining thousands of others across the country despite efforts by political leaders to open up the country ahead of Christmas. “We can’t leave the house,” Moore says. “It feels like this invisible barrier – we’ve all been saying it. We can go to the end of the driveway and watch people from a distance as they walk or drive past, but we can’t go any further. “It’s weird to feel normal, but also know that we’re infectious. It’s weird to think that just by me going out in the community I could share the love.” Moore, however, says they are among the lucky ones. With a stable housing situation, an ocean view and their other housemates visiting their families for the holidays, they have avoided a situation where they would have had to isolate from each other as well as the world. Their mornings are spent apart, but they share meals and wait out the time in the afternoons. Anna Mazzone had a different experience when she travelled to Adelaide from Berlin via Melbourne, and ended up spending almost three weeks in isolation over Christmas. It was the 35-year-old’s first trip home in two years to visit her parents and she had initially quarantined with her brother in a small unit in Adelaide. Over the course of the first week, the siblings couldn’t avoid each other in the “one big space”. Then, on the final day, Mazzone tested positive. “Unfortunately, I must have caught it travelling. When I landed in Melbourne, I got a test that was negative and I was meant to do a final test, and that was positive,” Mazzone said. While her brother, who was vaccinated, remained Covid-free, the unexpected result caused chaos. The pair immediately tried to physically distance as best they could while they worked out what to do next. Though they were supposed to receive a call with instructions, none ever came. Mazzone said they spent the day calling health authorities for details but had a “different answer for every person we spoke to”. Mazzone decided to take matters into her own hands by booking an Airbnb at a cost of $500 a day to isolate for 14 days, which has left her in debt. “It feels like it’s the first wave in Adelaide, like no one’s experienced Covid before. Even coming in through Melbourne, it seems like no one knew what the right thing to do was.” Others like Alex, who is chronically ill, began isolating as a pre-emptive measure when they saw case numbers start to climb, in a practice known as “shielding”. The 30-year-old, who did not wish to be identified and who lives with myalgic encephalomyelitis, otherwise known as chronic fatigue syndrome, spends most of their day in bed and relies on the help of their carer. They have struggled to apply for the NDIS, and have had to privately fundraise to pay for care. Alex, who is vaccinated, is not just worried about dying from Covid, but after-effects like long Covid that will make their circumstances worse. Their isolation has taken on “another layer” as their carer and two friends who helped with groceries have been exposed, and are isolating while waiting for test results. Until their results came, Alex said they would be on their own and having to triage basic tasks. “Basically the level of care that I need is very high, so whenever I have to exert myself, like cleaning stuff, sanitising all the stuff coming in, it takes so much out of me,” Alex said. “I just prioritise where I put my energy each day. So it’s like: OK, I’m meant to shower today, do I shower, do I make sure I’m having three meals?” Alex said for all the talk about “living with Covid” and allowing it to spread, disabled people were being left to carry the cost – often without government support. “It’s not just disabled people shielding, but the people who care for us, that we rely on,” they said. “There’s a shortage of people who are caring for us. “A lot of people are going to wind up getting disabled from long Covid, and the system already doesn’t support chronically ill, disabled people enough.”Australia’s 2021 was its coolest year since 2012, but still half a degree hotter than average according to data from the Bureau of Meteorology. A dominant La Niña weather pattern kept temperatures lower than in recent years and total rainfall across the country was only slightly higher than average. Across the bureau’s temperature records going back to 1910, 2021 was the 17th hottest, with the national temperature 0.56C warmer than the average between 1961 and 1990. Australia has not had a year where the temperature was below the long-term average since 2000. The hottest year on record is 2019, which was 1.51C above average. The data shows 2021 was the 28th wettest year nationwide since 1900 with a total of 507mm – only slightly above the annual average of 466mm. The wettest year on record remains 1974, when the bureau’s records show 760mm fell. Neil Plummer, a climatologist and consultant at Monash University’s climate change communication research hub, said 2021 had been a “signature La Niña” year. “We get a lot of stronger south-easterly winds flowing in to tropical areas and we get more convection and more high clouds and more rainfall in northern and eastern Australia. “That’s what we’ve seen since the back end of 2020. This is a signature La Niña over Australia.” New South Wales and the ACT had the coolest year since 1996, with the overall temperature only 0.15C above average. NSW recorded its wettest November since at least 1900, and 2021 was its sixth wettest year on record. In Victoria, the average temperature was the lowest since 2004, but still 0.26C above average. Rainfall was 36mm above the state’s annual average of 663mm. Queensland’s statewide temperature was 1C above average, making it the coolest year since 2012. Rainfall was also slightly above average. Western Australia, Tasmania, the Northern Territory and South Australia were all slightly warmer than average. The only state and territory to record below average rainfall was South Australia, which dipped below its average by just 4mm. The bureau declared the La Niña in November. Plummer, a former head of climate services at the bureau, said 2021 was one of the warmest La Niña years on record and continued the long-term heating being driven by climate change. “There’s a very clear warming trend in Australia,” he said. “There is no doubt that the climate risks are continuing to build. “Even though this 0.56C [above average] in 2021 is less than we’ve seen for a decade, that’s still giving us an almost straight line warming trend since 1950. “It is remarkable that we no longer see strong negative temperature anomalies. I wouldn’t say they’ve disappeared, but it’s going to be increasingly hard to get them.” The bureau will release more information about the climate of 2021 later this week. Last month the bureau’s climate outlook for the next three months said there was an increased chance of “unusually high minimum temperatures” for January to March over much of the country. Rainfall was likely to be above average for eastern Australia, with northern Queensland and coastal NSW in particular having a very wet January to March.Former Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva is set to make a globe-trotting start to 2022 as he ramps up his campaign to defeat Brazil’s far-right leader, Jair Bolsonaro, with a series of international trips to the US, China, Russia and Mexico. Twenty years after being elected Brazil’s first working-class president, in 2002, the veteran leftwinger is gearing up for an electrifying bid to reclaim power in next October’s presidential election. The Guardian understands that Lula, 76, is likely to formally announce his candidacy in March, shortly after his Workers’ party (PT) celebrates the 42nd anniversary of its foundation on 10 February 1980. Simultaneously, the politician, who governed from 2003 to 2010 during the early years of a commodity-fuelled boom, will make a series of overseas trips that allies say are designed to repair the South American country’s international reputation and denounce Bolsonaro’s threat to Brazil’s young democracy. “President Lula needs to travel the world to rebuild the bridges that were destroyed by Bolsonaro and to denounce the great risk Bolsonaro continues to pose to Brazilian democracy,” said Alexandre Padilha, a former Lula minister and PT congressman. Lula’s first trip is expected to be to Mexico in January, where he is likely to be received by its leftwing president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador. During a recent visit to Argentina, Lula was welcomed by its leftwing leaders, Alberto Fernández and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, and talked up the possibility of a progressive revival across Latin America. Trips to the US, China and Russia are also planned for the first quarter of 2022 while visits to Italy, Portugal and the UK are also on the cards. In November, Lula made a four-nation tour of Europe, during which he met the now chancellor of Germany, Olaf Scholz, and was invited to the Élysée Palace by Emmanuel Macron. Padilha said it was essential that Lula alerted the world over fears Bolsonaro might refuse to recognise the election result just as his political idol, Donald Trump, did in the US. “This isn’t just an ordinary electoral battle. We are going to face a historic movement in which a neofascist movement in Brazil led by Bolsonaro must be defeated.” With less than a year until the election, Lula appears poised to beat Bolsonaro, whose ratings have plunged amid soaring inflation and a devastating Covid crisis that has killed more than 615,000 people and hammered the economy. One recent poll gave Lula a 27-point advantage over Bolsonaro and suggested he was close to a first-round victory. Cláudio Couto, a political scientist from the Getulio Vargas Foundation, said much could change between now and the 2 October vote. “But everything suggests that at the very least Lula has a place in the second round. The question is, who will join him?” Most observers still believe the answer is Bolsonaro, who retains a hardcore support base of about 20% of voters and hopes Auxílio Brasil, a new social welfare programme, will win him back support among poor people. But Bolsonaro’s chances have been dented by a rightwing challenge from his former justice minister Sergio Moro, who resigned from the cabinet in April 2020 accusing the president of trying to meddle in the federal police. Moro, a former judge who helped force Lula from the 2018 presidential campaign before joining Bolsonaro’s government, recently announced his return to politics and appears third in polls. Couto said a “fratricidal war” between Moro and Bolsonaro could boost Lula’s campaign by splitting the Brazilian right. “I suspect Bolsonaro is probably very irritated, particularly with Moro. Bolsonaro and his sons have gone on the attack against him and this shows that they’ve grasped the danger of Moro stealing his place [in the second round].” Couto said Lula’s globetrotting was partly about re-engaging with foreign governments before what would be his third term as president. Mostly, however, the journeys were aimed at a domestic audience with Lula trying to contrast his statesmanlike travels with the international isolation of Bolsonaro, who has alienated key international partners including Joe Biden’s US, Xi Jinping’s China and EU leaders such as France’s Macron. Couto said Bolsonaro was considered a global “espalha rodinha” (pain in the neck) – “the kind of guy who makes everyone flee when he joins conversation”. “This is a trump card for Lula,” Couto said, adding that even Brazil’s economic elites, who helped elect Bolsonaro, now realised Lula commanded international respect, while Bolsonaro was widely rejected for his handling of coronavirus and the environment. Padilha said the world saw Lula as “a popular and experienced politician who favours dialogue … and was interested in protecting the environment and reducing poverty and inequality. Bolsonaro’s image is of destruction. Of a far-right leader who is anti-environment [and] anti-vaccine and condemned Brazil to the greatest human tragedy in our history.”Ahead of me at the far end of the path, just where it drops into the next valley, the wind has corralled a drift of dry leaves between the hedgerows. It fills the space behind the gate almost ankle deep, so that opening it sweeps a quadrant clear to mark my passage. The air is still and cold, the grass fringed with lines of frost, distant sounds seem unusually close at hand. Ivy weaves across the bank below the beech wood, bright green against the dead brash of the woodland floor, with early light reflecting from the glossy cuticles of the leaves. I pause and look eastwards along the valley of the Afon Rheidol. A few sheep look up from the pasture before realising I’m not carrying anything remotely edible – certainly not a rattling bag of grass nuts – and return to their stolid routine. A thin mist hangs between the trees that mark the course of the river, fading into the veil of haze which softens the distant hills. The sun has finally climbed above the horizon, but is still low in the sky – and a single red kite beats across the hillside in its search for breakfast. At the end of each pass the kite makes a sharp right-hand turn, the sun lighting up the russet of its underside as it wheels around. After the recent storms I’m relieved to see an old friend has survived. An ancient tree, split by time and weather into multiple trunks, and with an almost fractal crown, stands resolutely at the end of the hedgerow. Sheltered from the north and west by the steep hillside, only a scattering of twigs have fallen since I was last here, so the outline of the tree against the light retains its barely balanced complexity. I wander on down the lane under the bare chestnut trees, looking across at the field where gorse has begun to invade the lightly grazed pasture. Even at the turning of the year the gorse is, as usual, in flower – a scattering of yellow gently lit by the milky sunshine. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe Hong Kong independent news outlet Citizen News has said it will cease operations from Tuesday in the face of what it described as a deteriorating media environment in the Chinese-ruled city and to ensure the safety of its staff. “Regrettably, the rapid changes in society and worsening environment for media make us unable to achieve our goal fearlessly. Amid this crisis, we have to first make sure everyone on the boat is safe,” Citizen News, which was established in 2017, said in a statement. At a press conference on Monday, Citizen News chief editor Daisy Li said the environment had changed, and she didn’t know what “safe” news was any more. “If I am no longer confident enough to guide and lead my reporters, I must be responsible,” she said. The decision to close Citizen News was triggered by the early morning police raid of Hong Kong’s Stand News last week, Chris Yeung, chief writer at Citizen News and former president of the Hong Kong Journalists Association, told reporters on Monday. “We could not rule out that … we might be exposed to some risks,” Yeung said. “Reporting fearlessly means we aren’t afraid of offending the political elite, we criticise the authorities when their policies aren’t right, we don’t shy from covering corporations due to business pressure,” he said, according to local media. “But it doesn’t mean we should have to sacrifice our freedom as a price.” Last week hundreds of police raided the Stand News newsroom, and arrested seven current and former employees, including popstar activist Denise Ho. Two former senior editors of the outlet were charged with conspiring to publish seditious materials and denied bail. The UN and media watchdogs CPJ and RSF condemned the crackdown as an attack on press freedom. “The government is abusing a draconian colonial law that has not been used for more than FIVE decades to prosecute journalists,” said exiled activist and former politician, Nathan Law. It followed last year’s enforced closure of Apple Daily and the arrest of several journalists and executives last year, and a government-led overhaul of the operations of public broadcaster RTHK. Pro-democracy activists and rights groups say freedoms promised when Hong Kong returned to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, including freedom of the press, have been increasingly eroded since Beijing imposed a national security law in 2020. Hong Kong authorities have repeatedly rejected accusations they are eroding rights and freedoms, and the city’s government denies targeting the media. In an interview with China News Agency on Monday, security secretary Chris Tang lauded his bureau’s arrests of “anti-China agitators”, singling out the “cessation” of Apple Daily as the most impressive, the Standard reported. In its description on Facebook, Citizen News says it has no party affiliation and aims to promote Hong Kong’s core values, such as those of freedom, openness, diversity and inclusion. In a farewell message of thanks to its readers, the outlet said it had launched hoping “to serve the public and greater public good”. “We may not be the fastest or the most productive outlets in town but our team, with veterans and young journalists, stand united to publish truthful news reporting with depth,” it said. “We all love this place deeply. Regrettably, what was ahead of us is not just pouring rains or blowing winds, but hurricanes and tsunamis.” The Hong Kong Journalists Association said it was deeply saddened by the closures of the two outlets, and that the impact the crackdown on press would have on Hong Kong’s reputation was hard to describe. • This article was amended on 3 January 2022 to clarify details about the raid on the Stand News newsroom. Denise Ho was not one of the two former senior editors charged as stated in an earlier version.Hospitals in NSW are much closer to capacity due to surging Covid cases than is being admitted by officials, warn doctors and nurses, with one saying the system has “never been this bad”. One senior specialist said “even the most routine urgent treatment” was already being cancelled to divert resources to Covid. “People will die,” he said. The state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, repeated on Monday that the health system remained “very well placed” to cope with rising hospitalisation rates. The number of patients in intensive care units (ICU) rose 14% in the previous 24 hours with more than 20,000 new Covid cases again reported in NSW. Privately, though, doctors and nurses who are not authorised to speak publicly say the health system is close to capacity. “No way will the health system cope,” said the senior specialist. “It’s never been this bad.” The senior doctor said the focus on staff shortages overlooked the issue that all the state’s major hospitals were rapidly approaching bed capacity. At the current rate “every single bed will only be for Covid patients … it doesn’t matter how many staff they call back”. A nurse at a major hospital, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that while her centre still had spare beds, there were “huge gaps in staffing”. Lung and heart transplant patients were among those who were not getting the care they would have just two years ago, the nurse with almost a decade’s experience said. “People are turning up really unwell,” she said. “They are staying 40, 50, 60 hours” in emergency wards while they wait for capacity to be made available. “We don’t have enough staff to spread around,” the nurse said. “It’s just been brushed under the floor … we’re shocked.” At Liverpool hospital, one of Sydney’s major medical centres in the city’s south-west, five general wards and two ICU wards had already been set aside for Covid patients. The main emergency department waiting room on Monday was full with would-be patients who were spilling out into the street, with one young woman vomiting into a plastic bag as she waited to be seen. Staff were not permitted to speak to the media. Guardian Australia was told no hospital official would be commenting, and was politely asked to leave the hospital premises. Among those waiting in the 30C heat, though, was a mother and her two daughters from Padstow Heights, about 17km away from Liverpool. One daughter had Covid symptoms and the trio had been waiting for more than an hour outside the emergency department to see a doctor. They had already tried unsuccessfully to get tested at three other public sites. Alex Kanazir had waited four hours by early afternoon to have his 70-year-old mother treated for stomach pains. A month earlier, when his mum had broken her arm, they had only waited an hour before she was admitted, and spent five days in a ward. One concern for those facing lengthy delays was the added risk of contracting Covid, even if that was not the prompt for the visit. “It’s catch-22,” Kanazir said, adding visitors to the emergency department were warned there had already been at least one Covid case that morning. Emergency patients at the hospital would ideally wait no more than four hours before being moved to appropriate wards. The current wait can be a day or more, one staffer said. The nurse from another major hospital said general staff fatigue was on the rise and it was inevitable many experienced health workers would leave the industry. “I think we’re going to see mass resignations,” she said. “This isn’t the way the health system should work.”The world’s oldest person has celebrated her 119th birthday in Japan, saying she is determined to extend the record by another year. Kane Tanaka, who has a weakness for fizzy drinks and chocolate, marked the milestone on Sunday with staff at the nursing home where she lives in Fukuoka prefecture, south-west Japan, according to media reports. The Guinness Book of Records recognised Tanaka’s status in March 2019, when she was 116; she went on to achieve an all-time Japanese age record when she reached 117 years and 261 days in September 2020. Born in 1903 – the year the Wright brothers made their first powered flight and the first Tour de France was held – Tanaka has lived through five Japanese imperial reigns and has set her sights on reaching her 120th birthday, the Kyodo news agency quoted family members as saying. Tanaka, who was born six months before George Orwell, is one of a large and growing number of Japanese centenarians. In an estimate released in September ahead of the annual Respect for the Aged Day, the health ministry said a record 86,510 people were aged 100 or older, an increase of 6,060 from the previous year. Women make up the vast majority of centenarians, with men accounting for just over 10,000, the ministry said. When the annual survey was first conducted in 1963, Japan had just 153 centenarians, but the number had soared to over 10,000 by 1998. Life expectancy in Japan, one of the fastest-ageing societies on earth, is also at a record high, at 87.74 for women and 81.64 for men. The number of young people is shrinking, however, amid failed attempts to raise the country’s low birth rate. Government figures showed that 1.2 million people saw in the New Year as new adults – those who had turned 20 – a drop of 40,000 from last year and the lowest number since records were first kept in 1968. Twenty-year-olds have accounted for less than 1% of the country’s population for the past 12 years, public broadcaster NHK said. When Tanaka became Japan’s oldest person on record she celebrated with a bottle of Coke – her favourite drink – and made a peace sign for photographers. While visiting restrictions during the coronavirus pandemic means she has had limited contact with family members, she reportedly uses gestures to communicate with nursing home staff and is keen on puzzles and board games. The seventh of nine siblings, Tanaka married when she was 19 and helped run the family’s noodle shop after her husband and eldest son went to fight in the second Sino-Japanese war, which began in 1937. Her 62-year-old grandson, Eiji, said he wanted to congratulate Tanaka in person as soon as possible. “I hope she remains healthy and has fun everyday as she grows older,” Kyodo quoted him as saying.An appeal has been issued for women to stand as councillors in the Western Isles in 2022 in an effort to end the Hebridean islands’ unwelcome status as the only Scottish authority with an all-male council. Islanders and equality campaigners were stunned in 2017 when none of the seven women who stood were elected for the Western Isles. Only one, an incumbent, came close to winning a seat in the 31-member authority. Alarmed officials on Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, Gaelic for the Western Isles council, are staging an online workshop in January to persuade more women to stand in May’s elections, in concert with Elect Her, a group specialising in combating gender inequalities in government. Nearly 20 women have signed up for the workshop, and for many involved it has raised deeper questions for the authority, its leadership and the community as a whole. Western Isles has been the only all-male council in Scotland, and possibly the UK, for nearly five years. “It’s always concerning when a large sector of the population is unrepresented,” said Malcolm Burr, the council’s chief executive. “When our all-male comhairle was elected in 2017, we thought: this isn’t wholly representative of the community, what should we do about it?” Paradoxically, voting rates for Western Isles council elections are among the highest in Scotland. Women are prominent and influential leaders in community and business life, yet only a handful ever win seats. The peak was five in 2007. Few stand for election. One barrier is the ban on council employees being elected to the same authority, to prevent conflicts of interest. On the mainland, councillors can work for a neighbouring authority; in the Outer Hebrides, that is impractical. Western Isles council is the largest employer, with 2,185 staff for a population of 26,500; in many roles, most employees are women. Burr said the rules now allowed a council employee to stand for election. But they would have to quit their council job if they won, exchanging the security of a career, fixed hours and a public-sector salary for the £18,604 a councillor earned, with no guarantee of re-election. Zena Stewart, a former councillor who topped her ward’s election in 2012, only stood after retiring from the Nicolson Institute, the secondary school for Lewis, partly for that reason. “If you’re being paid as a councillor, there’s more asked of you,” she said. “I had to attend every meeting unless there was an obvious reason why I couldn’t.” Katie Laing, a part-time teacher, journalist and vice-convener of Stornoway community council, said that was a significant obstacle, in particular for women with children. In addition, a large majority of Western Isles councillors traditionally stand as independents, limiting the scope for positively discriminating in favour of female candidates – a strategy routinely used by political parties in mainland elections. Campaigners say that amplifies the importance of already powerful institutions such as the church – candidates known to local congregations have a ready-made electorate, and men dominate many Hebridean churches. Stewart said councillors connected to churches often won because they had earned respect; the same could apply to golf club leaders. Agnes Rennie, a community leader who also won election in later life, said councillors were expected to be present at key community events, involving long distances and late evenings away from home. For women with families, that burden could be onerous. “You are measured against whether you’re there or not,” she said. For some women, there was the perception council life was unjustifiably combative and toxic, said Laing, particularly in a small island community where conformity could be harshly policed. Rennie said much greater emphasis on flexible meeting times, video conferencing and policies allowing absences for those with family responsibilities was needed. So, too, were visible role models so “women can imagine themselves in that role. It’s a big step for many people,” she said. A long tradition of community leadership and voluntary work meant women “have tremendous skills and experience that would bring so much to the role; I have no doubt women bring a different perspective”, she said.Popular lockdown pursuits such as cooking, DIY and buying pets led to thousands of people needing hospital care for injuries, figures suggest. Analysis of hospital admissions in England by the PA Media news agency showed that thousands were treated for injuries sustained as a result of activities that surged in popularity as people were confined to their homes. The data from NHS Digital for 2020-21 showed that more than 5,600 people attended hospital after coming into contact with a powered hand-tool, and more than 2,700 were admitted after an accident with a non-powered hand-tool such as a hammer or a saw. Figures also showed that 349 people were admitted after injuring themselves with lawnmowers. More than 5,300 people were admitted after falling from playground equipment, with the average age of patients being nine and a half years. However, some parents and grandparents were involved as well, with dozens of people over the age of 30 admitted after falling from playground equipment, including eight people over the age of 90. Data showed that 962 people were treated in hospital for injuries sustained while climbing trees. Lockdowns also triggered a “pet baby boom” with data from the Pet Food Manufacturers’ Association in March showing that 3.2m households in the UK had acquired a pet since the start of the pandemic. These new animals did not always bring joy, however, as 7,386 people were admitted to English hospitals after being bitten or struck by a dog, along with 47 people suffering a rat bite, and 60 people who had come into contact with a venomous spider. Four people were admitted after coming into contact with a scorpion. Many people turned their hand to improving their cooking skills, and admissions data showed that 2,243 needed to be admitted after coming into contact with hot drinks, food, fats and cooking oils. Although many were grateful for the sunny weather in the first lockdown, 153 people were admitted to hospital with sunburn. The figures only include people who were admitted to hospital, and many more injuries would have been dealt with by A&amp;E doctors and GPs. The figures for most accidents and injuries were lower than in previous years as people generally spent more time indoors. A spokesperson for the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents said: “The publication of hospital admission figures always serves to remind us of the breadth of accident types that can result in an injury so severe that admission to hospital is required. In among the stranger entries in the database are some worrying trends that serve to highlight the accident challenges that we face. Accidents are preventable.”More than 440,000 small firms could be forced out of business by the late payment “crisis”, according to the Federation of Small Businesses, which has called for urgent government intervention to improve the way firms are paid. Almost a third of small businesses (30%) surveyed told the FSB that they had seen the late payment of invoices increase over the last three months, with at least 8% warning that the problem has become so bad that it was threatening the viability of their business. For years the problem of late payments – often by big FTSE firms – has dogged the small business sector. Firms are often forced to pay their suppliers, wages and other bills on time, but face long waits to be paid themselves. The FSB said more than 400,000 small firms have shut down since the start of the pandemic for various reasons, and that the future of a similar number is now threatened by this problem alone. “Late payment was destroying thousands of small businesses even before the pandemic hit – the pandemic has made matters worse,” said the FSB national chair, Mike Cherry. “In the past, the government has rightly identified greater board accountability as key to spurring change in this area, but delivery has been slow.” Cherry said small firms, which employ more than 13 million workers in the UK, are facing battles on almost every front, including new customs checks on imports from the EU and a looming energy cost crisis. “Today, it’s a fresh wave of admin for importers and exporters – in three months’ time it will be a hike to the jobs tax, that is national insurance contributions, a rise in dividend taxation, business rates bills and an increase in the national living wage. On top of that, operating costs are surging – many will soon be trying to strike energy deals without the clout of big corporates or the protections afforded to consumers.” The FSB has said every big business and government organisation should be abiding by the prompt payment code arguing that 30-day payment terms should be “the norm for those who are committed to environmental, social and governance best practice”. It wants every big UK corporation to have a non-executive director on its board with direct responsibility for payment culture. The other findings of the FSB survey of more than 1,200 members will concern ministers. More small firms now expect their performance to worsen over the coming three months than expect an improvement. Pessimism is especially pronounced in the retail, accommodation and food industries, as many UK consumers adopted self-imposed lockdowns in the face of Omicron. Pictures of deserted high streets in the run-up to Christmas, fears over spiralling energy costs and concerns that staff will not be able return to work on Tuesday have not helped matters. Spiralling energy bills have already forced some firms to close. Businesses are not protected by the price cap imposed by the regulator Ofgem. Companies importing goods from the EU also now face new, onerous paperwork. Regulations require businesses (in most cases those receiving goods in the UK, but in some those sending them to the UK) to notify the customs authorities of precisely what is being sent to Great Britain from the EU, and from where. The rules were in effect waived throughout 2021 but now apply for the first time. A government spokesperson said: “The government is making significant reforms to help small businesses get paid on time, including halving the payment period in the prompt payment code and consulting on fines and other new powers for the Small Business Commissioner.” “There is plenty of support available to ensure small businesses are well positioned to comply with UK border processes, including one-to-one advice through the Export Support Service.”The US could be under a rightwing dictatorship by 2030, a Canadian political science professor has warned, urging his country to protect itself against the “collapse of American democracy”. “We mustn’t dismiss these possibilities just because they seem ludicrous or too horrible to imagine,” Thomas Homer-Dixon, founding director of the Cascade Institute at Royal Roads University in British Columbia, wrote in the Globe and Mail. “In 2014, the suggestion that Donald Trump would become president would also have struck nearly everyone as absurd. But today we live in a world where the absurd regularly becomes real and the horrible commonplace.” Homer-Dixon’s message was blunt: “By 2025, American democracy could collapse, causing extreme domestic political instability, including widespread civil violence. By 2030, if not sooner, the country could be governed by a rightwing dictatorship.” The author cited eventualities centered on a Trump return to the White House in 2024, possibly including Republican-held state legislatures refusing to accept a Democratic win. Trump, he warned, “will have only two objectives, vindication and vengeance” of the lie that his 2020 defeat by Joe Biden was the result of electoral fraud. A “scholar of violent conflict” for more than four decades, Homer-Dixon said Canada must take heed of the “unfolding crisis”. “A terrible storm is coming from the south, and Canada is woefully unprepared. Over the past year we’ve turned our attention inward, distracted by the challenges of Covid-19, reconciliation and the accelerating effects of climate change. “But now we must focus on the urgent problem of what to do about the likely unraveling of democracy in the United States. We need to start by fully recognising the magnitude of the danger. If Mr Trump is re-elected, even under the more optimistic scenarios the economic and political risks to our country will be innumerable.” Homer-Dixon said he even saw a scenario in which a new Trump administration, having effectively nullified internal opposition, deliberately damaged its northern neighbor. “Under the less-optimistic scenarios, the risks to our country in their cumulative effect could easily be existential, far greater than any in our federation’s history. What happens, for instance, if high-profile political refugees fleeing persecution arrive in our country and the US regime demands them back. Do we comply?” Trump, he said, “and a host of acolytes and wannabes such as Fox [News]’s Tucker Carlson and Georgia representative Marjorie Taylor Greene”, had transformed the Republican party “into a near-fascist personality cult that’s a perfect instrument for wrecking democracy”. Worse, he said, Trump “may be just a warm-up act”. “Returning to office, he’ll be the wrecking ball that demolishes democracy but the process will produce a political and social shambles,” Homer-Dixon said. “Still, through targeted harassment and dismissal, he’ll be able to thin the ranks of his movement’s opponents within the state, the bureaucrats, officials and technocrats who oversee the non-partisan functioning of core institutions and abide by the rule of law. “Then the stage will be set for a more managerially competent ruler, after Mr Trump, to bring order to the chaos he’s created.”It’s an encouraging start to 2022. In an informal census – or perhaps a sort of watery award ceremony – the Wildlife Trusts’ marine review of 2021 has pointed to humpback whales off the north-east coast of Scotland and England, increasing numbers of seal pups being born, and seahorses in protected beds of eel grass off the Dorset coast. It seems the work of the trusts and other marine conservation bodies is having a good effect. Blue whales appearing in the Irish Sea may be physical beneficiaries of the general agreement of the International Whaling Commission in 1982, effected three years later, to halt the cull of the species. It is as if the whales themselves remember, encouraged to return without fear of someone sticking a harpoon in them. But in many ways these optimistic signs are also the markers of what we have lost. In the 19th century the waterways of the Solent were so full of salmon that local apprentices, according to one author writing in 1850, “stipulated in their indentures that it should not be served up to them oftener than three times a-week”. The same author reported shoals of porpoises in Southampton Water, “rolling and springing on the surface in their renewed gambols”. While in the 18th century, Oliver Goldsmith reported on an English Channel filled with whales, dolphins, cod fish, tuna and even great white sharks chasing columns of herrings. “The whole water seems alive,” Goldsmith wrote in one of the first popular science books, Animated Nature, in 1776, “and is seen so black with them that the number seems inexhaustible.” Humans, too, were once more watery. In the north of England and Scotland, fisherwomen were known as herring quines, so covered were they in silvery scales they seemed to be becoming fish themselves. Charles Richard Weld of the Royal Society declared in 1859, riffing on Darwin: “If a man may become a monkey, or has been a whale, why should not a Caithness damsel become a herring?” To these writers, the idea that one day there might not be plenty more fish in the sea would have been unthinkable. The depredations of the natural world that began to accelerate in the 19th century would remove much of that marine biomass from around our shores, with disastrous effects. The physical absence of the great whales such as blue, fin, humpback and sperm whales may have actually accelerated the climate crisis – because it deprived the oceanic food chain of their fertilising faeces, and their rotting carcasses which, on the sea bed, helped sequester carbon from the ecosphere and sustain species, from polar bears and seals to bone-eating osedax worms. The life cycles of smaller organisms depended entirely on carcasses. We look to science to point out what needs to be done, but often art inspires as much as academic reports. In 2012, Heather Ackroyd and Dan Harvey performed a kind of reincarnation on the skeleton of a minke whale stranded at Skegness by growing diamond-like chemical crystals on its bones. A year later, the artists Ellen Gallagher and Edgar Cleijne used the bone-eating worm to conjure up a similarly alchemical transformation in their film, Osedax: a dead whale slowly sways to the bottom to become, in the words of Shakespeare’s Ariel in The Tempest, “something rich and strange”. With its shapeshifting sense of gender (slipper snails form stacks upon each other, changing sex from male at the bottom to female at the top) and of time (“shadow” parts of the ocean may be 1,000 years old), the sea defies all our assumptions. It is a decidedly queer place; just ask any dolphin. Nor does it recognise national boundaries, of course. The sea is where our laws and jurisdictions run out. That inevitably raises contrary questions of responsibility and freedom. Indeed, it is hard to divorce the threats to our native marine life from “alien species” without considering the human refugees arriving on those same shores. Or to note that the climate crisis is a driver for both. It is easy to ignore the sea, or to think of it as a kind of highway with a fish shop attached. Some may consider it bizarre that commentators such as George Monbiot call for a rewilding of our seas as well as of the land. Others may worry there’s no chance of that while English and French politicians squabble over who has the “right” to take fish from the sea. But humpbacks off Whitby? Dancing sea slugs off Cumbria? White-beaked dolphins off Essex? These may be anomalies or signs of disruption, but merely bearing witness to such wonders has the power to restore our faith. As I swim in the chilly winter sea, the sleek black head of a grey seal pops up beside me, and in the louring grey sky a skein of brent geese, charcoal-coloured visitors from Siberia, steer into view. It’s not quite Goldsmith’s vision of Eden, but I’m still hoping for miracles in 2022. Happy new year to the sea, all its species, and to all of you. Philip Hoare is an author whose books include Leviathan, Or the WhaleThe BBC newsreader George Alagiah has said he feels lucky for the life he has lived even though cancer will “probably get me in the end”. Alagiah, 66, was first diagnosed with stage four bowel cancer in April 2014, which spread to his lungs, liver and lymph nodes. He announced in October he was taking a break from his presenting duties as he dealt with “a further spread of cancer”. In a conversation with Craig Oliver, a former Downing Street director of communications, Alagiah discussed living with the disease. “I don’t think I’m going to be able to get rid of this thing. I’ve got the cancer still. It’s growing very slowly,” he said in an interview for Oliver’s podcast, Desperately Seeking Wisdom. “My doctor’s very good at every now and again hitting me with a big red bus full of drugs, because the whole point about cancer is it bloody finds a way through and it gets you in the end. “Probably … it will get me in the end. I’m hoping it’s a long time from now, but I’m very lucky.” The presenter said he would never wish he had cancer, but he would not give back the years he had lived with it because he had learned so much. He added his cancer diagnosis had helped him to figure out what was important in his life. “I had to stop and say, ‘Hang on a minute. If the full stop came now, would my life have been a failure?’ “And actually, when I look back and I looked at my journey … the family I had, the opportunities my family had, the great good fortune to bump into [Frances Robathan], who’s now been my wife and lover for all these years, the kids that we brought up … it didn’t feel like a failure.” Alagiah was born in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) and attended primary school in Ghana before attending secondary school in Portsmouth and studying at Durham university. He joined the BBC in 1989 and, before becoming a presenter, worked as a foreign correspondent, reporting on events including the Rwandan genocide, and interviewing Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond Tutu in his role as a specialist on Africa and the developing world. Asked what piece of wisdom he would give, he said: “I think it would be to constantly ask the question, ‘What is it we can do together?’ “I spent a lot of my time in Africa, and in South Africa they have a word: ubuntu. It’s the idea that I’m only human if I recognise the humanity in you. There’s this collective notion of life which I think we have lost.” The podcast episode is released on 3 January.Here’s the latest in a long line of authorised-version sports documentaries that gives plenty of elbow room for the legend in question to explain themselves, and friends and family to add their admiring two-penn’orth. Shane Warne, Australia’s leading wicket taker in Tests, and second in the all-time list to Sri Lanka’s Muttiah Muralitharan, makes for an engaging enough subject as he holds forth on his exceptional cricketing career, making honest points about the top-class sportsperson’s ability to block out everything else when necessary, and the consequent damage it does to off-field relationships. Warne burst into the international arena in the 1990s; the odd combination of spin-bowling guile and beach-bum persona making him an instant star. There’s some good stuff on the techniques that he employed that made his bowling so deadly, and he repeats the allegation, in some detail, that Pakistan captain Salim Malik offered him $200,000 to throw a match. (In 2000 Malik was banned for match-fixing, partly on Warne’s evidence.) On the other hand, Warne is a little less forthcoming on his own sporting troubles: being fined for providing information to a bookmaker in 1994 and a 12-month suspension in 2003 for taking a banned diuretic. Otherwise, this profile skimps a little on the actual cricket – perhaps inevitable when Warne clearly wants to work through the personal stuff – and Warne being Warne, there’s a bit too much pointless comment from celebrity know-nothings such as Ed Sheeran and Chris Martin. On the other hand, Merv Hughes, looking more than ever like a Viking chieftain waiting for his shield-bearer, comes up with some great lines, including comparing Warne to King Kong. Warne no doubt intended the film to shore up his bloody-good-bloke image, and in this he’s got to be satisfied how it’s turned out. • Shane is released on 3 January on digital platforms.Dozens of beaches in Queensland were closed as ex-tropical cyclone Seth approached the Gold and Sunshine coasts, bringing with it huge waves and gale-force winds. Waves up to 9 metres were recorded off Brisbane and Tweed Heads, according to government wave monitoring buoys, while the Bureau of Meteorology issued a hazardous surf warning for the state. The ex-tropical cyclone is generating swells that are affecting the south-east coast of Queensland and the north coast of New South Wales, with residents advised to stay away from beaches. Surf Life Saving Queensland closed all beaches on the Gold Coast, as well as some on the Sunshine Coast and in the Wide Bay Capricorn region, with high tides exacerbating conditions. The bureau downgraded the cyclone to a subtropical system on Sunday night. Bureau meteorologist Helen Reid said waves along the Sunshine Coast and further south had averaged about 4 metres. That, combined with tides above their highest astronomical point, made conditions dangerous. “It’s quite dangerous, with sea levels higher than you’d expect, plus the waves, leading to a very dangerous situation,” she told Guardian Australia. “It’s almost like a storm surge coming through, with the regular tide high due to the cycle of the moon, and the ex-tropical cyclone, resulting in places that will be inundated.” Reid said it was “very dangerous” to go swimming but expected conditions to ease over the coming days. “We are expecting conditions to continue over the next 24 hours, but as the system moves slightly west, it might help, it is weakening as it drifts west.” The storm was expected to become a tropical low by the time it moved towards land later on Monday. “It will make life difficult for the coastline, definitely, but it is likely to weaken and not be classed as a tropical cyclone by the time we get to late Monday,” Reid said. The bureau issued warnings for strong winds of up to 100km/h over coastal areas and higher terrain in south-east Queensland from mid-Monday. The winds combined with the strong swell to create the high waves – with the dangerous surf conditions expected to remain until Tuesday afternoon. A warning for hazardous surf conditions was issued for areas along the coast of NSW on Monday afternoon, with the bureau warning that surf and swell conditions would remain hazardous until Tuesday. Reid said it was all part of one system moving roughly in line with the NSW-Queensland border. “Those warnings do cover a fair way along the NSW coast, it’s a similar situation with damaging surf and gale wind warnings, with the ex-tropical cyclone roughly in line with the border,” she said. “It means the weather and coastal experiences will be similar.” A woman in her 40s died on Monday after being pulled from rough waters at a beach on NSW’s mid north coast. Emergency services were called to Park Beach at Coffs Harbour about 12.50pm following reports an unconscious woman had been pulled from the water. Witnesses tried to save the woman before police and paramedics arrived and treated her, however she died at the scene. Police are investigating the circumstances and a report will be prepared for the coroner. Additional reporting by Australian Associated PressIf the clouds cooperate, you can start the year with a meteor shower. The Quadrantid meteor shower reaches its peak activity on or about 3 January each year. This year, the peak has been estimated to occur at about 10pm GMT, although this can vary by a day or so. The shower produces meteors in the sky any time between 28 December and 12 January. It is known for creating blue meteors with occasional fireballs and under ideal conditions can produce more than 100 meteors an hour. Yet, as fleeting as it is unpredictable, the peak is often over in a matter of hours. This year visibility is helped because the moon is new and will have set before the show starts, removing a source of illumination that masks the fainter meteors. To further enhance your chances, find the darkest sky you can and wrap up warm. Watching meteors is a waiting game. The chart shows the view looking north-east from London at midnight GMT on Monday. Do not look directly at the radiant, instead look off to one side. The best view will be in the hours after midnight, before dawn. The Quadrantids are best seen from the northern hemisphere.Four Lives 9pm, BBC One After a recent inquest found infuriatingly major police failings in the case, here is the first episode in a three-part drama about the four victims of the rapist and murderer Stephen Port. Sheridan Smith plays Sarah Sak, who wrote a book about the circumstances around her son’s death, while Stephen Merchant sheds his funny bone to step into an uncomfortably sinister role. Although the programme is bleak in subject, the makers spoke with the families of the victims to make sure their stories were told correctly. Hollie Richardson Food Unwrapped’s Healthy New Year 7.30pm, Channel 4 At a time of year when many of us are reassessing our diets, here comes a special edition of the foodie science format. The information buffet includes Briony May Williams investigating why gluten-free products often come at a premium, Jimmy Doherty pondering the health benefits of chia seeds – and a look at raw dog food (for consumption by pets, not humans). Graeme Virtue Inside Dubai: Playground of the Rich 9pm, BBC Two “Dubai is somewhere that, y’know, you can enjoy your wealth.” Meet highly unrelatable Gaynor Scott, who splits her time between mansions in Dubai and Jersey. Some will find this look at life in the shoes of Scott and her fellow expats in the Monaco of the Middle East guiltily moreish. Others might well be repulsed immediately. HR Party Island: Summer in Zante 10pm, Channel 4 A fizzy hour of the antics of young people in Zante? Sure, let’s do it on this grim Monday night in January. In the first of three episodes, Harry and Connor arrive for a last-minute lads’ holiday, while Tom and Duncan – who run a bar famous for its “dentist’s chair” – need the island to get busy again. HR Art on the BBC: The Great Salvador Dalí 9pm, BBC Four The art historian David Dibosa explores the BBC’s archives to chart television’s relationship with artists, from Monet to Turner. First up is the surrealist Salvador Dalí, who used the medium for self-promotion and found favour among producers. Henry Wong The Cabins 9pm, ITV2 Series two of a dating show that did well last year, perhaps because it basically puts the would-be couples in lockdown. They co-habit in log cabins and have an epic 24 hours to decide if they want to prolong the courtship. The twist is that the cabins are now adjacent, allowing gossip with other couples. Jack Seale“The events of last week are just par for the army’s inhumanity and immorality.” So says Michael Isherwood, chair of the Burma Humanitarian Mission and program director of Backpack Medics, after Myanmar’s junta massacred more than 35 people, including two Save the Children workers, on Christmas Eve. At the time, the attack garnered international headlines, with the children’s charity calling it “absolutely horrifying”, and the UN urging an investigation. Yet Isherwood says attacks like the one on 24 December are not isolated, and describes a military that is “randomly shooting unarmed men, women and children, who steal livestock and burn homes to the ground, who use rape as a weapon”. The medics he works with recognise the risks and “understand that the Burma army has no morals, character or anything close to civilised decency and behaviour”, he says. Myanmar has seen killings, imprisonment and chaos since the military seized power from the elected government led by Aung San Suu Kyi in February last year. Resistance groups have emerged but anyone thought to be opposed to military rule risks being arrested, sentenced to hard labour, or killed. More than 1,300 people have died at the hands of security forces, according to a local monitoring group. Another humanitarian worker, who preferred to not to be named, says: “This incident in Kayah does not mark a new level of violence. It’s not a shift in the pattern of the approach of security forces. It’s not unusual in this context. This is a normal tactic.” She believes the attack was intended to “oppress through fear the civilian population” rather than specifically target aid workers. “Since they’re blatantly, egregiously and frequently targeting the civil population in that way, and since that will often happen in areas where aid activities are needed, then of course that raises the collateral risks to aid actors,” she says. Her organisation would continue its work regardless, she says. A clampdown on domestic media has made details of alleged atrocities hard to confirm, she says, but the link to an international charity in the Christmas Eve attack has offered a grim insight into the risks the people of Myanmar regularly face. According to the Karen Human Rights Group, in the Sagaing region 11 civilians were burned alive on 7 December and 40 people were killed in three different attacks in July. Inger Ashing, the chief executive of Save the Children, put out a statement saying: “The people of Myanmar continue to be targeted with increasing violence and these events demand an immediate response.” ‘It happened quite suddenly’ On Christmas Eve, women, children, and two Save the Children staff members – both new fathers, aged 32 and 28 – were among the victims found on a highway outside Moso village in Kayah state, eastern Myanmar, where pro-democracy rebels have been fighting the military. Save the Children says its staff were travelling back to the office after working nearby when they were caught up in the attack. According to state media, the Myanmar military said it killed a number of “terrorists with weapons” after people in seven vehicles refused to stop. Images of the scene show the blackened remains of multiple bodies inside torched trucks. One international staffer living in Myanmar, who requested anonymity for safety reasons, says: “In this case, I don’t think there was any particular sense that the road was a risky one. It happened quite suddenly. Doing it on Christmas Eve probably was not accidental.” Many in Kayah state identify as Christian. The humanitarian worker says as far as their operations are concerned, they’d be keeping in close contact with staff in Kayah state and tracking their travel. “We’re trying to do what we can to advise people on where is safe to go and where is not but you can’t really know. It’s so widespread.”Herschel Walker has Donald Trump’s endorsement in the race for US Senate in Georgia but the former NFL star may be struggling to counter fears from some Republicans that he could damage the party’s chances of taking back a seat lost in 2020, and with it the Senate itself. In December, the former University of Georgia and Dallas Cowboys running back admitted he does not have a college degree – having repeatedly said that he did. Then, as January began, Walker posted to social media a short but to some bafflingly phrased video. Under the message “a few things to think about as we start the New Year”, Walker attacked policy priorities championed by Democrats including Raphael Warnock, Georgia’s first Black senator who will defend his seat in November. “Build Back Better,” he said, referring to Joe Biden’s domestic spending plan, which targets health and social care and the climate crisis. “You know I’m always thinking: if you want to build back better, first you probably want to control the border, because you want to know who you’re building it for and why. Then you probably want to protect your military, because they’re protecting you against people in other countries that don’t like you.” He then shifted to a broader goal, popular among progressives. “Defunding the police? Bad idea. You want to fund the police so that they have better training, better equipment to protect the law of the land, because you don’t want people doing whatever they want to do.” Then he shifted back again. “Build Back Better. You probably want to become energy independent. Otherwise you’re going to depend on other countries for your livelihood. Build Back Better. You probably want something written, like law of the land, stating that all men are to be treated equal. Oh! We have the constitution. So you probably want to put people in charge who’s going to fight for the constitution. “Just thinking. God bless you.” Burgess Owens, a Republican congressman from Utah who once played safety for the New York Jets and the Oakland Raiders, said Walker “represents what the American dream is all about: hard work, strong character, and love for our great country. I am honored to endorse Herschel for Senate and look forward to working with him!” But critics said the video – and a similarly rambling Fox News appearance – was evidence of Walker’s unsuitability for office. To some, such evidence has piled up ever since Walker signaled a shift into politics. Last summer, the Associated Press said “hundreds of pages of public records tied to Walker’s business ventures and his divorce, including many not previously reported, shed new light on a turbulent personal history that could dog his Senate bid”. The documents, the AP said, “detail accusations that Walker repeatedly threatened his ex-wife’s life, exaggerated claims of financial success and alarmed business associates with unpredictable behavior”. The AP also reported that Walker “has at times been open about his long struggle with mental illness, writing at length in a 2008 book about being diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder, once known as multiple personality disorder”. The report also quoted the Republican governor of Georgia, Brian Kemp, who said that while Walker “certainly could bring a lot of things to the table … as others have mentioned, there’s also a lot of questions out there”. In the matter of Walker touting a college degree he does not hold, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported that the false claim was made on a campaign website, “in an online biography advertising Walker’s book, at a campaign rally … and even during his introduction this year at a congressional hearing”. In a statement, Walker said: “I was majoring in criminal justice at UGA when I left to play in the USFL my junior year. After playing with the New Jersey Generals” – a team Trump owned – “I returned to Athens to complete my degree, but life and football got in the way.”Key Donald Trump loyalists Steve Bannon and Michael Flynn are at the forefront of a drive to expand Trumpist influence at the local level of US politics while forging ahead with efforts aimed at promoting baseless claims that Joe Biden’s 2020 election victory was fraudulent. The growing drive by Trump’s hardcore allies has spurred election watchdog groups to voice alarm about the threat to democracy posed by Flynn and Bannon – and other Trump acolytes – as they combine debunked claims about election fraud and calls for further 2020 election audits with planning conservative takeovers of official positions that run US elections. The moves come a year after the attack on the Capitol in Washington when a pro-Trump mob invaded the building in an attempt to stop the certification of Biden’s election victory. Flynn and Bannon, using varying paths, have focused new energy on increasing conservative influence by recruiting more allies for key posts at the local and precinct level with an eye on the 2022 and 2024 elections, and building more political alliances on issues such as vaccine requirements and mask mandates. The strategies Flynn and Bannon are deploying overlap those of other conservative outfits, such as the influential youth group Turning Point USA, to expand the pro-Trump base at the precinct level, and work to elect Trump-backed politicians to key posts such as secretary of state in Georgia, Arizona and other battleground states. Flynn and Bannon have separately relied on a mix of non-profit groups, including one backed by the multimillionaire Patrick Byrne, conservative social media outlets favored by the far right like Telegram, and events that convey evangelical Christian messages with political disinformation. Bannon, for instance, has used his War Room podcast to espouse plans for “taking over the Republican party through the precinct committee strategy” and invited would-be candidates to appear as guests. The podcast, which has tens of millions of downloads, has found a large and receptive conservative following. Flynn, meanwhile, touts the adage that “local action has national impact” and has been a star speaker in several key states at “ReAwaken America” events, which are dubbed “health and freedom” conferences and combine evangelical themes with misinformation about the 2020 election and vaccine skepticism. The conservative crusades by Flynn and Bannon come after Trump pardoned them post-election for lying to the FBI and fraud respectively. Bannon and Flynn also were central actors with other Trump loyalists in scheming about ways to block Congress from certifying Biden’s election, efforts that are under scrutiny as part of a House select committee investigation of the deadly Capitol attack by hundreds of Trump supporters. As they have carved out new roles in the conservative ecosystem, Flynn and Bannon still support Trump’s conspiratorial claims that he lost in 2020 due to massive cheating, a mantra that reinforces their drives to expand local and state electoral influence to give Republicans a better shot at recapturing Congress next year, and the White House in 2024. “We’re seeing a dangerous trend of election deniers lining up to fill election administration positions across the country,” Joanna Lydgate, chief executive of the States United Democracy Center, said in a statement to the Guardian. “And the efforts by Flynn, Bannon and other promoters of the big lie are all part of this playbook to hijack elections in 2022 and 2024 if their preferred candidate doesn’t win.” Likewise, as they have revved up political work on multiple fronts, the two ex-Trump advisers have taken more extremist stances sparking strong criticism. Flynn, a retired army lieutenant general, has been skewered for his authoritarian style advocacy of “one religion” for America, and for speaking at some events with heavy presences by adherents of QAnon conspiracy movement. Flynn’s call for “one religion” came during a talk to a conservative Christian audience in Texas on the ReAwaken America tour in November. “If we are going to have one nation under God, which we must, we have to have one religion,” Flynn said. “One nation under God and one religion under God, right? All of us, working together.” Flynn’s feature role at ReAwaken America meetings in several states such as Michigan and Florida is hardly an accident, according to Byrne, the multimillionaire founder of the America Project that counts Flynn as special adviser and spokesperson. Byrne, who has joined Flynn at some ReAwaken rallies, said in text messages that he and Flynn had a large hand in launching the ReAwaken tour during the spring by bankrolling the events with some “tens of thousands of dollars” from the America Project. Overall, Byrne said that the America Project has raised about $9.5m, of which he donated close to $7m. Byrne and the America Project poured over $3m into a months-long audit of Arizona’s largest county, which Trump was banking on to find major fraud, but which resulted in no significant changes to Biden’s win there or overall in the state, much to Trump’s dismay. Byrne said the project has helped promote audits in other states besides Arizona. Boasting a net worth pegged at about $75m, Byrne is the ex-chief executive of furniture retailer Overstock. Byrne texted that he didn’t vote for Trump, and deems himself a “rule of law” advocate who claims there’s still a “mountain of evidence” to support the widely debunked allegations of fraud. Byrne’s project has had no dearth of Trump links. The project’s president until late last month was Emily Newman, a former Trump aide. Newman, along with Byrne and Flynn, attended a meeting in December 2020 with Trump about ways to block Biden taking office where Flynn touted the option of declaring martial law and deploying the military to rerun the election in key states Trump lost, according to multiple reports. Flynn’s brother, Joe Flynn, has succeeded Newman as the project’s president, Byrne said. On top of his work with the America Project, Flynn’s focus on expanding the Maga base at the local level increased when he became chairman in May of another non-profit, America’s Future, which, in turn, has partnered with Turning Point USA and others to form a larger alliance dubbed County Citizens Defending Freedom USA. The county citizens group has sponsored an array of training programs, protests and candidate meetings with a focus on mask mandates, vaccine requirements and critical race theory, according to Florida lawyer Ron Filipkowski, a former prosecutor who authored a Washington Post article on the wave of local drives by Trump backers. For his part, Bannon’s heavy emphasis on a local “precinct strategy” to help Republican’s electoral fortunes combines conspiratorial and apocalyptic bravado. Bannon told CNN in December that his War Room podcast is an organizing tool to expand Trump’s base. “It’s about winning elections with the right people – Maga people,” Bannon said. “We will have our people in at every level.” “We’re taking over all the elections,” Bannon said in November on his War Room podcast. “We’re going to get to the bottom of [last year’s election] and we’re going to decertify the electors. And you’re going to have a constitutional crisis. But you know what? We’re a big and tough country, and we can handle that, we’ll be able to handle that. We’ll get through that.” Megan Squire, a computer science professor at Elon University, told the Guardian that much of Bannon’s political messaging has relied on alternative social media channels such as Telegram that appeal to conservative and far right allies to spread pro Trump gospel and help broaden the Maga base at the local level. To Squire, Bannon’s rhetoric and large audience look increasingly dangerous. “After being de-platformed from mainstream social media over the past year, Bannon has been promoting ‘alternative’, permissive social media channels such as Telegram and Gettr. There his listeners are able to amplify and intensify Bannon’s messaging into a 24-hour-a-day echo chamber filled with disinformation, scams, and conspiracy theories.” For Lydgate, the chief executive of the States United Democracy Center, the multi-front drives by Bannon, Flynn and other key Trump loyalists pose serious risks for the integrity of future elections. “They want to sow doubt in our democracy and make it easier to undermine the will of American voters.”Pay off costly debts first There is no point trying to save if you are burdened by costly debts. The average easy access savings account offers less than 0.2% interest, while on some borrowing you could be paying in excess of 20%. Aim to pay off expensive credit card, store card or overdraft debts before you think about putting money aside. Start a rainy-day fund Everyone should aim to have some cash in an easily accessible savings account to provide a financial safety net if the worst happens. “We all need robust savings to cope with the nasty surprises life tends to throw at us,” says Sarah Coles, a personal finance analyst at the investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown. “We should be working towards three to six months’ worth of essential expenses in an easy access account.” Essential expenses should include items such as housing costs, money for food and important bills. Do not be put off by how much this comes to – anything you can put away towards it will help if things do go wrong. Have a goal Beyond rainy-day savings, you may want to put aside other cash – and having a purpose will motivate you. “Setting a goal and giving it a name can help keep you on track,” says Annabelle Williams, a personal finance specialist at the investment firm Nutmeg. “By attaching meaning to your savings goals, such as a new home, a specific trip, or big purchase, you’re more likely to stick to your savings habit.” Make it a regular habit Regular savings accounts are a good option for those new to saving. You put aside money each month – usually via a standing order from your current account. These accounts offer some of the best interest rates out there, although the maximum you can tuck away often isn’t that high. If you have a NatWest current account, you can take advantage of its Digital Regular Saver account, which pays a market-leading 3% interest and is, it says, designed to help customers with little or no savings develop a savings habit and build financial capability. However, you can only pay in up to £50 each month. TSB’s Monthly Saver pays 2% and lets you save between £25 and £125 a month – again, you need to have a current account with the bank to open one. Most regular savings accounts run for a year, and the interest is paid at the end of the period. You will then need to shop around for a new account for your lump sum. Get some help For those on a low income, the government’s Help to Save account is definitely worth considering. It lets certain people on working tax credit, or receiving universal credit, get a bonus of 50p for every £1 they save over four years. You can put in between £1 and £50 each month, and the most you can earn in four years is £1,200 in bonus money. But paying into this account could affect some people’s eligibility for benefits and how much they get, so read the details carefully before you commit. Then there’s the lifetime Isa, which lets people save for a property or retirement. You can put away up to £4,000 each year until you are 50, and the government will add a 25% bonus to your savings, up to a maximum of £1,000 a year. To open one you must be aged 18 to 39. Round up your spending … Several banks are making saving easier by getting you to do it whenever you pay for something. Lloyds Bank has Save the Change. When you buy something with your debit card, if your account is in credit it will round up the amount spent to the nearest pound, and transfer the difference into a nominated Lloyds savings account. “If a purchase is £2.20, the bank will transfer 80p, which could see someone save £5.60 in a week if this is spent every day,” says Rachel Springall at the financial data provider Moneyfacts. The digital bank Chase does the same and deposits the small change into a separate account where it will earn interest at 5% for 12 months. … or round it down Another technique is to log into your current account, look at the balance and mentally “round it down”, Williams says. “If you have £221.60 until payday, round it down to £210 and move £11.60 into savings. It all adds up over time.” Use an app Chip and Plum are just two of the apps that offer “auto-save” features. Every few days the tech does the maths and automatically transfers some of your money into another account, which little by little adds up. Plum’s free option includes auto-saving, while Chip is changing its pricing in mid-January so that standard membership will be free. A budgeting app could also help. Springall suggests Money Dashboard, which automatically categorises spending into “buckets”, such as household bills and groceries – this lets you see what you can afford to save once the essentials are covered. Another budgeting app to check out is Emma, which analyses transactions across accounts and classifies them into spending categories. “Great budgeting starts with careful planning and reliable insights,” its website promises. Fix for a better return Some of the best interest rates are offered by fixed-rate savings accounts, where you typically tie up your money for a year or more. Of course, that won’t suit everyone. At the time of writing, you could get about 1.3% on a one-year fixed-rate bond, about 1.6% on a two-year bond, and about 2.1% on a five-year bond. For the latest rates, keep a close eye on Moneyfacts’ tables. Switch current account If your current account isn’t cutting the mustard, you can get some free cash – enough, perhaps, to kick off a nest egg – by moving it to a new provider. Many banks pay £100-plus if you move to them. Nationwide will give you up to £125 if you are a member and switch to its FlexDirect current account. If you are not yet a member, it is £100. Meanwhile, HSBC is offering £150 if you move to its Advance or Premier accounts. Typically, the money is paid into the current account you have switched to, shortly after the move has been completed. You can then use this cash to start a new savings account or boost an existing one.The first single that I ever bought Our House by Madness. I was four, so the actual purchase was instigated by my father. He was such a big music fan and wanted to make sure that I knew this was the first song I was buying. I still adore it. In 2020’s lockdown, we did Kitchen Discos: I sang on my Instagram with the kids. After 10 weeks, I chose to close the whole thing with Our House. It celebrates the glory and chaos of family life. *** The song that is my karaoke go-to I used to sing Shoop by Salt-N-Pepa, and it’s really fun to do the rap – but when you do a karaoke version, the backing track is quite slow, so you get people looking a bit concerned for you as you trip your way through it. Basically, what you want is a people-pleaser. The one I go to is Faith by George Michael. It just always works. *** The song I’ve streamed the most In the days of having an Alexa, the ruler of the roost is my little one, Mickey. He’s two, and he will get a passion for a song and just play it over and over. For a while it was Let’s Get Loud by Jennifer Lopez; now we’ve progressed to In Da Getto by Skrillex and J Balvin. He likes his heavy dance and his reggaeton as well. It could be a lot worse. *** The best song to play at a party If you want something a bit slinky, Grace Jones – Pull Up to the Bumper. But if you’re trying to entice people to the dancefloor, then I’d probably go disco. Thelma Houston’s Don’t Leave Me This Way is very seductive. *** The best song to have sex to For music that’s got that undercurrent of “the man singing wants you to get saucy”, it’s got to be Darling Nikki by Prince – you’re not reading between the lines with that one. Kiss has got lots of flirtation, too. Gett Off would be my top one. *** The song I want played at my funeral The one that I’ve said since I was really small is Mickey by Toni Basil – which, I grant you, is going to be quite weird. It came out when I was about two, and it made a big impression on me. It’s got such urgency and passion and it’s a little bit off-kilter. It’s probably not one of the Top 100 hits for funerals, but I think of it as “one of my songs”. *** The song I pretend to hate that I secretly like I’m not really afraid of saying what I like. I don’t believe in guilty pleasures. The things I say are my favourites are my favourites. There’s a song that came out by Rufus Wainwright song, Peaceful Afternoon, that’s just so beautiful. I like Everything Now by Arcade Fire, Harmony Hall by Vampire Weekend. *** The song that is my actual favourite It depends what mood you’re in. But some songs are just pretty perfect. Something like Wichita Lineman [by Glen Campbell], it’s a very beautiful song – just glorious. It sounds wistful and captures the purity of wanting to find that connection with someone: you’re sending out your message to them. That’s all of us, isn’t it? Hoping that someone’s on the line. Sophie Ellis-Bextor’s Kitchen Disco is available on BBC Sounds.Michelle de Kretser’s slyly intelligent sixth novel pairs two first-person narratives. One takes place in a dystopian near-future Melbourne, where Lyle, an immigrant father of two, is employed by the state to write sinister-sounding “evaluations” nominating fellow migrants for arrest and repatriation; the other half of the book is set in 1981 and follows Lili, a 22-year-old Australian working as a teaching assistant in France, prior to postgraduate literary study in Oxford. It’s typical of De Kretser’s sophistication that she leaves the link between these narratives entirely up to you – even the order in which they are to be read is left to the individual reader, given the book’s reversible, Kindle-defying two-way design. I plunged straight into Lili’s intimately conversational reminiscence of running with a circle of young Europeans attached to her Montpellier lycée, in particular Minna, who takes a year out of art school in London to tag along with her boyfriend Nick. Lili struggles for cash, has problems with her landlord and neighbour, and faces everyday racism (her family emigrated to Australia from Asia, like De Kretser, who was born in Sri Lanka). She can’t help but fall for Minna and Nick’s rackety aura of entitled glamour, not least when she learns that Nick is at work on a novel, something it never occurred to her she could do, even as an aspiring scholar under the spell of Simone de Beauvoir. As the three knock around together, Lili’s story unfolds as a coming-of-age vignette portraying the lonely restlessness of unfocused sexual desire and shapeless creative ambition. Regular moments of comedy erupt, especially when Lili joins Minna en route to Italy to visit John Berger’s mistress (apparently an acquaintance of Minna’s mother), where various mid-trip lunch options are rejected as bourgeois until Minna alights on a suitably authentic workers’ restaurant, only to balk at what’s on the menu. Yet there’s steel, too, in De Kretser’s portrait of the chilly welcome Lili receives having arrived into the bosom of the western culture that has defined her intellectual interests. When Lili’s section ends in a moment of collective rapture at the election of François Mitterrand’s socialist party, there’s an immediate shift in tone for the reader, who then turns the book 180 degrees to begin the plottier, more urgent thread set in Lyle’s Australia. Here there are hoverboards, yes, but three-figure-factor sun cream is the norm, much of Sydney is underwater and Islamic worship is banned as a terrorist activity under a suite of laws targeting minorities. As a civil servant who is also a migrant, Lyle recognises that he’s a hair’s breadth from falling foul of the authoritarian powers he helps enforce. When he speaks of a wind that “cuts as if it’s factory-fresh from Gillette”, it’s a mark of De Kretser’s cleverness just how psychologically acute the line feels, almost as if Lyle is trying too hard to signal his buy-in in order to pass without attracting suspicion. The plot turns on cranked-up domestic strife, as Lyle’s go-getting wife sets out to exploit recent euthanasia legislation to kill off his mother and liquidate her assets to move to a new area better suited to the circles they aspire to. There’s an affinity here with the type of story found in George Saunders’s Tenth of December, whose speakers unwittingly reveal the disturbing norms they have assimilated without question. Much of the energy comes from the way De Kretser lets us piece together the precise nature of her climate-ravaged hellscape, as when Lyle speaks casually of prepping his cattle prod before walking to his car at night. De Kretser’s previous novel, 2018’s The Life to Come, also comprised discrete segments, and as in that book, there’s a certain riddling quality here. While the doomy tendency of Lyle’s segment all but snuffs out the heady sense of possibility captured in Lili’s thread, the book’s overriding sense of anger and alarm also mingles with satirical glee. Even if she obviously has the apocalyptic drift of the present in sight, De Kretser passes on to the reader the inescapable feeling that she’s also having fun, in this engaging amalgam of lament and warning shot. Scary Monsters by Michelle de Kretser is published by Atlantic (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWildlife officials in Yellowstone national park captured the “unusual” sight of a cheeky grizzly bear tagging along with a pack of hunting wolves, then making off with their kill. The enthralling video, posted to the National Parks Service Facebook page, shows the October incident in which the wolves from the Junction Butte pack in northern Yellowstone were joined by a lumbering grizzly as they hunted a herd of elk. After the wolves take down an elk, the bear moves in and steals the carcass: a phenomenon known as kleptoparasitism, or parasitism by theft, in which one species steals resources, usually food, from another. The Yellowstone incident was unusual, the NPS said, because wolves and bears usually compete for food and hunt separately. While bears stealing food wolves have captured is not uncommon, in this case the bear decided its best interests were served by actively joining the hunt. “From the bear’s perspective, it takes a lot of energy to follow a wolf pack around, but the reward is high if it successfully takes over a carcass,” the NPS said. “A fresh elk carcass is a wonderful source of fat and protein for a grizzly bear preparing for hibernation. This bear seems to have figured out that following the wolves in the morning will increase its chances of encountering a high-calorie meal.” The wolves were forced to wait until the bear had finished its meal before taking advantage of their own kill. “Typically, wolves will yield to incoming bears,” the NPS said. “Since hunting is dangerous and often unsuccessful, it’s better for wolves to wait their turn at a carcass that has been usurped by a bear than it is for them to continue hunting.” Previous videos from Yellowstone show wolves and bears confronting each other. In one episode, filmed in 2019, a tour guide captured close-up images of a grizzly defending itself from a pack of wolves trying to reclaim an elk carcass. Yellowstone is home to about 123 gray wolves, the NPS says, with 90% of their winter diet consisting of elk. The park, spanning parts of Idaho, Montana and Wyoming, also has about 150 grizzly bears, listed as a threatened species in 1975. A federal judge restored protections for grizzlies in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem in September 2018, after the US Fish and Wildlife Service, claiming a “remarkable recovery”, delisted the species a year earlier.That’s where I will leave you for tonight. Here’s what we learned today: Scott Morrison has resisted calls to make rapid antigen tests free across the country, insisting that the health system can manage the “very different” Omicron variant and that “you can’t just make everything free”. New South Wales again cracked the 20,000 case mark for Covid-19, but it is the hospitalisation rate which is of most concern for health officials. There was a rise of more than 200 people in hospital with Covid-19 in the state on Monday, as doctors warned hospitals in the state are much closer to capacity due to surging Covid cases than is being admitted by officials. As demand for PCR tests continues to place strain on the system, a private pathology company has indefinitely closed 19 of the 20 Covid-19 testing clinics that it runs in NSW following “a well-documented surge in demand” for the tests. In Western Australia, the government announced it would ease restrictions, including on dancing indoors and seated alcohol consumption, after the state only recorded two cases of the virus. Queensland’s chief health officer has said “all of us are going to be exposed” to Covid-19 in the coming weeks, as concerns mount about increasing case numbers in the state’s remote Indigenous communities. A dominant La Niña weather pattern kept temperatures in Australia to their lowest since 2012, but 2021 was still half a degree hotter than average according to data from the Bureau of Meteorology. The Bureau of Meteorology is warning that at 5.20pm severe thunderstorms were detected on the weather radar near Belconnen, Canberra Civic, Hall, Gungahlin and South Canberra. The bureau says the thunderstorms are moving towards the north. “Large, possibly giant hailstones, heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding and damaging winds are likely,” it said in its latest update. Looks like quite the storm has hit the nation’s capital. Hospitals in NSW are much closer to capacity due to surging Covid cases than is being admitted by officials, doctors and nurses are warning, with one saying the system has “never been this bad”. Peter Hannam reports: A private pathology company has indefinitely closed 19 of the 20 Covid-19 testing clinics that it runs in New South Wales following a “a well-documented surge in demand” for the tests. In a notice on its website pathology provider Australian Clinical Labs said that all but one of the drive-through and walk-in clinics it operates across western Sydney would close “effective immediately until further notice”. In a statement, the company said the pathology staff had been “working around the clock”. “Clinical Labs and the entire pathology sector have dealt with testing surges during the pandemic and we are focused on ensuring we deliver surge capacity for testing and laboratory processing,” a spokesperson said. “Pathology staff are working around the clock. This is an unprecedented situation and we and the rest of the sector are doing everything we can to meet demand and the needs of the community. Staff across the sector are working 24/7.” Something about the sticky floors of the dingy nightclub Gemma Moore was at on the New South Wales central coast gave her the sense she was about to get sick. “It was a good night, but I just really didn’t feel comfortable being out,” Moore said. “There weren’t any QR codes and the staff weren’t wearing masks. And I remember thinking: someone in here has Covid.” A few days later, the 28-year-old care worker’s hunch proved correct when she, her boyfriend and her housemate all showed symptoms and tested positive to Covid. The Northern Territory has recorded 58 new Covid cases. The territory’s health department says there are also 21 people hospitalised with Covid-19 in the NT, none of whom are in ICU. The territory has updated its Covid reporting times to a “24-hour reporting period”, with a cut-off of 8pm the night before. Previously it reported up to 8am that morning. It effectively means today’s count is only over a 12-hour period, which might explain why the numbers are down from yesterday’s count of 95 cases. Sanderson says the low case numbers mean that from 6am tomorrow public health restrictions around seated consumption and dancing will be lifted. However the indoor mask requirements will remain in place until 6pm on Friday. She also says proof-of-vaccination requirements will be extended to include places such as nightclubs and large music venues. Good afternoon. Western Australian health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson is speaking now. The state has recorded two new Covid-19 cases, a 20-year-old male, who, she says, is a backpacker and is unvaccinated. The other is a 24-year-old woman who lives in the same household. She was vaccinated. Sanderson also says the state has upgraded its Covid-19 border designations for the ACT and Tasmania to high risk. With that, I am going to hand you over to Michael McGowan who will take you through the afternoon! Teenage Australian rookie Josh Giddey has made history as the youngest player to notch a triple-double in the NBA. Giddey starred with 17 points, 14 assists and 13 rebounds for the Oklahoma City Thunder in a 95-86 home loss to the Dallas Mavericks. At just 19 years old and 84 days, he overtakes fellow NBL alumni LaMelo Ball who set the previous record at 19 years old and 140 days in January last year. While we wait, here is Adam Hills on RATs. WA Health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson is set to hold a press conference within minutes. This is a helpful graphic put together by the Vic govt (but obviously applies to everyone) about when you can get your booster. Staff shortages due to Covid and a “high number of people” with mild symptoms presenting to hospital and requesting a test are putting “excessive pressure” on three Melbourne hospitals, according to its administrators. In a statement that follows a social media post issued earlier on Monday, Suellen Bruce, an executive director at Western Health, called on the community to “avoid presenting to its emergency departments, unless it is absolutely necessary”. As previously reported here, emergency departments facing “extremely high levels of demand and a range of additional pressures” included Sunshine, Footscray and Williamstown Hospital. Bruce said: A range of factors have led to the excessive pressure: significant staff shortages due to Covid; a high number of people with mild Covid symptoms presenting seeking a Covid test; the typical high demand during a public holiday period; and limited available beds within our hospitals (in part due to furloughing of staff). If we could ask the community to please not visit our emergency departments with mild Covid symptoms seeking a PCR or rapid test. Instead please visit one of the many testing sites across Melbourne. More on the Covid situation in Tasmania from AAP: Passengers on a cruise ship in Hobart are being held onboard and tested for COVID-19 after two confirmed cases. Public health officials are also concerned about a rising number of infections associated with a music festival at Launceston with 25 linked to the event so far. Tasmania’s Premier Peter Gutwein said the two people who tested positive on the Coral Discoverer have been removed from the vessel. About 60 crew and 30 staff remain on board and are being tested for the virus with contact tracing to continue over the next two days. The ship’s operators have activated their COVID response plan, to manage the outbreak and ensure no broader risk to the wider community. The premier said the people who attended Launceston’s Party In the Apocalypse at Inveresk Park on December 27 and 28 were also being asked to carefully monitor for symptoms with two dozen infections now linked to the event which attracted about 10,000 fans. “I want to be really clear (that) this does not mean that everybody who attended Party in the Apocalypse needs to turn up at a testing clinic or take a rapid antigen test,” he said on Monday. “But if you were at that event, you need to use your commonsense and monitor for symptoms and if symptomatic please call the public health hotline and go and get a PCR test.” Obtaining rapid antigen tests over the next two weeks is likely to remain “bumpy” across Australia as supply chain issues cause shortages and price spikes. The distribution of tests is “still being worked out with the government”, the Pharmacy Guild of Australia has said. The guild’s national president, Trent Twomey, said price rises were “coming from distributors and manufacturers who are paying extra to get stock to Australia, even chartering jets to get supplies here. Those costs are being passed on.” SA Labor party leader, Peter Malinauskas, has tested positive for Covid. Posting a statement on Twitter, Malinauskas said he had cold-like symptoms and his family had so far tested negative. Beaches are closed from QLD to NSW as ex-Tropical Cyclone Seth creates heavy surf and dangerous winds on parts of the east coast. Rudd not mincing words here ... We are still waiting on the numbers from the NT and WA – but so far today’s case count sits at 37,152. The breakdown so far: NSW records 20,794 new Covid cases. Victoria records 8,577 new Covid cases and three deaths. Tasmania records 466 new Covid-19 cases. ACT records 514 new cases. Queensland records 4,249 new Covid cases. SA records 2,552 new cases. NT: Still to come. WA: Still to come. We’ll have the last two jurisdictions for you as soon as they are out. Hello everyone – this is Cait Kelly back from lunch. Sandro Demaio is the CEO of VicHealth, he posted this about free RATs (or the lack of) on Twitter earlier: Here are some more details on the situation in Queensland, thanks to Ben Smee. Chief health officer Dr John Gerrard said: I think we just have to assume that all of us are going to be exposed in the next few weeks. The next few weeks ... that’s a fairly short timeframe ... Thanks, Cait – Tory here, coming to you from SA where 15 minutes face-to-face is still considered a close contact. It was interesting to hear premier Steven Marshall say that it’s because we don’t have the workforce issues of other states (I’m not sure everyone would agree with that). And that’s it from SA. I am going to hand you over to Tory Shepherd while I grab some lunch! Marshall says there is no evidence of price gouging for RATs in SA. We just got to be careful that we’re not scaring people. There is a shortage of RATs around Australia. There may be an example where somebody has tried to sell it over the internet, but hopefully what we’re going to see in the coming days is those stocks coming into SA. Marshall says the vaccines won’t stop you from getting Covid but will save your life. The early information is that the current vaccination status isn’t as effective at stopping the transmission, but it is far more effective at reducing the severity of the symptoms. The strong message is, go and get yourself vaccinated if you are eligible for your booster. Marshall is asked about the number of cases in prisons. He says the 90 cases are stable. Marshall says they will see forecasting before the end of the week in regards to the peak. He says it will likely be in January. I believe it will certainly be before the end of January ... the reality is nobody has a crystal ball with regards to Omicron, the world only found out about it almost on 24 November. So really only about five weeks ago. He is asked if that peak will be in the thousands: What we don’t really have a clear picture of, is what the likely effects of Christmas Day and New Year’s Eve are going to be in South Australia.” Marshall is asked about the impact on business and says SA has enjoyed the “lowest level of lockdown” in the country. We have had good trading conditions compared to just about every other sector in the country or the world over the last 12 months, and I expect we’ll get back to that as quickly as possible, but we’ve got to do it safely. Marshall says the hospital system is working well, and the state is working within its capabilities. We’re still, even with Omicron, well within the bounds of that flexed up capacity that we’ve got. Both in terms of beds, and in terms of ICU and in terms of ventilators. And now the decision that’s been made with regards to elective surgery that gives us another massive flex up in the number of new beds that we’ve got in our state. Marshall is asked if the new definition will impact people going out. I don’t think so. I think people have been pretty cautious in South Australia since Omicron has arrived. We’re just asking people to be careful and cautious. Marshall says the peak is “some weeks away”. He says elective surgeries will be banned from midnight unless they are urgent category 1 and category 2. He says hundred and thousands of shots will have to be handed out in SA in the coming weeks to help limit the spread. Marshall is asked why SA is the only jurisdiction in Aus to put in the 15-minute timeframe. As I was saying before, other states might have a greater pressure with regards to the workforce than we have in South Australia. I know that there are some fairly big skill shortages in health systems right across the country. We’re not immune from that here in South Australia. Marshall says the new definition of close contact covers people who have been face to face without a mask for 15 minutes. That’s when we know that you’ve got a very high likelihood of transmission. Marshall says SA has the highest rate of testing per capita. And I think probably still enjoys the shortest turnaround time. Marshall says exposure sites will be listed only when there is a high viral load or several cases. We’ll do that assessment, what we’ve demonstrated over the last few weeks is we can narrow, and narrow again ... those people we want to put in isolation. He says there is plenty of spare capacity in PCR clinics that people can get their results quickly. That timeframe has fallen by 12 hours in the last week. Marshall is asked why SA is not following the national cabinet agreed definition of close contact. I think every state has got to adopt an approach which is going to work in their setting. Marshall is asked what if you are dining at a restaurant and the case is one or two tables away. It really is when you’re dining with somebody or you’re face to face contact in a very close proximity. The definition again: So if you’ve been indoors with somebody has been Covid positive for more than 15 minutes without a mask on. Marshall says from today casual contacts in SA are no longer required to isolate. He said they had been asked a lot about who is a close contact. If you are face to face without a mask indoors, then you will be the designated close contact if you have been there for more than 15 minutes. Marshall says vaccinations were low yesterday. We really want to see that climb. He says he will announce the surge in capacity for jabs in the coming days. Marshall says 90 people in prison are now Covid positive. He says all of them are in a stable condition. The numbers unfortunately, are escalating. It’s something we’re keeping a very, very close handle on. SA’s premier Steven Marshall is speaking now. He says 94 people are in hospital and nine are in ICU but none on a ventilator. NSW has reported 20,794 new Covid-19 cases and four more deaths, as authorities asked residents to avoid putting unnecessary pressure on the stressed health system. With 1,204 people hospitalised with the virus on Monday – up from 1,066 the day before – and more than 2,500 health workers furloughed, the health system is under strain. Chief health officer Kerry Chant: We are seeing health systems around the world put under stress and whilst we are very well placed ... it is important that we all play our part in not placing unnecessary burden on the health system. People should avoid going to the emergency department to seek PCR tests for Covid-19 if they’re not unwell, Dr Chant said. That potentially compromises the care of those that need it. I know that people want to know what their diagnosis is ... but can you also just think about some of the implications of those actions. Dr Chant reassured NSW residents that the health system is available for those who need it, urging people with health concerns not to delay seeking treatment. As of 30 December 2,510 healthcare workers were in isolation after being exposed to Covid. Cricket Australia chief executive Nick Hockley has tested positive to Covid-19. CA announced on Monday morning Hockley had returned the positive test after developing mild symptoms, and assured he has had no contact with the Australian men’s team, who are due to play the Sydney Ashes Test from Wednesday. “After experiencing mild symptoms, I immediately got a PCR test which has since returned a positive result,” Hockley said in a statement. “I am isolating at home with my family, who have returned negative results.” And that’s it for Victoria. SA’s premier Steven Marshall is expected to speak soon. Weimar is asked to clarify that if a household contact tests positive, then after a few days their housemate/family member tests positive if the original case has to continue isolating for another seven days. We are not seeing any evidence yet of people getting reinfected if they have previously been positive. If you’re living with another household member who turns positive later, if you have finished all those isolation, if you’ve been cleared, you can go around your business as normal. Jeroen Weimar says if you are waiting more than four to five days for your test to check in with the hotline. He says if you know you’ve been with a positive case get a RAT if you can and monitor your symptoms. Foley says “we are still learning about the Omicron variant”. It doesn’t need much to get into vulnerable populations to people with underlining conditions, our elderly community, our immunosuppressed community and it’s in those communities that even a less virulent strain can have severe health outcomes. We want to really act quickly to get in front of that. The way to do that is boosters and vaccines for kids, he said. Foley has just been asked about the tweet from Western Health asking people not to rock up to ED if they don’t have to. Yes, I continue to be very concerned that all of our emergency departments are facing unprecedented demand that grows every day. He says the more people that test positive to Omicron, the greater the pressure grows and more hospitals in other areas of the city are also putting in the same procedures. Here it is again for those who didn’t see it on the blog earlier: Back to Victoria quickly where Foley has labelled Omicron “a substantial challenge” for the healthcare system. He says hospitals are preparing for more cases in the coming months. We are already seeing in the space of three days, more people being infected than over the course of the entire first year of the pandemic. Foley says case numbers will continue to increase “exponentially”. You’ll recall the December meeting of national cabinet received advice from the Doherty Institute, which essentially pointed to precisely what’s happening. If anything, about the Institute’s modelling, it might indeed be conservative in terms of the infectivity rates that we’re starting to see with Omicron. Foley says the states support free RATs. The states clearly have a view that freely available rapid antigen testing as part of an ongoing response to Omicron forms part of the national response. In lieu of that national response, the states have to fill the void. Weimer says if you are symptomatic you should have a PCR or RAT test as soon as possible, but act as if you are already positive. With the high case numbers in our community, we have to assume if we’re symptomatic, that we’re probably Covid-positive. He says there are currently 1,700 healthcare workers currently impacted by being a close contact or workplace contact. Victoria’s Covid commander Jeroen Weimar says half of the PCR tests are coming back after two days because of the high rates of positive tests. The rate of positive cases of all the ones we’re testing ... we’ve never seen before. We’re now seeing one in five cases who are being tested in a PCR system is now positive. That’s a tenfold increase. Normally ... it’s around a 2% positivity rate. Emergency departments in the west of Melbourne are asking people to not come in unless they really need to. Foley says the government is scaling up its state-run vaccination clinics to help with booster shots for children. We will be ensuring that up to 300,000 Victorians can get vaccinated every week, through our ramped up state-run clinics, and we look forward to meeting that number. A further 28 pop-up clinics will be put up from 5 January across the state. Foley says if you have had your second dose in September or earlier, you are eligible for your third dose as of tomorrow. One million more Victorians are now eligible. Vaccination is the best protection that you can have against the Omicron variant. Foley: As we head into 2022, it is more important than ever that if you are eligible for that third dose to come forward and get it. Kids five to 11 will also become eligible from 10 January. Victoria’s health minister Martin Foley is speaking now. First up, on vaccinations, 10.9% of Victorians, 12 and above have now had their third dose. Therefore there is still a very large number of people who need to come forward for their third dose. He says over 93% of Victorians have now had two doses. 491 people are currently in hospital and of those, 104 are in ICU and 24 are on a ventilator. We are now waiting on Victoria’s health minister Martin Foley and Covid commander Jeroen Weimar to give a press conference in Melbourne. Cases in Queensland are expected to peak late January, early February. Queensland chief health officer John Gerrard is speaking now. He says one patient in ICU is ventilated. Gerrard says “we know there has been a strain on the testing”. There has been significant demand on the Gold Coast and we are increasing our capacity in the next day or so. Palaszczuk says there are 10 people in ICU and the state has recorded one death, a man in his late 30s. This goes to show that this pandemic can have very serious consequences for anyone. She says there were 30,800 tests in the last 24 hours. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is addressing media now. This is a highly infectious strain. And I will ask Queenslanders to think where they’ll be going this month, especially if they haven’t had their booster. At close to 11pm last night, SA Health tweeted out a new list of exposure sites. Check them in the link below: Here is the press release about Labor’s plan to build a fleet of nationally owned ships. There are 11 people in hospital and of those two are in ICU. Albanese says the government has no plan for addressing climate change. The fact is that he has had presided over a period whereby they’re just treading water. There’s no plan for the future. Labor is putting forward a comprehensive suite of policies to increase living standards, to increase wages, to support permanent jobs, to make sure that we ... deal with the challenge of climate change. Albanese is attacking the government on the vaccine rollout. Why is it that the government says they want a four-month gap at the moment in between your second shot and your booster but that reduces to three months at the end of the month? The reason why they’re doing that is because they don’t have the capacity to move to three months right now. They haven’t planned in terms of the supply of the booster shots. Albanese is now attacking the government on the latest job figures: One of the things we see with the jobs figures is the fact that two million Australians are either unemployed or want more hours. They want full-time, permanent jobs. And one of the things we’re seeing in Australia, with the insecure work is more casual jobs, less permanent jobs, and therefore less security for people. Albanese is asked if RATs should be free: No one should be excluded from getting a rapid test because of the income. In Newcastle and indeed the Central Coast it has been impossible for people to get tested. Now they’re being told, go get a rapid antigen test, but there aren’t enough rapid antigen tests available for sale. And for those people who could find one, of course, we have some price gouging going on and ... becoming simply unaffordable for many people. Anthony Albanese is speaking in Newcastle now talking about his plan to build an Australian shipping fleet. We know that exploitation in the international shipping industry through flags of convenience is a major issue. We want to make sure that we have good jobs, good pay jobs for Australians with Australian businesses being backed. When you have an asset like the Newcastle port that isn’t being utilised fully for the economic benefit common sense has to kick in here. A former Australian under-19s cricketer who alleges he was sexually assaulted on a representative tour in the 1980s has revealed the “trauma and distress” he has felt for decades. Jamie Mitchell went public with the allegations in an ABC report on Sunday, stating he believed he had been raped by a team official on a tour of India and Sri Lanka when he was 18. From Australia Associated Press: Lots of chatter this morning on Twitter about the PM’s response to questions over why RATs are not being provided by the government. He said “you can’t make everything free”. This is from senator Rex Patrick: And this from secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions Sally McManus: Some of the stats on the climate in Australia in 2021 are now available from the Bureau of Meteorology (although the full briefing is a few days away). Rainfall, as you might expect for a second year affected by a La Nina event in the Pacific was above average for the country. Note, though, it was not that much above the long-run norm at a national level. On the warmth side, Australian mean temperatures were also above the 1961-90 average, with rainfall a factor. Those charts complement this review on a year of storms, I wrote last week: As for the start of 2022, expect a bit of rain across much of coastal eastern Australia, particularly if you’re in the crosshairs of ex-tropical cyclone Seth as it arcs back towards southern Queensland and northern NSW. Note too, that hazardous surf warnings are out for the Sydney coast region for dangerous conditions from Monday afternoon into Tuesday and longer. I know this tweet from GA’s Paul Karp is a few days old, but all this chatter about if RATs should be free this morning has made me think about the same point. Tasmania has reported 466 new Covid-19 cases, marking another record day for fresh infections. AAP reports: The state’s health department confirmed the new infections on Monday, as active infections rose to 1,691 cases. Tasmania’s previous daily case high of 428 was reported on Saturday. Fifty-six cases are being cared for at community case management facilities and 278 are being managed at home. Covid-positive hospital cases have dropped from three to two. None are in intensive care. Some 120 people were released from isolation on Saturday after recovering from Covid-19. Health minister Jeremy Rockliff said a three-year-old child had tested positive for Covid-19 in the state’s south, after presenting to Royal Hobart hospital’s emergency department. While no doubt distressing for the family, the child was treated by an emergency department medical specialist and was deemed safe for discharge. Rapid antigen tests remain available to asymptomatic close contacts or anyone directed to take a test by the health department, he added. Hunt finishes off by saying the supply is strong, as is Australia’s position. There are more vaccines, more boosters, more rapid antigen tests and more treatments. And the fact that we now have a disease which right around the world is leading to more cases, but too vastly fewer severe cases by comparison with what we had seen previously on a per capita basis, of those infected, is an immensely heartening development. There are challenges in every phase of this pandemic. But Australia has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world and one of the lowest rates of death and loss of life in the world. Mirroring the PM this morning, Hunt says: “You can’t have an infinite supply of free goods.” If there were an unconstrained flow of completely unpriced products – so if there was an infinite supply to an infinite number of people, then, of course, that demand couldn’t be met. The common sense of providing an infinite supply of free goods somehow has been lost in this discussion. Hunt says Omicron “has changed the balance” and that the decision by states to put PCR tests on travellers put a strain on the system. We have less severe cases, but we have more transmissible cases. We actually as a federal government, we’re in the market in orders. We’ve provided continuous supply for aged care throughout that which has been our part in it. We know that many of the states were offered and they’ve only recently just prior to Christmas or since then, have decided to take up the offers that have been made by suppliers, but we welcome that. But also the decision to impose PCR tests on state travellers put enormous stress on that system. And I’m very pleased that Queensland had dropped the requirement of PCR test and that means that there are people for non-health reasons that are requiring rapid antigen tests to travel interstate but there is actually a very significant flow into the country. Just want to point out it wasn’t only Queensland that had PCR requirements. Hunt says there is “a strong supply” of RATs coming into the country. We’ll have over 100m rapid antigen tests, more than double available over the course of the next two months. So I just wanted to put all of that into perspective. Hunt is asked when we will see details on the distribution of RATs into vulnerable communities. That’s being discussed at the national cabinet this week. I’m working today ... the prime minister is engaging in it. And so we’re actually ahead of schedule as to where we expected to be. At four million RATs contracted, that will increase to over 100m shortly. And there’s a significant private market inflow. Hunt is asked if the GST should be dropped on RATs – he says it’s a matter for the states. That’s entirely a matter for the states. The prime minister, myself, the treasurer have discussed that money doesn’t go to the commonwealth, that goes to the states. It took a long while for us, the prime minister and the treasurer, and myself in our different roles at the time to work on [getting the] GST removed on sanitary products. It took a lot of convincing for some of the states and we’re very happy to do that here, but it would require the states to sign off on it because they forego that revenue and so under the rules of the national agreement, they would need to sign off on that. There are no barriers at the commonwealth level. Hunt is asked about RATs and if he is concerned people are spreading Covid because they can’t find tests. So far we’ve had just over 55m PCR tests. There are well over 84m tests that the states have ordered. The commonwealth is also in the process of securing over $370m worth of tests and we’ve already procured 10m tests. The second is the state system is providing the rapid antigen tests and we’ve covered 100% of the vaccine costs and 50% of those tests costs for about $2.5bn. And then thirdly, there is the over the counter purchasing which will be supplemented by the support for concessional cardholders which the prime minister was addressing so very considerable supplies. Obviously there’s high global demand, but just quietly, the Australian government has gone into the market and secured that support for those with health conditions and those that are concessional card holders. Hunt says Omicron is more transmissible but less severe. What that means is that the risk is not of hospital beds or places being overwhelmed, particularly ICU, particularly more so ventilation, but always in terms of balancing the workforce. So national cabinet this week, will continue to focus on the workforce measures. And as we look around the world, we’re seeing similar discussions and similar changes. Hunt says 91.5% of Australians have had their second dose. Over 2.5m boosters already delivered and that is set to increase significantly as the state clinics joined pharmacies and the GPs in this rollout programme. Hunt says as of tomorrow an additional 3.75 million people will be eligible for boosters. There is enough vaccine for every Australian to have their booster already in the country and all orders are being met. We’re on track with TGA approval supply and the distribution process is already beginning for children’s vaccines to commence on 10 January a week from today. And so, again, not all of these will occur on the one day, but we want to make sure that every parent books a child in between five years and after 12 years of age, it can help protect them ... and above all else it protects the older members of the family. Greg Hunt is speaking now. He says we are seeing “significantly less” people on ventilation. This is actually down 54 patients, nationwide, on the 15 December. So almost three weeks later, there’s been a reduction of patients on ventilation. Stephen John Duckett is a health economist at the Grattan Institute. He posted this on Twitter earlier: From AAP: New figures released by the tax office showed 485,000 jobs were created across the nation since September. Josh Frydenberg said the county had experienced a jobs boom in recent months. “Small businesses across the country who did it so tough early on (in the pandemic) ... are now coming [back] better,” Frydenberg told Sky News on Monday. “We’re starting to see these jobs coming back and it’s looking very promising for the Australian economy.” The Australian Taxation Office data on Monday comes after the unemployment rate recently fell to 4.6%, which was a 13-year low. Job advertisements are also at a 13-year high, with more than 250,000 jobs available. The ATO data takes in the period following the lifting of Delta variant driven lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. Covid-19 restrictions across the country eased after the lockdowns ended, but infection case numbers have surged in recent weeks due to the spread of the Omicron variant. Bonning says asked what the increase in Covid cases will mean for healthcare workers: What we know from data is that there are no such things as quiet times and peak times in the healthcare system anymore, it’s pretty much running at capacity the whole time. Michael Bonning, chair of the AMA NSW Council, is speaking to the ABC now. He said the vaccines were keeping people out of hospital. But certainly the higher case rates across the state and across the country do mean we should expect to see increasing rates in hospital. Now, whether that will extend to ICU is a story where, you know, we’re still working to understand. Our understanding of the new variant and whether it is milder, we’re developing evidence on that at the moment. First, it was toilet paper, then it was vaccines, now it’s all about no RATs. As Peter points out here, NSW’s ICU numbers are up by 14.4%. This will add to concerns the health system is under pressure from rising hospitalisations and isolating staff. Earlier, Australian Medical Association vice president Dr Chris Moy told the AAP the system was “struggling”. “People look at the numbers and see the 1,066 in hospitals but the health system doesn’t just look after Covid and people are having critical surgery delayed,” he said. Victoria has recorded more case numbers but less testing, with less than 44,000 PCR tests conducted in the last 24 hours. Hospitalisations have also slightly risen to 491 people in hospital. NSW now has 1,204 people in hospital, a jump from 1,066 yesterday. In ICU 95 people are currently being treated, up from 83 yesterday. Here is the video of the PM on Sunrise. He says we need to “stop thinking about case numbers, and thinking about serious illness, living with the virus, managing our own health and ensuring we are monitoring those systems and keep our economy going.” From AAP: Prime minister Scott Morrison has stressed Australia’s health systems are more than equipped to handle a rising number of Omicron infections. Morrison has urged people not to solely focus on case numbers, despite infections exploding in states and territories in recent days. However, he said levels of Covid-19 patients being treated in intensive care and on ventilators remained stable following the rise in cases. “It’s important that with the rising case numbers, we see that the severeness of this illness is already being shown to be around 75% less than what we saw with Delta,” Morrison told the Seven Network on Monday. “Rising case numbers is part of the Omicron period, it’s part of the new phase of the pandemic we’re in.” More than 32,000 Covid-19 cases were reported nationwide in the 24 hours to Saturday evening, most of them in NSW. The prime minister said talks were under way with state and territory leaders to ensure health systems were able to meet a potential surge. While Morrison was heading to Canberra on Monday for discussions on concession arrangements for rapid-antigen tests, he ruled out making it free for everyone. “We’re now in a stage of the pandemic where you can’t just make everything free,” he said. Researchers in Antarctica are dealing with an outbreak of coronavirus despite being based in one of the world’s most remote regions. Since 16 December at least 16 of the 25 polar researchers based at Belgium’s Princess Elisabeth Polar Station are now infected with the virus. Cases remain mild so far. “The situation isn’t dramatic,” Joseph Cheek, a project manager for the International Polar Foundation, told the BBC. “While it has been an inconvenience to have to quarantine certain members of the staff who caught the virus, it hasn’t significantly affected our work.’’ All staff were offered to leave on a flight out on 12 January but so far, they all say they will stay. All 25 researchers are fully vaccinated and one has had a booster shot. Before arriving at the station the team went through strict quarantine and testing process – they had a PCR test in Belgium before flying to South Africa. They then all quarantined for 10 days in Cape Town, taking another test during that time. They all then took a third test before leaving for Antarctica and another five days after they arrived. One of the team members tested positive seven days after arriving and despite isolating, the virus has spread across the centre. From AAP: There are an estimated 1.7m undiscovered viruses in mammals and birds, any one of which could become a new pandemic. To combat and manage emerging zoonotic diseases, the federal government will put an additional $8.4m into Australia’s wildlife health and early detection research over the next four years. The agriculture minister, David Littleproud, said the funding would put Australia at the forefront of a global initiative aimed at preventing future diseases. “Covid-19 has brought into sharp focus the importance of recognising and managing emerging zoonotic disease risks which can originate from wildlife,” Littleproud said. “Nearly all major exotic livestock diseases of potential concern to Australia, including African swine fever and foot-and-mouth disease, will have wildlife and/or feral animals as part of their cause or spread.” The environment minister, Susan Ley, said a healthy environment was a precursor to human and animal health. “This funding will prioritise the investigation of significant wildlife disease events to identify the underlying causes and determine their relevance to human, animal(s), and environmental health,” she said. Anthony Albanese was on RN earlier. This is what he had to say about RATs: While we are on the topic of NSW hospitals, here is a little bit more from AAP this morning: As of Sunday, 1,066 people were in hospital with the coronavirus including 83 in intensive care, 24 of whom require ventilation. Not all of the 1,066 people in hospital with coronavirus were admitted for treatment for Covid-19, new research has revealed. Some patients in hospital with Covid-19 were admitted for unrelated illness or injury, a small sampling of patients in two local health districts taken by NSW Health over the past two weeks shows. Among the people being counted as Covid-19 hospitalisations are women in labour, people seeking mental health support and care, and people with appendicitis or bowel obstruction, NSW Health said in a statement. The agency did not respond to questions about whether a similar proportion of hospitalisations during the Delta wave were primarily for other reasons. “It is to be expected that as Covid-19 cases in the community increase some patients will present with conditions other than Covid-19 as their primary reasons for seeking healthcare,” a NSW Health spokesperson said in a statement. The Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation of New South Wales and the Health Services Union have both joined the AMA in expressing their concern this morning about the rising number of Covid patients in hospital and the pressure on the system. The number of people in hospital in the state with Covid has topped 1,000. Those peak bodies have predicted that the healthcare system will reach a critical phase within the next two months. NSW Health announced in recent days that some staff who are asymptomatic and deemed close contacts will be able to get out of isolation and come back to work to take the pressure off the system. Frydenberg is asked about the UK, where 25% of the public sector is off sick with Covid, and if we will see the same here. The isolation requirements for those health workers is actually putting pressure on the system and it is an issue that national cabinet will be dealing with this Wednesday. The prime minister is talking with not just Greg Hunt and the chief medical officer but myself and others about the processes that – and the changes that potentially could be made to ensure that we have a furlough system which doesn’t leave too much pressure on our health system because those workers are absolutely essential in key settings. Frydenberg is asked about job figures. Australia is experiencing a jobs boom. We have seen nearly half a million new jobs created since September as our two largest states, New South Wales and Victoria, come out of lockdown. The unemployment rate today is around a 13-year low at 4.6% and job ads are around a 13-year high with more than 250,000 job ads available. A common refrain from businesses around the country is where can they get more workers from? We are seeing key workforce shortages as the borders have been closed, the international students haven’t been coming in in the numbers that would normally occur and so too with skilled workers. Frydenberg is pressed on this: why not make them free for everyone if they are essential? We can’t make every product for free. What we do is provide it to those most vulnerable in those settings and particularly the aged care system and working through the public health orders to meet the costs with the states on a 50-50 basis. Significant amounts of rapid antigen tests are making their way to Australia. There is high global demand, as you would expect, because the Omicron variant is much more transmissible than the Delta variant. The good news is perhaps that the Omicron variant is going to provide a bridge from the pandemic to the endemic because early medical evidence is in showing that it’s perhaps 75% less severe than the Delta variant. Josh Frydenberg is talking on News Breakfast now. He has just been asked why the federal government won’t make rapid antigen tests free for everyone. We are making those rapid antigen tests available to people who are in aged care and the vulnerable settings and we are partnering with the states to provide concessional access. That is work that is being undertaken by the national cabinet based on the medical advice and there is a meeting set down for Wednesday. The states have ordered 84m rapid antigen tests which are on their way. The commonwealth has ordered further rapid antigen tests. They will be an important defence against the virus but we have also provided 55m PCR tests at a cost to the commonwealth of $2.5bn to date. Good morning everyone. This is Cait Kelly and I will be taking you through the news this morning. Here are the big stories so far: The NSW health system is facing staff shortages, the peak medical association has warned as Covid-19 hospitalisations passed 1,000. As of Sunday, 1,066 people were in hospital with the coronavirus including 83 in intensive care, 24 of who require ventilation. Australian Medical Association vice president Chris Moy said the system was “struggling” with staff shortages as case numbers rise and health workers fall sick, test positive or are identified as close contacts. “People look at the numbers and see the 1,066 in hospitals but the health system doesn’t just look after Covid and people are having critical surgery delayed,” he told AAP. At the peak of the Delta outbreak on 21 September, there were 1,266 people hospitalised with Covid infections and 244 in intensive care. A NSW Health spokesperson said as of 30 December, 2,510 healthcare workers were in isolation after being exposed to Covid-19. Labor has promised to build an independent fleet to secure Australia’s access to fuel supplies and overseas trading routes. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, says despite shipping accounting for almost all of Australia’s imported and exported goods, only 1% of seaborne trade is carried by Australian ships. “The Morrison-Joyce government has put our national security and economic sovereignty at risk by standing idle as large multinationals dumped Australian flagged and crewed vessels so they could hire cheaper overseas crews,” he said. “Our nation [relies] on foreign governments and companies for our essential imports ... including fuel.” Many people across the country are still waiting days for their PCR tests to come back and Sydney charity Reverend Bill Crews Foundation is asking the NSW government to make the tests free for rough sleepers. We’ll bring you more on these stories and others as we go through the morning. With that, let’s get cracking.In a normal universe, we’d be solely focused on the final minutes of a drama-filled classic between the Buccaneers and Jets. We’d gush over Tom Brady’s game-winning drive that again ripped whatever semblance of hope remains in New York’s long-suffering fans. We’d marvel at Brady’s unmistakable precision with under two minutes, culminating in his cool-as-a-cucumber delivery on a 33-yard touchdown strike to Cyril Grayson that left not nearly enough time for Zach Wilson to respond. We’d question Robert Saleh’s decision to go for it on fourth-and-2 at the Bucs’ seven-yard line instead of kicking a field goal that would opened a seven-point lead with two minutes to spare. Instead, this game will be remembered for a different brand of dramatic: Antonio Brown adding to his endless list of disturbing antics. In the third quarter, with the Tampa Bay offense on the field mid-drive, a visibly furious Brown removed his jersey on the sideline, threw his shoulder pads down, then cascaded across the end zone, tore off his tank top, threw the tank and a glove with vigor into a sea of Jets fans, then continued shirtless into the tunnel with one final peace sign before fading to black. It was a scene so bizarre and rare that reportedly MetLife Stadium security thought the shirtless man was a fan and were about to tackle him until they realized it was the seven-time Pro Bowl wide receiver. The game continued and, perhaps not coincidentally, the Bucs started mounting their comeback. Brown’s antics made a mockery of his team, of Brady who been his No 1 advocate – some might say enabler – and of course himself. Again. All because, according to Fox’s Jay Glazer, Bucs coach Bruce Arians asked Brown to come into the game. It was too much even for Arians who moments after the game declared that Brown “is no longer a Buc”. As Brown has personified like no other, you can get away with pretty much anything in the NFL if you have talent. You can be an accused rapist, rob a delivery truck, and fake a vaccination card. You can quit on your previous teams. Too many coaches, Arians included, believe it will different when they get a hold of a troubled player with natural ability. But even Arians reached a point with Brown after the fake vaccination card stunt where he was unable to sugarcoat the situation by pretending Brown was a changed man, or that he would go to therapy, or that he deserved his umpteenth chance for whatever other reason. When asked about Brown’s return from suspension and how people would react to giving him yet another opportunity after Arians had previously said Brown only had one chance, the frustrated coach responded: “I could give a shit what they think, the only thing I care about is this football team.” Translation: Antonio Brown can help us win football games, full stop. Well, Brown won’t be helping the Bucs anymore because, less than two weeks after his return from suspension, he finally found a rule to break that will be judged more seriously than his many graver off-field misdeeds. He quit on his team on live television. Everyone saw it, so unlike his other, more serious alleged acts, his enablers can’t hide behind lame excuses. This was not mutual. He was not provoked. No one is trying to extort money from him. Blah, blah, blah. Brown is, simply put, not a person who respects, well, anything. He remains, however, a damn good football player. In his previous three games before the shirtless farewell in New York, he amassed over 300 receiving yards and three touchdowns. Brown figured to be a key contributor for the Bucs as they defended their Super Bowl title defense in the playoffs, especially with Chris Godwin out for the season. The loss of Godwin and necessary ousting of Brown will make the Bucs chances of a repeat much slimmer. But at least the Tampa Bay locker room has rid itself of an immeasurable amount of toxicity. Hopefully, for the sake of all the people Brown has tormented, this will truly be the final straw in his NFL career. Video of the week A FedExField railing came crumbling down in Dan Snyder’s sorry excuse for a stadium but luckily Philadelphia quarterback Jalen Hurts, fresh off a 20-16 win that by day’s end lifted the Eagles back into the playoffs, was there to save the day. MVP(s) of the week Joe Burrow and Ja’Marr Chase, Cincinnati Bengals. One glance at Burrow’s and Chase’s stat lines (446 passing yards, four TDs and no INTs for Burrow, 266 receiving yards and three TDs for Chase) and you might think they were still at LSU beating up on some hapless Division II patsy. Instead, this explosion of offense came against the Kansas City Chiefs, who have been one of the NFL’s stoutest defenses this season. Burrow and Chase put the rest of the AFC on notice that the connection we saw in spades during the middle of the season is back and better than ever. The Bengals’ gutsy 34-31 win came after being down two scores down. More importantly, it clinched the AFC North for Cincinnati, an incredible feat for a team that finished in the division cellar last season. Burrow did give Bengals supporters a slight scare when he came up favoring his right knee and sat out for the game’s final play, but we’re all set to declare him healthy. Stat of the week Bill Belichick records his 20th season with at least 10 wins. It rained points for New England early and often in a dominating 50-10 win over the hapless Jaguars. With the win, Belichick tied Don Shula as the only coaches in NFL history to achieve 10 wins in 20 separate seasons. Belichick acknowledged the feat after the game though wasn’t exactly self-congratulatory, “Players win games … fortunate to coach a lot of great players,” he told reporters. “I’ve been lucky.” Belichick returns to the postseason after a one-year hiatus, thanks in large part to the quick maturation of Mac Jones. Jones was again efficient, completing 22 of 30 passes for 227 yards and three touchdowns. Conversely, Trevor Lawrence was erratic and threw three picks. Lawrence has shown signs of living up to the hype this season though probably less than most expected. But it’s hard not to ponder what Lawrence’s rookie season would have looked like had he been under steady hands like Belichick and Josh McDaniels and not inside the Urban Meyer trainwreck. Quote of the week “I wasn’t good enough today. We weren’t good enough today. That’s why the result was what it was.” – Mike McCarthy, following Dallas’s 25-22 loss to Arizona There were myriad reasons the Cowboys lost on Sunday but none loom as large as McCarthy’s horrific clock management. McCarthy had no timeouts left on the Cardinals’ final drive, thus was unable to challenge what appeared to be an obvious delay of game and, more importantly, a fumble. (The fumble occurred right before the two-minute warning, after which it would have been under automatic review. ) Elsewhere around the league • The Dolphins’ seven-game win streak came to a dramatic halt as the Titans shellacked Miami 34-3 to not only clinch the AFC South but move into the No 1 seed in the AFC (by virtue of KC’s loss). Ryan Tannehill was efficient against his former team, but the Dolphins truly had no answer for D’Onta Foreman’s 132 yards and a score on 26 carries. Tennessee’s defense continues to be a revelation. The Dolphins, like most Titans opponents of late, struggled to both run and convert big plays. • Rookie Trey Lance succeeded in his second start of the season as San Francisco bested Houston 23-7. It was a ho-hum performance for Lance in the first half as the offense struggled to generate momentum. But he came alive in the second, tossing two touchdowns including a beauty to Deebo Samuel. Having the 49ers’ defense pitch a shutout in the second half was a nice bonus. Despite the win, Kyle Shanahan quickly declared that Jimmy Garoppolo, who is nursing a thumb injury, will reclaim his starter role as soon as he is healthy. The 49ers can clinch a playoff spot with a win next week or a New Orleans loss. • The Raiders’ 23-20 win over Indianapolis was the first time this season a team beat Indy after allowing Jonathan Taylor to rush for over 100 yards. Now the Raiders have a pivotal matchup against the Chargers in Week 18 with the winner clinching a wild-card berth. • Las Vegas’s win was also a nice punctuation mark on an afternoon in which the life and influence of John Madden was widely celebrated with a moment of silence in every NFL stadium. • The Rams’ offense struggled mightily against a beaten-up Ravens secondary but came alive late to give Los Angeles a come-from-behind 20-19 win over a gutsy Ravens squad. A win in the NFL is always a glorious thing but Sean McVay has to be concerned about Matthew Stafford’s propensity for throwing the ball to the wrong team. Sunday’s two-interception game marked the fourth time this season that Stafford has thrown multiple picks.Forty years ago this month, at the height of darts’ first great tungsten rush, Jocky Wilson left Jollees nightclub in Stoke clutching a world title and a cheque for £6,500 – about £26,000 in today’s money. It is a measure of the sport’s renewed popularity that whoever lifts the PDC World Championship trophy on Monday night will pocket £500,000. And while the final ‘Oi, Oi, Ois’ are yet to ring out across Alexandra Palace, it is already safe to hail this year’s tournament as a vintage edition. When Michael Smith outpowered Jonny Clayton in a last 16 final-set tiebreak it was instantly hailed as a game for the ages. But such was the quality in so many subsequent matches, including Smith’s 5-4 victory against the world No 1, Gerwyn Price and Peter Wright’s 6-4 slugfest over Gary Anderson – during which Wright hit 24 180s, a record for a world championship match – it may not even have been the best encounter of the week. Meanwhile a nine-dart finish was once so rare that in 1982 the sponsors offered £52,000 for anyone who could land it – eight times bigger than the winner’s prize. No one did. Yet when Price achieved the feat against Smith on Saturday it was the third of the tournament – a record. An average of a million people watched last year’s final. Would anyone be surprised if that figure was surpassed on Monday when Wright faces off against Smith? So what accounts for the popularity of darts? To these eyes its pleasures come from its purity – dart and board, eye and nerve – combined with its unremitting pressures. After all, there are few sports where the gap between perfection and failure is so slim; where the adrenaline surge of hitting a 180 can so abruptly morph into a public shaming if three darts for a double are spurned; where a player must think, to calculate where to throw next, but not overthink, as then the tension and heckling will buckle the mind with doubt. It is a sport with so many momentum shifts it could be played on a seesaw. And at the highest levels, when players throw for a leg or set or match every 90 seconds or so, darts becomes almost a combat sport. True, an opponent cannot hit. But they can constantly wound. It perhaps helps that darts remains a sport where you don’t have to be fast-tracked into an academy, or born with a silver spoon in your mouth. The Scottish player Peter Wright was a tyre fitter before making it as a professional in his mid-30s. His compatriot Gary Anderson, his opponent in Sunday’s semi-final, was a builder. With their pot bellies and tattoos, they look more like us than most elite sports stars. Longevity, too, may play a part: incredibly Paul Lim, “the Singapore Slinger” who played alongside Wilson in 1982 was still good enough to play in this year’s world championship at 67. Wilson, of course, was the ultimate darting rags-to-riches-and-back-to-rags story. He grew up in desperate poverty, including years in a children’s home, before he began playing in the mid-1970s while on the dole. Famously he had no teeth. Early in his career his dentures fell out during a match and in the excitement he trod on them. When the Observer went to the 1980 world championship they found Wilson wandering about with “cans of beers in his pocket, needing a shave, and with bits of dried fruit in his pockets”. At one point a girl from the sponsor Embassy gave the players 200 cigarettes each for the night. “They smoke so many free fags all the week that they are coughing their hearts up by the end of it,” our man noted – including Wilson, who played with a cigarette lodged in his non‑throwing hand. But Wilson could play, and how. Two years later he beat John Lowe in the 1982 final despite arguments with the press, leaving the stage in tears after a row with Alun Evans, and the roof of his council house in Kirkcaldy collapsing during the tournament. “It was not a particularly good final,” Matthew Engel wrote in these pages. “Lowe was off by a millimetre or so, and millimetres are more significant in darts than in any sport except mountaineering.” That victory allowed Wilson to buy a house of his own. Tragically over the years his drinking (the commentator Sid Waddell famously quipped that Wilson would “win darts matches when other people would have been in intensive care”) took its toll and the Scot ended his days back in the council estate where he grew up. Meanwhile a sport that was once the sole preserve of pubs and working men’s clubs is now attracting interest from academics. One recent study examined 29,381 matches and found that, if both players could win the match with just one dart, performance at youth and amateur level worsened by 10%‑26%, while for professionals it dropped less than 1%. That is a striking finding given the abuse that top players face at crunch moments. It has been particularly bad in this 2021 tournament, with the sozzled crowd telling the Welshman Price that he was “a sheep-shagging bastard” and barracking and booing non-English players. The unwillingness of the announcers to properly call it out remains a lingering stain. Meanwhile another study showed observers could accurately decipher how a top darts player would throw based on their body language. Typically, faces showed more expression and anxiety – with preparation times shorter – before a poor throw than before a good one. Of course darts has its detractors. But even they would have to accept that a sport that has zig-zagged from boom to bust, schism to lengthy separation, and from resuscitation to renaissance over the past four decades is booming, and now as much a part of the Christmas and New Year furniture as hangovers and failed resolutions.A US spymaster inadvertently helped the Nazis develop one of the most effective disinformation campaigns of the second world war by spreading rumours about Hitler’s plans for a Where Eagles Dare-style Alpine redoubt, a historian with access to classified US military records has found. The myth that the Nazis were amassing weapons and crack units of 100,000 fanatical soldiers in the spring of 1945 for a last stand in the Austro-Bavarian Alps was without any basis in fact but had a powerful hold on the imagination of American and British military leaders, who feared it could prolong the war for years. Thomas Boghardt, a German historian at the US Army Center of Military History in Washington DC, argues in a new book that the myth of an Alpine Nazi fortress was not a crucial factor behind American forces abandoning the race to Berlin in favour of a southward push but was one that US spycraft had a hand in making. The Nazi leadership first got wind of allied fears of a mountaintop last stand in 1944, after the SS’s intelligence service intercepted a cable sent from the US embassy in Berne, Switzerland. As Boghardt shows in Covert Legions: US Army Intelligence in Germany 1944-1949, the message had most likely been sent by Allen Dulles, later the head of the CIA during the Bay of Pigs invasion fiasco but at the time the Berne station chief for the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). British intelligence had discovered that the special cipher used to secure Dulles’s communications had been compromised, but the American spymaster continued to ignore their warnings, driving one irate British agent to despair. “[C]ould you report to the fool [Dulles] who knows his code was compromised if he has used that code to report meetings with anyone, Germans probably identified persons concerned and use them for stuffing [disinformation]”, the agent vented to his station chief. “He swallows easily.” As the British had feared, Goebbels’s propaganda ministry would spend the following months building up the myth of a German defence effort in Austria and Bavaria via disinformation and media reports, hoping a sidetracked US military leadership could be drawn into separate peace talks or even an alliance against the Soviets. “Dulles was a very capable case officer who excelled at working with human sources, but when it came to signals intelligence he was indeed highly negligent,” Boghardt told the Guardian. As Covert Legions shows, allied forces were extremely susceptible to disinformation campaigns in the final stages of the war, with Field Marshal Montgomery arrested at one point as an impostor by American guards following a rumour that the Germans were planning to impersonate the British commander. After the end of the war, Nazis setting themselves up on snowy mountaintops became a staple of swashbuckling war movies, such as 1968’s Where Eagles Dare, starring Richard Burton and Clint Eastwood. However, while some allied intelligence reports explicitly cited the Alpine redoubt theory as an argument for an allied push into southern Germany in 1945, Boghardt rejects the idea that it played a crucial part in shaping the second world war endgame and setting the ground for cold war tensions with the Soviet Union, as Winston Churchill later claimed. The US decision not to back a British plan for a “pencil-like thrust” to Berlin likely owed more to the fact that the Red Army was already within 20 miles of the German capital while Anglo-American forces were still 300 miles away, he said, and a deal to divide up the city had already been agreed. “My impression is that the US command ultimately didn’t really believe in the Alpine redoubt myth, but may have kept it alive to persuade the British of their overriding strategy.”David Sears spent six weeks sleeping outside on the splintered remains of his home on Grand Isle, Louisiana. The house was destroyed by Hurricane Ida at the end of August but Sears had nowhere else to go. So he returned to this barrier island, out in the gulf of Mexico, and lived on his front porch for over a month. Grand Isle, with its sweeping white sand beaches, rows of bobbing shrimp boats and 1,000 permanent residents, took the first punch from Ida, the category 4 hurricane that became one of America’s most powerful storms when it landed here in the summer. And four months later the scars have barely begun to heal. Debris still litters the roadways, destroyed homes line the beachfront and hundreds of residents remain displaced. This sliver of land, the last frontier of humanity before the open ocean, is used to taking hits from extreme weather. But Ida was the worst in the island’s history. Sears, a 70 year old with a white handlebar moustache, contracted pneumonia and staph infections in both his eyes after his six weeks living outdoors. He was rushed to hospital and told he may not survive. But after nine days of treatment, he made it out in mid-November. “I believe the Lord was looking down on me,” he said, sitting outside as a sea breeze passed over his new trailer home, a few feet from the beach. The retiree, who lives on social security payments, was one of the first to move into this row of temporary Fema homes, sheltering dozens of the island’s residents who have lost everything. With his long term prospects still uncertain, Sears was living day by day. “One day at a time,” he said. “I’m going to stay right here for now. I’ll save some money. And one day, hopefully, I can buy the trailer.” This post-storm purgatory was felt among many, who are preparing for an uncertain new year as Grand Isle continues to grapple with a gargantuan recovery effort. Adriane Cunningham, a patrol officer with the island police force, was living in a trailer a few down from Sears. Her home was crushed by two trees ripped from their roots by Ida. She had been living without insurance and had already spent over $3,000 just to remove the debris. She had no idea how much it would cost to rebuild or if she even could. “It seems like every time we do something with the house, something else goes wrong with it,” she said. “It’s just so much money.” For now, she splits her time between the trailer during the week and her sister’s house, three and a half hours away, at the weekend. Her five children have been withdrawn from the local school district and moved to a school outside of the state capitol, Baton Rouge. The family simply cannot fit inside the trailer. 141 households on Grand Isle applied for Fema housing in the wake of the storm, with 42 still waiting on approval or unit availability, said Jefferson parish fire director Bryan Adams, who is overseeing local government reconstruction efforts. Ida came ashore with pummeling 150mph winds, damaging every structure on the island. Local officials estimate around 700 buildings, a quarter of the island’s constructions, have either been destroyed or will need to be completely demolished. Many are homes constructed before Hurricane Katrina. Less than 400 people have returned to live. There is progress, but it has been gradual. Electricity returned to the island in October, and thicker pylons with deeper foundations have been installed. But there are still regular outages, and Grand Isle is still being powered by generator energy and remains unconnected to the grid. Running water has also returned, but a boil water advisory remains in place. Gas connections are sporadic, with some on the island still living without. Some of the most devastating damage was done to the island’s levee protection system. The Gulf coastline on Grand Isle is enveloped by a so-called “burrito levee”, a 13 foot tall sand-filled tube that sits at the back of the beach. It was breached at multiple locations, flooding much of the island and leaving thick dunes of sand over six foot high. Standing on top of the winding burrito, where rips in the tubing are exposed to the afternoon sun, Grand Isle’s Cajun mayor David Camardelle spoke of the battles he has fought since Ida hit. “Everything is a fight,” he said “A fight to save our community.” Camardelle is in the process of lobbying not only to hasten the levees repair but to increase protection from the devastating storm surge further out at sea. He pointed to the horizon where, on certain parts of the landscape, clusters of breakwater boulders are placed out at sea. Camardelle argues that the devastation to the west of the island was intensified as there is no breakwater protection in certain areas, meaning the surge from the sea is stronger. He is lobbying the US army corps of engineers to invest in new construction, but with an estimated $50m price tag his efforts are not certain to go forward. With hundreds of homes requiring demolition, the levees in a state of disrepair, Grand Isle already finds itself in a race against time to prepare for the 2022 hurricane season. Amid coastal erosion and rising sea levels, all exacerbated by the climate crisis, which has already triggered more frequent and devastating storms, has Camardelle considered whether he is fighting a losing battle? “No,” he said. “This is a community. We’re families and we all know each other. What made me run for office was to save this island.” Camardelle is an incumbent since 1997. His grandfather, a shrimp and crab fisherman, moved to Grand Isle in 1947; his mother, in her late 80s along with his uncles, aunts and children all live on the island. Like many other island advocates, Camardelle pointed to the fact that Grand Isle frequently takes the first punch from extreme storms, cushioning the blow for larger populations, like New Orleans and Baton Rouge further inland. One of the mayor’s lifelong friends, Bennie Gatz, a local mosquito terminator who lives close to the beach and is an embodiment of the required hardiness to exist out on the frontiers. At 70 years old, Gatz, like most residents evacuated during the storm, but returned after running water was restored to his home. He is a dialysis patient, but attempted nonetheless to repair his stilted home himself. Much of the porch had been destroyed and inside the drywall was covered in mold. But soon after returning he slipped on the wooden stairs and broke both his legs in two places. With the nearest hospital, Lady of the Sea, closed following damage sustained by Ida, Gatz was forced to travel for an hour and half by ambulance in severe pain to the nearest functioning emergency room in the town of Thibodaux. They put both his legs in casts, and he left in a wheelchair. He returned straight back to the island, a place he says he will never leave. There’s still no gas at his home, so he relies on hot meal handouts from the local government and has hired some friends to assist with the rebuild. “It’s a unique place,” he said. “I love the tales of old pirates. I love the fishing; trout, redfish, you name it. “You have to be extremely resilient,” he said. “And you have to love it here.”So that was it? One great heave of climate diplomacy at Cop26 in Glasgow and we can go back to normal? No: 2021 was one of the hottest years on record, coal is booming, emissions surging and we are well on track for climate catastrophe. We need an immediate post-Cop climate reset now because the job is far from done. Britain remains president of the UN climate body for another year and is expected by the rest of the world to lead by example at least until we hand over to Egypt in November. Indeed, 2022 is probably more important than 2021 because the gap between rhetoric and action is vast and must now be closed. So here, culled from groups like Friends of the Earth and Carbon Brief, global bodies like the UN, International Monetary Fund and World Bank, as well as the Welsh and Scottish governments, is the reset. It would be popular, cost little, greatly improve millions of lives and restore Britain’s reputation as a progressive country. 1. Announce an end to North Sea oil and gas exploration. Hardly any oil extracted from wells on the UK seabed ever gets to a UK-based refinery, let alone a British car or boiler. It’s mostly exported, earns the government little, but adds vastly to emissions and the wealth of foreign-owned corporations. We could announce an immediate end to exploration and few people would even notice. Along with the expected end of UK coal power in 2022, it would be a powerful signal to the world that the era of fossil fuels was ending. 2. Ditch fossil fuel subsidies. Despite pledges, progress at Cop26 to abolish or reduce the $420bn (£313bn) spent each year by governments on subsidies for the fossil fuel industry was incremental at best, and is already being watered down. Britain spends billions a year propping up the polluting industries but less than a 10th of that goes to support renewable energy. Whatever the imminent high court ruling on the legality of government fuel subsidies, the UK could immediately level the playing field, and save billions by not encouraging the wasteful use of energy which mostly benefits the rich. 3. Protect nature. The most important meeting in 2022 will be in China in April when all countries meet to finish negotiating new goals to halt and reverse biodiversity loss. Many have already said they plan to protect 30% of the planet’s land and oceans but have failed abysmally in the past to meet even minimal targets, so are not to be trusted. Covid has shown how climate, biodiversity and human health depend on each other, so Britain could be the first to act boldly by translating all global goals into law. 4. Stop adding to deforestation. There are plans to clean up the UK’s supply chains to help protect forests and reduce climate emissions, but they will not stop companies buying from legal deforestation and they do not address human rights abuses. The proposals could be easily tightened. 5. Slow steaming. The 2008 financial crisis forced shipowners to cut fuel bills and many chose to reduce the speed of their ships. As a result, CO2 emissions were simply, if inadvertently, reduced by nearly 200m tonnes, or about what a country like the Netherlands emits a year. The UK could work with others to press the International Maritime Organization to adopt ocean speed limits. This would greatly reduce air pollution, cut the cost of cruise holidays and save billions of tonnes of carbon over the next decades. 6. Keep changing behaviour. Thanks to Covid, climate anxiety and conviction, people are shifting diets away from meat and dairy, cutting back on flying and pledging to change carbon-polluting habits. Schools, institutions, companies and individuals can all help increase demand for climate-friendly, plastic-free consumerism. 7. Scrap most transport plans. The £24bn roads programme, the £1.2bn Silvertown tunnel in London, much of the £96bn HS2 project and proposals for many new runways and airport expansions are not needed, will add to emissions and could be shelved without much complaint. The money saved would allow the government to concentrate on popular, sustainable public transport schemes. The UK is going in the opposite direction to most countries which are prioritising affordable rail travel, cycling and walking. The financial, health and carbon savings of a radical change in transport direction would be immense. 8. Confront the building industry. New regulations due to come into effect in 2022 are intended to reduce carbon emissions from new-build homes by about 30% compared with current standards. But a more ambitious Future Homes Standard, which aims to make all new buildings “net zero ready”, will not come into force until 2025 and the government has a long and bad record of bowing to industry pressure to weaken plans. 9. Insulate, insulate. A major programme to promote household solar, increase electric car-buying, better insulate all homes and switch to renewables could galvanise many industries, reduce soaring energy bills, improve health and dramatically cut emissions. 10. Keep the promises we have made. For all the fine words at Glasgow and the “net zero” and other pledges, countries do not have the policies in place. The priority for the UK is to make the net zero target legally binding and help other countries deliver on their promises rather than to widen the gap between targets and delivery. That’s some list. We must be realistic, but also ambitious. Achieving just a half of all that would be something Britain could be proud of when it hands the Cop climate baton to Africa next year. But the reset must start now. John Vidal is a former Guardian environment editorApril isn’t the cruellest month – January is. There is no other time of year when we are as prone to navel-gazing, often literally, as this one. In this period of anxiety about the size of our waists and what we consume, simple dietary rules are appealing. “Eat like our ancestors” is a particularly catchy slogan to live by, at least on the surface. But who exactly are these ancestors we are supposed to emulate? Are they our great-great-grandparents, cooking wholesome things from scratch? Or are they that nebulous group of hairy low-browed brutes we imagine “cavemen” to be? The popular “paleo” diet pins modern health woes on the birth of agriculture, claiming that we should stick to eating meat, nuts and berries. Strict paleo dieters are forbidden from eating beans, as well as potatoes and grains. This kind of stone age reenactment has rather a loose grip on history, however. For starters, it’s based on the false premise that palaeolithic peoples all ate the same food, regardless of their location. Somerset’s 9,000-year-old Cheddar Man, who scientists tell us was rather disappointingly lactose-intolerant, would not have eaten the same foods as his contemporaries on the Kenyan savannah. Geography, climate and culture shaped the food choices of humans of the past as they do today. The amount of meat people ate, and how much was obtained by hunting versus scavenging, is also up for debate. Founded on what Giles Yeo refers to as the “‘Fred Flintstone and his brontosaurus ribs’ school of pre-history”, the paleo fad has a streak of solipsism as well as hubris and fantasy. It is focused almost exclusively on what’s perceived to be good for our bodies, without any concern for the rest of nature, including other humans whose livelihoods are threatened by western overconsumption. Conversations about how to eat well and recreate the habits of the past often feature a selective suspicion of science and technology. What is supposedly “natural” – a category that includes polio, death in childbirth and poisonous mushrooms – is conflated with what is good or right. Professor Heidi Larson has observed a clustering of identity markers on social media – “paleo, gluten-free-diets, home births” – with anti-vaccine sentiment. Beneath the intellectualisation, there is a gnawing sense of alienation from our bodies, and disenchantment with modern lifestyles. Yet attempts to recreate the past are not only misguided but impossible. The fruit and vegetables we eat today are the result of many generations of tampering with the genetics of once-wild plants. Growing cereal crops is necessary to feed populations that hunter-gatherer lifestyles could not sustain. Processing food in some way, whether by cooking, fermenting or drying it, has allowed us to obtain more energy from it, made it safer, and helped us to preserve it for leaner times. Which is not to say that some of the changes we’ve made to our food and the way it’s produced are not harmful to our bodies, other animals and the environment. While we are living longer than ever, modern life can make us sick. Eating lots of ultra-processed foods – with excess salt and sugar, emulsifiers, inverted corn syrup, flavourings and colourings – is associated with an increased risk of a range of diseases. Such foods are often designed to be hyperpalatable, hitting a sweet spot of sugar, salt and fat that makes them devilishly moreish. Michael Pollan’s suggestion that we should be wary of things our great-grandmothers wouldn’t recognise as food is a reasonable but blunt instrument to help avoid these. Mine would certainly be mystified by a wedge of Stinking Bishop. Were I to eat like my own Punjabi farming great-grandparents, I’d breakfast at dawn on a glass of fresh lassi and a hot chapati with a fist-sized lump of cultured butter, lunch on seasonal fruit, and dine on lentils and roti. Wild honey from a forest beehive would be a precious treat, often reserved for the sick. On the rare occasion that someone’s bullock broke a leg, it would be slaughtered and the meat distributed throughout the village. This diet is based on the wheat and dairy staples that people in the Punjab have relied on for probably at least the last two millennia – the sanskrit hymns of the Rig Veda are drenched with references to milk and butter. But as delicious and “authentic” as it might be for me to follow its lead, the ethics of industrially farmed dairy products in the 21st century muddies the waters. We crave authority, and look to the ancients to tell us what to do and how to live. Ancestor worship is more ubiquitous in human culture than belief in a creator god. The romance of eating like our ancestors, whatever that means, can obscure ethical considerations in a haze of nostalgia. Now, probably more than ever before, what we eat connects us to the fate of other beings, human and non-human, and to the fate of our planet. With this in mind, choosing to be deliberate about what we eat, and cooking it ourselves if we have that privilege, can only be a good thing. But a dogmatic approach to this would be a mistake. Better to preserve what’s worth keeping, let go of what isn’t and remain clear-eyed about our culinary past – much of which is unknowable, unethical and impossible to replicate in any case. As we resolve once again to live better this year, neither Rousseau’s noble savage nor Great-Aunt Ethel need dictate what’s for dinner. Further reading Cook As You Are: Recipes for Real Life, Hungry Cooks and Messy Kitchens by Ruby Tandoh (Serpent’s Tail, £19.99) Why Calories Don’t Count: How We Got the Science of Weight Loss Wrong by Giles Yeo (Orion Spring, £14.99) In Defense of Food: The Myth of Nutrition and the Pleasures of Eating by Michael Pollan (Penguin, £9.99)Which films kept you entertained over the holidays? Was it Silent Night, the sweary festive Britcom starring Keira Knightley? The courtroom drama Naked Singularity, with John Boyega as a crusading lawyer? Or did you watch Leonardo DiCaprio as a dorky astronomer in Don’t Look Up, a slapstick political satire? Whichever it was, I hope you poured yourself a large one, because none of those films are quite as light as they seem. All take place in the shadow of imminent Armageddon. That’s right: the end of the world is nigh, and it’s no longer the preserve of megabudget disaster movies or bleak survivalist thrillers. These days the looming obliteration of our species can just as readily form the backdrop to some governmental mockery or a boozy country-house drama. Why the sudden change? After all, existential catastrophe is hardly a new subject for Hollywood, which has been churning out such tales for the best part of a century. Historically, though, they have largely come in the form of razzle-dazzle showstoppers, be it during the original disaster-movie boom, with titles like When Worlds Collide, or more recent CGI-fuelled fare such as The Day After Tomorrow. The more muted end-times films have been generally been left to less popcorn-hungry countries like Russia (The Sacrifice), France (Time of the Wolf, Delicatessen) and Canada (Last Night). But the mainstream movie industry has nonetheless made sure that even the most casual filmgoer will be well used to witnessing humanity’s spectacular destruction. We’ve seen it carried out by deranged scientists and comic-book villains, by robot uprising and cosmic collision, by viral outbreak and biblical flood, by dragons, birds and talking monkeys. And unsurprisingly, a genre predicated on the ultimate worst-case scenario has tended to reflect the anxieties of the time. Invasion of the Body Snatchers offered an allegory for McCarthyism; Steven Spielberg’s War of the Worlds, with its nightmarish urban devastation, was the first truly post-9/11 blockbuster; Wall-E sounded the alarm about mass consumerism. The genre itself initially mushroomed during the cold war, when “mutually assured destruction” became a household phrase. Now it’s exploding again. According to the Wikipedia page listing “apocalyptic films”, there were more additions to the genre in the past decade than the previous two combined. In the last year alone the destruction of our planet has been either realised or threatened in sci-fi extravaganzas, family tearjerkers and chirpy animated romps. This year will bring more of the same: slated for TV are two cheerless visions of post-viral dystopia, The Last of Us and Station Eleven, as well as the Ronseal-titled Extinction. At the cinema, we’ll get the big-screen pageantry of Moonfall from disaster impresario Roland Emmerich, and a Noah Baumbach adaptation of Don DeLillo’s eco-fiasco novel White Noise. But before all that, treat yourself to the best film of the festive season: The Humans, an understated chamber piece in which a dysfunctional family gather for Thanksgiving under a distinct atmosphere of – you guessed it! – creeping existential dread. The real drama, though, lies in the bickering of rival siblings, senile grandparents and sozzled patriarchs. It’s more evidence that end-times anxiety can now be treated as mundane, off-screen, secondary to the domestic fallout: call it kitchen-sink nihilism. It’s a long way from the cigar-chomping triumphalism of Armageddon and Independence Day – both certified artefacts of Clinton-era America – but maybe this trend for quietly apocalypse-adjacent storytelling is to be expected in an era when the real-world headlines tell of survival bunkers, fire tornadoes and doomsday glaciers. Dr Strangelove’s breakneck bomb-ride was the response to a world where nuclear decimation could arrive at any moment; maybe this new mode of restraint reflects a reality where the unthinkable seems to be unfolding bit by bit, a matter of glum inevitability. Adam McKay’s climate-change satire Don’t Look Up takes its lead from Kubrick’s movie, invoking the apocalypse as an act of ridicule towards a complacent political class. But six decades on, the tone has shifted from anarchic glee to resigned exasperation. “Maybe the destruction of the entire planet isn’t supposed to be fun,” says Jennifer Lawrence’s scientist. “Maybe it’s supposed to be unsettling.” It’s a credo that unites this current crop of films, which all provoke angst rather than excitement, defeatism rather than hope. This is the way the world ends: not with a bang, but a shrug. Or as Arnold Schwarzenegger grumbles in End of Days, while the scenario of the title closes in: “We have some real serious problems here – and we’re not solving any of them!” And when it comes to the annihilation of humankind, there’s a man who knows what he’s talking about.New year, new Rumour Mill, new Newcastle. At least, that’s the plan, with their new ownership having waited three long months to splash the cash on their plaything. Among the first to come in looks likely to be Kieran Trippier, scorer of a World Cup semi-final goal for England and a La Liga winner with Atlético Madrid last season. What might attract him to a move to the north east? The word is a previous working relationship with Eddie Howe from their time together at Burnley. Who else might come in? Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, unloved at Arsenal but heading to the Africa Cup of Nations with Gabon, looks like a two-plus-two-equalling-five equation. Odion Ighalo, who plays his football in Saudi Arabia with Al Shabab, and must be gettable, is also at the Afcon with Nigeria. Which may leave Darwin Núñez of Benfica, though he may cost a premium of £50m and, as one of the hottest properties in the game, may need to be offered serious cash to fight out a relegation battle. Luis Díaz, Porto’s Colombian flier, is another player linked with Newcastle though Liverpool are also a possible destination should they wish to refresh their squad in the absence of Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané at that soccer jamboree in Cameroon. And another possible Newcastle target – let’s face it, most of the footballing world is a target at this point – is Gabriel Barbosa of Flamengo: aka Gabigol. How about a defender? Sven Botman of Lille, the Dutch international, a Ligue 1 winner last season will cost £30m from a club willing to sell the 21-year-old, as they are short of cash. But is Botman willing to join? How about a midfielder? An emotional return for Georginio Wijnaldum, on big money but not playing much for Paris Saint-Germain? Seems unlikely, but all bets are off in the magical world of the January market. Meanwhile it is said that PSG would like to sign Chelsea-owned Crystal Palace tyro Conor Gallagher to play in midfield. Other clubs are available, and there is talk of a swap deal – like they ever come off – between Manchester United and Barcelona for Ousmane Dembélé and Anthony Martial. United’s long-term target is Declan Rice, but good luck in getting West Ham to sell in January. The Hammers, though, may be willing to spend some of the summer’s probable Rice cash – he is also wanted by Chelsea and Manchester City - on Rumour Mill favourite Adama Traoré, who also interests Tottenham. Any other Spurs business? Yes, the wild suggestion in Italy that unhappy Romelu Lukaku might want to join up with Antonio Conte to put an end to his Chelsea “nightmare”. With Manchester City running away with the Premier League and most of the big clubs keeping their powder dry before the summer, it may be a quiet market beyond Real Madrid’s continued interest in Kylian Mbappé. And that probably means this column should be thankful for Newcastle having money to burn.Everton are close to signing the right-back Nathan Patterson from Rangers for £12m plus add-ons. The 20-year-old Scotland international is in line to become the club’s second January purchase after Vitaliy Mykolenko. Patterson is not a regular starter for Rangers but was identified by Rafael Benítez as a target when the manager took over last summer. Two Everton bids were rejected in that transfer window, with Steven Gerrard, the then Rangers manager, describing the initial £5m offer “a joke”. The fee agreed by Rangers would be the biggest received by the club. Patterson’s arrival after that of Mykolenko would meet Benítez’s desire to strengthen in both full-back positions. Mykolenko, a Ukraine left-back, cost an initial £17.9m and the money being spent by Everton is a substantial upgrade on last summer, when the £1.7m Demarai Gray and free transfers were signed. Patterson has played six times for Scotland and scored on his most recent appearance, the 2-0 win in Moldova that guaranteed a place in March’s World Cup play-offs, in which Steve Clarke’s team face Ukraine in the semi-finals. Everton’s poor form – one win in 12 games – continued on Sunday with a home defeat by Brighton. There was again no place in the team for the left-back Lucas Digne, who is expected to leave this month after being ostracised by Benítez.Elise, a fiftysomething writer, has work that she enjoys, a husband of 23 years with whom she is “uncommonly happy”, and two grownup sons. If her life is uneventful, it’s also replete; she is content and (this is the more important thing) grateful for such contentment. But then, as if a heavy stone had been hurled into a tranquil pool, it happens. At a party, she meets Dagmar, and something inside her shifts. Back at home, she considers her body in the bathroom mirror and thinks vaguely of what it might be like to sleep with this woman – or anyone! – at this point in her life. It is unthinkable and yet, it’s about to happen. She and Dagmar start sending each other text messages. Quite soon after this, they go to bed with each other, and it is wonderful. Elise doesn’t lie to her husband. She tells him that she doesn’t want to leave him, but that she cannot stop herself from seeing Dagmar, and he makes his decision: they separate, and he begins a new relationship. But freedom doesn’t make life any easier for Elise, and not only because she misses Henrik so badly. Dagmar has a wife and two children, and she will not leave them for Elise – though neither will she break off with her. Live in the moment, she tells her lover; be happy with what we’ve got. But what have they got? Conversations conducted on cold park benches. Snatched weekends that are over almost before they’ve begun. An endless, lonely present. Which would be worse, Elise asks herself: a life without Dagmar, or this half-life of longing and WhatsApp? Is a little bit of Dagmar, however small, really better than nothing at all? And if it is, what does this say about the rest of their lives? I adored Anneli Furmark’s last book, Red Winter, about love among radical leftists in northern Sweden, but I feel even more strongly about Walk Me to the Corner (translated by Hanna Strömberg). However painful to read, it captures so brilliantly both the unexpectedness of sudden desire in middle age – as Elise tells her son, she hadn’t realised that fiftysomething love would feel exactly the same as twentysomething love; that it would come with all the same ridiculous and paralysing uncertainties – and the utter misery that comes with falling for someone whose deeds simply do not match their words. Does Dagmar love Elise? She says she does. But will she give up anything for her at all? No, she will not. Furmark’s richly coloured drawings are sketchy, rough around the edges. But they’re wonderfully effective: I love the way she makes women’s bodies and faces look so seductively solid and generous; somehow, she imbues even everyday objects – a quilt, a coffee cup, a freshly laundered vest – with an incredible tenderness, as if these things, too, had feelings. Given the complexity of what she’s aiming to capture – all the agonising repetition of a lop-sided affair – her narration is amazingly concise, in part because she’s so very deft at incorporating the tiny screens of mobile phones into her story. How swiftly yearning reduces a lover’s world to the length and breadth of their malevolent/ecstatic glow. With what astonishing speed a heart comes to depend on a brief text message. Walk Me to the Corner by Anneli Furmark (translated by Hanna Strömberg) is published by Drawn &amp; Quarterly (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyCats have been effortlessly stealing scenes from their human co-stars for decades. Who could forget Audrey Hepburn’s adorable marmalade tabby in Breakfast at Tiffany’s? Or Jinx, the toilet-flushing Himalayan in Meet the Parents? Behind every famous film cat, there is a dedicated trainer patiently teaching them to obey a command, making sure they’re happy on set, and grooming them fastidiously to maintain their fluffy good looks. The film-makers behind The Electrical Life of Louis Wain, a British period biopic about the Edwardian artist and illustrator who became famous for his surreal portraits of cats, were adamant they didn’t want to use CGI for the shoot, so animal trainer Charlotte Wilde was brought in with 40 feisty felines. “It was organised chaos,” she says. “They had their own green room and were treated like royalty.” Wilde, who has also worked on Fighting With My Family and Bohemian Rhapsody, runs a London agency that provides animals for film and TV. Felix, her 10-year-old black and white moggie (“a very cheeky chap!”), was cast as Peter, Wain’s furry best friend, who inspires his first sketches. Cats, of course, are notoriously fickle and independent – but that doesn’t mean they can’t be trained like dogs to behave and do tricks on screen. Wilde says she uses positive reinforcement with plenty of snacks on hand to dish out as rewards. “We teach our cats to go to mark,” she says. “They’ll walk in and they’ll know where to stop. We train them so they run to the sound of a buzzer. We’ve got some that can roll over. A couple can retrieve. They’ll lie down, rub against people’s legs, walk alongside someone. We show them what they’ve got to do. Then we try to make that happen on the take.” A clicker is used as encouragement. “You might have a moment in between a couple of lines where we can get a click in, just so the cat [knows]: ‘You’re doing really well. Wait. Food is coming.’ Obviously, that’s really distracting for actors. They’re probably sick of the sound of a clicker by the end of the film!” Mark Harden, an animal trainer based in Los Angeles, was in charge of the five snowy white Chinchilla Persians who played Snowbell in Stuart Little, and looked after 40 cats on the set of Catwoman including several rare Egyptian Maus. With cats, he says, it’s all about getting into their mindset. “They’re a predator but they can also be skittish. They’ve got a very strong flight reaction. The most important thing with a cat is desensitising them to strange environments. A movie set is a very strange environment.” Canadian animal trainer Melissa Millett has a novel way of desensitising the cats she works with: she stages mock film shoots at home. For the Pet Sematary reboot, she recruited five Maine Coons from rescue shelters to play Church, who is transformed into an aggressive zombie cat. This meant gradually acclimatising them to wearing makeup and being wet. The whole process took two months. “We started with a catnip party in the bathtub. A little bit of water on the cat while it’s eating. Then we worked up to a full bath. Separately, we would start with a bit of egg white and then work our way up. All the products had to be edible.” Expectations for cat actors tend to be much lower than for dogs, says Harden. “People are more in awe of you when you have a good working cat. I guess they expect the cat to be scared.” Even so, animal trainers can teach cats to do the kind of tricks that would easily outshine Lassie. Millett has a talented Bengal named Sashimi, who can ride a scooter. Wilde taught one of her moggies, Leicester, to pretend to play the harmonica, while Harden trained Cairo, an Egyptian Mau, to pick up a mobile phone with his teeth and run off with it. But it’s not all cats being cute and cuddly on cue. Being bitten accidentally is an occupational hazard. Then there’s the cat hair that gets everywhere. “You certainly don’t wear your best clothes to work!” says Wilde. “You have to get up extra early because you’ve got to get the animals ready. You go to bed later because you’ve got to put them to bed. They come first no matter what. I’d say it’s a way of life rather than a job. It’s incredibly rewarding. They give you so much.” • The Electrical Life of Louis Wain is out in UK cinemas on 1 January.A milky-white and sky-blue stone hangs from a red string around Ethels Correa’s neck, and every so often she rubs it between her fingers. “When I feel anger, I grab this stone and I begin to relax, because they taught me how to breathe, to relax the body and to relax the mind,” she says. “I carry it with me all the time.” Correa, 41, from the south coast of Honduras, is among a group on a visit to La Siguata, a healing centre for women like her who are suffering from trauma as a consequence of having stood up for human rights in the country. “When I came here, I felt old, wrinkled,” says Correa, a mother of five who has been involved in land struggles in her home town, Zacate Grande, for two decades. But now, when she looks in the mirror, she sees a different reflection. “I look beautiful.” Inaugurated earlier this year, the 10-day retreat at La Siguata is part of a tiny but growing movement led by the Mesoamerican Initiative of Women Human Rights Defenders, which funds this and another centre in Oaxaca, Mexico, addressing the mental health issues that come with working in one of the world’s most dangerous regions for activists and women. “We realised that there was lots of burnout and also strong impacts on women defenders as a result of structural violence, as well as patriarchal violence that was very invisible and normalised,” says Ana María Hernández of Casa La Serena healing centre in Oaxaca, Mexico, which opened in 2016 and has since welcomed hundreds of women from across the region. “The very demanding dynamics of women defenders’ activism means that we don’t have time to recover our energies, to connect with our bodies and needs. There is an imbalance between giving and receiving,” adds Hernández. Hernández and colleagues from the Consortium for Parliamentary Dialogue and Equity in Oaxaca developed a holistic approach to help women overcome trauma and recharge, so they can continue their work with renewed vigour. During their 10-day visits to the centres, women participate in activities from the artistic to the spiritual, in groups and individually, and are given a personalised self-care plan to take home. La Siguata – which means “the woman” in the Uto-Aztecan Nahuatl language – sits behind high walls in the pine-covered mountains above the capital Tegucigalpa. “Since entering that gate, I felt connected, I felt like a protected woman,” says Correa. Solidarity is a guiding principle of the centre, encapsulated by a motto adopted from the Garifuna culture of the country’s north coast, painted over its entrance. It translates as “You for me, me for you.” The grounds of flowers and fruit trees provide a stark contrast to the concrete landscape of the city below. The women can relax in hammocks or gather around a firepit surrounded by marigolds. “This space teaches us to love nature, to feel that energy of the earth and the air, which I had not experienced,” says Sandra Laínez, 63, a member of the Network of Domestic Workers, who were among the first group to visit La Siguata. The centre has facilities for massage, bathing and acupuncture. “I arrived with a lot of body pain and I didn’t feel well,” says Correa, who has suffered a lot of violence over her life, including a blow to the head that she says she was lucky to survive. “If I’m sick, then I’m no good to the organisation.” Inside the house are dormitories, a spacious kitchen where cooking lessons are held, and an altar with candles and flowers dedicated to environmentalist Berta Cáceres, murdered after years of threats over her opposition to a dam project. It provides a poignant reminder of the hostility towards activists in Honduras, a nation with the highest rate of femicide in Latin America. “In the midst of this struggle, we have lost our sisters and our comrades,” says Rebeca Girón, of the National Network of Women Human Rights Defenders, who runs La Siguata. The centre is also open to survivors of sexual abuse and families of disappeared migrants. In the near future, it is hoped that women from Nicaragua – where the government has brutally repressed dissent, resulting in more than 300 deaths during the wave of protests in 2018 alone – will be able to visit. “We know that these 10 days are not going to be the 10 days that will transform their lives, with sudden changes from one day to the next,” says Girón. “But we do consider that we open the way. “La Siguata represents the recovery of that internal flame of passion, for wanting to live again and even to enjoy human rights work anew.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:1) Chelsea miss flying full-backs more than Lukaku On the first Sunday of 2021, a first-half Chelsea capitulation against Manchester City hastened Frank Lampard’s exit and deepened a despondent mood. Twelve months on, Liverpool’s two early goals at Stamford Bridge could have induced Groundhog Day feelings. Instead, Thomas Tuchel’s side roared back and showed that, whatever other problems have recently beset the Chelsea manager on and off the field, this is a team that plays for him. Though they did so in a rather un-Tuchel-like manner. The intense atmosphere generated by the Premier League debut of safe standing was met with the kind of front-foot, high-tempo performance more associated with a Jürgen Klopp side. Chelsea were the better team against Liverpool but they will rue the openness at the back that meant they had to settle for another draw which probably ends their title hopes, and more than the much-discussed Romelu Lukaku it is their first-choice full-backs, Ben Chilwell and Reece James, that they are missing most. Tom Davies Tuchel refuses to guarantee Lukaku return to Chelsea team 2) Mané makes his presence felt in more ways than one Liverpool were not at their fluent, cohesive best at Chelsea, though they played their part in a compelling spectacle. But they came away with a point because they have what Chelsea lack, forwards with a ruthless and instinctive eye for goal. It was no surprise Mohamed Salah scored another fabulous goal, and could have added an even better one with an instinctive long-range chip that Édouard Mendy saved sharply, but Sadio Mané’s was the more intriguing display after a lean run. His goal showcased the Senegalese at his clinical best, punishing Trevor Chalobah’s botched clearance, and he was a busy presence throughout. Yet there were also rash moments, from the risky raising of an elbow against César Azpilicueta in the sixth second of the match to the slightly weak, hasty finishes at the end of a couple of slick breakaways early in the second half. Overall he showed enough to demonstrate why Senegal will cherish him, and Liverpool miss him, during the Africa Cup of Nations. TD Match report: Chelsea 2-2 Liverpool 3) Arsenal should focus on positives after City’s smash and grab There are times when you can take genuine succour from listening to your opponents. “Arsenal were better,” Pep Guardiola said after Manchester City’s smash and grab at the Emirates. “We faced an incredible team,” agreed Rodri, the matchwinner. Guardiola has historically gone out of his way to praise Mikel Arteta, a close friend, but no exaggeration was required on Saturday: City were overwhelmed for half of the game and Arsenal would do well to focus on that rather than the VAR calls, correct but convoluted, that helped turn the outcome. Officials are not biased against your team, whoever you support, even if is tempting to feel that way after such a rousing display counts for nothing. It is better to focus on what gives pleasure. Nick Ames Match report: Arsenal 1-2 Manchester City 4) VAR gives Watford fans – and referees – cause for outrage Another example of how VAR creates controversy. When Hugo Lloris dived at the feet of João Pedro and the referee, Robert Jones, who seemed in a good position, decisively gestured that the goalkeeper had won the ball, there was no reason not to think the decision had been correct. The ball had squirted out of the challenge at the sort of angle that suggested Lloris had taken it cleanly. But slowed down, a different picture emerged. Lloris, almost certainly, did foul Pedro, but that was almost impossible to tell in real time. Before VAR, while Watford fans may still have been outraged, others would have shrugged and accepted that in a fast-moving game, some things are impossible to give. Now, though, VAR creates an expectation of perfection and that makes the already difficult job of refereeing even harder. Jonathan Wilson Match report: Watford 0-1 Tottenham 5) Olise can be Palace’s next young star Patrick Vieira’s decision to replace Luka Milivojevic and Christian Benteke with Michael Olise and Jean-Philippe Mateta in the second half almost rescued a point for Palace, three goals down at the break to West Ham. Olise has now been directly involved in a goal every 63 minutes in the Premier League this season having set up Odsonne Édouard before scoring directly from a free-kick. Not bad for a player who hadn’t even trained for the last week and a half. “Michael is a top young player with a lot of talent,” said Vieira. “It was a gamble for us, as we didn’t know how he was physically. I was really pleased with the way he came into the game because he created chances, he created situations, and he scored a goal. He showed in the space of 20 minutes his quality, and that’s really good for the football club.” Ed Aarons Match report: Crystal Palace 2-3 West Ham 6) Brentford look safe for second half of the season Brentford can be delighted with the first half of their Premier League bow. After 19 games they are 12th with 23 points and, even though there is plenty of football to be played, you would struggle to find a single onlooker who believes they will not secure another season in the top flight. That said, the victory over Aston Villa felt crucial given they had only won two games in their previous 11. It was earned through sheer grit and Thomas Frank had a fair point when he said afterwards that only Leeds have suffered comparable injury woes. Promoted sides often wilt when the ravages of the winter begin to kick in but Brentford, who dazzled with their flowing football in the Championship but have shown different sides to their game in the Premier League, have displayed the mentality of giants to pull through and prove doubters wrong. Nick Ames Match report: Brentford 2-1 Aston Villa 7) Mac Allister’s form another feather in Potter’s cap Whereas Rafael Benítez prefers to freeze out Lucas Digne to such an extent that Séamus Coleman started at left wing-back against Brighton, with the France international an unused substitute for Everton’s eighth defeat in 11 games, Graham Potter’s ability to keep unhappy players onside underpinned his club’s first ever victory at Goodison Park. Alexis Mac Allister was, by his manager’s own admission, frustrated with his limited playing time earlier in the season but marked his third successive start in a demanding week with a match-winning display against Benítez’s toiling team. “It just goes to show that football changes quickly,” the Brighton manager said. “Alexis has worked hard, stuck with the team and because he has been professional he can come in and perform. He scored two great goals but his overall performance was fantastic.” Andy Hunter Match report: Everton 2-3 Brighton 8) Burnley could melt away without Cornet to count on It is far-fetched to ever suggest one team’s fortunes are defined by a single player, but the case of Maxwel Cornet and Burnley is about as close as you could find right now. Cornet’s sixth goal of the season in 11 Premier League appearances looked as though it would rescue a point at Leeds before the visitors were undone by two late strikes. The worry for Burnley is that Cornet, a player who they clearly rely on for moments of magic, is now headed for the Africa Cup of Nations. That makes Burnley’s January business all the more important but, even with new additions, you suspect their hopes of survival will revolve largely around one man as the season heads for the final stretch. Aaron Bower Match report: Leeds 3-1 Burnley 9) Wolves a stern test for troubled Rangnick regime Manchester United are unbeaten in five games under Ralf Rangnick and yet the mood music continues to be downbeat. The 3-1 home win over an understrength Burnley barely salved the wounds of a dreadful performance and fortunate draw at Newcastle, a feast for amateur body language experts. Rangnick was an antsy sideline presence during the Burnley game, repeatedly urging his players to chase the “second ball” far harder. He has already shifted his 4-2-2-2 to something more akin to 4-4-2. Wolves did not play during the festive season but they will likely be harder to beat for United than two teams in the bottom three. Before Wolves’ hiatus, It look a last-minute goal for Liverpool to win at Molineux while Manchester City required a penalty to squeak past them. They don’t score many, but they don’t concede many either. John Brewin Rangnick says Cavani ‘definitely’ staying at United 10) January window finally here for Newcastle Whenever Newcastle return to action, the expectation is Eddie Howe will be able to pick from a far fuller deck, with Covid isolation periods ending, the injury list easing and a first tranche of Saudi Arabian loot spent on new players. The names linked most closely are not quite of the Kylian Mbappé and Neymar level just yet, but someone as accomplished and experienced as Kieran Tripper would add quality to their defence. Eddie Howe’s working relationship with the England full-back from their time at Burnley a decade ago may facilitate that deal but other transfers may be harder to pull off. Convincing players to join a team second-bottom of the league and with one win all season will take serious cash and powers of persuasion. The suspicion is Newcastle’s back office, with no director of football or chief executive yet appointed, lacks the expertise and contacts to bring in the players who might guarantee survival. JB Newcastle facing unique January transfer challengePeople struggling to get lateral flow tests for Covid “should just refresh” their webpage, the education secretary has suggested, as concerns mount over the impact of the Omicron variant on the country’s workforce. Nadhim Zahawi told Sky News he had organised a separate supply of tests for schools in England ahead of children’s return to the classrooms, amid requests they take at least two a week. But when it was put to the cabinet minister that shortages of tests were still being reported intermittently across the country, he said: “If people feel that they can’t get a supply they should just refresh their webpage.” Zahawi said supply had been increased to 300m a month and delivery capacity trebled to 900,000 a day. In addition to testing, the government will ask secondary students in England to wear masks in classrooms once again. And it was announced that an additional 7,000 air cleaning units will be provided to schools, colleges and early years settings to improve ventilation in teaching spaces. Classes could be merged if the number of school staff off sick grew too high, the education secretary has said. He told Sky News: “The priority is to keep schools open. The testing, the staffing support we’re putting in place, and of course the ventilation is going to make a big difference to schools this year. The most important thing is to keep them open. “We monitor staff absenteeism, I just said to you we’re running at about 8% last year. If that rises further then we look at things like merging classes, teaching in bigger numbers.” But Zahawi repeated the government line that “there’s nothing in the data” to suggest further coronavirus measures will be needed later this week. He told BBC Breakfast that plan B measures would be reviewed on Wednesday, but added: “There’s nothing in the data that gives me any concern that we need to go beyond where we are at. “There’s some really good data from London that it looks like the infection rates are plateauing, if not yet coming down. But we are seeing leakage into the over-50s in terms of infections, and it’s generally the over-50s who end up with severe infection and hospitalisation.” Zahawi moved to reassure patients that the NHS was “very good at being able to move staff around”, amid fears over shortages in the health service. He said the NHS was used to dealing with staff being off over the winter and during “big flu viruses”. He told BBC Breakfast: “The NHS is very good at being able to move staff around within the system. They have an infrastructure to do that. We now have 10,000 more nurses and 3,000 more doctors than we had last year working in the NHS. “But the NHS is very good at sort of making sure that staff shortages are monitored and dealt with pretty well. They’ve done it over many years in winter when we’ve been, you know, have big flu viruses around.”The Mower’s Song My mind was once the true survey Of all these meadows fresh and gay, And in the greenness of the grass Did see its hopes as in a glass; When Juliana came, and she What I do to the grass, does to my thoughts and me. But these, while I with sorrow pine, Grew more luxuriant still and fine, That not one blade of grass you spy’d But had a flower on either side; When Juliana came, and she What I do to the grass, does to my thoughts and me. Unthankful meadows, could you so A fellowship so true forgo? And in your gaudy May-games meet While I lay trodden under feet? When Juliana came, and she What I do to the grass, does to my thoughts and me. But what you in compassion ought, Shall now by my revenge be wrought; And flow’rs, and grass, and I and all, Will in one common ruin fall. For Juliana comes, and she What I do to the grass, does to my thoughts and me. And thus, ye meadows, which have been Companions of my thoughts more green, Shall now the heraldry become With which I shall adorn my tomb; For Juliana comes, and she What I do to the grass, does to my thoughts and me. The Mower’s Song is one of four “Mower” poems by Andrew Marvell (1621-1678), complementing his most substantial work in the country house genre, Upon Appleton House. All date from the period he spent at Nun Appleton House (1651-2) as tutor to Mary, the daughter of Lord General Thomas Fairfax. The English civil war and the impending first Anglo-Dutch war enrich Marvell’s view of Arcadia. Lord Fairfax had laid out the gardens at Appleton “in the Figure of a Fort”. Upon Appleton House develops a brilliantly extended metaphor of the horticultural battleground, producing one of the most unusual and moving anti-war meditations of any age. Images of wounding, physical and psychological, recur in the Mower quartet. Perhaps Damon the Mower provides the most relevant and helpful context here. Damon, in love with Juliana (whose name is associated with July and thus the high summer heat of Damon’s desires) suffers not only the flames of love but accidentally wounds himself in the ankle with his own scythe. The theme of being “mown down” by love might suggest satire (for which Marvell certainly had no little talent) but its treatment is scarcely light-hearted, any more than the Mower is simply a figure of rustic innocence. The Mower imposes his will on nature like the more sophisticated, commercially motivated horticulturalist excoriated in The Mower Against Gardens. Intrinsic to banishment from Eden, the war between nature and unnaturally greedy humanity further infects the vision of the garden as redemptive pastoral. Lost clarity of understanding is proclaimed by the Mower in the first verse of his song, where the noun “survey” suggests a once informed, rational perception of the landscape. His hopes have similarly been decimated. The meadows are the subject of the second stanza, flourishing with new spring grass and a proliferation of wild flowers. Envious of the “gaudy May-games” the singer turns on these “unthankful meadows”, addressing them directly in stanza three. He goes on to declare that he will vengefully enforce the meadows’ withheld “compassion” (they should have wilted in sympathy with the lover) and ensure that “flow’rs, and grass, and I and all, / Will in one common ruin fall.” Marvell’s refrain suggests, perhaps, a rustic style of diction. The grammatical jolt between the two lines, “For Juliana comes, and she / What I do to the grass, does to my thoughts and me”, brings the violence of the scythe into the syntax, and turns the poem away from any potential comedy. Juliana’s verb, “came”, changes tense as the poem continues, while the narrative remains in the present continuous. When “came” shifts to “comes” in the last two stanzas, we can imagine the mower’s grass-like trembling at the approach of footsteps. In the final line of the refrain’s couplet, the two half-lines seem to swing like a scythe, the separating comma suggesting the pause between one keen stroke and another. Lightest of the Mower poems, The Mower’s Song still leaves us in no doubt about the speaker’s sense of devastation, and that these represent the general state of the fallen human world and its relationships. For a detailed examination of the Mower poems and their relation to Marvell’s other work, this thesis is well worth a look.In my first class on an archaeology course at Lund University in Sweden, I stood out more than usual. It was not just that it was full of blond and blue-eyed students, more than in any other class I had ever attended – it was that archaeology is not a field that many migrants study. My teacher and classmates were lovely, yet I still had this feeling of “What am I, a Somali refugee, doing here?” Furthermore, I had never even seen an archaeologist before, or held an archaeological object. But I had read a sentence in a book (Africa: history of a continent, by Basil Davidson) which said that to write African history we need to do archaeological research. As this first class was on European stone age archaeology, stone implements were handed out. An axe was passed to me. To my astonishment the label read “Somaliland”. Wow: an axe from my own country. The moment was like a message. It was as if someone was saying to me: “Yes, you belong in this classroom”. I bombarded our teacher with questions about the axe. He had no idea where it was from – he did not seem to care. Why would he? Stone age artefacts are mostly the same. No, he did not think there was any further documentation: only that they were palaeolithic objects. I later discovered that these objects were extraordinary. It turns out the axes were in fact history-making implements, taken out of my country in the exciting days when the idea of human evolution was taking shape. Fast-forward 20 years from that day in Lund and I’m creating a new global initiative, a digital museum to bring together in one platform all Somali objects and materials. I want people across Africa to feel the same connection to the subject as I did. In archaeology, context is everything: if your bones are found with those of extinct bears and mammoths, then you’ve probably been dead for tens of thousands of years and are most likely not even a Homo sapiens. In 1856 the first Neanderthal was discovered in Neander Valley in Germany. The Neanderthal would understandably not have liked to be thought of as the only link between modern humans and the great apes – they were too sophisticated. So it must have been a relief when, in the 1890s, Homo erectus came into the picture. The Java man, as this find came to be known, was labelled the “missing link”. Soon this “upright-ape-man” was joined by more hominids discovered in Asia. These discoveries reinforced the theories of Charles Darwin, first set out in 1859 in On the Origin of Species, and his idea of natural selection gained more ground. This was further evidence for the idea that humans had evolved from one common ancestor. Archaeologists didn’t bother to look to Africa until 1896, when Heywood Walter Seton-Karr, a Scottish game hunter, returned to London with hundreds of stone implements from British Somaliland. He proclaimed, to global attention, that he had found the garden of Eden: “Here it was, in my opinion, that the human race originated.” Major museums – one of which must have been the Lund natural history museum – lined up to acquire Somaliland artefacts, including stone tools. More discoveries on the continent followed, such as Kenya’s “Turkana boy” or Ethiopia’s “Lucy”. I have spent the past year surveying the same area where Seton-Karr stumbled on the stone axes. I asked village elders about him, hoping for some lingering generational memory. And though the name did not ring a bell – why should it – they told me the Ingriiskii (the British) used to come looking for macdan (gems) here. Often, foreign archaeological missions failed to tell the locals what they were really doing – indeed sometimes this still happens. The village chief vowed to me to protect his area, which also includes newly located 5,000-year-old rock paintings. By uncovering the hidden history of African collections long forgotten in museums in the west, the founders of our new archive have unearthed a wealth of art, technology and human history. With the application of technology, things of the past can come alive – through photogrammetry and 3D virtual tours – and feel more relevant to modern-day societies. We are collaborating with major western museums that hold African collections, including a number of UK institutions (the British Museum and Powell-Cotton Museum among them). But with all our digital work being carried out by African local teams, we are tapping into a new tech-savvy generation. The idea is to inspire Africans to be the owners of their heritage and its narratives. This is not just about the past. Our fast-growing demands for goods have put huge pressure on climate and resources and also made us forget our traditional ways of resource management and interacting with nature. One of the most extraordinary individuals we worked with was a blind potter. She had been trained by her mother who was in turn trained by her mother. Now she was with her own daughter who was training her daughters. This lineage of female potters will die out after surviving so many adversities just because so many people now opt for machine-produced pottery and imported plastic goods. Our museum aims to revitalise craft technologies such as pottery and iron-making. With objects often locally neglected, or forgotten in the storage departments of major museums, this heritage is at risk for the first time in history. If we do not bring together the people and stories that reflect what is most beautiful about human life – the ability to adapt to change and challenges – we may well lose sight of humanity itself. Sada Mire is an archaeologist and incoming associate professor of heritage studies at UCL Institute of Archaeology. She is author of the book Divine FertilityFifty years ago, the entire Creole population of the Chagos Islands were forcibly removed from their homes by British forces in order to make way for a US military base. Families were torn apart, scattered between the Seychelles and Mauritius, where they endured enormous economic hardships and discrimination. In Olivier Magis’ documentary, the horrors of those nights are painfully alive. Over atmospheric shots of rippling ocean waves we hear shocking first-person accounts of people throwing themselves overboard and small babies dying during these arduous journeys. Sabrina, a second-generation exile, carries this startlingly recent legacy on her indefatigable shoulders as she fights for the rights of her people to return to their homeland. Perpetually displaced, many of the Chagosian refugees currently living in England face insurmountable financial precariousness and get little state support. Their fervent protests outside the House of Lords also seem to fall on deaf ears: in 2016 the UK government decided against a resettlement of the islanders, citing monetary costs. While Sabrina’s campaign is hampered by endless obstacles, moments of solidarity shine through; a major section of the film is dedicated to the camaraderie of a Chagosian football team who participate in the 2016 World Cup for stateless and diaspora groups. As a Chagosian song is played before a match, it not only rouses the spirit of the young athletes but also becomes a searing proclamation of statehood. There are some clumsy formal choices – Sabrina’s meetings with activists in the US are inexplicably scored to a jazzy improvisation – but this film is a damning reminder of a cruel imperialist intervention whose ramifications remain largely unfamiliar to the general public. • Another Paradise is available on 7 January on True Story.Several hospitals in Lincolnshire have declared a “critical incident” over “extreme and unprecedented” staff shortages. The United Lincolnshire hospitals NHS trust (ULHT), which includes four hospitals across the county, told its sites it was unable to maintain safe staffing levels, leading to “compromised care”. An internal memo dated Sunday, leaked to the media, said the biggest factor was the rapid increase in staff sickness across two of its sites, Lincoln county hospital in Lincoln and Pilgrim hospital in Boston. Figures showed the number of staff members absent because they were ill or quarantining with Covid-19 had doubled in the month before Christmas, with 150 staff isolating on Boxing Day. The trust insisted “essential services remain fully open for anyone who needs them” as it urged people “to come forward for care” if they needed to. The memo said the increasing numbers of Covid-positive patients were also adding to the pressure, with “a number of nosocomial infections on some ward areas” – people who had caught Covid since being admitted to hospital. Staff ratios have been increased – the number of patients each nurse looks after – and NHS staff are being asked to volunteer to work extra hours. The memo reiterated its “full support to those taking a risk-balanced approach to patient care at this difficult time”. One of the largest acute hospital trusts in England, ULH includes Lincoln county hospital, Grantham and district hospital, Pilgrim hospital in Boston and County hospital Louth. In a statement, ULHT’s medical director, Dr Colin Farquharson, said: “As a result of significant staffing pressures due to absence related to Covid-19, we are having to take additional steps to maintain services. “Our staff continue to work exceptionally hard and we would like to reassure our patients and the public that in spite of the challenges faced, essential services remain fully open for anyone who needs them, so people should continue to come forward for care.” He added that people could help by getting their Covid booster vaccine “to protect themselves and their families and reduce pressure on health services”.Good morning. The fallout from the Capitol attack continues as the first anniversary on Thursday approaches. Yesterday, a Republican member of the House committee investigating the events of 6 January 2021 had a stark warning for her party – they must choose between Trump and truth. “Our party has to choose,” Liz Cheney told CBS’s Face the Nation. “We can either be loyal to Donald Trump or we can be loyal to the constitution, but we cannot be both.” Trump supporters attacked Congress in an attempt to stop certification of his defeat by Joe Biden, which Trump maintains without evidence was the result of electoral fraud. Five people died after a riot in which a mob roamed the Capitol, searching for lawmakers to capture. On Sunday, Cheney and Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the committee chair, again discussed the possibility of a criminal referral for Trump over his failure to attempt to stop the riot or for his obstruction of the investigation. What else did Cheney say? She told ABC’s This Week there were “potential criminal statutes at issue here, but I think that there’s absolutely no question that it was a dereliction of duty”. What did Thompson say? The Democrat told NBC’s Meet the Press the committee was examining whether it could issue subpoenas to members of Congress. US could be under rightwing dictator by 2030, Canadian professor warns The US could be under a rightwing dictatorship by 2030, a Canadian political science professor has warned, urging his country to protect itself against the “collapse of American democracy”. “We mustn’t dismiss these possibilities just because they seem ludicrous or too horrible to imagine,” Thomas Homer-Dixon, the founding director of the Cascade Institute at Royal Roads University in British Columbia, wrote in the Globe and Mail. “In 2014, the suggestion that Donald Trump would become president would also have struck nearly everyone as absurd. But today we live in a world where the absurd regularly becomes real and the horrible commonplace.” Homer-Dixon’s message was blunt: “By 2025, American democracy could collapse, causing extreme domestic political instability, including widespread civil violence. By 2030, if not sooner, the country could be governed by a rightwing dictatorship.” How does he think it will happen? The author cited eventualities centered on a Trump return to the White House in 2024, possibly including Republican-held state legislatures refusing to accept a Democratic win. Meanwhile, key Donald Trump loyalists Steve Bannon and Michael Flynn are at the forefront of a drive to expand Trumpist influence at the local level of US politics. Hospitalization figures a better guide to Omicron than case count, says Fauci The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, has joined a growing body of experts who say hospitalisation figures form a better guide to the severity of the Omicron coronavirus variant than the case count of new infections. Referring to the Omicron surge in the US as a “tsunami”, Fauci also cautioned the public against putting too much stock in preliminary data suggesting the variant lacks the severity of earlier Covid-19 variants, such as Delta. “You have a virus that looks like it might be less severe, at least from data we’ve gathered from South Africa, the UK and even some from preliminary data from here in the US,” he told CNN’s State of the Union. Why is it important to look at hospitalization figures? A number of experts have questioned if such reports on rocketing cases of Covid cause unnecessary worry, and suggest deaths and hospitalization data should better inform mitigation efforts. What else did Fauci say? He said: “The real bottom line that you want to be concerned about is, are we getting protected by the vaccines from severe disease leading to hospitalisation?” In other news … A New York court is to unseal a confidential 2009 deal between Jeffrey Epstein and Virginia Roberts Giuffre in what is a crunch week in Prince Andrew’s fight to avoid a public trial over claims he sexually assaulted Giuffre when she was 17 and had been trafficked. The world’s oldest person has celebrated her 119th birthday in Japan, saying she is determined to extend the record by another year. Kane Tanaka, who has a weakness for fizzy drinks and chocolate, marked the milestone yesterday with staff at the nursing home where she lives in Fukuoka prefecture, south-west Japan, according to media reports. A US spymaster inadvertently helped the Nazis develop one of the most effective disinformation campaigns of the second world war by spreading rumours about Hitler’s plans for a Where Eagles Dare-style Alpine redoubt, a historian with access to classified US military records has found. The personal Twitter account of the Georgia Republican congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene has been permanently suspended for violating policies on Covid misinformation. The action against Greene on Sunday came under the “strike” system Twitter launched last March. Stat of the day: 3,000 litres of alcohol poured into Kabul canal amid crackdown A team of Afghan intelligence agents poured about 3,000 litres of liquor into a canal in Kabul, the country’s spy agency has said, as the Taliban authorities crack down on the sale of alcohol. Video footage released by the General Directorate of Intelligence showed its agents pouring alcohol stored in barrels into the canal after seizing it during a raid in the capital. Three people have also been arrested in the capital as the Taliban government increases raids over alcohol and drugs. Don’t miss this: Is that really me? The ugly truth about beauty filters Live, augmented reality filters on photo- and video-based social media platforms including TikTok, Instagram and Snapchat have evolved from silly hats and puppy dog ears to more subtle beautifying effects that may not be immediately obvious to other users. As well as adding makeup, many of the popular filters that have crept into app libraries also change the face’s proportions, generally to fit female, European beauty standards, with thinner faces, smaller noses and plump lips. But how are these unattainable ideals harming young users? … or this: 100 ways to slightly improve your life without really trying Whether it’s taking fruit to work (and to the bedroom), being polite to rude strangers, planting spring bulbs even if you only have a pot and no garden, or taking up skinny-dipping, here’s a century of ways to make life better, with very little effort involved. Top tip: there are even more good suggestions in the comments under the article. Climate check: Indigenous groups team up with conservationists to protect swaths of US Although Indigenous peoples make up only about 5% of the world’s population, their territories encompass 80% of global biodiversity, according to the 2020 report The Indigenous World. Today, it’s clear conservationists have been looking to traditional ecological knowledge in their work. At the same time, environmental organizations and tribes have been coming together to protect the natural world, and a key part of this teamwork has been land transfers. Last Thing: Kleptoparasitic bear steals wolves’ kill in Yellowstone drama Wildlife officials in Yellowstone national park captured the “unusual” sight of a cheeky grizzly bear tagging along with a pack of hunting wolves, then making off with their kill. The enthralling video, posted to the National Parks Service Facebook page, shows the October incident in which the wolves from the Junction Butte pack in northern Yellowstone were joined by a lumbering grizzly as they hunted a herd of elk. After the wolves take down an elk, the bear moves in and steals the carcass: a phenomenon known as kleptoparasitism. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comSome of us binged on box sets, others grappled with the challenges of home school and zoned out of Zoom meetings: for many, life under lockdown felt glum. But for Jeremy Lockwood, a retired GP turned palaeontologist, 2021 was a standout year featuring two big dinosaur discoveries and laying plans to make the Isle of Wight famous for its prehistoric inhabitants once more. “It was an absolutely thrilling time for me,” Lockwood said. Lockwood, 64, who retired as a family doctor in the Midlands seven years ago, was behind the widely publicised discovery of a new species of iguanadontian dinosaur with a distinctively large nose and a second species, nicknamed “the horned crocodile-faced Hell Heron”. At the start of the pandemic, Lockwood re-registered with the General Medical Council and volunteered to work. However, his daughter, also a doctor, pointed out that before vaccines were available, hospitals would not want people in their 60s walking around wards. So for the past two years, Lockwood has immersed himself in fossil hunting on the beach and sifting through boxes of bones from museum archives. In palaeontology, like astronomy, amateurs often work alongside academics and their scientific contributions are frequently recognised. On retirement, Lockwood decided to put his lifelong interest in dinosaurs on a formal footing and persuaded his wife to move to the Isle of Wight, where a steady stream of dinosaur fossils emerge from the cliffs as they are eroded. He contacted Prof David Martill, of the University of Portsmouth, about doing a PhD and was quickly accepted. “I felt I had to do something to keep me active,” he said. “I don’t think I could’ve just played golf or grown roses.” Lockwood is revisiting a golden era for dinosaur discovery with a focus on iguanodons, the first specimen of which was unearthed by Gideon Mantell, also a doctor turned palaeontologist, in Sussex in 1825. Some have assumed that the long timeline of discovery means that the understanding of British dinosaurs is essentially “done and dusted”. On the contrary, Lockwood said, certain dogmas have remained unchallenged. And modern methods, such as using software to cluster specimens into a most likely family tree, have not always been applied to earlier finds. Most dinosaurs found on the Isle of Wight had been traditionally assigned to just one of two species: the plant-eating Iguanodon bernissartensis and Mantellisaurus atherfieldensis. After sifting through many hundreds of bones that had been sitting in boxes in the Natural History Museum and the Dinosaur Isle museum, Lockwood identified a clear outlier with an enormous bulbous nose. The finding suggests there were far more iguanadontian dinosaurs in the Early Cretaceous of the UK than previously thought and raises the prospect of tracing the evolution of different traits through time. “You can almost liken this huge collection of iguanadontian bones to several jigsaw puzzles that are all mixed up,” said Lockwood. “I’m trying to put together something that is meaningful.” Officially, Lockwood is doing his doctorate part-time, but acknowledges that he has become “a bit obsessed”. “Sometimes I’ll work for 16 hours a day for a few weeks,” he said. “You struggle to find time to cut the lawn and decorate your house, and friends and family have to put up with you talking about dinosaurs all the time.” Alongside his work on archive specimens, Lockwood also makes daily surveys of the beach to spot any dinosaur bones emerging from the cliffs. Winter is peak collecting season. “Certainly with winter storms eroding things, that’s when the big finds come in,” said Lockwood. He is also coordinating a bid to redevelop the Dinosaur Isle museum, by a charitable group that Lockwood chairs together with a German company, Dinosaurier-Park International, after the local council launched a tender process. “I’m trying to take over the museum,” Lockwood said. “The Isle of Wight undersells its dinosaurs. Most people are unaware that we’re Europe’s hotspot for dinosaurs and early mammals. We need a much bigger museum.” Lockwood said he has “great sympathy” for former medical colleagues still working on the frontline during the pandemic and is particularly annoyed by the “lazy GP stereotype” sometimes aired in media coverage. “Nothing could be further from the truth,” he said. “You can see burnout happening all over the place.” Several doctors have got in touch to congratulate him on his recent successes. “Some of the nice tweets were from other doctors approaching retirement,” he said. “It’s really good to see that there’s a life after medicine.”Ukraine’s culture minister Oleksandr Tkachenko has issued a complaint to Netflix over its offensive stereotypical image of a Ukrainian character in its show Emily in Paris. In a Telegram post, Tkachenko wrote: “We have a caricature image of a Ukrainian woman that is unacceptable. It is also insulting. Is that how Ukrainians are seen abroad?” Media in Ukraine confirmed that he has sent a letter to the streaming giant to complain about the portrayal of Petra, played by actor Daria Panchenko, who is terrified of being deported in the show, shoplifts while on a shopping spree with Emily and has bad fashion sense – the ultimate faux pas in this appearance-obsessed world. Emily in Paris is about the titular American, played by Lily Collins, who moves to the city of light to work for a marketing firm and swiftly becomes an influencer. This is far from the first time the show has been blasted for cliched and stereotypical depictions – in fact, it has become renowned for its beret-wearing, chain-smoking and philandering French characters. The Guardian review of its debut series declared it “astonishingly tone-deaf”, adding: “You name a stereotype, and within the first three episodes, Emily has not only encountered it, but tried to rectify it, to adjust it to the American way.” French critic Charles Martin, who writes for Première, was irate. “Frankly, watching Emily in Paris there’s plenty to feel insulted about. When they decided to caricature us, the authors didn’t hold back … no cliche is spared, not even the weakest.” In an interview with Elle UK in December, Collins declared that the show was seeking to correct some of the perceived errors in its second run, stating that it would be “more inclusive and diverse” as a result. Collins said: “For me as Emily, but also as a producer, after season one, hearing people’s thoughts, concerns, questions, likes, dislikes, just feelings about it, there were certain things that spoke to the time that we’re living in and what is right, moral and correct and should be done. I wanted diversity and inclusion in front of and behind the camera to be something that we really put our focus on.” Emily in Paris remains a hit for Netflix, and is currently in the top 10 most-viewed shows on the platform around the world.Thomas Tuchel used to be about control. When he arrived at Chelsea a year ago, that was what he brought: suddenly a team that had been desperately vulnerable on the break stopped conceding on the counter. They held the ball and a 3-4-2-1 formation gave them a naturally solid structure with two midfielders stationed in front of the defensive line. They won the Champions League because they demonstrated how it was possible to play pressing football without leaving yourself open in transition. That had always been Manchester City’s issue, less in the Premier League (although Leicester have often troubled them, as they did last week even in conceding six) than against top European sides. They were a remorseless attacking force, as imposing as the Death Star, but they also had that fatal exhaust port that meant they could be destroyed. To an extent that is intrinsic to the philosophy: push high and there will be space behind the defensive line; the question was how to guard against balls played into that space without losing the aggression of the press. City have clearly worked on that. Even in possession they often have five men behind the ball. They are more measured in their approach than they were when Pep Guardiola first arrived in England. But it was Tuchel’s Chelsea who seemed to have found the balance, beating City three times in the final seven weeks of the season, including in the FA Cup semi-final and the Champions League final. But while City march on, only 10 points dropped in the league this season, Chelsea have lost that sense of control. Having conceded four goals in their first 12 league games, they’ve leaked 12 in the past nine, with only one clean sheet. Their form has been far from disastrous: they have lost only one of those games, but equally they have won only three. And as so often, once the rot sets in, it spreads rapidly. Romelu Lukaku, having suggested he was unhappy with the 3-4-2-1 to which Tuchel has returned, will have further talks with the management on Monday. That is significant not only because he cost £97.5m and ideally would not be talking about how he pines for Inter eight league starts after leaving them, but because he seemed the solution to the slight toothlessness that was the only real doubt towards the end of last season. Not only is he a habitual goalscorer – only once in the past 12 seasons has he failed to get into double figures – but he is a player whose movement seemed ideal for Chelsea: why wouldn’t the same drift out to the right to create space for Kevin De Bruyne that has worked so well for Belgium work also with Chelsea’s inside-forwards? But as he has struggled to make an impact, so Chelsea’s entire forward line has come under scrutiny: £71m for Kai Havertz, £58m for Christian Pulisic, £47.5m for Timo Werner, £34m for Hakim Ziyech … some have suffered injury or illness and some or all may yet come good, but that’s £308m on five players over two and half seasons, none of whom could be said to have been a resounding success. Chelsea’s leading scorer in the league last season was Jorginho; this season it is Mason Mount. Tuchel arrived with a reputation for prickliness, as somebody with a tendency to fall out with players, directors and journalists eventually, but for most of the past year has been drily charming. Only in the last weeks has that begun to change, the Lukaku interview and its fallout the first sign of tension with his squad. Resolving that situation feels vital, not only because Chelsea need a Lukaku figure scoring goals and leading the line, but because the history of Chelsea managers who cannot accommodate big signings is not good. But everything, ultimately, comes back to that loss of control. It didn’t matter that Chelsea’s wing‑backs had scored more than their forwards when they were keeping clean sheets; the grumbling of a high-profile player matters less when you are winning games. The loss of Mateo Kovacic, first to a hamstring injury and then to Covid, has been hugely costly: Chelsea have conceded only four goals in his 10 league starts this season and three of those have come in the past two games when, Tuchel has acknowledged, he was rushed back. His absence, and N’Golo Kanté’s ongoing struggles with a knee injury, have increased the pressure on Jorginho, who has at times looked weary, notably in the defeat at West Ham. The deadline-day loan signing of Saúl Ñíguez, who has managed a total of 164 league minutes for Chelsea, has not worked out, and Ross Barkley, 154 league minutes this season, surely has no future at the club. Injuries have also played havoc in the back five, with Reece James and Ben Chilwell particular losses. But there is also self-inflicted uncertainty, with Antonio Rüdiger and Andreas Christensen out of contract in the summer and Thiago Silva finally agreeing an extension on Monday. After announcing losses of £145.6m last week, a squad that last season seemed vibrant, ready for years of domination, has come to look fragile. Which just goes to show how rapidly things can spin out of control. The loss of the attribute that defined Chelsea in the second half of last season is now threatening to undermine the whole project. Sorting out Lukaku may be the priority, but Chelsea also have to get that sense of control back.In 2020, an environmental non-profit returned over a dozen acres in Oregon to the Clatsop-Nehalem Confederated Tribes. Two months later, a conservation group worked with the Esselen Tribe of Monterey county to return more than 1,000 acres in California to the tribal group. And then late last year, in one of the largest transfers of its kind, an environmental organization returned thousands of acres of wildlife rangeland in Washington state to the Colville Tribes. Although each agreement was distinct, in recent years an important pattern has emerged of conservationists and Indigenous people working together by way of land transfers. The effect has been twofold: protecting ecologically vital spaces while helping to right historic injustices by returning properties to their original caretakers. The Colville Tribes agreement in October transferred about 9,243 acres of arid grasslands, dotted with sagebrush, that encompass several canyons in north-central Washington state that are valued by biologists as an important corridor linking the Cascade mountain range to the Rocky mountains for lynx, wolverine, wolves and grizzly bears. It was traditional territory of the Okanagan Tribe, a First Nations and Native American people who spanned across the Canada-US border, and it was part of the original Colville Tribes’ reservation that was stripped away by the federal government in 1892 after gold was discovered. In recent decades, it has been used as a family ranch. But then when it emerged in a few years ago that the land would be put up for sale, the environmental non-profit Conservation Northwest attempted to get it into the hands of a buyer who would preserve it. However, according to the non-profit’s executive director, Mitch Friedman, these efforts were at first unsuccessful. Toward the end of last year the land’s ecological and historical elements seemed to align perfectly when tribal officials and the non-profit’s leaders worked to return it to the hands of the Colville Tribes. “It was, I would say, the best kind of news that we could receive, to get land back,” said Andy Joseph Jr, chair of the Colville Business Council, who described stepping back on to the land in late October for a ceremony as a feeling of returning home. The community, which consists of 12 bands, is known for its substantial natural resources departments and had previously worked closely with Conservation Northwest, most recently to relocate threatened Canada lynx on the reservation. In early October, after Conservation Northwest raised about $4.6m in eight months to buy the property, and the tribe approved a protective covenant that outlined protections on the land, the group immediately transferred the land’s deed to the Colville Tribes. Preserving biodiversity Although Indigenous peoples make up only about 5% of the world’s population, their territories encompass 80% of global biodiversity, according to the 2020 report The Indigenous World. And nature on Indigenous peoples’ lands is “generally declining less rapidly” than other land, according to a 2019 report by the Intergovernmental Science – Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Today, it’s clear conservationists have been looking to traditional ecological knowledge in their work. At the same time, environmental organizations and tribes have been coming together to protect the natural world, and a crucial part of this teamwork has been land transfers. In September, the Nature Conservancy transferred the 132-acre Safe Harbor Marsh Preserve along the west shore of Flathead Lake in Montana to the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes. The Indigenous community has a large natural resources department and developed a strong relationship with the environmental organization. They also have a long history with the preserve. Once a part of the tribe’s reservation, the marsh had been lost, along with thousands of other acres, through a pair of federal allotment acts in the early 1900s. Chairwoman Shelly Fyant said the tribes had made it a point to buy these properties back, but faced challenges with skyrocketing costs. She said they were extremely happy when the Nature Conservancy leaders approached them about the marsh. “It’s just so amazing and, you know, really heartwarming that we have allies that understand us. They understand what our goals are, you know, in the big picture,” she said. “It’s not about money; it’s not about making a profit or capitalism or development. It’s about conserving it for future generations, so that our descendants can enjoy that.” The tribe passed a resolution specifying that the site will be dedicated to conservation, wildlife and cultural uses. Fyant explained that they’re working to integrate it into their management plan and to preserve the marsh for the waterfowl and other migratory birds. But at the same time, tribes are in no way a monolithic group. And there have been instances of Indigenous communities’ work running afoul of conservation efforts. The Navajo Nation Council, for example, recently spoke out in opposition of the Biden administration’s proposed ban on oil and gas drilling around Chaco Canyon. At the same time, the Makah Tribe has spent years working to regain its whaling rights, which has put them at odds with several conservation groups. Jill Sherman-Warne, executive director of the Native American Environmental Protection Coalition and former elected official of the Hoopa Valley Tribe, explained that given all the ignored treaties and other agreements cast aside, tribes have been left to take care of themselves. And in some cases that may mean logging, gaming, tourism or other practices that don’t necessarily align with conservation. But overall, she said, tribes are incredibly effective protectors of the natural world. “Tribal people have in their histories knowledge that before geologists or hydrologists can prove scientific fact,” she said. “Tribes have stories about the environment that existed before any of the science, which now is proving their oral histories to be true.” Serra Hoagland, a biologist and tribal liaison for the US Forest Service, said that traditional ecological knowledge and western science can complement each other very well. Citing a 2012 Journal of Forestry study, she said that while western science tends to be more concrete and look in short time periods, traditional knowledge is often more abstract and looks in longer time periods. “You commonly hear throughout Indian Country, tribes and Native people talking about the seventh generation,” said Hoagland, a member of Pueblo of Laguna. “And that’s because we’re thinking that far ahead into the future about our decisions that we’re making today.” Conservation plan Officials within the Confederated Tribes of the Colville reservation have started putting together a conservation management plan guided by traditional knowledge and western science for the recently returned land. Cody Desautel, natural resources division director for the Colville Tribes, said the process will probably take about six months and involve examining the species on the property, the condition of the land and the types of improvements that may need to be made. One of the species he said he anticipates will be a priority is the endangered sharp-tailed grouse, which are known to have breeding grounds on the land. The Colville Tribes also plans to conduct a cultural plant inventory to identify those culturally significant to the tribe. They may also be seeing two additional pieces of land returned in the coming months. The Methow Conservancy recently bought more than 300 acres and has announced its plans to give it to the tribe. And after Conservation Northwest was able to raise about $300,000 over the amount needed for the previously returned land, they plan to help the tribe with closing costs on another property within that same corridor. Chairman Joseph said given the importance of returning land and their shared caretaking goals, he hopes to see others follow suit. He said that it is their traditional and cultural belief that “as long as we take care of the land, the animals, the foods, the medicines and the water, they’ll always be here for us. “It seems like the conservationists feel the same way.”As Shaka Senghor was serving 19 years in prison for murder, a letter from his father gave him the strength to endure and eventually reform. “I’ll never leave your side,” Senghor’s father wrote to him, after Senghor told his family, in a letter written from solitary confinement, that they should move on with their lives without him. Senghor explored his road to redemption in his New York Times best-seller Writing My Wrongs: Life, Death, and Redemption in an American Prison. At 19, Senghor was convicted of second degree murder after shooting a man during a drug deal in Detroit. He was released from prison in 2010 and since then has been a MIT Media Lab Director’s Fellow, delivered a TED Talk in 2016 that has collected more than 1.6m views and been featured on Oprah Winfrey’s SuperSoul 100. Now, in his second book titled Letters to the Sons of Society, which will be published later this month, Senghor has written a collection of letters to his two sons: Jay, who was born while he was in prison, with whom he had a distant and fractured relationship, and his younger charge, Sekou, who was born to a wiser, redeemed Senghor who was able to be a present and attentive father. In his book, Senghor, 49, wrestles with reconciling and building a relationship with his adult son who first knew him as an inmate, and his second child, born of a different mother, who is being raised by an accomplished and liberated man. Senghor grapples with his regret over missing out on so much of his eldest son’s life, battles with his own toxic ideas of masculinity and ultimately works to find a way to love both his children and engage in their lives authentically. Letters played a big role in your own redemption and transformation. Why did you decide to write this book in the form of letters versus other narrative styles? My transformation really started with letters from my dad. He is a beautiful letter writer and he would write me five to six page handwritten letters about life. We did a lot of healing and growing together and challenging ideas through our letters. And in my toughest moments in prison, I would go back and reread his letters as a reminder that there was someone on the other side of the four walls who really cared about me. Someone who loved me, loved me unconditionally. Through our letters, we were able to really be honest and very transparent with each other. He could admit the areas where he felt he came up short and I could accept my failures and be accountable and free him from the oppressive thought that it was his fault I landed in prison. I felt like the intimacy of the letters between my dad and I were something we just don’t see: an honest and emotional exchange between Black men. I thought, if I could ever write something to my sons that they could go back to, the way I went back to the letters with my dad, their lives would be good. You wrote Letters during a nine month period in 2020, during the pandemic constraints and a moment of racial uprisings and reckonings. How did that timing influence your approach? When I began to put the letters together, it was before the social unrest we witnessed globally. When I put my first proposal together, it was in late 2019, I was thinking about the narrative around Black men and this negative story that kept being told. We’re framed like we are America’s problem; we’re the Black community’s problem; we’re Black women’s problems; we’re everybody’s problem and nobody’s solution. It really bothered me because I know so many incredible Black men. Originally the letters were going to be addressed to different sons: my hip-hop sons, my non-binary confirming sons, my entrepreneurial sons. Then as I thought about it, I thought, “I need to write these letters to my sons because between these two worlds are the many sons I encounter.” Your oldest son, Jay, is 29 and your youngest, Sekou, is 10. How have they responded to what you’ve written? Jay does not want to read the book. He is so nonchalant and in his own world. I realized that I can’t insert myself into his life in a way that he hasn’t given me permission to do. So I make the offering, and whatever he chooses to do, I’m cool with. With Sekou, it’s different because some of the content is more mature than where he is at. He did read some and had the best reaction ever. He was so amused that my dad once bought me some fake Jordan (sneakers). He was just like, “Not the Pro Wings.” It was a special moment. Do you see this book as a parenting guide for Black boys? Or do you expect it to have a wider resonance? This is a book that white fathers and sons should consume, too. Oftentimes they are in those positions that are systemically oppressive to people who don’t look like them. It’s really important for white dads to understand that Black fathers want the same things for their sons: safety, well-being, the ability to thrive and not just survive. The biggest thing I want (all) to take away is the power of love – the emotional accessibility that we owe ourselves and owe our sons and how impactful it is when you can open up. Love is truly our power and is the source of all things great. You wrote a letter unpacking isolation and you draw a parallel between being in solitary confinement in prison and the isolation of the early days of the pandemic. What took you there? When the global pandemic first began and people started going into lockdown, I saw a lot of people struggling. Whenever people would reach out to me, they’d say I feel bad because you dealt with real isolation going through solitary confinement. And I’d say: “No, this is real. There is not a comparison to make, but there are similar themes.” In solitary what really challenges you is this indefinite sense of not knowing. There’s never a concrete time frame of when you’ll be out. It was the same with this pandemic – we don’t know when we are coming out of it. The depression that set in for many people was familiar territory to me. I remember one day, I was in my office and was getting off my fifth Zoom meeting. I had ordered food in. I felt a sense of the room closing in on me. I realized I was triggered and my mind had gone back to a previous experience – my prison experience. It felt just like when they would bring your food to the cell. And this is where you’ll be and you can’t go anywhere. And so I had to leave, to remember, I can get out of here. Isolation happens in many forms. You spent about seven years combined in solitary confinement for various reasons and during that time found meditation, discipline and hope. I remember writing to my dad and telling him I think I’m going to die in this place and they are never going to let me out. I want you to go on with your life and take care of Jay and the family. I wrote him an honest letter because I thought my life was over and I didn’t want to see him suffer as a result of my suffering. My dad wrote me back and told me that while he wished I wasn’t in solitary confinement he had no judgment. He told me that no matter how long I was in prison he wouldn’t leave my side and would always have my back. I read the letter so many times because it affirmed me and kept me strong on so many days. You write about trauma, abuse, alcohol and drug addiction, among other serious topics. Why did you want to broach these issues with your still young sons? Prison is designed to lay you bare. It dehumanizes you in such a way and it strips you. Once you reconcile that, you can live with any truth. There are conversations that our community does not have with children. There is this old model … and we tiptoe around a lot of topics. I’m a parent, a dad and I mentor kids all over the country. I go into these schools and these 12-year-olds, 13-year-olds, they are watching everything on social media. Their conversations are hyper-mature but in a very toxic way. My responsibility is to empower my sons with my truth and that truth comes through my own vulnerability. Because I have a public life and I’ve been convicted of a very serious crime … kids could say things to my youngest son. I had a fear that someone could say to him, “your dad is a murderer”, without him having any context it would hurt him. So for me, the responsible thing to do is to speak the truth. I want to be real with both of them. [They] already know the worst thing I’ve done in my life. So for me, the rest of the topics are not hard conversations to have. What does a whole Black boy look like to you? When I think of a whole Black boy the first thing that comes to mind is an image of Sekou dancing to old-school soul music. I imagine a boy who is full of joy and that is able to explore the world with curiosity and be unimpeded in his quest to learn, to have fun, to contribute, to have agency over his body and thoughts. To be able to give love and receive love without it being filtered through a lens of trauma or skepticism. To really smile freely, smile in a way that makes other people smile when they walk in the room. Somebody that can express themselves and has full access to their emotions. There’s nothing more beautiful than when my son comes up to me and says he needs a hug. He’s so funny to me – he says: “Dad bring it in, bring it in.” That freedom of emotional access, that is wholeness to me.It was fascinating to see lentils growing on low plants, protected by bean-sized green pods. We were in a field in the middle of Sicily, and there were chickpeas growing, too, also in neat green jackets, and in the next field wheat. It was June and the sun was high and hot, but it had rained the night before, so our ankles were warmed by steam. We had been told to wear sensible shoes, and I was wearing clogs; sensible, but not in a field. So while I tried to listen to Francesco Di Gesu explain how the lentils grown on his land would be harvested, thrashed and dried, I was distracted by the way my feet were collecting the clay earth. Not a normal amount, but massive, ever-increasing clumps, which made my legs look like uprooted tree trunks and walking harder and harder, until eventually I lost one and got stuck in the other; part stork, part adult version of a childhood game. After pointing and laughing, someone came to my aid and we used a stick to lever off some earth; I managed to stomp off more on the way to the van. Later, back where we had come from, I sat and scraped away the rest of the now dry mud, and with it dozens of lentils, a memory now relived every time I tip a bag of them into a pan and cover with water. You are, most likely, reading this in early January, so happy new year. Maybe you ate lentils last night, their coin shape an augury of wealth and happiness for this coming year. Or maybe you ate a grape every time the clock struck or iPhone beeped down to midnight – that, too, is said to ensure a secure and comfortable tomorrow. If you didn’t, here is a recipe that includes both, about which I can’t promise anything (although I am always optimistic), except for its goodness. Most of the time I braise lentils, cooking them in just enough water that by the end it is almost completely absorbed and the final consistency soft. For this dish, however, while the lentils should be completely cooked and tender, I don’t want them to collapse, so I boil them in well-seasoned water, then drain. The cooking time of lentils depends on their variety, and on how old they are and how they have been stored, so, as always, keep tasting. This is a recipe that lends itself to variations. The cheese could be replaced with hard-boiled eggs and anchovy fillets, sausages or roast red peppers. That said, I do suggest trying it with the goat’s cheese – its creamy sharpness is terrific with the sweet-earthy lentils. Most herbs can be stirred into warm lentils, as can lightly toasted cumin seeds or crushed coriander; you could even stir in a handful of cooked chestnuts, toasted hazelnuts or ribbons of radicchio. Or spoon the lentils on radicchio leaf-boats, ready to sail into 2022. Lentils, roast grapes and goat’s cheese Serves 4 350g small brown or puy lentils 2 bay leaves 1 garlic clove, unpeeled 1 stick celery Salt and back pepper 200g small red grapes Olive oil A few marjoram sprigs 4 small goat’s cheese (60-80g each) 1 tsp red-wine vinegar 1 tbsp chopped parsley Put the lentils, bay, garlic, celery and a pinch of salt in a pan, cover with one and a half litres of water, and bring to a boil. Turn down the heat to a simmer and cook for 30 minutes, until the lentils are tender but still hold their shape. While the lentils are cooking, put the grapes on a small baking tray, pour over some oil, sprinkle with salt, add the marjoram, and toss. Bake at 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 for 20 minutes, until soft and blistered, then pull from oven, put the cheese on top and return to the oven for five minutes, until the cheese is warm. Drain the lentils, then put them in a bowl and toss with three tablespoons olive oil, salt, lots of black pepper, the red-wine vinegar and parsley. Share the lentils between four plates and top each serving with some of the grapes and a cheese. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThroughout 2021, American workers stood up and fought back to an unusual degree. Workers went on strike at Kellogg’s, Nabisco, John Deere, Columbia University and numerous hospitals, while non-union “essential” workers – furious about how they’ve been treated – walked out at supermarkets, warehouses and fast-food restaurants. Workers have sought to unionize at Starbucks, Amazon, even the Art Institute of Chicago. And a record number of Americans have been quitting their jobs each month, more than 4 million monthly, fed up and eager for something better. Millions of workers are angry – angry that they didn’t get hazard pay for risking their lives during the pandemic, angry that they’ve been forced to work 70 or 80 hours a week, angry that they received puny raises while executive pay soared, angry that they didn’t get paid sick days when they got sick. Out of this comes a question that looms large for America’s workers: will this surge of worker action and anger be a mere flash in the pan or will it be part of a longer-lasting phenomenon? The answer to this important question could turn on whether all this anger and energy are somehow transformed into a larger movement. At least for now, America’s labor leaders seem to be doing very little to tap all this energy and hope and to build it into something bigger and longer lasting. Yes, we are seeing unionization drives at this workplace and that one, but we are not seeing any bigger, broader effort to channel and transform all this worker energy and discontent into a new movement, one perhaps with millions of engaged and energetic nonunion workers, that would work in conjunction with the traditional union movement. Worker advocates I speak to keep wondering: what are labor leaders waiting for? If not now, when? In Joe Biden, we have the most pro-union president since Franklin Roosevelt, and public approval for unions is the highest it’s been in more than a half century. For decades, union leaders have said they are eager to reverse labor’s long decline – more than 20% of workers were in unions three decades ago, now just 10% are. Unless unions step up and do something bold, they’ll relegate themselves to continued decline. Many labor leaders evidently think it’s impossible or improbable to turn this year’s energy and anger into a new movement or a big, new group. But building a movement from scratch isn’t impossible. 350.org was founded in 2008 by several college students and environmentalist author Bill McKibben, and within two years, it organized a mammoth Day of Climate Action with a reported 5,245 actions in 181 countries. After the horrific shootings at Marjorie Stoneman high school in Florida in 2018, a handful of students founded March for Our Lives, and within five weeks, their group had organized nationwide rallies with hundreds of thousands of people calling for gun control. Black Lives Matter also grew into a powerful national movement within a few years. None of these movements were one-shot or one-month affairs – they have become powers to contend with in policy and politics. So why isn’t the labor movement seizing on this year’s burst of worker energy to build something bigger? I was discussing this with friend who is a professor of labor studies, and she said she thought that most of today’s union leaders were “constitutionally incapable” of building big or being bold and ambitious. She said that after decades of being on the defensive, of being beaten down by hostile corporations, hostile GOP lawmakers and hostile judicial decisions, many labor leaders seem unable to dream big or think outside the box on how to attract large numbers of workers in ways beyond the traditional one-workplace-at-a-time union drives. But building big and outside the box isn’t impossible for labor. Just look at the Fight for $15. The strategists and SEIU leaders behind it had a vision: they wanted to push the issue of low wages into the national conversation and lift the pay floor for millions of workers. They started small, with walkouts by 200 workers at a dozen fast-food restaurants in New York City, and within two years, they built a powerful national movement that held strikes and protests in hundreds of cities. This movement ultimately got a dozen states to enact a $15 minimum wage, lifting pay for over 20 million workers. Perhaps some brilliant, visionary workers or worker advocates will step forward to seek to channel this year’s burst of worker anger and energy into a new movement. Social media could certainly help build it, perhaps with the assistance of groups like Coworker.org, which has considerable experience engaging and mobilizing disgruntled rank-and-file workers via the internet. For many workers, a big new group or movement could be a waystation toward unionizing: helping educate and mobilize workers to unionize, guiding them on next steps and what their rights are, and promising a pool of ready support if they seek to unionize. This new group or movement could send out bulletins telling members how they could help other workers in their community or nearby communities – perhaps help unionization drives at Amazon or Starbucks or strikers at Kellogg’s or Warrior Met Coal in Alabama or food delivery workers who are cheated out of tips and don’t have access to bathrooms. Members of this new group could be called on to protest outside the offices of members of Congress or state lawmakers about myriad issues, perhaps raising the federal minimum wage or enacting paid family leave or the Protecting the Right to Organize Act. Or they could join rallies for voting rights or immigrant rights or against police abuses or to combat global warming. Working America, an arm of the AFL-CIO, does some of this, mainly urging its members to vote and to contact lawmakers. To truly help reverse labor’s decline and capitalize on today’s worker anger, much more will be needed – an organization that is far more connected to workers and does far more organizing, protesting and mobilizing. America’s labor movement is terribly balkanized, with many unions engaged in turf battles and upset that another union has (perhaps) stepped into its territory. As a result, they too often find it hard to work together. But if America’s unions are serious about wanting to strengthen worker power and reverse labor’s decline, it’s time to put past divisions behind them and figure out how to build back something bigger. There are three main reasons that America’s labor movement has declined: first, corporate America’s fierce resistance to unions, second, the decades-long slide in factory jobs, and, third, the Republican party’s decades-long fight to weaken unions and make it tougher to unionize. But there’s another factor behind labor’s decline that is rarely discussed – many labor leaders don’t do nearly enough to inspire workers and expand the union movement. Today’s workers could use some vigorous, visionary leaders like Mother Jones, Sidney Hillman, John L Lewis and A Philip Randolph to lead and inspire, and build something bigger. Perhaps many union leaders haven’t been hearing what I often hear from rank-and-file union members: “Lead or get out of the way.” Steven Greenhouse is a journalist and author, focusing on labor and the workplace. He is the author of Beaten Down, Worked Up: The Past, Present, and Future of American LaborClick here to access the print version The clue for 11 across is normal, with a normal solution to be entered in the grid normally. All other clues consist of two cryptic clues, side by side. The two solutions they generate are to be entered side by side in the grid but cyclically, starting anywhere in the designated space. The required starting points will be confirmed by crossing letters and by the fact that, in the 26 squares around the perimeter of the grid, all the letters A to Z appear once. Deadline for entries is 23:59 GMT on Saturday 5 February. You need to register once and then sign in to theguardian.com to enter our online competition for a £100 monthly prize. Click here to register.A memoir about growing up before and after the fall of communism in Albania has won rave reviews in the west but has prompted “vicious” abuse from a vocal minority of Albanians, its author says. Free by Lea Ypi, a Marxist Albanian professor of political theory at the London School of Economics, might seem an unlikely bestseller. But in its first full month on sale in November the memoir sold 10,000 copies. It has been shortlisted for the Costa biography of the year and will soon be available in 17 languages including Korean and Mandarin. Despite its criticisms of the disastrous impact of market changes in Albania, the book received five-star reviews in the Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph, and was named the Sunday Times book of the year. But in Albania the book generated such a torrent of online abuse that Ypi had to appeal to Albanians to stop sending her “offensive, accusatory and defamatory” messages. She told the Guardian she usually enjoyed engaging with her detractors. But she said this abuse was different because it came from people who had either not read the book or misunderstood its criticism of capitalism and communism. The book is told from her perspective as a child in 1980s Albania, when she was taught to worship the dictator Enver Hoxha, and her family’s dissident views became clear only after the regime fell. “One of the most important messages in the book is that however oppressive a regime, it never completely crushes human dignity,” she said. Some of Ypi’s Albanian critics have mistaken such ideas as an apology for communism and have accused her of experiencing Stockholm syndrome. This has been particularly hard for Ypi to take. “It touches you personally if you have a grandfather who spent 15 years in a communist prison to be told you are somehow trying to rehabilitate communist murderers,” she said. Some of the reaction has been sexist – in one message Ypi was told she looked “more like a showgirl than an academic”. Another dredged up an old newspaper cutting that quoted Ypi as an 11-year-old expressing a desire to help her country, and accused her of turning against her former self. She said: “It’s a minority but it’s so vocal and so personal and so vicious, it affects you a lot more than the other responses which have been overwhelmingly positive.” In the book, she recounts being bullied as a child in part because she spoke French. “It’s exactly the same kind of people who were bullying me when I was a child that are doing it now,” she said. Ypi says much of the criticism came after she launched the Albanian version of the book at Hoxha’s former house in the capital, Tirana. “For me it was like imagining Hoxha in hell, having someone from a family of dissidents promote a book about the Albanian legacy. It was symbolically really powerful,” she said. But the irony of the location was lost on some, who feel the property should be destroyed and suspected Ypi of trying to rehabilitate the dictator. The presence at the launch of the Albanian prime minister, Edi Rama, and many of his ministers was also misconstrued. Ypi said: “I’m very critical of the Albanian government, but people felt I was being manipulated or appropriated by them.” Such perceptions have even fuelled false rumours that Ypi is to become the next president of Albania. She said: “If you keep repeating fake news like that it almost becomes like real news. And then it erodes constructive criticism. What should happen to Enver Hoxha’s house is a valid debate, but if you start basing it on fake news and misreadings the debate never happens.” Ypi, who wrote the book in parallel in English and Albanian, feels that for all the negative online comments, the book has succeeded in sparking constructive discussions about the merits of socialism and capitalism. She said: “Through family histories I try to engage everyone in a big conversation about freedom – my mother has one idea of freedom and my father has another. When it works it opens up big conversations not shuts them down. And there’s a younger generation who are concerned about what kind of system we live in.”The sole distributor of Covid lateral flow tests (LFTs) to pharmacies closed for four days over the Christmas period just as it received a delivery of 2.5m devices, it has emerged. Alliance Healthcare took delivery of the tests on Christmas Eve and then shut, the Times reported. It provides LFTs to pharmacies to give out to the public. An update from the Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee, which represents NHS pharmacy contractors, confirmed 2.5m tests had been delivered to Alliance Healthcare on 24 December and added: “That stock was ready to be delivered [on] 29 December when Alliance Healthcare reopened after its planned Christmas break, and it represents circa 357,000 individual packs of seven tests and just over 6,000 cartons.” Each pharmacy is able to place a daily order for a single carton, containing about 55 packs, each with seven tests, but the surge in Omicron variant cases, guidance to increase the amount of testing and a change to the isolation rules have led to an increase in demand. People are able to leave Covid isolation early after testing negative, and school pupils are being encouraged to test at least twice weekly when they return to classrooms this week. This has led many pharmacies to run out within hours of delivery, and there were reports of patchy supplies before Christmas. Alliance Healthcare said last week there could be “some service disruption across the Alliance Healthcare network” due to Covid-related absence. The company has been approached by the Guardian but a UK spokesperson told the Times it had closed on 25 December until 28 December, and distribution had resumed on 29 December “when the majority of community pharmacies reopened”. He said: “Since the start of the pharmacy collect scheme, Alliance Healthcare UK has distributed over 280m lateral flow tests to community pharmacies across the UK. We distributed more than 2m lateral flow tests on Christmas Eve to support a number of community pharmacies that remained open over Christmas bank holiday and where stock was available. “We continue to distribute around 2m lateral flow tests daily from stock made available to us from UKHSA.” A UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) spokesperson said: “The UK’s testing programme is the biggest in Europe, with almost 400m tests carried out since the start of the pandemic. We are delivering record numbers of lateral flow tests to pharmacies across the country, with over 8m test kits being made available to pharmacies between 29 December and New Year’s Eve. “We have made 100,000 more PCR [polymerase chain reaction test] booking slots available per day since mid-December and we are continuing to rapidly expand capacity – with over half a million tests carried out on 23 December alone and delivery capacity doubled to 900,000 PCR and LFD [lateral flow device] test kits a day. If you have not been able to get the test you need from gov.uk, please keep checking every few hours as more PCR and LFD tests become available every day.”I used to fancy myself as a special occasion cook, marinating and reducing for occasional wows, but since lockdown I’ve mostly taken over – with as little control freakery as I can muster – doing my full share of proper family meals, well. Does that count as a hobby? Of course not. But when you are writing and reading and wandering and watching for a living, it can feel that all of life is a form of solitary indulgence, so the distractions I crave are generally communal, and simply hands on. That feeling has become more urgent in the last two years. Having worked from home for a couple of decades, I was used to mostly being alone with the contents of the fridge. Now, there were four of us in the house, Zooming and essay-writing and being lectured online and the days seemed to demand different kinds of punctuation marks. A few things conspired to make that effort seem more of an adventure than a chore. For quite a few of those weeks and months, in and out of bubbles, we were joined by my daughter’s boyfriend, James, who is vegetarian. It seemed a good time for us all to cut out meat, so that happily concentrated our minds, too: how do we create flavour and variety without the fallback of a slab of protein? (Most of the best answers I found were inevitably plagiarised from Anna Jones or Ottolenghi or Mr Slater.) Then there was the question of supply. I stopped going to supermarkets entirely and got to know the strengths and weaknesses of local greengrocers – my 10,000 steps were usually directed towards a mission for tarragon or Swiss chard. And then, I guess, mental health. The real challenge of a life of blank pages to be filled on screens has always been, for me, how to negotiate that early evening switch over to not thinking all the time about filling blank pages on screens. Suddenly, in the absence of the prospect of ever going out, chopping herbs and crushing garlic and rolling pastry seemed like a far better strategy for that gear shift than just opening another bottle of wine (though that often happened, too). I realise, writing this, that for many people, particularly from and in countries and cultures where food preparation is indistinguishable from the regular flow of life, the idea of cooking as a brand new hobby might seem somewhat perverse or nonsensical. But, in small ways, ludicrously late, I’ve found that the new habit of starting the day discussing what’s for lunch or what’s for supper and then later doing those things, together or alone, the best you possibly can, alters the balance of how you think about any of the day’s challenges. We are forever fed the lie that our psychological ease lies in greater convenience, speed, the avoidance of complication and difficulty; that life is a battle for me-time; that work is the enemy and leisure the goal. It almost goes without saying that those ideas empty out life rather than fill it, and miss the texture of what makes most days worth living: doing things as slowly and well as they demand (even if it’s only making a great omelette), mastering skills for their own sake, searching for tomatoes that taste like tomatoes. Over the years, I’ve been lucky enough to meet or write about a few people for whom that speed of life has been second nature. More often than not they have been people who have learned to pace themselves by the rhythm of days and seasons, rather than trying to force time to their own will. I once spent a few days staying in the Provençal house owned by Richard Olney, author of The French Menu Cookbook, who was instrumental in reminding western cooks that food was all about rootedness. Or I think of Simon Hopkinson, formerly chef at Hilaire and Bibendum, whose eyes lit up when he described the thrill of finding mackerel at the market that morning so fresh they were still a little curled, and going home to cook them. If there had been a rulebook to make the last couple of years a bit more bearable it would, for me, certainly have involved Hopkinson’s mantra from his Roast Chicken and Other Stories: “It is important to cook in the right frame of mind (we are not talking everyday chores here) and to do things in the right order. Ergo: feel hungry; go out shopping with pen and paper and money. See good things, buy them. Write down further items that will accompany previous purchases. Come home. Have a glass of wine. Cook the food and eat.” If I’m honest, the first two entries on that list have always presented the biggest challenge for me. While envying a little the joy people like Hopkinson found in mastery, I realise I’ve tended to accept that such commitment might be beyond me. I had a powerful feeling growing up, I think, that, in contrast to the men of my dad’s generation, I would always be a corner-cutter, a bit slap-dash when it came to practical tasks, a DIY bodger, a dabbler rather than a perfectionist. One of the things that cooking has taught me in recent months is that those kinds of self-images can perhaps, even in your (sometimes terrifyingly) advancing 50s, be unlearned and rewritten. Sometimes, late at night, as I go round turning the lights off in the house, or loading the dishwasher, I find myself totting up the day just ended, in the manner of Ronnie Barker, as he used to shut up shop in Open All Hours. Just lately, it’s been good to have a few new phrases entering that internal voiceover, along with the tally of uncompleted tasks and worries to sleep on – “that watercress sauce, wasn’t half bad, was it?” or “next time, I think, a little less cinnamon in those poached pears”. How to do it Ravneet Gill’s Damson Jelly Academy offers online tutorials for beginners and The Bertinet Kitchen, is run by baker Richard Bertinet from his base in Bath. Try it for breadmaking, classic patisserie and pie-making courses. The School of Wok teaches you dishes from most south, east and south-east Asian cuisines. Leiths has options ranging from online classes for enthusiasts to professional courses. Migrateful is a charity that hosts classes by refugees and migrants. You get to learn how to cook food from another culture; your chef gains training and employment. To try recipes by the chefs who have inspired Tim Adams, Anna Jones runs online courses or go for her book The Modern Cook’s Year. Roast Chicken and Other Stories by Simon Hopkinson with Lindsey Bareham is as delightful to read as make dishes from. For new recipes from Nigel Slater, read his weekly column in the Observer Magazine.This is the fiction feature debut from film-maker Eric Steel, previously responsible for the controversial documentary The Bridge, about people who kill themselves by jumping off the Golden Gate Bridge. Minyan is a subdued, withdrawn emotional drama set in the 1980s among the Russian Jewish immigrant community of New York’s “Little Odessa”. David (Samuel H Levine) is a young Jewish gay man who reads a lot of James Baldwin; he is at odds with his overbearing parents and much closer to his recently widowed grandfather Josef (Ron Rifkin) who has now got a modest but comfortable apartment in a much sought-after subsidised residency building for observant Jews. David comes to live there, too, both agreeing to make up the numbers required (the “minyan”) for public worship. David can see that two of the older Jewish men in the building are in fact a couple, their relationship accepted on a don’t ask, don’t tell basis, but whose sexual identity has in formal terms been suppressed, or at any rate tacitly considered by them irrelevant in comparison with the horrors they lived through during the war, and the consequent need for loyalty to traditional Judaism. David’s Jewish identity is also at odds with his own concealed gay identity, and he has a passionate affair with handsome bartender Bruno (Alex Hurt) who is angry at David’s ignorance of the Aids crisis. Steel brings a very distinctive kind of control and restraint to his film, both in terms of its subdued colour palette and an emotional language which despite explicit scenes of both sex and homophobic tension and paranoia, has something opaque and elliptical about it. The film however concludes with that now quaint rarity: the freeze-frame shot, which seems to belong to a lighter, more quizzically humorous film. Levine brings an assertive and intelligent performance. • Minyan is released on 7 January in cinemas.The footballer Marcus Rashford’s free school meals campaign last year set off untold chain reactions across the UK In the case of Broxtowe in Nottinghamshire, Labour activists had been running a campaign to provide food aid for local people during the pandemic when they heard about another project nearby: Phoenix FC, a youth football club inspired by Rashford to provide lunch boxes to local families in need. Members of Broxtowe Labour party went round bearing multipacks of crisps and offers of help. When I visited Phoenix FC on a recent weekday, their coach Darren admitted that he and club manager “Bomber”, both full-time workers and parents in their late 30s, were initially suspicious of the Labour people turning up at the door. But a relationship was forged in the heat of the crisis: any local group offering support was inundated with requests, as the pandemic plunged swaths of the population into food poverty. Demand soon exceeded capacity at Phoenix, so the Labour team connected the club to Himmah, a grassroots action network running one of Nottingham’s largest food banks, which provided boxed, ready-to-dispatch supplies. One year on, Phoenix FC are setting up a new community centre, with a lease and funding from the cross-party council. They operate in Chilwell, a traditionally white working-class Nottingham suburb, where public spaces and services have been gutted by austerity, leaving people with nowhere to go. The plan is to use the space to run coffee mornings and after-school clubs, alongside skills training and anti-racism awareness, from a now-empty nursery building. The new community centre could be seen as a sign of the serendipitous power of mutual aid: the unexpected possibilities that open up when people pool their time, skills and resources. But it is also the kind of thing that Labour’s community organising unit might have been able to create, if it were still running. The national unit was set up by Jeremy Corbyn in 2018, and had been operating in Broxtowe in the run-up to the 2019 election – but was disbanded by Keir Starmer in February. Without a Labour MP – Broxtowe is a marginal seat that has been Conservative since 2010 – and with no say-so from Labour HQ, local members decided to reboot a version of this dormant form of community organising for the pandemic. Whereas many of the mutual aid efforts established via WhatsApp groups since March 2020 have explicitly sought to steer clear of party politics, Broxtowe shows that the two approaches to political organising can successfully overlap. I recently sat down with the chair of Broxtowe CLP, Jane Marshall, at the local party’s community hub – a drop-in centre that during the worst months of the pandemic also delivered about 300 food parcels a week. Marshall suggested it was entirely possible to copy and paste the Labour values of collectivism and solidarity on to the mutual aid model: “When there is a crisis, people look to see who has stepped up, and it should be Labour that [does].” Responding to the immediate needs of neighbours for medicine and food deliveries, pandemic mutual aiders uncovered a deeper crisis: the combined effect of economic neglect, insecure work, atomised neighbourhoods and a hobbled welfare state. Labour’s community organising unit had been set up to respond to this shocking decline, not with top-down solutions imposed from London, but by empowering and supporting those already engaged in grassroots work locally. People like Bomber and Darren at Phoenix FC. It’s hard to overstate the positive impact and the trust generated when Labour volunteers show up consistently in a neighbourhood more accustomed to being ignored. In places such as Chilwell, for too long the prevailing view of politicians and campaigners has been that you’ll only see them at election time, bearing clipboards and empty promises. The challenge for Labour isn’t simply to tally votes but to persuade people of the value of voting at all, so diminished is the idea that politics could ever change anything. Coaches at Phoenix FC see the area’s youth written off, and a pervasive sense that nobody could ever improve their situation. The club want to provide young people with skills training that could be an essential first rung in the ladder to formal learning. They have already helped funnel young people into universities and apprenticeships, and the new community centre could act as a force multiplier. Himmah, the Communication Workers Union and Unite are also helping with funding and potential skills training for community centre users. It’s a collaboration bringing in different networks, all pulling in the same direction, wanting the area to be better for everyone. For Sajid Mohammed, Himmah’s co-founder and a local Labour councillor, helping create a climate of social cohesion is a core part of the work. “We have common problems and can’t allow our working-class communities to be split on race, gender or sexuality, or else we will all lose out.” Appraisals of Labour’s decline in its long-held heartlands often suggest the party has lost touch with socially conservative white working-class voters. That much was telegrammed in leaked strategy plans earlier this year, showing the Starmer leadership in pursuit of an “authentic values realignment” premised on flags and dressing smartly. Rather than fobbing off communities in long-neglected areas with a bit of red-white-and-blue, why not offer them the means to make things better? Phoenix FC’s managers didn’t need to be told to set up a community centre, or to have it set up for them. Instead, they sought advice on getting funding, and navigating the gnomic local council planning process. Broxtowe Labour marshalled the resources required: a slow-burn, quietly radical act more impactful than the empty pledges of remote political leaders. When the Phoenix pair talk about their new community space – for which they are about to sign a lease – their enthusiasm is infectious. They want to consult the community it is intended to serve first, but already see the centre bringing in elderly people and stay-at-home parents, after-schoolers and dog-walkers, hosting cookery clubs, mental health and diversity awareness groups. Their plans are full of a spirit of revival and care and connection. Imagine the power of that. Rachel Shabi is a journalist and broadcasterWhen Brigitte Baptiste walks on to the 10th floor of Bogotá’s Ean University at 9.45am in a plunging dress, knee-high cheetah-print boots and a silvery wig, the office comes to life. She examines some flowers sent by the Colombian radio station Caracol to thank her for taking part in a forum, her co-worker compliments her on her lipstick, and she settles in for a day of back-to-back meetings, followed by a private virtual conversation with the UN secretary general, António Guterres. Later that evening, she flies to Cartagena for a conference on natural gas. The 58-year-old ecologist is one of Colombia’s foremost environmental experts, and one of its most visible transgender people, challenging scientific and social conventions alike. An ecology professor at the Jesuit-run Javeriana University for 20 years, she has written 15 books, countless newspaper columns, and won international prizes for her work. Most recently, she was appointed chancellor of Ean University, a business school, as part of its push for greater sustainability. Baptiste was one of the scientists who founded the Humboldt Institute, the leading biodiversity research centre in Colombia, and she was the director for eight years. Much of her research involved rural development, and biodiversity’s role in land management. It took her to communities from the Amazon to the coast. She saw the “social character of conservation” and the links between war, displacement and environmental degradation. A forceful proponent of a peace deal with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc), she saw a deal as an opportunity for a “great ecological experiment” in the swaths of former Farc territory had been unexplored for years. Baptiste is a biodiversity expert in a biodiverse country facing destructionfrom deforestation, land grabs, drug trafficking, illegal farming and the displacement of indigenous people. Water pollution from illegal gold mining and inadequate sewage systems have also taken a toll. And this year Colombia was named the world’s deadliest country for environmental defenders for the second year in a row. Threats to activists concern her more than any other issue, which is what she planned to highlight to Guterres that night in the three minutes allotted to her. “There is no democracy that can be built on violence, on the extermination of unarmed people,” she says. “There may be many things in Colombia that do not work well environmentally, economically – but all that goes into the background until we are able to respect human rights and guarantee the lives of all Colombians.” Meetings with world leaders are not uncommon in Baptiste’s career, but the natural-gas conference the following day – where she push energy companies to offset carbon – is a change of pace from the insular world of academia. She decided to take on this role, and the fossil fuel industry meetings that come with it, to apply the results of a lifetime of biodiversity research, and to achieve change from within the system. Baptiste is a believer in “green capitalism” – that the free market can promote sustainable development. “There have to be businesses that are not only good for your pocket, they have to be good for people, they have to be good for nature, they have to be good for future generations,” she said. “So that is the idea of sustainable entrepreneurship. That is the contribution that I bring to this school, a search to build that concept in theory and in practice.” Her views have sparked a backlash from environmental activists, but Baptiste sees her job as encouraging Colombians to value their biodiversity as an economic bounty that can be harvested sustainably. “With businessmen, with bankers, they are always the evil ones at the table,” she says, but stresses: “You have to work with the bankers, the investors, obviously you have to work with the decision-makers, with the politicians, with the civil organisations, and without fear of open debate, whether it’s convenient or not.” Baptiste has achieved stature in a conservative Catholic country, where violence and discrimination against transgender people are widespread. Between 2019 and 2020 alone, at least 448 LGBT people suffered acts of violence including murder and police brutality. Baptiste says that now she only faces discrimination on social media, not at work. But does not believes that reflects a higher level of trans acceptance in Colombia. “I don’t think so,” she says. “I believe that what I have achieved, whether it be a little or a lot, was because I built it before becoming Brigitte publicly.” Baptiste transitioned in 1998 aged 35, and had already completed a master’s degree and a doctorate, co-founded and directed a non-profit and served on boards. People respect her because she had earned “guaranteed spaces” before she transitioned, she says, although there are those that feel they “have to put up with Dr Brigitte” with a hint of “yes, la doctora” – she says, imitating her naysayers. “So the gender issue is always used to question the legitimacy of my work.” “Having a trans woman rector was a bet the university made,” she says. “A generous bet, but also calculated to send a message to society: that this is a different university that can welcome a trans woman as rector. “But because I already came with an important visibility,” she adds, “who knows if the same thing would have happened with other trans women?” Daniela Maldonado Salamanca, director of the Trans Community Network in Bogotá, cautions that Baptiste can often be held up as successful in a way that ignores the barriers that prevent most trans women with fewer privileges achieving similar success. “We are very far from being there – socially, economically [and] in access to educational capital,” says Salamanca. “Light years from those processes.” Baptiste is still misgendered daily, in taxis and restaurants and says trans women have still not achieved “a minimum of linguistic respect” in Colombia. She is hopeful she will prompt more acceptance. “If she has been able to do all the things that she has managed to do, a country like this has all the hopes in the world,” says her colleague, executive director of Ean University Billy Crissien. “We can transition to being a better country, we can transition to being better people, we can transition to being what we want to be as a country,” he says. “Brigitte has shown us a way that wonderful things can be done. I think she fills us with hope for a country like us.”The European Commission is facing a furious backlash over plans to allow gas and nuclear to be labelled as “green” investments, as Germany’s economy minister led the charge against “greenwashing”. The EU executive was accused of trying to bury the proposals by releasing long-delayed technical rules on its green investment guidebook to diplomats on New Year’s Eve, hours before a deadline expired. The draft proposals seen by the Guardian would allow gas and nuclear to be included in the EU “taxonomy of environmentally sustainable economic activities”, subject to certain conditions. The taxonomy is a classification system intended to direct billions to clean-energy projects to meet the EU goal of net zero emissions by 2050. Robert Habeck, who became the economy and climate action minister last month as part of a traffic-light coalition of Social Democrats, business-friendly Free Democrats (FDP) and Greens, said the plans “water down the good label for sustainability”. Habeck, a co-leader of the Greens, also told the German press agency dpa it was “questionable whether this greenwashing will even find acceptance on the financial market”. Austria’s government repeated its threat to sue the commission if the plans go ahead. Leonore Gewessler, the country’s climate action minister, said neither gas nor nuclear belonged in the taxonomy “because they are harmful to the climate and the environment and destroy the future of our children”. She added: “We will examine the current draft carefully and have already commissioned a legal opinion on nuclear power in the taxonomy. If these plans are implemented in this way, we will sue.” She also accused the commission of a “a night and fog operation” in the timing of the publication, a charge echoed by Luxembourg’s energy minister, Claude Turmes, who described the draft as a provocation. However, opponents are not expected to secure the supermajority needed to block the plans. France and other pro-nuclear states, such as the Czech Republic and Hungary, support the inclusion of nuclear, while many governments in central, eastern and southern Europe lobbied for gas to be included as a “bridge” fuel. Germany’s finance minister, Christian Lindner of the FDP, told the Süddeutsche Zeitung on Sunday that Germany needed gas-fired power plants as a transition technology because it was foregoing coal and nuclear power. “I am grateful that arguments were apparently taken up by the commission,” he said. He was speaking after Germany closed three of its six nuclear power plants on Friday, to meet a pledge of phasing out the technology by the end of 2022. France’s European affairs minister, Clément Beaune, said the proposal was good on a technical level and the EU could not reach its goal of carbon neutrality by 2050 without nuclear power. Under the draft, gas could only be classed as a “sustainable investment” if “the same energy capacity cannot be generated with renewable sources” and plans are in place to switch to renewables or “low carbon gases” by a specific date. Nuclear power could only be included if a project demonstrated it had a plan to deal with radioactive waste. NGOs accused the commission of seeking to evade scrutiny. WWF, a member of an official expert group on the taxonomy, said the commission had allowed just eight working days – until 12 January – to provide a formal response “to this highly complex and controversial file”, whereas most Brussels consultations last four weeks. “The European Commission couldn’t have tried harder to bury this proposal,” said the WWF spokesperson on sustainable finance, Henry Eviston. “For fossil gas and nuclear, we get a document written behind closed doors and published on New Year’s Eve. If the EU is confident in this proposal, it must hold a public consultation.” The EU taxonomy became law in July 2020, but legislators left important details to be resolved through “delegated acts” – secondary legislation meant for technical issues that is not subject to the same degree of ministerial and parliamentary oversight. The plans have already attracted the ire of Greta Thunberg and other young climate activists, who say this “fake climate action” contradicts the EU’s goal of net zero emissions by 2050. Additional reporting by Philip Oltermann in BerlinThree matches and three heavy defeats into the series, the Ashes already lost, seven defeats and no wins in eight Tests in Australia as captain, and after a poor year for England’s red-ball team there are several obvious reasons for removing Joe Root from the England captaincy – but I would like him to stick around. In his book The Captain Class, the Wall Street Journal’s Sam Walker identifies the key characteristics of elite captains which include: extreme doggedness and focus in competition; a low-key, practical and democratic communication style; motivating others with passionate non-verbal displays; strong convictions and the courage to stand apart; and ironclad emotional control. England’s failures will bring criticism, but Root has many of the qualities you would look for in an ideal captain. He is also incredibly popular among the playing group, meaning he can comfortably socialise with any of the players in his squad. He has a great sense of humour, which helps to put people at ease. Anyone going into that dressing room has a captain who is approachable, knowledgeable, and who they can learn from. What he needs is an experienced coach who is able to provide a vision and strategy across the England set-up, while also helping Joe with his leadership skills and his tactics, reviewing with him sessions of play and decisions made. Sometimes under Root there have been tactical missteps, both in individual sessions and across entire series. For example he went to Sri Lanka in 2018 wanting the team to play an aggressive style of batting, a different approach to many England sides against Sri Lanka’s spinners, and although that tactic worked in those conditions England then went to the West Indies wanting to continue in that vein. Against good, accurate swing bowling England started the series by being bowled out for 77 when a rather more orthodox attitude was needed. I have one particularly strong memory of Joe from later in that tour. England were 2-0 down when they arrived in St Lucia for the final Test, and though the team had the day off Joe wasn’t happy with the way he was batting so we went to the beautiful ground at Gros Islet and had two hours in the nets. It was probably my most enjoyable session as a coach, to be with a great player, to listen to how he spoke about the game and watch how he worked on it. I remember someone asking me when I first took over as England’s batting coach: “What on earth can you tell Alastair Cook?” With players of that calibre you don’t tell them anything, you try to ask the right questions so they problem-solve. In those two hours in the hot Caribbean sun Joe worked hard on his alignment, his bat path and his basics. My job was to listen, to encourage, support, and now and again to challenge. He scored a second-innings century as England won the third Test comfortably. I think we have seen Joe improve as a captain, but while he has tried to be more proactive it isn’t a particular strength of his. Too often we don’t see him dictating terms through good captaincy. For example, he dismissed Travis Head in the first innings in Adelaide but has not bowled a single delivery at him since. I’m absolutely convinced that a captain such as MS Dhoni or Kane Williamson would have brought Joe straight on to bowl the next time Head came out. Small things like that can make life uncomfortable for a new batter, and show a flexibility in approach. Root also often fails to use his fielding positions to create doubt in the minds of incoming batters: stick a man short on the leg side when a batsman is on nought, put someone at silly point, try to build pressure. But regardless of how good a captain you are, if you’re consistently not scoring enough runs as a team you never have the chance to be innovative with your bowling attack. Problems with player availability and team selection have hindered England in the past year. The big one is Ben Stokes, one of the team’s core players, who missed too much cricket to come in and perform in this Ashes series. Jonny Bairstow has been marginalised despite having a good record as wicketkeeper-batsman, the gloves taken off him, not being consistently picked, and I think his confidence has been affected. His treatment contrasts with that of Jos Buttler, who has never given me the impression that either technically or in terms of mindset he is comfortable batting in Test cricket. With the bat there is no doubt that Root has led by example. To score 1,708 runs in a calendar year, more than England’s next four highest scorers put together, is a monumental achievement, and his ability to focus on his own personal game despite wickets falling around him and the added concerns of captaincy is phenomenal. And he has also been able to transition from being incredibly successful in short‑form cricket to making thousands of runs in Tests, which for me demonstrates the importance of an orthodox technique. I remember watching Rohit Sharma and KL Rahul open for India last summer – two players with huge amounts of runs in the Indian Premier League, yet also able to open in a Test against Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad in overcast English conditions. With a few exceptions most of the batters who have been able to move between formats have, like Sharma and Rahul, superb defensive technique, good judgment around off stump, and excellent concentration. When I visited India as assistant coach to England Under-19s in 2016 the insistence within the Indian structure on good batting basics was obvious. Meanwhile I spoke to an MCC coach recently who happily told me that when kids come to Lord’s he tells them to just smack the ball and have fun. There are many significant problems facing English cricket at the moment, and I don’t think Joe Root is one of them.Charlie Sheen, played Chris Taylor My brother Emilio Estevez and I were huge fans of Scarface and Midnight Express, which were both written by Oliver Stone. Emilio kept talking to me about Oliver’s new Vietnam film, which he was auditioning for. He got the lead part, Chris Taylor, but then couldn’t do it because of scheduling conflicts. When I auditioned, Oliver said I was “too mannered” and needed to do more work. So I did The Boys Next Door and Lucas – and I got the part, but only if Willem Dafoe approved. I didn’t meet Willem until we got to the Philippines. He ran past me in our hotel and gave me a hug. Later, Oliver came up to me and said: “Willem digs ya.” Oliver dumped us in the jungle and put us through a gruelling training course. It was insane. You had to be treated according to your rank. Willem and Tom Berenger, playing two sergeants, were in command and I was an FNG – a “fucking new guy”. It really felt as if I was expected to scrub latrines, which I actually ended up doing in the movie. I thought we’d go out in the day then return to the hotel at night, but at sundown on the first day, there was no bus pulling up. I looked at Johnny Depp and Forest Whitaker and said: “I guess we’re just staying here.” It was a shock – but I don’t know if we could have captured the authenticity without that intense boot camp. Relationships that were forged there still exist to this day. We survived together. Everybody was tired and angry. At one point, we found a coconut grove and Forest somehow got a coconut. I can still see him now, trying to line it up with his machete. Before I could say, “Your thumb is too close!” he swings and hits his thumb dead centre. He popped it into his mouth and two thick streams of blood poured out both sides. It was a “scream for the medic” moment – and that was still in training camp. Oliver’s easily one of the smartest people I’ve ever met but he likes to show that off. When I knew I could get a laugh out of him, and he saw that I gave him respite from his self-imposed darkness, we got along famously. I remember the scene where Kevin Dillon goes nuts in the village with some poor guy. As my character was shooting the ground and losing his mind, I could see Oliver just off camera pumping his fist, jumping up and down and wanting to scream “Fuck yeah!” but not ruin the take. When I wrapped, there was a coup brewing in Manila and Oliver was taking his director of photography and a camera into the streets to film it, which was madness. I got on the flight home and, as we banked over the country, I could see everything I had left behind, everything we had all experienced. I started weeping because I was just happy to be alive. Veterans thank me for finally telling their story and a lot of them have tears in their eyes. It’s their life. John C McGinley, played Sergeant O’Neill I didn’t find the training that big a deal physically, but what was hard was learning how to read maps, load weapons and be in this triple canopy jungle out in the middle of frickin’ nowhere. We were eating MREs – Meals Ready to Eat – and nobody could poop. Willem drank water from a river when there was a decomposing oxen downstream and he got medivacked, Tom dropped a knife in his fucking foot – it was just all getting terribly real. And there were snakes. Two weeks earlier, we were running around New York’s West Village having coffee, bagels and talking about Hamlet. Now we’re in the jungle with bamboo vipers. Oliver loved it, of course. After that boot camp, it took only a tiny imaginary leap to believe what we were saying. When my character said, “I gotta get the fuck out of here”, I meant it. My mother was having a brain operation back in Pittsburgh. There was no acting. I only felt in danger once, when I almost fell out of a helicopter. It was up about 1,000ft. It was supposed to land and we would run out and past the camera. Something was going wrong on the ground, so they wanted to go to a different area. For three weeks, we’d been drilled that the one thing you don’t ever let go of is your weapon – so as the helicopter turned, I start to fall out because I was holding it. Francesco Quinn, who played Rhah, grabbed my backpack and pulled me in. If he hadn’t done that, I would’ve fallen out. I got pretty righteous with Oliver after that. During the film’s final battle, my character hides by covering himself with a dead body. Afterwards, on a press tour, I was seeing veterans and doing self-help chats – which I had no right doing. Dozens of vets would tell me they covered themselves with bodies too. They would be weeping. I was just this 26-year-old donkey, way out of my depth, but none of that was lost on me. What Oliver touched on, all of that stuff, was overwhelming.The man who gunned down seven people, killing five, in a rampage in Plymouth is being lionised by an online “incel” community, with some ironically venerating him as a “saint” and celebrating the attack as an aid to their recruitment drive. Jake Davison, 22, killed his mother, Maxine, 51, after a row before going on to fatally shoot four others and then himself in August last year. Before his death, he expressed misogynistic and homophobic tendencies, as well as angrily lamenting his failure to find a girlfriend. He also shared hate-filled views on Reddit forums used by incels – men who express online hostility and resentment towards those who are sexually active, particularly women. Analysis of online forums popular with incels by counter-extremism experts reveals the extent to which Davison’s killings in August struck a chord with many who, like him, were drawn to the subculture. Despite debate as to whether Davison was truly one of them, most of those posting on at least 13 threads hosted on the main English-language incel forum celebrated the attack, according to research shared with the Guardian by Moonshot, a counter-extremism tech company. The killings also prompted speculation about where users believe another attack could occur and the possibility of media coverage of the attacks bringing an influx of new incels. Recent data shows the number of visits to incel forums has increased by almost sixfold in nine months. The Times has reported that web traffic since March to three of the biggest incel sites has grown from 114,420 visits per month to 638,505. Among those who identified as living in the UK, discussions in the months after the Plymouth attack also showed how these sites can be fertile ground for the far right and fringe conspiracy theorists. They included responses to the fuel crisis, in which UK incels embraced “accelerationist” notions that shortages would lead to a larger crisis or civil war, or propagated conspiracy theories that the shortages were deliberately engineered in order to reform society around “climate goals”. More than four months on from the killings, a nuanced debate continues among experts and campaigners in the field about the extent to which any incel threat should be treated as terrorism. The nature of any response is also discussed, though there is agreement around bolstering often stricken mental health services and engaging in outreach. Alex Amend, the director of communications at Moonshot, said it was notable that incels identifying as UK-based did not only deride what they regarded as UK society’s “gynocentricism” and “progressive” politics, or share familiar extreme rightwing sentiment. “UK users also discuss broader societal issues, and criticise the UK government, complain about their difficulties finding affordable housing and sustainable employment, as well as accessing mental health support through the NHS. Users regularly describe London as particularly isolating, and note that making friends as an adult there is challenging,” he said. Amend suggested there should be investment in outreach, adding: “Creating alternative spaces for at-risk men and boys to share grievances in a healthy environment would also help, especially if those environments are connected to available mental health resources.” Tim Squirrell, head of communications at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, a London-based extremism thinktank, warned against expanding Britain’s current counter-extremism and “securitising” the incel community. “We need to recognise that many people, particularly young men, who essentially need some combination of social services, mental health support and other kinds of non-securitised intervention are instead being caught up by counter-terrorism programmes,” he added, echoing privately expressed concerns of some involved in the Prevent counter-extremism programme that they have become the safety net for cases who should otherwise have been picked up by underfunded mental health services. Laura Bates, the founder of the Everyday Sexism Project, described the understanding of the police about the potential incel threat as “patchy”, adding that she had carried out training with some forces to raise awareness. The speed at which investigators said there was no link to terrorism was an indication of the way in which the threat was viewed at a high level, she said, before adding: “You cannot just quantify this in terms of, for example, the numbers of attacks alone.” “My day to day interactions with young people would suggest the impact of this form of radicalisation when it comes to the treatment of teenage girls by their male peers is enormous,” said Bates, who called for greater resources and training for teachers. “One optimistic thing is that more schools are reaching out for training now. There is more awareness and appreciation of the link between the epidemic of school sexual violence and factors such as incel radicalisation.”The UK is rapidly approaching peak Netflix with the streaming giant attracting the lowest number of new subscribers in 2021 since launching a decade ago, as it turns to a new generation of “silver streamers” for future growth. With a seemingly endless pipeline of big-budget content, from House of Cards to The Crown and Squid Game, a binge-watching strategy and bargain basement pricing, Netflix has revolutionised traditional TV watching and won millions of British fans. In 2021, however, it is estimated that it attracted just 800,000 new subscribers as it approaches saturation point in British homes. “It is peak Netflix, in the sense we are never likely to see the scale of subscriber additions we have seen over the past few years,” says Richard Broughton, a director of Ampere Analysis, a market research firm. “Netflix will continue to grow, but at a much slower rate.” Globally, Netflix has said it expects to report 18.4 million new subscribers for 2021, when it reports its full-year figures next month, taking its global base to 222 million. The rate of growth is half that seen in 2020 as rolling pandemic lockdowns led to almost 37 million new signups, the most the streaming giant has ever managed in a single year. While the streaming landscape was once a duopoly, Netflix’s rapid early success prompted Amazon to match its international expansion by rolling out Prime Video. There is now significant competition from both global rivals and burgeoning domestic services. The serendipitously timed launch of Disney+ at the start of the pandemic, populated by hit content such as the $100m (£74m) Star Wars TV spin-off The Mandalorian, resulted in the service adding more UK subscribers in a year in 2020 than any other streaming platform has ever managed. And since 2018, Amazon’s Prime Video, which has built its content base beyond entertainment into live sport including Premier League football and international rugby, has outperformed Netflix in annual subscriber growth in the UK. The pandemic has fuelled record-setting growth. However, this accelerated uptake has “pulled forward” many of those who would have signed up in the coming years, hastening Netflix’s shift towards saturation in mature markets such as the UK. In the US, new subscriber growth has stalled this year. “Netflix has tapped out the early adopter base and is now trying to convert audiences more resistant to paying, to the concept of streaming services and who find Netflix’s content less appealing to their taste,” says Broughton. Which leads us to ask who Netflix is now targeting, and will need to target, to continue to eke out growth in the UK market. Netflix has already burned through most of the younger demographics most comfortable with new technology, and to whom the larger proportion of content is likely to appeal. About four-fifths of people aged 18 to 34 in the UK with internet connections are now estimated to be either subscribers or have access through their families or shared passwords, according to research from Ampere. This is almost identical in the US. In the 35- to 44-year-old bracket about 70% have access, while there is more hope for new converts among those aged 45-54, with the demographic just 62% won over by Netflix’s charms. The biggest opportunity is among older people: only half of those aged 55 to 64, and who are internet-connected, are subscribed or have access to Netflix. “The one thing holding Netflix back from converting more households is those that are not converting don’t like all the content Netflix currently offers,” says Broughton. “These are older consumers, whose likes are more akin to traditional UK broadcast channels. They like things such as more local productions. Netflix is beginning to tap into that with more new productions targeting these consumers.” While Ampere does not have information available about older demographics, the internet service provider TalkTalk says analysis of its network has shown that the pandemic has fuelled a rise of the “silver streamers”. Internet usage has risen more among over-75s than in any other demographic since pre-pandemic summer 2019, up 72%, as stay-at-home health restrictions forced them to become “more comfortable with leading online lives”, according to TalkTalk. The next biggest rise in usage was in the 65- to 74-year-old demographic, up 66%. “Silver streamers is now a big thing,” says Jonathan Kini, the managing director of TalkTalk Business. “Everyone is looking for more choice and when we look at research on the top 10 streamed shows among over-65s you see a number of Netflix programmes including The Crown, Bridgerton and Squid Game. Streaming shows on Netflix now accounts for a fifth of all peak traffic on our network.” A knock-on effect of Netflix having hoovered up most of the easiest converts is the rising marketing costs of attracting these harder-to-win-over potential subscribers. In Netflix’s earlier years, when new subscribers came with little effort, a single subscriber cost about $40 to $50 in the US and probably a little lower in the UK. It is estimated to have now potentially tripled in mature markets reaching saturation. When Netflix’s inexorably rising production and licensing budget – expected to hit $17bn globally this year to keep subscribers happy and compete effectively against burgeoning numbers of deep-pocketed rivals – is factored in, subscribers can expect more price rises. In March, Netflix put up the price of its most-popular package by £1 a month to £9.99, not a huge increase given a decade ago at launch it was priced at £6.99, but as saturation comes closer to reality there will be more pressure to revisit prices more frequently. Netflix’s growing pains from streaming upstart to fixture in the TV landscape will be mirrored by its rivals, with its position as the most popular streaming service in the UK set to remain intact even as growth slows. Disney, which despite having popular franchises including Marvel, Pixar and Disney classics, is expected to saturate markets sooner because it has a narrower range of content overall. There are already signs of this trend in the UK where its record 3.5 million subscribers in its first year of operations in 2020, has slowed to just 1.2 million this year. While Netflix’s closest competitor, Amazon, is still growing at a faster rate – it is expected to add 1.3 million regular video users this year compared with Netflix’s 800,000 – it is not forecast to become the market leader in the coming years. “The situation Netflix finds itself is more an indication of historic success in achieving impressive scale rather than a particular fundamental issue facing the UK business,” says Broughton. “Netflix reaches about half of UK households. At its best Sky TV peaked at a little under 40% in 2011, although it faced an arguably harder task with a highly priced service – an enviously impressive position for any subscription business.” Top 10 most streamed TV programmes by over-65s 1 Line of Duty 2 The Crown 3 Peaky Blinders 4 Bridgerton 5 Squid Game 6 The Queen’s Gambit 7 The Handmaid’s Tale 8 Tiger King 9 Below Deck 10 Normal People Source: TalkTalkJohn Glacier is someone who knows the importance of privacy. She says she’s “20,000 years old” when we meet over drinks in a London hotel; her Instagram bio reads “I have no name nor number”, and the icy-blokey name she performs under is intentionally deceptive. But in person she is open and friendly, with an unguarded demeanour. “I have no fucking life,” she jokes, deadpan. “I’m like: ‘Yay, something to do today!’” In July, she released Shiloh: Lost for Words, a widely lauded debut mixtape full of conversational, stream-of-consciousness raps over twitchy lo-fi beats. It’s deeply introspective, mixing in religious references and diary-like scenes from her life, with genius wordplay casually thrown in: “Can’t chat to me about grindin’ / Push more lines than Pusha T on a full eclipse, I’m all-nighting”, a beautifully unfolding nest of references to rap duo Clipse on Icing. The tape’s creation was largely therapeutic, to “get certain stuff off my chest,” she says. “[It’s about] circumstances of life and closing old chapters that needed to be closed.” Lyrically, it’s a mishmash of her personal beliefs and memories; things like her views on passing judgment on others, or old memories of writing to friends who were incarcerated. “Nine times out of 10 it’s from my life. Very self-centred, basically,” she chuckles. It was only a few years ago that she got into music, teaching herself GarageBand and Logic for fun and dropping esoteric beats on a SoundCloud page. These soon spread by word of mouth, catching the attention of other producers she met by chance on nights out – people like Psychedelic Ensemble and Vegyn, who, along with Portuguese producer Holly, produced the bulk of Shiloh. Her often muted tracks create a space for “comfort, but also getting lost and travelling your own mind”. Glacier is from Hackney, London, born to Jamaican parents, the second eldest of seven. As a child she gravitated to the spoken word as a means of expressing herself, giving written poems out as gifts. She soaked up the endless music playing in the house: reggae, pop and country played by her parents, as well as early 2000s rap and grime like Ghetts and Kano, who she saw at Hackney Empire: “I even bought my friend a ticket with my secondary school money – that’s how into it I was.” Growing up, she wanted to be a cleaner, footballer and gymnast. She assisted in film workshops for children with physical and learning disabilities, and started an organic haircare line for Black hair, which she plans to revisit. She lives with a chronic disability, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, so when her music took off it was a happy “accident”, one of many hobbies that ended up fitting around her needs. “It’s realistic for a disabled person to do,” she says. “This one usually involves sitting down – if you do perform it’s gonna be no more than a certain amount of hours. Doesn’t put that much strain on your body at all.” For now, her focus is on handling a growing presence that was wholly unexpected, and figuring out the kinks of the industry. Despite the accolades she is still humble about her talent, and quietly committed to staying true to herself. “Whether people like what I make or not, I don’t care,” she smiles. “I will always make it, because I know I need it for personal reasons. I always make music for myself.”Thirty years ago, when Li Jingwei was four years old, a neighbour abducted him from his home village in China’s Yunnan province and sold him to a child trafficking ring. Now he has been reunited with his mother after drawing a map of his home village from his memories of three decades ago and sharing it on a popular video-sharing app in the hope that someone might be able to identify it. “I’m a child who’s looking for his home,” Li said in the video. Unable to recall the name of his village or his address, Li’s recollection and reconstruction of the village’s key features – including a school, a bamboo forest and a pond – proved crucial. “I knew the trees, stones, cows and even which roads turn and where the water flows,” Li said in an interview with the Paper, a Chinese media outlet. Shared on Douyin – known outside China as TikTok – on 24 December, the map was matched by police to a Yunnan village where there was a woman whose son had disappeared. That son was identified as Li through DNA tests, leading to an emotional reunion on Saturday. Video footage showed Li carefully removing his mother’s mask to examine her face before breaking down in tears and embracing her. “Thirty-three years of waiting, countless nights of yearning, and finally a map hand-drawn from memory, this is the moment of perfect release after 13 days,” Li wrote on his Douyin profile before the reunion. “Thank you everyone who has helped me reunite with my family.” He told the Paper: “My mother cried as soon as I got on the phone. After the video call, I recognised her at a glance. My mother and I have the same lips, even my teeth.” Abducted in 1989, Li was sold to a family in Lankao, more than 1,100 miles away. Child abductions are common in China and Li was probably taken because the family wanted a boy. Li said he was inspired to look for his biological family after seeing high-profile stories in the media describing two other abduction cases that ended in reunions. He mentioned the case of Guo Gangtang, who became a media celebrity after searching for his missing son for 24 years, travelling more than 300,000 miles by motorbike in his eventually successful search. “When I saw the story of Guo Gangtang, I thought to myself: I should try to find my biological parents … I wanted to see them when they are still alive,” Li said. “I realised I could not wait any longer because my parents should be getting older now. I worried that when I figured out where I am from, they might have passed away,” he told Henan Television after posting his map. Now living in Guangdong province in southern China, Li had had no success in asking his adoptive parents – who he said had brought him up well – or consulting DNA databases about his origins.Meatless Farm burgers (227g, £2.50 for two) Main ingredients: water and pea protein (18%) Very disappointed – I had tipped this one to be my winner. It cooked like a “normal” meat burger, but the texture was rubbery and dry. Lacking in flavour. Score: 1/10 Plant Pioneers Ultimate plant burgers (Sainsbury’s, 210g, £2 for two) Main ingredient: soya protein (53%) I really didn’t enjoy this burger. It looks more like an underseasoned rump steak. Lacking flavour and seasoning. Score: 1/10 Richmond meat-free burgers (170g, £2 for two) Main ingredients: soya and wheat protein (43%) I was really disappointed by this, as I expected it to be a crowd-pleaser, based on the grill marks reminiscent of barbecues. The taste was bland and boring and the texture was lacking in substance. Score: 2.5/10 Linda McCartney’s vegetarian burgers (227g, £2.20 for two; vegan approved) Main ingredient: soya (58%) Lacking in flavour, seasoning and substance. No distinctive flavour. I’ll stick to the sausages. Score: 3/10 Plantlife mushroom and chestnut burgers (Waitrose, 227g, £2.50 for two) Main ingredient: potato (28%) This was more akin to a nut roast than a burger. Good umami flavour, but the texture didn’t hold well enough. Not what it says on the label; otherwise, very tasty. Score: 4/10 The Curators plant-based mushroom burgers (200g, £3.50 for two) Main ingredient: mushrooms (86%) This feels pretty outdated, as if it belongs in the 70s. It is a mushroom stuffed with more mushrooms, meaning the texture is too mushy. It doesn’t really taste of much and lacks seasoning. Score: 5/10 Love Your Veg! vegan mix burgers (Sainsbury’s, 225g, £2 for two) Main ingredient: mushrooms (24%) If imitation meats aren’t for you, this has your name on it. It has a good mixture of vegetables, including sweetcorn, peas and carrot, with hints of coriander and chilli. Unfortunately, it falls apart easily. Score: 6/10 Plant Chef meat-free burgers (Tesco, 226g, £1.30 for two) Main ingredients: water and pea protein (20%) This caught me by surprise – especially considering the price. The flavours are well balanced and the texture is succulent. I enjoyed it a lot. Score: 7/10 Moving Mountains ¼lb plant-based burgers (227g, £4 for two) Main ingredients: water, pea and soya protein (15%) This is really close to a traditional meat burger. Not only does it have the look and texture of the real deal, but it is also bursting with flavour: smoky, peppery and buttery. I will certainly have this again. Score: 8/10 Beyond Meat Beyond Burgers (226g, £4.40 for two) Main ingredients: water and pea protein (16%) My winner. It boasts a juicy and convincingly meaty texture, with a brilliantly beefy flavour and a moreish pink centre. Score: 9/10 Max La Manna is the author of More Plants Less Waste (Hodder &amp; Stoughton, £22). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Find Max’s plant-based recipes on Instagram and TikTokWhen Mary moved from Bedfordshire in the UK to Michigan in the US on a Fulbright scholarship in 1985, she wasn’t expecting to find love. Her mind was focused on the nutrition course she had enrolled on and her plans for a future career. In the spring of 1986, she was cycling home from a meeting with her tutor when she approached a fence covered in ivy. Roy, who had been pushing his bike, emerged from behind the fence before she had the chance to stop. “I hit his wheel and, because my hands were cold and I was wearing a backpack, I went sailing over the handlebars,” she remembers. “I landed on my chin and broke my jaw on the concrete.” In typical British fashion, she told him she was “absolutely fine”, but Roy says it was clear she was badly hurt. “My apartment was pretty close by so I got my roommate to drive her to the university health centre,” he says. The next day, Mary had to have her jaw wired shut, meaning she couldn’t eat solid food for three months. “Roy came to my apartment with some juice to suck through a straw. He said that when my jaw was unwired he would make me dinner,” she recalls. Although it was an accident, Roy felt “terrible” about what happened. “I was really concerned about her,” he says. Over the summer they went their separate ways, with Mary returning to her home in the UK for the holidays. When she arrived back at university, Roy had moved in two doors down from her. “By chance, my roommate had moved home and a place turned up in Mary’s building,” he says. That September, he followed through on his promise to make her dinner. They quickly hit it off, and realised they had more in common than they’d thought. “He was on a PhD programme in geography and also had a Fulbright scholarship,” says Mary. “We were both vegetarians and had an interest in reading and travel. Roy had been all over the world and spoke different languages.” He was equally impressed. “I liked that Mary rode horses and had a different accent. She was the nicest person I’d ever met and was very easy to be with,” he says. Before long they were a couple. “We’d go for day trips to Lake Michigan and study together,” says Mary. “We met in such an intense way, through the accident, that it sort of got rid of that usual period where you get to know someone slowly.” In 1987, they married in the US before moving to England. “It’s a running joke in my family that he had to marry me or I’d sue him,” laughs Mary. By the following January, they had moved to Sudan for Roy’s work. He was studying the impacts of climate change in Africa, and Mary took a contract with Unicef, working in nutrition. “There was a coup while we were there and it became hard to get food, so it was a tough experience, but amazing, too,” Roy says. They returned to Michigan two years later, and their two children were born in 1990 and 92. Mary found a job as a dietitian while Roy became a professor at Grand Valley State University. When Mary suffered a brain bleed in 2012 and was put in an induced coma, Roy cared for her. “She was in hospital for two months and it took two years to fully recover,” he says. “We kept going together and it brought us even closer.” Just as the pandemic hit, they moved to St Louis to be close to their children, now adults themselves. “Having kids was always a priority for us,” says Mary. “We loved having them and they were the best thing that we ever did. We share the same values and always compromise for the same reasons.” Roy appreciates his partner’s poise and calm nature. “She doesn’t jump into the fray – she’s measured. It’s easy to have meaningful conversations and there’s never any drama. We laugh together all the time.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.This outrageously good supper came about one afternoon when I was craving the anchovy and parmesan dressing of a classic caesar salad. But it was cold outside and I needed more substance on the plate, so, instead of the crisp lettuce, in came wedges of chargrilled hispi cabbage, all sweet and smoky, which I laid on garlic-rubbed toasts; both were perfect for mopping up that insane dressing. I have made this dish several times since and have loved it every time – I sincerely hope you do, too. Grilled hispi caesar salad with parsley and shallot salad The sprightly, refreshing parsley salad is inspired by the famously good one at St John in London, and balances the almost meaty-tasting cabbage beautifully. Prep 30 min Cook 15 min Serves 4 2 hispi cabbage, cut through the stem into 4-6 wedges 5-6 tbsp olive oil, plus extra to drizzle Salt and black pepper 2 garlic cloves, peeled 6 anchovies 1 tsp dijon mustard 1 tbsp white-wine vinegar 4 tbsp buttermilk 4 tbsp grated parmesan, plus extra, to serve 4 pieces sourdough toast, to serve For the salad 1 banana shallot, peeled and finely sliced 2 big handfuls parsley leaves 2 tbsp capers Juice of ½ lemon Heat a griddle pan or heavy frying pan. Rub the hispi wedges all over with one or two tablespoons of oil, season lightly and grill for six to nine minutes on one cut side. Turn and repeat on the other cut side of each wedge. Meanwhile, put a garlic clove and the anchovies in a mortar (or small food processor) with a scrunch of sea salt, and grind to a paste. Whisk in the mustard, vinegar and buttermilk, followed by the remaining four tablespoons of oil in a slow, steady stream, to make an emulsion. Stir in the grated parmesan and season to taste. Put the shallot, parsley and capers in a medium bowl, squeeze over the lemon and season lightly. When you are ready to eat, cut the remaining garlic clove in half and rub the cut sides over each piece of hot toast. Put a piece of toast on each of four plates, drizzle with good olive oil, then lay the warm hispi wedges on top. Spoon over the dressing, allowing it to fall into all the nooks and crannies, then grate over a little extra parmesan. Serve with a generous handful of the parsley and shallot salad on the side. The simple flex … You can leave out the anchovies and still create a delicious sauce with the addition of a little extra garlic, a splash of Henderson’s relish (the veggie version of Worcestershire sauce) and, if you like, a spoonful of white miso. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThere are tiny but telling hints of what happened in the Keyham area of Plymouth on 12 August last year. A stretch of freshly laid pavement at the corner where Jake Davison turned his pump-action shotgun on himself after killing five people. A pile of compost in a community garden, created from the thousands of flowers left for the victims and set aside to be used when memorial trees or flower beds are planted. The new bench in the park installed in memory of two victims. “Everywhere you look there are awful memories,” said Hazel Lynch, a member of the Keyham neighbourhood watch, one of the groups leading the recovery from that evening in late summer when Davison, a 22-year-old apprentice crane operator who harboured extreme misogynistic views, carried out his 12-minute attack. Lynch pointed out, for example, the area where the air ambulance had landed as children raced for safety and the spot where one boy sat for three whole days afterwards, trying to process what happened. “He wanted to be there and to try to understand what had happened. People are still doing that.” The attack hit not just the relatives and friends of those affected but the whole community. Three hundred people, many of them children, directly witnessed Davison’s attack or the immediate aftermath. Children still struggle to sleep, worried the “bad man” will get them, while some elderly people are too frightened to leave their homes. Many hundreds of personal alarms have been handed out to girls and women and Lynch said she now carries one for the first time in her life. “I wouldn’t go to the park by myself after dark now,” she said. The city had scarcely caught its breath after Davison’s attack, which began with him killing his mother, Maxine, when a few miles away 18-year-old Bobbi-Anne McLeod vanished from a bus stop in the Leigham area of the city in November. Her body was found near a beach three days later, a second disturbing crime with a woman at its centre. Much soul-searching has been prompted in Plymouth with the launch of a commission in the city to examine violence against women and girls. While crime figures overall are down in Devon and Cornwall, sexual attacks have risen. Stalking and harassment is up by 24% on 2019, rape by 18% and other sexual offences by 13.5%. Since September there have been more than 200 referrals to an app that allows people to highlight areas in Plymouth where they do not feel safe. Millions of pounds are being spent to try to help make the city safer for girls and women through initiatives such as setting up new CCTV cameras, boosting the number of taxi drivers after a post-Brexit drop and introducing initiatives such as bystander training to help people know how to challenge bad behaviour. Alison Hernandez, the police and crime commissioner for Devon, Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly, said a lot of work was being done but admitted girls and women were too often victims – and did not feel safe. “Although we have one of the safest force areas in the country, violent crime is rising. Bobbi-Anne’s death reminds us that policing must be relentlessly focused on making our communities safer, but we need to engage schools, local government and our public in that effort.” She believes society needs to look deeply at problems ranging from the accessibility to young people of violent pornography to domestic abuse. “This is a problem that cannot be resolved by police officers alone,” she said. Lyn Gooding, the chief executive of the charity First Light, which works with victims of domestic abuse and sexual violence, agrees. She told a Q&amp;A organised by the new commission that work needed to be done in primary schools to help youngsters understand what a healthy relationship looked like. “We need to have difficult conversations with our young sons.” For Keyham specifically, the Home Office has provided more than £800,000 for additional crime prevention measures and more policing and almost as much again has been made available in the area to pay for extra children’s social care workers and educational psychologists to work in schools. So many Keyham people have a sad story to tell. Olivia, 15, who lives close to the spot where Davison killed himself, said she still thought often about his body slumped on the pavement. “It is still very difficult for a lot of people here,” she said. Rosemary, whose teenage son witnessed one of the shootings, said she feared his mental health had been compromised. “He is very confused. He finds it hard to understand what happened.” The Labour MP for Plymouth, Sutton and Devonport, Luke Pollard, who lives half a mile from the scene, warned that tragedies could lead to long-running social problems such as children struggling at school, rising crime rates, more people suffering from depression. “A whole community, a whole city can be traumatised.” He said people were beginning to ask more questions about the gun laws and in the new year a “Keyham manifesto” setting out what the area would like to be changed is due to produced. Heather Welch, the acting operations manager for Victim Support in Devon, said the shock waves would be felt for many years. It has called for the experiences of survivors of the Manchester Arena attack and the Grenfell fire to learn how to help people in Keyham. “People have had to make sense of the world in a different way.” The politicians and experts are keen to flag up the great work being done by people such as Hazel Lynch, who is leading the transformation of a rickety old shed on the sports field where the shootings vigil took place into a community cafe, and the neighbourhood watch chairman, Kevin Sproston, who lives by the motto: “Let’s make Keyham as good as the people.” He is still dashing around organising the Safer Keyham programme, which includes providing new security measures, such as better locks and peepholes, to try to make vulnerable people feel safer in their homes. Richard Baron, the managing director of a double glazing company, said he and his team had improved the security at 150 homes, providing the materials at cost. “If we can help make people a bit safer then we’re very happy to do that,” he said. “It will take a long time for this community to heal.”The NHS will face significant pressure in the coming weeks from the nationwide spread of the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson has said, while rejecting the idea that England’s relatively limited Covid restrictions amounted to a gamble. Speaking to reporters on a visit to Buckinghamshire, the prime minister also had strong words for Conservative MPs and others seeking a swift relaxation of the rules, saying it would be “absolute folly” to believe the threat had passed. There was, Johnson said, “no question Omicron continues to surge through the country”. He added: “I think we’ve got to recognise that the pressure on our NHS, on our hospitals, is going to be considerable in the course the next couple of weeks, and maybe more.” Asked if the decision to have fewer restrictions in England compared with other UK nations or many other places in Europe constituted a gamble, Johnson rejected this. “The way forward for the country as a whole is to continue with the path that we’re on,” he said. “We’ll keep everything under review. But the mixture of things that we’re doing at the moment is, I think, the right one.” While saying that Omicron “does seem pretty conclusively to be less severe” than the previous Delta and Alpha variants, Johnson warned against people believing that the pandemic was approaching an end. “Looking at the pressures on the NHS in the next couple of weeks, and maybe longer, looking at the numbers of people that are going to be going into hospital, it would be absolute folly to say that this thing is all over now bar the shouting,” the prime minister said. “We’ve got to remain cautious, we’ve got to stick to plan B.” Johnson said he had spoken to the NHS England chief executive, Amanda Pritchard, and its medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, adding: “I appreciate the pressures that our hospitals are under. I think it’s vital that we make sure that we help them by trying to contain the pandemic in the ways that I’ve set out.” His comments at a vaccination centre in Aylesbury came as the chief executive of NHS Providers, the membership organisation for health trusts in England, warned that pressures on hospitals outside London was growing fast. Chris Hopson said the pressures of more Covid patients and of staff absences from Omicron came in combination with an “already very, very busy” winter period. He told Sky News: “It’s those two things on top of how busy the system already was.” With parliament returning from the Christmas recess on Wednesday, Johnson is due to gather his cabinet to decide the next steps before then, with the timing not yet confirmed. However, ministers are expected to keep restrictions as they are, and to keep in place the plan B rules on areas such as mask use, Covid passports and home working, following a formal review, also due on Wednesday. Asked about guidance for secondary school students to wear masks once schools return, which has angered some Tory MPs, Johnson said there was “an increasing body of scientific support for the idea that face masks can contain transmission”. He added: “We don’t want to keep them. I don’t like the idea of having face masks in classrooms any more than anybody else does, but we won’t keep them on a day more than is necessary.”For many New Yorkers, the inauguration of Eric Adams as the 110th mayor of New York City – and only the second Black person to serve in the position – has evoked a range of feelings, from excitement at the possibility of change to confusion and concern. Adams’ rise through city and state politics was fairly typical. In addition to serving as a New York police captain, he was the Brooklyn borough president and a state senator. But he remains an unconventional, even enigmatic figure. There are questions surrounding his home address and curiosity about his plant-based diet, but information about his actual policies remains scarce. “Where Eric Adams has thrived, in many ways, is in really failing to lay out a vision,” said Sochie Nnaemeka, director of the New York Working Families party. “His transition has been defined by personality, less [by] an agenda for the city.” Progressives and advocates working across multiple sectors have voiced concerns at the slow emergence of Adams’ plans and priorities, and worry about positions he has taken including increasing the use of the heavily criticized “stop-and-frisk” policy and resurrecting plainclothes police units. Adams’ ascent comes at a crucial time in New York history, as the city seeks to emerge from the pandemic and the economic and social chaos that has come with it. New York’s ballooning homelessness crisis, primarily caused by a lack of affordable housing, is one of the largest issues Adam must contend with. In 2020, more than 120,000 people, including children, slept in the New York municipal shelter system, with homelessness reaching the highest levels since the Great Depression. Covid presented additional challenges, spreading rapidly among homeless populations. Advocates have widely supported Adams’ priority of increasing permanent, affordable housing in a city which has some of America’s most expensive rents. But many have raised concerns about Adams’ main plan: converting 25,000 hotel rooms into permanent apartments, noting zoning and conversion requirements many hotels do not meet. Public housing, managed by the New York Public Housing Association, is another area where Adams has faced pushback. Adams supports privatizing public housing units as well as selling air rights above public housing units. Activists have said such actions, presented as an opportunity to raise capital for blighted buildings, are ineffective and that oversight for private landlords when it comes to addressing housing issues like mold and lead paint would become even more difficult. “His focus is going to be on his big-money donors. That’s been his track record all along. That’s not a secret,” said Fight for NYCHA core member Louis Flores. “We expect him to continue down that road, and for public housing that he’s going to support policies that benefit the real estate development industry at the expense of the public housing residents.” Despite ambiguities around some of Adams’ plans for addressing homelessness, some experts are hopeful delays in appointments – and Adams’ reputation for flexibility – could be an opportunity for his administration to receive input from community leaders on how to address the crisis, including through the creation of a deputy to oversee homelessness and affordable housing. “Having a bit more of a deliberative process is ultimately going to be more impactful than coming out on day one with an ambitious target for the number of units of affordable housing that should be created that might not actually have the impact of reducing homelessness and housing insecurity,” said Jacquelyn Simone, policy director at Coalition for the Homeless. Proposed changes to policing are another point of tension. Adams, who has described assault at the hands of an NYPD officer as inspiration for joining public service, has faced criticism for his plans to resurrect controversial plainclothes units, an anti-crime department in the NYPD involved in a number of shootings, and increase use of stop-and-frisk, a policy critics have condemned as racially discriminatory. While Adams and his newly appointed NYPD commissioner, Keechant Sewell, the first Black woman to lead the department, have supported these policies and vowed to use properly trained, “emotionally intelligent” officers, progressives have argued that previous training attempts have failed, with many officers continually excused for misconduct. “What does the emotional intelligence of an officer matter if he’s got you up against the wall, patting you down,” said Kesi Foster, a lead organizer with the nonprofit Make the Road New York and a steering committee member with Communities United for Police Reform. Simone said: “The ways to solve unsheltered homelessness is not through policing and pushing people from one corner to another.” Other policing initiatives Adams has sponsored have met criticism, specifically when it comes to New York’s troubled jail system. While Adams has publicly supported closing down Rikers Island, a jail with notoriously poor conditions where several people have died in pre-trial custody, he has also promised to bring back solitary confinement to Rikers, reversing a previous ban on a practice many experts have called “inhumane”. Adams has publicly opposed bail reform measures, meant to curtail pre-trial detention but rolled back, citing debunked claims that releases have spurred increases in crime. “Changing the bail bill is not going to achieve the outcome the mayor wants. We’re hoping that we can convince him of that during his tenure,” said Marie Ndiaye, supervising attorney of the Decarceration Project at the Legal Aid Society. “Getting wishy-washy on bail reform is pretty scary because there’s a pretty linear correlation between the rollbacks and the jail population increasing,” said Sara Rahimi of the nonprofit Emergency Release Fund. In general, advocates contend there is more to be learned about Adams as more appointments are made, but given his comments so far, many are approaching the mayor-elect with caution and timid hope of being able to advance progressive policy. “Cautiously optimistic and cautiously pessimistic all at once would be the way to go there,” said Ndiaye.The British Council has launched an inquiry into allegations from black current and former staff members in Kenya who claim they were subjected to systemic racism. Senior white executives at the organisation, which is the British government’s cultural arm abroad, have been accused of discriminating against BAME Kenyan-born staff, particularly as they were selected and assessed for redundancy. A letter that claims to represent seven current and former staff members sparked the inquiry in July when it was sent to the British Council as well as the Kenyan authorities. It says: “The cases underline a repeated practice by white members of staff to constantly assign Kenyans as underperformers, inadequate, unskilled, unprofessional, and suspects as the organisation abuses its procedures and systems to validate its discriminative practice.” Five of the seven accusers claim they were discriminated against during a redundancy process that they say favoured white colleagues. The allegations come amid cuts in central government funding for the British Council as well as a shortfall of income related to the Covid-19 pandemic. The British Council, known as the UK government’s main instrument of soft power, launched an inquiry into the claims in September and says it takes racism claims seriously. It claims it is still waiting for all of the complainants to come forward with evidence and has queried some of the claims in the initial letter. One of the complainants who was made redundant said he would not cooperate with the inquiry because it was too narrow in scope to include earlier allegations. Apollo Edewa, 33, a former programme manager at the office in Nairobi for five years until February, said staff believed the organisation gave much greater weight to white people’s opinions compared with black people and now wants to tailor the inquiry to justify its prejudices. He said: “The British Council says it will only investigate these allegations if we allow them to manage the complaints process and select the cases to be investigated. But many former and current employees believe that there is a racist culture in the organisation which goes back many years. White people’s opinions are given more weight than black people from Kenya.” Many of the claims revolve around a recent redundancy programme implemented after a shortfall in income after government cuts to the aid budget. Allegations outlined in the letter include: A programme manager who worked at the British Council from August 2014 to 2019 who claimed they were put at risk of redundancy without adequate explanation. Another complainant claimed they resigned as a senior official of the Kenyan office’s welfare association after a white executive frustrated efforts to channel staff concerns to the senior leadership team. “Staff have no confidence raising concerns through HR … for fear of being victimised,” the complainant said. A manager for the professional skills centre in Kenya who claimed they were among a number of black employees who were unfairly targeted for redundancy. The British Council was founded in 1934 to improve cultural relations and improve social mobility, It generates 85% of its own income, mainly through teaching and examinations, and receives some funding through a government bloc grant. It is facing substantial job cuts and office closures after income from English-language teaching and exams plummeted during the pandemic. Regarding the complaints of racism in Kenya, a British Council spokesperson said that they received the letter in July and launched an inquiry in August but were still waiting for all of the complainants to identify themselves. They also pointed out that 98% of employees were locally appointed. According to the British Council, an individual who recognised details of their case in the letter now says he did not give his consent to be included in the complaint. The spokesperson said: “The British Council takes all allegations of discrimination, racism, bullying and harassment very seriously. We operate in over 100 countries across the world and our values of equality, diversity and inclusion are at the heart of everything we do. “On receiving the anonymous letter, we immediately initiated an investigation. This investigation is ongoing, and we are keeping avenues of engagement open with the author of the letter. The author of the letter has not been willing to be interviewed and has not yet provided evidence in support of the allegations.”Feminist campaigners in France are calling for tougher government action to combat violence against women and girls after three women were allegedly killed by their current or former partner on the first day of 2022. The body of a 28-year-old military recruit who had been stabbed to death was found near Saumur in western France on Saturday. The local prosecutor, Alexandra Verron, said a 21-year-old man, also a soldier, had been arrested and investigators were looking into a possible femicide – the killing of a woman by her partner or ex-partner. In eastern France, police discovered the body of a 56-year-old woman with a knife in her chest after neighbours at Meurthe-et-Moselle reported a violent dispute. The victim’s husband was questioned by police and was due to appear before a judge on Monday. On Sunday, a 45-year-old woman was found in the boot of a car at a property in Nice. She had been strangled. Police were interviewing the woman’s former partner, a 60-year-old man who reportedly admitted having a violent altercation with his ex-wife, and their 24-year-old son, in whose vehicle the body was allegedly discovered. The mayor of Nice, Christian Estrosi, said he was devastated by the alleged killing and described it as a “horror”. The collective #NousToutes accused the French government of remaining “scandalously” silent on the grim start to the year for women. It said an estimated 220,000 women reported conjugal violence every year, but judges had ordered the use of electronic bracelets in only 379 cases. Lena Ben Ahmed, of #NousToutes, told France Info radio: “These femicides are not isolated cases. They’re not the occasional news story. They are systematic violence. The whole system colludes in these murders because it banalises and minimises sexist and sexual violence. That’s why we are scandalised by the government’s silence.” In France, there were at least 113 femicides last year, an increase on the 102 officially recorded in 2020. In 2019, a record 146 women were killed. Féminicides Par Compagnons ou Ex, the Femicide by Partner or Ex association, which announced the figures for last year, said it was only an approximate figure and almost certainly an underestimate. “Numerous events that are being looked into and are subject to the omerta of the prosecutors’ offices haven’t been counted,” it said. “No, these’s aren’t ‘family dramas’ or ‘separation dramas’ or ‘crimes of passion’; they are conjugal killings carried out by frustrated men who think they have the right to kill … who because of the patriarchal education given to men think they possess their women and children and can do with their lives as they wish,” the association added. Last August, the interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, announced new measures to combat violence against women and girls, including prioritising complaints of conjugal violence and ensuring each police station and gendarmerie had at least one officer specialised in treating female victims. “The number of police and gendarmerie interventions for intra-family violences remains very high, with more than 400,000 (in 2020), which is 45 every hour,” Darmanin said. “Not a day goes by without [specialist police] freeing a woman or children who are being held hostage,” the minister added. In the UK, the Femicide Census estimates one woman is killed by a man every three days, 62% of them by a current or former partner. A history of abuse was recorded in 59% of killings of women carried out by partners or ex-partners or a male relative. Françoise Brié, the director of the Fédération Nationale Solidarité Femmes (National Federation of Women’s Solidarity), said tougher legislation was needed, including allowing women to conceal the address where they were living if they leave the family home and a violent partner with their children. Ben Ahmed, of #NousToutes, added: “We need training, education, prevention from a young age in schools, lycées, colleges … obviously we are calling on all the presidential election candidates to make concrete promises that include extra personnel, money and materials to address the question of sexist and sexual violence.”Countries that succumb to authoritarianism rarely do so with a sudden dramatic flash, where one day freedom is there and then suddenly it isn’t. It is normally a process of attrition, of rights and liberties eroded by stealth. The political atmosphere becomes gradually more intolerant: hysteria is whipped up against dissidents, whose supposed transgressions are carefully selected to justify a new crackdown. The battle lines are defined between a law-abiding majority and an extreme fringe. This is what has happened in Hungary, governed by a party that once belonged to the Liberal International and now has set up a virtual dictatorship. It is the danger facing our own country, too. I spoke to 21-year-old student Louis McKechnie as he made a journey from the prison gates familiar to countless rebels before him. An activist involved with climate protest group Insulate Britain, he was imprisoned for six weeks after breaching an injunction against road blockades. “I got to the point where I was more terrified of the government’s inaction on the climate crisis than I was about any repercussions the courts would give me,” he said. He was “terrified” of prison, but far from deterring him, his incarceration has made him more resolute. Along with eight fellow activists, their imprisonment was a warning to anyone seeking to take up Britain’s long tradition of peaceful civil disobedience. Insulate Britain is not popular, but then neither was Pussy Riot in Russia when they stormed a church in Moscow. Now all reasonable people would accept that Putin’s Russia is an authoritarian state – much more so than our own – and we would look to the imprisonment of those protesters as a case in point. But it is easier to recognise repression for what it is in other countries. The punitive measures deployed against Insulate Britain are an example of a country descending into an authoritarian mire. Imagine if another country introduced a law allowing the police to shut down protests for being too noisy or causing “serious annoyance”, allowing stop and search without any suspicion, banning specific individuals from joining protests and granting sweeping powers to the state to decide which protests are allowed. This is what the Conservatives’ police, crime, sentencing and courts bill in its current form allows for. Using the backlash against Insulate Britain, the government has toughened up the law. It exposes the laughable claims of some commentators that Boris Johnson’s guiding philosophy “is that he will not restrict our liberties unless there is an overwhelming reason to do so”, as one senior journalist put it. “It won’t stop people protesting,” as human rights organisation Liberty’s Emmanuelle Andrews put it, “but many more people who go out to protest will be at risk of arrest. It shrinks our ability to make our voices heard in quite an unprecedented way.” Banning orders can bar anyone convicted of more than one protest-related offence from exercising their democratic right. Protesters who attach themselves to others, the ground or an object (or who are deemed to intend to do so) face imprisonment. If a protest is thought to cause a huge public nuisance then stop and search can be used with impunity. Note the Tory MPs who have defined temporary restrictions to prevent the spread of a deadly virus as transforming Britain into a police state. Like Marcus Fysh, who declared: “We are not a ‘papers please’ society. This is not Nazi Germany. It’s the thin end of an authoritarian wedge.” Or Tim Loughton, who said he did not want to live in “a society in which we ask for papers and deprive people of their liberty”. Yet they backed and voted for measures that strip away hard-won rights and freedoms, dramatically enlarging the ability of the state to deprive its own citizens of their liberty. The danger, as Liberty’s Andrews noted, is that it “changes the face of what democratic participation looks like: that only a protest ‘elite’ who are willing to get arrested” take to the streets. Insulate Britain’s Louis McKechnie may feel emboldened: but many more may be deterred. Indeed, it is inevitable that those most affected will be Britain’s marginalised communities. We know that Black Londoners are up to eight times more likely to be victims of stop and search; and that the Metropolitan police were twice as likely to fine Black people under Covid rules compared with white people. It’s not all over – the House of Lords will debate the legislation in January – but the course Britain is on is clear. From the policing bill to the nationality and borders bill – which further brutalises refugees and migrants and grants power to strip millions of dual nationality Britons of their citizenship – we are coming to resemble a police state cosplaying as a democracy. How gruesome to watch rights and freedoms our ancestors fought for at huge cost stripped away with barely a murmur. Whether we decide to replicate their courage to resist is up to us. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistThe head of the National Trust has said she received anonymous death threats during a “culture war” row over the organisation’s perceived “wokeness”. Hilary McGrady, the NT’s director general, said she did not report the intimidation to the police as “it comes with the territory”. The row was sparked by NT efforts to learn more about the history of its properties, including a report published last year that found connections between 93 of its historic places and colonialism and slavery. Criticism of what some saw as a politicised assault on heritage spilled on to social media and the press. McGrady said the academic author of the report “had a much harder time” than she had. More recently, a group calling itself Restore Trust sought to win seats on the NT’s governing council at its annual general meeting in October. The group claimed to represent grassroots opposition to what it characterised as the NT’s “woke” agenda, and said it wanted to steer the trust “back to its core purpose of looking after our heritage and countryside”. Three of Restore Trust’s candidates were elected to the 36-seat council, although one has denied he endorses the group’s concerns. McGrady said she suspected Restore Trust would continue its campaign despite its failure to realise its goal of six council members. “I would like to engage with them honestly and openly. What isn’t helpful is a war of words. I’m really up for having those conversations … I have to accept I can’t lead an organisation of this scale and not take on these challenges. It comes with the territory and I’m pretty sanguine about that,” she said. Some members and visitors had been “really cross and angry with us” over the issues raised by Restore Trust, she said. “There were also people really delighted and relieved that we’re finally looking at the history that they want to learn.” McGrady said the past two years had been difficult for the NT but there was “a sense of being able to draw a line” despite worries around the Omicron variant of Covid. There had been a “huge jump” in membership in the past few months, she said. The NT had been on the verge of reaching 6 million members when the pandemic struck. “We did lose a lot of people for all sorts of reasons – financial worries or just knowing that they wouldn’t be able to use their membership – but I think we’ll be back to 6 million this coming year,” she said. The trust has ambitious plans for 2022, including picnics, fetes, beacon lighting and tree planting to mark the Queen’s platinum jubilee, and an exhibition on Beatrix Potter in conjunction with the V&amp;A in London. It has also set a goal of being net zero by 2030. “As a very significant landowner, we have a huge part to play in dealing with climate harm,” McGrady said. The trust aims to convert 10% of its 250,000 hectares of land to “nature rich”, and is planting 20m trees this decade. The NT plans to build on work after the report published last year detailing connections between 93 of its properties and colonialism and historical slavery. “Every day we uncover another bit of history. We have an obligation to tell this huge, complex, layered story of the history of the three countries we’re responsible for. The idea that history stands still is nonsense because you keep finding new things.” McGrady said the 2020 report was “first-stage research. The next step is, property by property, to [ask if] we need to do more research. And how would we weave that into the story so that we get a whole history of the place? It will take a long time, to be honest.” She insisted: “No one is forcing this down your throat. No one is trying to make you read this stuff. There’s no sense that we’re trying to preach and, certainly, definitely not judge. We’re trying to provide layers of information; we’re taking nothing away. We’re adding to the complexity of the information available. But if [people] want to come along and walk around the garden and have a lovely cup of tea, I am delighted about that. Why would I be prescriptive as to how people should engage with the National Trust?” When McGrady was appointed to lead the NT in 2018, she wanted to make it a “truly accessible” organisation, she said. “It certainly wasn’t an organisation that feels necessarily for everybody, and it still doesn’t. My mission was to take down any barrier that might get in the way of anyone feeling the trust is here for them.” That included practical measures such as wheelchair access and audio loops, and ensuring that the NT’s staff reflect “the UK as it is”. She said the demographics of its membership were changing from the perception of white, middle-class and middle-aged, but “it’s not as diverse as I want it to be. And I’m as interested in the socio-economic split as I am BAME and people with disabilities.” The organisation’s strategy was to reflect the communities it serves, but the community in the south-west was very different to the community in Birmingham, she said. “I’m very conscious that across the country there are different communities who want different things from the trust. That’s what I’m really focused on. How do we make ourselves accessible to the people who want to engage with us? But what a long way to go, and I’m the first to acknowledge that.”Romaine Hart gave me my start in the film business, hiring me as an usher at the Screen on the Green cinema in Islington, London, when I was 18; alongside the programmer Roger Austin she taught me fundamental lessons about cinema management that inspired me through the Other Cinema, Scala and later Palace years. As a teenager I had witnessed the transformation of my local, the Rex cinema on Upper Street, a downmarket fleapit that was part of a declining chain owned by the Bloom family (Romaine’s maiden name), to the Screen on the Green, with its progressive and clever programming. It showed critically acclaimed, mainly US second-run classics by day (the first double bill I attended as a 15-year-old was The Graduate and The Thomas Crown Affair). From 11.15pm the late-night cinema club showed cult films such as Performance, audacious double bills featuring Chabrol, Kurosawa and other greats of world cinema and obscure but daring fare like Henry Miller’s Quiet Days in Clichy. The Friday all-nighters of the Marx Brothers and Humphrey Bogart classics were usually packed to the rafters. To keep this challenging programme viable in newly gentrified Islington, Romaine kept overhead costs to a minimum (I can still feel the weight of those heavy metal 35mm film cases, running them up and down the narrow stairs to the tiny projection box). Sales of Kia-Ora squash drinks and boxes of Maltesers were pushed to the maximum with all of the ushers doing ice-cream breaks with a tray between films – even at 1am. It was tough in the 70s: cinema audiences were at a low ebb and the Screen was barred from showing first-run films, which instead went to the Odeon Angel, ABC cinema on Holloway Road and Essoldo Caledonian Road. Romaine was a shrewd, incisive and – beneath the occasionally gruff but glamorous business exterior – generous person who gave me a fundamental grounding not just in exhibition but also distribution with her company Mainline Pictures. With Roger she distributed movies by Alan Rudolph, Monte Hellman, Billy Wilder and John Waters at a time when distribution costs were at a premium; later on I released Eraserhead with her at the Scala. Programming an all-nighter of films interspersed with live performances from the then unknown Sex Pistols, the Clash and Buzzcocks was just one more brilliant coup that inspired a new generation of punk fans into the cinema. It was an unforgettable event to have been an usher at and another example of thinking outside the box against the oppressive shackles that the film industry had imposed on exhibition at that time. Romaine’s attributes are too numerous to list but, as a woman in the quite frankly sluggish and male-dominated 70s British film industry, her acumen, good taste, quick wit and infectious sense of humour stood out as a beacon of hope for so many who followed. Later I took her values with me into production – her principles of acquiring high quality or challenging films combined with reasonable budgets remain with me as a producer. I personally owe a lot to Romaine and Roger, and to try to put that into words is difficult, but she transformed cinema-going in that little part of London where I grew up and brought excitement back in a pre-home video, pre-multichannel TV time period, when most people were pronouncing the film industry as dead in the water. • Stephen Woolley is a film producer, whose credits include Mothering Sunday, Carol, Made in Dagenham and The Crying Game.It’s gotten rather tricky to calibrate the the annual relative quotient of tragedy. (For the future reference of misery-focused sociologists, that’s the ARQT.) 2021 was a year of tribulation closing out with a backslide into the same rampant viral spread that we saw in square one of the pandemic that just won’t end – but hey, at least it’s not 2020 any more. As it becomes apparent that we will have to accept a few massive catastrophes as the new status quo, assessing the quality of life turns into a matter of degrees, weighing each fresh stretch of hardship against the last. It may prove some cold comfort to note that things have, by sheer numbers, gotten slightly better since last year. The corollary to this way of thinking, however, is the understanding that our circumstances can always get worse. Just take a look at the films set in the year 2022, united as they are in agreement that something horrible is just waiting to happen. There’s a futuristic sheen to the number, as if a robot’s stuttering while giving a readout of two, that’s compelled a handful of film-makers to select this date as the point at which a major crisis comes to pass. Whether it’s a chance armageddon landing at an inopportune time or a boiling-over that our species has been building to for years, the movies have marked 2022 as cursed. The only hope as we approach the beginning of another year is that whatever challenges await us, they won’t have the terrible finality of the world-enders listed below. Read on for a smorgasbord of possible apocalypses imagined for the coming months, and take some solace in the small consolation that we have yet to start eating each other: The Dark Side of the Moon Way before Carey and Chad Hayes made their name by writing 2013’s The Conjuring, the twin brothers scripted this direct-to-video cult classic about a crew of astronauts venturing into a galactic no man’s land. They’ve entered the void of low orbit to repair a nuclear-arming satellite, but a power failure sends them floating helplessly toward a long-defunct Nasa shuttle they board in search of aid. The game of cat-and-mouse that follows is too weird in its particulars to be dismissed as the Alien rip-off it appears to be; the reanimated corpse and the leather dominatrix robot prime us for the grand reveal that the stalker picking off the explorers is actually Satan himself. (Turns out this station is hovering above the Bermuda Triangle.) As unfortunate turns of events go, this one isn’t so bad, by its very nature contained and remote. If the devil does turn out to be one of next year’s primary antagonists, we should be so lucky to keep him stuck in outer space. Soylent Green Soylent Green, as you may already be aware through sheer cultural osmosis, is people. In Richard Fleischer’s infamous sci-fi thriller, the NYPD detective Frank Thorn gets the ultimate validation for his paranoia about the miracle foodstuff mass-produced by a shadowy corporation, for which the magic ingredient just so happens to be the finely ground corpses of the underclass. The screenwriter Stanley Greenberg (and Harry Harrison, author of the novel Make Room! Make Room!, which inspired the film) was right on the money in his vision of an economy stratified by scarcity, as overpopulation, pollution, and an eerily prescient climate cataclysm exacerbate hunger and poverty. That said, we haven’t yet resorted to devouring each other – that seems to be the one taboo that’s going to hold up through any and all mounting desperation – but we’re not so far off from Snowpiercer’s future of nutrient-rich sustenance bars made from mashed cockroach. Once we’ve cleaned out the global cupboards of actual food, we’ll have no choice but to turn to that which is merely edible. The Tomorrow War This past summer’s straight-to-streaming Chris Pratt vehicle didn’t make quite the splash a producer might hope for from a $200m budget, but it’s built around an idea with deep resonance in the present day: that it falls to those living now to anticipate and negate the conflicts that will face the next generation. In 2022, emissaries from the year 2051 materialize with a warning of an impending alien invasion twenty-six years down the road and beg for the help of the present-day armed forces to time-travel ahead so they can help beat back the extraterrestrial menace. Pratt’s Green Beret-turned-super-soldier gets the drop on the beasts dubbed “Whitespikes” only to discover that to completely purge the Earth of these hostiles, he’ll have to return to his own time and act then. (It’s worth noting that the aliens were actually submerged in a glacier and released by the thaw of global warming.) Goes to show that the old saying is right – an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of full-bore military offensives. The Purge When the lucrative spec-fic horror franchise first launched with this flagship film, 2022 was far away enough to allow for acclimation to an unthinkable way of life. The survival nightmare takes place after eight successful observances of the Purge, the annual holiday during which all crime is legal, allowing America to release its pent-up rage and chill out for 364 days of the year. Though this series has yet to realize the full disturbing potential of its ingenious premise, its name has been invoked to describe real-life goings-on with greater frequency as of late. During the run-up to the 2020 election, Donald Trump’s favorite scaremongering tactic was to paint a picture of Joe Biden’s America as a lawless hellscape where marauding gangs sowed mayhem with impunity. In actuality, the tenor of unrest is almost the exact opposite of that articulated in the film: rather than the barely repressed bigotry fueling the Purge onscreen, the demonstrations of destruction during protests were motivated by demands for justice. No Escape Martin Campbell’s juiced-up B-movie taps a peak-form Ray Liotta for the ex-marine John Robbins, a man imprisoned for the murder of his commanding officer back in Benghazi. He’s sent to the island penal colony of Absolom, where the worst of the worst have been left to their own murderous devices and divided themselves into the warlike, savage Outsiders and the civilized, humane Insiders. The miniature revolution led by Robbins didn’t have all that much insight to shed on the carceral-state debate at the time of its release, but today, it looks like a comically outsized take on a real issue. Its guiding principle that inmates are robbed of their dignity by a system that treats them like easily exploited chattel holds true, if anything rendered more impactful by the advances in public understanding of this sorry situation. We can only hope that we’ll have as noble a leader as the character actor Lance Henriksen to expose the treatment festering in the prison-industrial complex. Geostorm Well, the good news is that we haven’t implemented the use of widespread weather-control satellites just yet, so annihilation-level inclement conditions on a global scale may not be on the cards. That’s the armageddon facing the human race in Dean Devlin’s admirably dumb eco-spectacle, in which the space cowboy Gerard Butler represents our last line of defense against certain death by Mother Nature. The opening salvos before the much-feared main event giving this film its title are bad enough, ranging from skyscraper-drowning typhoons to torrential downpours of lightning singeing city blocks to a crisp. It’s all a bit store-brand Roland Emmerich in the awed-eyed photography, but natural events of biblical ruin are growing regrettably commonplace. Even if Butler cuts a larger-than-life figure, the threat he faces still speaks to a legitimate fear many of us contend with every time we open a newspaper. His character and his power to stop doomsday is a reassuring fiction, the one man who can change an obliteration the rest of us are helpless to halt.Why have we had such mild weather this winter? According to the UK’s Met Office: “The extremely mild spell is driven by a flow of warm, moist air pushing across the UK from the Canary Islands and further south in the Atlantic.” This has resulted in the “unusual situation of one weather system breaking weather records for two days in separate calendar years”. Where was this warm air coming from? Low pressure in the Atlantic below Iceland meant conditions were perfect for a stream of subtropical air known as the Azores plume to drift up to the UK. Michael Dukes, the director of forecasting at MetDesk, said: “This subtropical air came in on south to south-westerly winds across the UK. As the air mass came from so far south, temperatures were well above normal for the time of year with date records broken on New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day.” Were records broken? According to the Met Office, Bala, north Wales, reached 16.5C on 31 December 2021, a New Year’s Eve record for the UK and Wales. (Although not the warmest ever recorded in December - that was in 2019, when the Azores plume also reached the UK and brought temperatures as high as 18.7C.) New Year’s Eve temperature records were set across all the other UK nations. Keswick in England hit 15.9C, Kinlochewe in Scotland reached 16.1C and it was 15.0C in Magilligan, Northern Ireland. A daily minimum temperature of 13.2C recorded at Chivenor, Devon, is provisionally a new UK and England record for January, surpassing the previous UK record of 13.1C, set at Magilligan, in 2016 and the previous English record of 13.0C, set at London in 2008. There is also a new Welsh January daily minimum temperature record, 12.8C, which was recorded in Trawsgoed in Ceredigion. This beats the previous record of 12.5C, set at Gogerddan, also in Ceredigion, in 2016. How long did the mild weather last? On Sunday, rain moved in from the west across the whole country. By Monday morning, yellow weather warnings were being issued for snow and ice over parts of Scotland, with a band of cold and rain moving south over the rest of the UK, pushing back the warmth and bringing Arctic air with it. Why did it happen, and is it linked to climate change? The Azores plume has drifted up to the UK before, most notably in 2019, as mentioned above. There are always areas of low and high pressure in the Atlantic, and when the conditions are right, subtropical air will be drawn up to the north. It is hard to link a single weather event to climate change, although the science in this field is improving rapidly. However, said Dukes, as the planet slowly warms it means “we are just a touch warmer than we used to be in similar weather set-ups. So if this weather pattern had occurred in the 1980s, say, temperatures would still have been way above normal, but probably half a degree lower than they were on this occasion.” Will we see more of this in future? Nasa scientists have established that in 2020 the planet’s yearly global averaged temperature had increased by 1.02C from the baseline between 1951 and 1980. In the next week or so, Nasa, Noaa and the UK’s Met office will publish their assessments of how hot 2021 was, but we already know that back in the summer Death Valley hit the world’s highest recorded temperature of 54.4C for the second year in a row. In the last couple of days, there have been extreme contrasts in the US: while Texas hit the highest January temperature in US history, an icy cold front coming down the west coast meant that there was an extraordinary difference with northern Montana of 99F (37.2C) to -39F (-39.4C) – a gap of 138F (or 76.6C) . Argentina also experienced one of its hottest New Year’s Days, reaching 46.6C at Pozo Hondo. And meanwhile Indonesia saw severe flooding following days of torrential rain. This trend will only continue, say scientists. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that if carbon emissions continue to grow and no action is taken, global temperatures could rise by between 2.6C and 4.8C by the end of the century, with more rain, more drought, and more record-breaking hot weather events. • This article was amended on 3 and 4 January 2022. Some text was changed to clarify December’s previous lowest recorded temperatures. Also, Trawsgoed and Gogerddan are in Ceredigion, not Dyfed as an earlier version said. The caption for the main image was amended to include the Welsh name for “Bala Lake”, Llyn Tegid.Police have named a five-year-old boy who died in Oldham, Greater Manchester, on New Year’s Eve as Dylan Scanlon. A woman in her 30s has been detained under the Mental Health Act and police are investigating the death. Dylan’s father, Gary Keenan, described him as his best friend, in a tribute on Facebook. He wrote: “To my Dylan I love you more than everything in this world you was my best friend and I’m really going to miss you son sweet dreams and we will meet again 1 day love you son.” Greater Manchester police (GMP) said officers were called by the ambulance service at about 6.20pm on Friday 31 December. Dylan was pronounced dead at the scene. The force has referred itself to the police watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct, and its professional standards branch because of “previous police contact”. DCI Alicia Smith, of GMP’s major incident team, said: “Our thoughts are with the family at this difficult time and they are being supported by specialist officers. An investigation by a dedicated team into Dylan’s death is ongoing and the family is being kept fully informed.” Anyone with information is asked to contact police on 0161 856 3656 or anonymously via Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.The return of a requirement in England for secondary pupils to wear face masks in class has sparked a backlash at the start of the new term, but several EU countries have already adopted the measure even for primary school children. Some Conservative MPs and parents’ groups have objected to the move, warning of a long-term impact of masks on children’s mental health and arguing that they they will have a longer-term effect on people’s ability to learn and socialise. In countries such as France, however, where a mask mandate for pupils aged 11 and over was reimposed in November after a brief relaxation at the start of the new school year, face coverings have been compulsory in all primary schools since 15 December. The measure, previously applicable to children aged six and over only in areas with a particularly high incidence, has not so far met with significant resistance during a record-breaking surge in infections fuelled by the Omicron variant. Catherine Nave-Bekhti, the general secretary of the Sgen-CFDT teachers’ union, said the requirement was “a reasonable and logical precaution given the current dynamic of the epidemic – the objective, after all, is to close as few classes as possible”. With infections exceeding 200,000 a day, children aged six and over are also now required to wear masks in indoor places open to the public, including shops, cinemas, sports complexes, trains and buses, and outside in big cities such as Paris and Lyon. Unless the entire class has been vaccinated, Italy has also required all pupils aged six and over to wear a mask indoors at school since last year, while Greece extended the mandate to nursery school children – with masks to be changed three times a day. Belgium made mask wearing mandatory for all children over the age of six, including at school, in early December, with the health minister, Frank Vandenbroucke, saying the key lay in “stopping the engine” of viral transmission among children. Spain’s school children aged six and over have been waering masks in class since September 2020. The rule has generally met little resistance, although the far-right Vox party has sought to make political capital out of opposing it, claiming continued mask wearing by children “could be counter-productive” and affect development. “Almost all children over six have worn masks without rejecting it, they’ve normalised it,” said Mireia Orgilés, the author of a study on the psychological impact of the pandemic on young people in Italy and Spain. “If we explain it to them well, they can understand it and follow the rules. A lot of the time they can accept it more easily than adults,” Orgilés told the specialist publication El Diario de la Educación. In Germany, where federal states can set their own rules, mask requirements have been reimposed as the Omicron surge looms. Masks are mandatory inside all school buildings for all age groups, but can be taken off for exams and presentations. Not all European countries have followed suit: pupils in Swedish schools are not required to wear masks. The state epidemiologist, Anders Tegnell, said on Monday school closures were possible – but not nationwide – when term starts next week. Schools in Sweden have instead been told to take preventive measures such as spending time outdoors, emphasising good hand hygiene, avoiding crowding, and ensuring pupils stay at home if they develop coronavirus symptoms. Norway, too, does not require masks to be worn at school, although children over 12 must wear them on public transport, and Poland has so far refrained from imposing a mask mandate on pupils but warned on Monday new restrictions could be imminent. In the US, where many schools that would normally welcome students back to classrooms are delaying their start dates by a few days and mandating a negative test, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance suggests masking in schools. Policies vary radically across states, however, with more than half having no set strategy but leaving the decision up to local and county governments. Eight states, primarily in the south of the country, have moved to ban mask mandates in schools. As the Omicron variant sweeps the country, teachers were scrambling on Monday to test pupils and staff: all staff and public school students in Washington DC, for example, must upload a negative test result administered no later than Tuesday to the district’s website before class begins on Wednesday. A recent German study found that requiring children – and particularly adults – to wear face masks in schools can potentially decrease Covid-19 outbreaks at schools, since clusters were generally more severe when an adult was the source. Martina Sombetzki, the lead author, said the results showed “mandatory masking of teachers and caregivers and children at schools in the 2020 to 2021 school year each resulted in a significant reduction in the number of transmissions.”The unusually warm spell of weather, which included record temperatures over the new year, will come to an abrupt end overnight, plunging by up to 10C (a drop of 18F) across parts of the UK. The forecast follows the hottest new year’s weekend on record when 16.5C (61.7F) was reached at Bala, Gwynedd, on 31 December 2021 – a New Year’s Eve record for the UK and Wales, when it is usually about 7C. The Met Office has issued warnings for snow, ice and winds in northern and eastern Scotland, with the cold air affecting Scotland expected to sink south across the Pennines and into the Lake District, north Wales and the Peak District. These areas could get snow flurries. Tom Morgan, a Met Office meteorologist, said: “Compared to the 16C experienced in London over the weekend, for example, tomorrow it will likely be 6C or 7C. It’s not just the cold air which will make us feel so much colder – it’s also going to be the strength of the wind. When these factors are combined, the change will be a shock to the system.” An arctic chill will engulf most of the country by midweek, bringing frost and icy road conditions for many. “Factoring in the wind speed, in many areas of the country it will feel like -1C or -2C,” said Morgan. Northern parts of Scotland including the Highlands, Aberdeenshire and Moray are under a yellow alert for frequent snow showers and gale-force winds from 3pm until 6am on Wednesday. The Met Office warned of difficult driving conditions, especially on coastal and mountain roads. It said: “In combination with winds gusting 50 to 60mph at times, temporary blizzard conditions and some drifting of snow on higher level routes is likely.” With cold air spreading south across Scotland and bringing wintry showers, icy stretches are expected to form by late afternoon on Monday. In Orkney gusts could reach up to 80mph. Forecasters anticipate some train or bus services could be cancelled or delayed where flooding and spray caused by heavy rain occur. Though the Met Office has only issued warnings for Scotland, commuters in England and Wales returning to work on Tuesday could also see some snow, said Morgan. “There is a band of rain that could briefly turn to sleet or snow, around breakfast time to mid-morning. Seeing flakes of snow could be a surprise for many people, given how mild it has been.” Jack Cousens, the head of roads policy for the AA, said: “A mild start to the year will suddenly become cold and blustery over the coming days, with warnings of snow and ice in the Highlands. Drivers should make sure their cars are in good condition prior to setting off. Most breakdowns can be avoided by checking fuel, oil and coolant levels while ensuring tyres are undamaged and have plenty of tread. “Preparing for the worst is worthwhile, so keeping some warm clothes and coats in the car, along with some sweets and water are recommended.” The UK Health Security Agency urged people to check on vulnerable members of the public in the coming days, including elderly people and those with serious illness. The UKHSA consultant Agostinho Sousa said: “Cold weather can have a serious impact on health, particularly for older people and those with heart and lung problems, as it increases the risks of heart attacks, strokes and chest infections.”France has taken over the rotating EU presidency for the next six months, an opportunity the president, Emmanuel Macron, will no doubt use to nudge Europe towards his goal of greater “strategic autonomy” in the world. Some in Brussels worry that hotly contested presidential elections in April could interfere with France’s EU presidency before a key conference on the future of Europe delivers any results. It’s not reassuring that Macron’s decision, temporarily, to fly the blue and gold EU flag at the Arc de Triomphe in Paris has already drawn the fury of far-right and conservative election candidates. But many European Muslims are concerned about the French stint in the EU chair for another reason: they fear that France’s divisive anti-Muslim political discourse will seep dangerously into EU policymaking. The French election campaign essentially means it is open season on Muslims in France. Many French politicians have adopted rampant Islamophobia as an electoral strategy. Toxic debates on Islam and Muslims, mixed with acrimonious intersectional swipes at race and migration, are becoming increasingly venomous. Alarmingly, Muslim-bashing is no longer the preserve of the far-right anti-immigration candidate Marine Le Pen. Macron’s hardline interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, accused Le Pen, during a recent television debate, of going “soft” on Islam. The former TV pundit Éric Zemmour has brought an even more vicious anti-Muslim agenda to the presidential contest, while candidate for the Gaullist Les Républicains party, Valérie Pécresse, is taking a hard line on immigration, having previously banned the wearing of burkinis at outdoor leisure centres in the Paris region. Macron himself, who is expected to seek re-election, is already enforcing a spate of anti-Muslim policies, including a bill supposedly aimed at preventing “separatism” and the emergence of a “counter society” among France’s six million Muslim citizens. Macron’s government is also under criticism for shutting down the Collective Against Islamophobia in France, a leading anti-discrimination body which documents anti-Muslim hate crimes. The European Network Against Racism warns of a full-blown “Islamophobic witch-hunt” of French Muslims and says the government is using “countless administrative procedures” to close down Muslim-led organisations, mosques, schools, and even Muslim-owned snack bars, on unproven claims of links to the Muslim Brotherhood. But the fear now is that France will use its EU presidency to push for even tougher Europe-wide measures. It’s a reasonable fear in the context of French ministers calling out Helena Dalli, the European commissioner for equality, for meeting members of Femyso, the Forum of European Muslim Youth and Student Organisations, a network that also participated in a Council of Europe anti-discrimination campaign focusing on hijabs. That campaign caused a political outcry in France as an attack on its “values”. Dalli rightly defended meeting Femyso representatives to discuss challenges facing young European Muslims as “a result of stereotyping, discrimination and outright hatred”. Attacking Dalli for the meeting, Marlène Schiappa, the citizenship minister in the Macron government, said Femyso was an “Islamist association” that was “attacking France” and “infiltrating” EU institutions, allegations which Femyso flatly denies and which its president, Hande Taner described in a statement as “laughable”. An intervention by the French government with the European Commission meanwhile prompted a delay which led ultimately to the cancellation – ostensibly for administrative reasons – of planned EU funding for another rights group, Alliance Citoyenne, which has defended the right of Muslim women to swim in public pools wearing burkinis. My own reports and articles on France and Europe written over the years note a persistent unease about Islam as an alien faith, Muslims as undesired foreigners and an irrational fear of the hijab and of halal food. Diatribes conflating Islam, extremism and terrorism are a tediously recurring phenomenon at both formal and informal gatherings. France’s Muslim-panic has parallels elsewhere. In Austria the former chancellor Sebastian Kurz took aim at the alleged rise of so-called political Islam after the launch of a much-criticised website called “Islam map” which shows the locations of more than 600 mosques. The map, according to rights groups, has led to incidents of violence against Muslims. Denmark’s former immigration minister, Inger Støjberg , was given a jail sentence recently for illegally ordering the separation of young asylum-seeking married couples from Syria and Iraq, where the woman was under 18. Seeming to implicitly link Islam and refugee policy as is often the case across Europe, Støjberg had said she wanted to protect “child brides”. She previously caused controversy by arguing that Danish Muslims be kept out of work places during Ramadan because daylight fasting could create safety hazards. Støjberg has now been impeached, and may be a political outlier, but it is hard not to see Denmark’s hardline approach to “integration” and refugees, including a June law which enables it to transfer asylum seekers outside the EU while their cases are being processed, as at least partly driven by a fear of Muslims. The Austrian academic Farid Hafez raises troubling questions too about the motivation behind the Vienna forum on countering segregation and extremism in the context of integration, an annual conference launched by Austria with the support of France and Denmark to fight “political Islam” and so-called “non-violent extremism and Islamism”. If not outright McCarthyism, as Hafez calls it, such initiatives are a dangerous step towards prejudging all Muslims as a potential threat to liberal societies. Once restricted to the EU’s far-right groups, France’s fixation with Muslims has extended across the European political landscape; Islam is seen either as a threat to national secular traditions or to the idea of “Christian Europe”. Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and his EU allies have long raged against Islam, but dog whistling to anti-Muslim extremists is becoming the standard pattern for many mainstream EU conservatives. Even without chalking up any major electoral victories (so far), far-right parties have in effect succeeded in mainstreaming their hostile narrative on Muslims and migrants. No wonder hostility and discrimination towards Europe’s Muslims is widespread as the EU’s own Fundamental Rights Agency warns. The 2020 issue of the annual European Islamophobia report, co-edited by Hafez with scholars, experts and civil society activists from more than 30 European countries, concluded that anti-Muslim racism has worsened across the continent. There are bright spots. In Germany, which welcomed more than a million refugees from Syria and other countries in 2015, the new governing coalition has promised a “modern immigration country”. EU governments and the European Commission are – quite rightly – struggling against violations of the rule of law, attacks on the judiciary and the erosion of media freedoms in Hungary and Poland. But they have turned a blind eye to policies and actions that reinforce exclusion and prejudice in some western EU member states. Being a European Muslim has never been a walk in the park. With about one-third of French voters saying they will vote for far-right and ultra-nationalist candidates, France’s Islam-panic is likely to escalate in the coming months. Despite the EU’s lofty talk of equality, diversity and non-discrimination, European Muslims should be braced for a tough start to the new year. Shada Islam is a Brussels-based commentator on EU affairsThe publishing rights to David Bowie’s huge and peerless catalogue of songs have been sold by his estate to Warner Chappell Music (WCM), the publishing arm of Warner Music Group, in a deal worth at least $250m (£185m) according to anonymous sources speaking to Variety. Guy Moot, chief executive of WCM, said: “These are not only extraordinary songs, but milestones that have changed the course of modern music for ever … We are looking forward to tending his unparalleled body of songs with passion and care as we strive to build on the legacy of this most extraordinary human being.” The deal means that Warner now owns the rights to Bowie’s songwriting itself, as well as to almost all the recordings of it. In September 2021, the company completed a deal to acquire Bowie’s recordings from 2000 until his death in 2016, adding to the recordings it already owned from 1968 to 1999. Just a small cache of recorded music made prior to Bowie’s late-60s breakthrough is now not owned by Warner Music. The company has been lavishly repackaging Bowie’s back catalogue in a series of box sets in recent years. The deal is the latest in a series of major acquisitions by various companies of the catalogues of pop artists, with Bruce Springsteen, Bob Dylan, Neil Young and various members of Fleetwood Mac selling the rights for their songs for large cash sums. These deals allow the publishing companies to accrue income from royalties, as well as when music is licensed for use in films, TV and advertising. Terms of the Bowie deal have not been disclosed but the Bowie estate has historically closely controlled the use of his work. The 2020 biopic Stardust, about the birth of Bowie’s Ziggy Stardust persona, was forbidden by the estate from using Bowie’s music. WCM co-chair Carianne Marshall said: “We were pleased that the estate felt that Warner Chappell has the knowledge, experience, and resources to take the reins and continue to promote a collection of this stature. All of our global leaders and departments are incredibly excited and primed to get to work with these brilliant songs across multiple avenues and platforms.” Another film that does already have the blessing of the estate is a forthcoming untitled documentary by film-maker Brett Morgen, who is using thousands of hours of rare and unseen live performance footage as its basis.The first professional trip I took was to Jersey, to interview a teenage skateboarder. He was slated to win some big competition, but I’m afraid I can’t tell you whether he did or what his name was. What I do remember is standing by the skate park, next to his mum, in this peculiar low island light, while he smashed himself to the ground, repeatedly, and got back up again. Before long, his elbow was bleeding – but this, his mother assured me, was an old wound, so it opened up most days. He brushed it off – didn’t even appear to notice – along with every other brutal encounter with physics and gravity. “Well, he’s 14,” his mum said. “They bounce at that age.” He skated into my thoughts this week, while the news was ablaze with England’s back-to-school mask mandate. Educationists were (and are) justifiably upset, since they received this communication – that all pupils in year 7 or above should wear masks in the classroom – long after the media had been briefed. But disgust at the absolute dishevelment of governmental standards was nothing compared with the rage of the anti-mask libertarians. It sounds like a niche group, but it includes many Conservative backbenchers, plus their supportive commentariat. Teenagers, these anti-maskers maintain, have already suffered enough. Face-coverings interfere with their learning, leave them unable to communicate with peers, render them insensate to life’s daily pleasures and reduce them to a state of slavery (granted, I saw the last claim on Twitter, where the collective 2022 resolution appears to be “be more crazy”). The thing is, my house is lousy with teenagers and I have agreed, stupidly, to stop writing about them. But I am still allowed to make the most general observations (I think). I have seen them forget their masks, try to eat through a mask, pick up a mask from the street and put it on, and flick each other with masks. But I have never heard any of them complain about wearing one. Please don’t walk away with the impression that this generation has stopped complaining. They bellyache constantly about stupid things, such as having to spend all day in the same classroom, rather than moving from one subject area to another. “What is so fun about walking down a corridor?” I have wondered aloud more than once. It’s the journey, not the destination, they say, sagely. Corridors are where all the stuff happens. Staying put and waiting for the teacher to come to you makes it feel like primary school. Will they put up with it, for the sake of public safety? Yes, but they wish the management to know that it isn’t ideal. They don’t complain, yet it is visible in their demeanours that it saps their life force when they have to attend school from home. They absolutely hate it when non-essential shops are forced to close. They weren’t wild about the bubble phase, when they had to self-isolate after the positive test result of someone they didn’t even like. There was a brief period in 2020 when they were allowed only on certain buses; that was a veritable assault on their human rights. But they adapted to masks absolutely seamlessly, uncomplainingly, faster than a baby adapts to a sock. There are a load of plausible explanations for why teenagers might moan about masks less than adults. They have better hearing, so they aren’t relying on lip-reading without knowing it. They tend to have better cardiovascular health, so they are not constantly wondering why stairs have got harder. Fundamentally, though, they are just more adaptable. We talk constantly about all the ways in which the teenage brain is like an adult brain, only less good – more volatile and impulse-driven, less able to predict consequences – and hardly talk at all about the ways in which teenagers are superior. Their entire day is structured around life’s unreasonable demands and they just acclimatise. This unruffled resilience and psychic elasticity – or bouncing, in 90s skateboarder’s-mum parlance – looks suddenly a lot more mature than what passes for maturity. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistA woman must lunch somewhere. When the prime minister told Liz Truss to examine every road post Brexit, her thoughts naturally turned to Mayfair and Hertford Street. Perhaps that nice caff at No 5. We are after all lunching with that nice American trade envoy, Katherine Tai. Perhaps two measures of dry gin; three bottles of Pazo Barrantes Albariño, a Spanish white wine, costing a total of £153; and two bottles of the French red Coudoulet de Beaucastel, costing a total of £130. Perhaps a £3,000 bill. Besides, the proprietor of 5 Hertford Street is Robin Birley, half-brother to Boris Johnson’s mate Zac Goldsmith, and buddy of Michael Gove and David Cameron. And he tipped Johnson 20 grand for his “leadership” campaign, wherever that went. Surely such generosity calls for a kindly nod and wink. 5 Hertford Street posted substantial losses last year, so the money might come in handy. Birley even halved the bill if it could be paid straight away. The office wants Truss to slum it in Soho. She hits the roof. Who wins trade deals in Soho? Besides, this is one for Birley. The joy of British corruption is that there are no crude brown envelopes stuffed with notes. Money is never seen changing hands. Negotiation is via a pat on the shoulder, a placement at a dinner, a nod at the tennis net. There need not be a direct quid pro, but favours can flow both ways: a party donation, a contract, a planning refusal overturned, all rounded off with the knighthood or peerage. The British like to pretend their political culture is pure, but benign terms have been used to mask questionable interactions. In times past, the Metropolitan police vehicle for the receipt of informal benefit was the “police benevolent fund”. It was the stuff of legend and occasional comedy. Now, at a time of wild budgetary spending, every dodgy oddball is crowding round the pig trough. Goodness knows what antics will be revealed, if ever, from the proposed inquiry into the pandemic. It should be standing room only at the Old Bailey. The strangest transactions seem to revolve around politicians striving to live up to the dignity of their office, be it flat decorations, country houses or foreign holidays. Lunch at 5 Hertford Street is a classic. Turn to a party donor; at least he could host a good lunch. Truss’s civil servants saw the danger a mile off and steered her towards a more modest watering hole. She would have none of it. It went to her permanent secretary, who let it through, but he is clearly a mouse not a man. Should it now go to the cohort of Whitehall standards scrutineers? If so they must be worked off their feet, with every self-respecting property developer or drug manufacturer feeling they are carrying the weight of the Tory party on their shoulders. Perhaps the best discipline is daylight. Lunch at 5 Hertford Street is hardly a hanging crime. It rather indicates a general casualness towards public funds and relationships; an attitude of mind. Johnson was very nice to Truss. She returns the favour by shamelessly going on manoeuvres to replace him. Now she is currying favour with his friends. Is that who we want as a future prime minister? Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist This article was amended on 4 January 2022 to correct details of the drinks reportedly ordered at 5 Hertford StreetNewcastle United are increasingly confident of signing Kieran Trippier from Atlético Madrid by the end of the week and hope to open formal negotiations with the 31-year-old England right-back within the next 48 hours. Although Atlético rejected Newcastle’s initial offer for Trippier, a deal in the region of £25m is expected to be finalised after Diego Simeone appeared to abandon realistic hope of keeping him in the Spanish capital. “Kieran Trippier is an extraordinary footballer who has given us a lot and we will try to keep him,” said Atlético’s manager. “We want him to stay, he’s an important player, but nowadays, when a player wants to leave, you can’t force them to stay. You can’t retain them.” Although Trippier started Atlético’s 2-0 home win against Rayo Vallecano on Sunday, he appeared to wave farewell to the crowd at the end and was the last player to leave the pitch. With Chelsea potentially interested in Trippier, Eddie Howe is keen to seal the reunion with a player he signed for Burnley as soon as possible but Newcastle’s manager seems unlikely to have Sven Botman alongside Trippier in defence when Watford visit St James’ Park for a vital relegation “six-pointer” on Saturday week. Newcastle have had a bid rejected by Lille for Botman, a Netherlands Under-21 centre-half who has recently broken into his country’s senior squad. The French club appear determined to keep the 21-year-old, with an offer in the region of £30m currently insufficient to persuade them to part with a defender also admired by, among others, Milan. Although Lille have financial difficulties they are in the knockout stages of the Champions League, eighth in Ligue 1 and believe Botman remains vital to their European ambitions. Howe also covets the Burnley centre-half James Tarkowski but, even though Tarkowski could leave Turf Moor for nothing in the summer, Sean Dyche appears adamant he will not countenance weakening his team’s survival chances by selling the 29-year-old to a relegation rival. With Callum Wilson’s torn calf muscle dictating that Howe is in the market for a centre-forward and a central midfield also on his shopping list, Newcastle hope to welcome a minimum of four signings.A teenager has been charged with the murder of 15-year-old Zaian Aimable-Lina, one of two boys to be killed within about an hour of each other in separate stabbing incidents in London on Thursday evening. The suspect, who is also aged 15 and whom police have not named because of his age, was arrested on Saturday and is due to appear at Bromley magistrates court in south London on Tuesday. Another 15-year-old has been released under investigation after being arrested on suspicion of murder on Friday. He has been bailed until late January, police said. A postmortem gave the cause of Zaian’s death as a stab wound to the heart. A vigil was held over the weekend at Ashburton Park in Croydon, where the stabbing took place. Dozens of people gathered at a gate leading into the park on Saturday evening. Candles were lit and people consoled each other following the latest tragedy in the capital. There was also an increased police presence, with officers patrolling up and down the road adjacent to the park. The second teenager stabbed to death on Thursday evening, a 16-year-old boy in Yiewsley, west London, has yet to be named. A 16-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of his murder on Sunday. The two incidents made last year the deadliest on record in terms of homicides of teenagers. The 30 recorded in 2021 surpassed the 29 in 2008 – the previous worst toll. As the news emerged, campaigners said efforts to tackle knife crime had been inadequate and it was now so prevalent that it was becoming normalised. “Knife crime is accepted by this generation as part-and-parcel of growing up and that’s completely unacceptable,” said Patrick Green, the chief executive of the anti-knife crime charity the Ben Kinsella Trust, which was set up in 2008 after the fatal stabbing of 16-year-old Ben in north London. “It shows that not enough has been done and, if I’m being really critical, then I’d say the approach to tackling it has been scattergun. We have to sustain our response to knife crime, it has to be over the long term and not just one- and two-year funding for projects. It is a societal problem which will continue unless it is addressed properly.”The Barcelona president, Joan Laporta, has insisted that the club are “back as big players” in the transfer market after Ferran Torres was unveiled at Camp Nou. When asked if Barça were interested in signing the Dortmund striker Erling Haaland despite the club’s financial problems, Laporta replied: “We’re working to build a top team. Everything is possible if we do things well, and I’m sure we will. Top players are open to joining Barça. “We’re definitely recovering our status. Everybody in the world should get ready, as we are back as big players in the market.” The club president also praised Torres, who has joined from Manchester City, with Barcelona securing a bank loan to help fund the Spain forward’s €55m (£46m) move. Laporta said: “We knew about Ferran’s situation and we were very pleased that he wanted to come to Barça so much. He is a great player.” The club’s director of football, Mateu Alemany, brushed off concerns about completing the formalities of the transfer. “The truth of the situation is that when we signed Torres, we knew we did not have room in terms of salaries,” Alemany said. “However, we have been making moves in different areas and we are convinced we can register him.” Torres was presented as a Barcelona player after signing a five-and-a-half-year deal with a €1bn buyout clause. The 21-year-old said he was attracted by the “challenge” of returning the club to the top of European football. “I am facing this challenge with ambition, humility and a lot of desire,” Torres said. “This is a dream. I had the idea of coming back to La Liga and Barça showed an interest. I want to take Barça back to where it belongs. “Having played for two coaches with Barcelona roots, like Luis Enrique and Pep Guardiola, has helped me to adapt to the Barca DNA.” Torres spent 16 months at the Etihad Stadium after joining City from Valencia for an initial fee of £20.8m in the summer of 2020, scoring 16 goals in 43 appearances in all competitions. The forward broke his metatarsal on international duty in October, but is expected to be fit for the Spanish Super Cup semi-final against Real Madrid on 12 January.When then US president Donald Trump caught the coronavirus, Zorawar Sidhu found himself refreshing his phone for updates. Waiting anxiously for the 2020 presidential election result, he was glued to flashing screen again. “My appetite for news had been increased,” the 36-year-old says by phone from New York. “Maybe it’s the frequency of it or the pace of how the information comes in or just how intense every morsel of information is, where the next thing is more alarming than the previous.” We are all doomscrollers now, compulsively absorbing a constant flow of negative news with untold psychological and social consequences. Sidhu and fellow artist Rob Swainston, who marry historic printing processes with 21st century tools, have responded with works designed to make us stop and regain our footing. Their exhibition of woodblock prints, Doomscrolling, interprets 18 moments between 24 May 2020 and 6 January 2021, a stretch for the history books that saw the coronavirus pandemic, Black Lives Matter protests and deadly insurrection at the US Capitol. The project was born after Sidhu and Swainston found themselves bombarded by images from 2020 and after Swainston took photos of an eerily deserted Manhattan under quarantine during morning bike rides. “It was a very strange sight and everything was empty and all you really saw was this very visible homeless population but everyone else was sort of hiding,” the 51-year-old recalls. “Then, all of a sudden, this plywood started to go up all over lower Manhattan in response to the protests. “I was photographing and I was like, wow, this is such an opportunity for someone who works in print media, and knows the potential of woodblock prints, to get this plywood somehow and use it to tell the story of 2020 on plywood that was put up to ‘protect institutions’. It just seemed so poetic.” The artists contacted various institutions asking if they could have the plywood when it came down and got several positive responses, particularly from the art world. Eventually they collected around 120 sheets. It proved the perfect means of expression, in part because woodblock prints have an association with social change movements going back at least 500 years, in part because the distressed, beaten up material could convey an inherently messy story. Sidhu explains: “In this case, woodcut was the appropriate medium because these prints are made with the paper directly touching the wood, which was outside during these protests and collecting graffiti and was scratched and gouged and drilled into and weathered. All this is still visible when you look up close at those prints.” To create a montage effect, the artists overlaid image upon image, as if scrolling through a computer screen or mobile phone. Sidhu and Swainston used art historical references such as a horse taken from Albrecht Dürer’s The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, hands from Käthe Kollwitz and heavy shadows from Edvard Munch. The 18 prints each represent a specific image or event, including a 24 May New York Times front page “US DEATHS NEAR 100,000, AN INCALCULABLE LOSS” and, a day later, the police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis, which sparked daily demonstrations against racial injustice in New York and other cities. Swainston, who has an academic background in both art and political science, recalls: “There were images that just circulated and circulated and there were some that in New York City circulated a lot among us and our friends. “I participated in some of the protests that went daily from Prospect Park to McCarren Park in Williamsburg. When the curfew happened, the police started to be aggressive to anyone who was out on the street after seven o’clock and lots of images were passed around. He continues: “Some of these events were very clear that we wanted to do something with, like the day in DC that the parks police gassed everybody and Trump went out and held up the Bible in front of St John’s Church. “There are some other dates that were harder: OK, how do we talk about Covid? Do we look at the dates that have the largest death day? Some of them were a little more nebulous as to what the exact date was but they were feelings that were happening in the time. Social distancing, hospitalisations, memorial images that we just wanted to bring into the series to tell the whole story.” One print focuses on Kyle Rittenhouse, who was 17 when, armed with an AR-style semiautomatic rifle, he shot and killed two people and wounded a third at a protest in Kenosha, Wisconsin. In court, Rittenhouse argued that he fired in self-defence and was acquitted on all charges. But the first piece they finished was the last in chronological order: the storming of the US Capitol in Washington by a pro-Trump mob intent on overturning the election result on 6 January. It felt like a natural bookend. Sidhu explains: “There was an urgency in that moment of January 6 so we all felt that it was time to actually do something about it. For us, as artists, that first thing that we could do was to take that imagery and just get it out, try to do something with it.” Many people, including doomscrolllers, have felt overwhelmed by the past two years. The artists hope to disrupt the idea of these moments as fixed and inevitable. Instead, they argue, their montages keep the moments alive with unfixed meanings, a clue that dialogue and social change are still possible. Sidhu, who was born in Ludhiana, India, says: “It encourages a re-examination of everything that’s happened rather than moving on as if these issues are resolved. We see Covid coming back with Omicron. With the show opening on January 6, it’s already an opportunity to reflect on that date and everything that comes with it.” Swainston adds: “We hope that, by putting it out there, by keeping the images in circulation, they continue to have possibility and don’t just become fixed in the past and we just move on from it. We are still in this moment in my mind and these culture wars that are brewing in the United States that threaten to pull us all apart. “These unresolved issues of race, of gun violence, all of these things we can’t put them behind us and just keep living in them. We need to start to address them and, in our society, it is through images that we are processing information now in a more and more significant way.” The departure of Trump from the White House, and his removal from Twitter, seemed to invite a little less doomscrolling in 2021, but persistent crises including the Omicron variant suggest the phenomenon will not be going away soon. Still, Swainston hopes the exhibition, which opens at the Petzel Gallery on New York’s upper east side on 6 January, can help to wean visitors off their fast food media diet. “We talk about the way that the media environments now are set up to reinforce what you’ve already seen but the way it’s happening is that images get thrown at you and they stack on top of each other, and the next one resonates with the next one. We become very fast in our reading of image; we understand right away. “This is a relatively new thing. The way that humans looked at images in previous environments, they were slower. We would take a long time with a painting or a photo or we would see the pieces first and then the whole. It just has consequences in the way that we look at images.” He adds: “We hope that this series slows people down. This is what you see, but as you’re looking, more and more unfolds, more and more is there, and it gives space for the viewer to continue to look and discover and make up their own mind about what these mean.” Doomscrolling opens on 6 January at the Petzel Gallery in New YorkIt’s been 20 years since pallid faces, dark eyes and black clothes haunted UK secondary schools and shopping centres. While some might argue that they never left, merely retreating into the shadows, the consensus for 2022 is that goth style is returning to mainstream culture with a vengeance. There are some differences this time. The modern goth is more likely to take inspiration from ultra-glam “hot goth girlfriends” such as Kourtney Kardashian and Megan Fox and the fashion world darlings Rick Owens and Yohji Yamamoto than the Marilyn Manson-loving self-proclaimed outsiders of the early 2000s. They are also more likely to integrate elements of a darker style of dressing into their wardrobes than to subscribe to a whole culture and lifestyle, with shopping platforms and social media sites reporting huge increases in searches containing the word “goth”. “At one point there was an idea goth was ‘strange and unusual’, but it doesn’t feel that way any more. I wouldn’t like to say it’s mainstream, but it’s much more visible,” said Catherine Spooner, a professor at Lancaster University who specialises in gothic culture. Andrew Groves, professor of fashion design at the University of Westminster, sees the new goth style as a reaction to the preening, gym-honed, Instagram-filtered perfection of the 2010s. “It has become unappealing. Instead, smudged eyeliner, bitten oxblood lips, and a deathly pallor have once again become enticing.” He said it’s unsurprising that people are looking for ways to express darker emotions aesthetically when “we have been overwhelmed with news about death, mortality, and illness” since the beginning of the pandemic, while school closures have lent themselves to a mood of “romantic disengagement, sullenness, and introspection” among teens. The clothing resale app Depop, which is popular with Gen Z consumers, reported a 20% increase in “goth” and “gothcore” searches over the past three months, including a 200% spike for “black corset top” in October. Sophie Daly, who runs a goth clothing business on Depop, said the new approach to goth style is to mix and match influences as online communities have connected previously disparate tribes, united by a love for sombre palettes and dark thoughts. She said: “Visually a goth could literally be anything now. In 2022, goths don’t even have to wear black.” She said videos on TikTok, such as those under the #goth hashtag, which has 8.8bn views, are fuelling the interest in vintage goth fashion, with some sellers auctioning pieces for up to £350 due to high demand. The shopping platform Lyst said searches for collections by the cult goth designer Rick Owens, which feature black leather and punk details such as rips and zips, have grown by 200% this year. Searches for black items have grown 169%, while chokers have grown by 81% and fishnet tops by 196%. Pinterest data, meanwhile, points to the goth aesthetic influencing everyday life. Searches for “goth business casual”, described as “Wednesday Addams goes to the office”, are up by 90% this year, with goth baby clothes up 120%, goth decor by 85%, and searches for goth pyjamas up 185%. This is echoed in the online communities building around the topic. On Reddit, the r/Goth community has grown by 35% over the past year to reach 101,000 members, while r/GothStyle had a 136% increase to 115,000 members. The focus this time around has been on personal style and the way it has inspired and been lifted from high fashion, with cyber goths haunting the runway in Balenciaga’s spring-summer 2022 show, Givenchy showcasing 90s teen goths, and Olivier Theyskens taking inspiration from gothic brides. There is also a goth influence on culture more broadly. Taylor Swift’s latest album references folk horror, Willow Smith has a subversive new look, and the 18-year-old singer-songwriter Olivia Rodrigo, who sports a “goth princess” aesthetic, references the goth-adjacent emo subculture of the mid-2000s in her songs. Daniel Rodgers, a fashion and culture writer, said the new goth aesthetic taps into the early noughties revival that has defined youth fashion and culture in recent years. It’s not a return of the “deathly looking goth”, he said, but rather a way to “gesture at subculture more generally” by drawing on a blend of earlier dark style tribes, including emo, punk and strands of goth such as the Camden-inspired cyber-goth look. Rodgers charts the current moment from the eboys and egirls phenomenon of the late 2010s, where young gamers popularised a style that combined elements of goth and emo with Japanese anime and cosplay. He sees this and the current iteration of goth as reflecting the way culture develops in the internet. “We’re in a constant cycle of looking back and reproducing things, spewing up references on to the table, which is like a buffet young people can choose from.”Some wild birds can be killed in order to protect game birds bred for shooting in England, the government has ruled, in an update to guidance on general shooting licences. General licences give broad permissions to shoot certain species of wild birds to protect livestock, aid conservation, and preserve health and public safety. The new licences have been issued for two years rather than one, with government officials saying this is to provide “stability and certainty” to shooters. General licences are permissive licences, meaning users do not need to apply for them but they must comply with their terms and conditions when undertaking licensed acts. There has been debate over whether pheasants, partridges and grouse count as livestock, as they are wild birds, and so whether predators can be shot in order to protect them. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) has released a new definition of “livestock” including these birds, to give explicit permission to shoot carrion crows, jackdaws, magpies and rooks. It reads: “‘Livestock’ is as defined in section 27(1) of the 1981 [Wildlife and Countryside] Act. For the purpose of this licence, this expression also includes game birds kept in an enclosure or which are free roaming but remain significantly dependent on the provision of food, water or shelter by a keeper for their survival. This does not include supplementary feeding.” A Defra spokesperson said the change was made after gamekeepers asked for more clarity about whether game birds counted as livestock. The new language makes it clear that wild predatory birds cannot be shot under this licence in order to protect wild game birds that are not dependent on food and shelter from humans, but they can be shot under the licence if they are. The official added: “The new general licences have been updated to clarify when they apply and make clear when a game bird ceases to be livestock and becomes a wild bird. None of the changes alter the activities licence users are authorised to do. “We continue to work with stakeholders to ensure our licensing process is robust for wildlife and workable for users going forward.” Conservation groups raised concerns that the update could mean an increase in the killing of wild birds. The RSPB’s head of site conservation policy, Kate Jennings, said: “If this update to the livestock general licence goes beyond a reclassification of terminology and implies that it will lead to an increase in the killing of wild birds to protect game bird interests, then given the nature and climate emergency we find ourselves in, this would be a massive backward step for nature conservation in this country.” The general licences have been challenged by wildlife groups including the BBC presenter Chris Packham’s Wild Justice. His group has challenged the legislation and in 2019 managed to get it suspended. Wild Justice has since managed to secure changes including removing all gull species, and the places they can be used no longer include sites of special scientific interest and other nature reserves. • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. The headline of an earlier version inaccurately said the law had been changed; it is the guidance on licences that has changed by introducing a new definition of “livestock”. The sub-heading and introduction was also amended to clarify this.An estimated 12 people a day died or disappeared while trying to reach Spain in 2021, more than double the total for the previous year. The 4,404 refugees who perished included 205 children, according to Caminando Fronteras (Walking Borders). In a report published on Monday, the NGO noted that the number of deaths was more than twice the 2,170 deaths and disappearances recorded in 2020. “It’s horrible,” said Helena Maleno, who leads Caminando Fronteras. “These are the worst figures we’ve seen since we began keeping count in 2007.” The report drew a direct link between the steep rise in the number of deaths and European efforts to curb migration in the Mediterranean. As a result, refugees have turned increasingly to the treacherous Canary Islands route – one of the most dangerous crossings into Europe – setting off in unstable vessels that are often unfit to face the fierce currents of the Atlantic. Up until 28 December last year, 22,200 migrants landed on the shores of the Canary Islands, according to the Spanish government. Caminando Fronteras estimated that 4,016 people died or vanished along the route, suggesting that for approximately every six people who make it to the Spanish archipelago, one person dies or disappears. The figures compiled by Caminando Fronteras are drawn from the work it does in fielding distress calls from migrants or their families and alerting coastguards and maritime rescue services. The NGO also logs missing vessels and works with relatives to identify the missing and the dead. “The 4,404 is the minimum number,” said Maleno. “The truth is that there could be more victims that we aren’t aware of.” Boats en route to Spain often vanish without a trace, in part explaining why the bodies of 95% of those who died or disappear are never recovered. People who were lost attempting to reach Spain came from 21 countries, from the Ivory Coast to Sri Lanka, many fleeing armed conflict or the consequences of climate change. Those who do make it to Spain, particularly via the Canary Islands route, are often haunted by the journey. “The waves were taller than the dinghy,” one survivor told Caminando Fronteras after a voyage in which 15 of the 58 people onboard were lost. “The waves washed people away, sweeping them off the boat,” they said. Another man from Mali described spending days lost at sea as food and water supplies dwindled and nearly all of the 59 people onboard succumbed to starvation. After 19 days adrift, rescuers found him and two others barely alive. He had spent much of the trip force-feeding a young boy who also managed to survive. “I would open his mouth to feed him a scrap of biscuit with the bit of water that was left and tell him to swallow,” he said. “He looked dead.” On Monday, Caminando Fronteras called on the Spanish government to take urgent steps to address the rise in deaths, noting that more than three decades had passed since a body turned up on the shores of Andalusia, in what is believed to be the first known death of a Spain-bound refugee. “In those 34 years, the idea that people can die by crossing a border has become something that people have accepted as normal,” said Maleno. “It’s not normal.” The International Organization for Migration has described 2021 as the deadliest for migration routes to and within Europe since 2018. At least 1,315 people have died on the central Mediterranean crossing, while at least 41 lives were lost at the land border between Turkey and Greece. In November, 27 refugees, including a pregnant woman and three children, drowned in the Channel while trying to cross from France to the UK.Antonio Conte says he has nothing to prove to anyone at Chelsea as he prepares for a first return to Stamford Bridge since his sacking in 2018. The manager goes back with Tottenham on Wednesday night for the Carabao Cup semi-final first leg and it is sure to be emotional, given the relationships he made during his two seasons in west London. Conte won the Premier League in his first campaign, seeing off the challenge of Spurs – then managed by Mauricio Pochettino – and he followed it up with an FA Cup triumph in his second season, his team beating Manchester United in the final. It was not enough, however, to earn him a longer stay. Conte’s focus is on the cup game and managing a return of Covid cases to his squad. After the large outbreak in December that led to Spurs being forced to postpone their Europa Conference League tie against Rennes and the league fixture at Brighton, Conte said the club were “checking a couple of situations about Covid” with regard to players, although he was “not sure 100% that they’re going to miss the game”. Yet Conte did acknowledge the romantic side of the story that pits him against the club that gave him his first opportunity to work in England. “I spent two seasons where I created a good relationship with players, staff, people who work at Chelsea,” Conte said. “We did a really good job and I think in my position I mustn’t prove anything to anyone. I’m a manager that has experience and continues to have experience and do important jobs at other teams. It’ll be a pleasure for me to come back to Stamford Bridge.” Conte is acutely aware that Spurs have won nothing since 2008 but he also knows that Chelsea are at a different stage of development. “At this moment, Chelsea is more ready than us to win,” he said. “They won the Champions League last season. We have a lot of space for improvement, to be a team with aspirations to win. To use the verb ‘to win’ is more simple than winning because to win you have to build something important, be solid, have an important squad. Then you’re ready to win. Otherwise you have to hope.” On the disruption of Covid cases, Conte said: “We are living with this situation – not only Tottenham but all the clubs. We have to be ready to find always the right solutions. For sure it’s not simple for any coach to change the plan you have, especially when you play many games in a short time. You make a plan in your mind and sometimes you arrive and players are positive so you have to totally change your plan.” Meanwhile, the Premier League confirmed that between 27 December and 2 January, there were 94 new positive cases of Covid-19. This figure, which came from 14,250 tests, includes players and staff from the 20 clubs. It was the first week-by-week decrease in positive results for eight weeks.Covid-positive nurses are being recalled to work in hospitals across New South Wales – in breach of state health protocols – as hospital managers resort to desperate measures to staff facilities buckling under the Omicron outbreak. Guardian Australia has been contacted by multiple nurses working across several hospitals in the state who are alarmed at finding themselves working alongside Covid-positive colleagues, as 2,500 health workers are in isolation across NSW. The public hospitals span three local health districts in NSW and include major Sydney hospitals and smaller regional facilities. All of the nurses say they had received unofficial, verbal advice from their hospitals in recent days that Covid-positive nurses could leave their mandated isolation to work, provided they were asymptomatic and wore personal protective equipment. However, some claimed they saw Covid-positive nurses on wards with obvious symptoms, including coughing and sneezing. At one Sydney hospital, the Covid-positive nurses appeared to be limited to working in Covid wards. However, at other hospitals, nurses said they were treating non-Covid patients and interacting with Covid-negative staff. “God help any non-Covid patient in a hospital right now. They are sitting ducks,” one nurse told Guardian Australia. “It’s like everyone has given up. I’m absolutely devastated. It’s a circus … positive nurses working with healthy staff and non-Covid patients.” Protocols for healthcare workers in NSW have been loosened in recent days, including an exemption announced on New Year’s Eve to allow workers who are close contacts that should be isolating for seven days, to return to work if they are asymptomatic and deemed essential by their employer. However, a NSW Health spokesperson confirmed that Covid-positive nurses do not fall under this exemption. “Healthcare workers in NSW who test positive to Covid-19 are required to isolate at home and are not permitted to return to work until they are released from isolation,” they said. Nurses who expressed concern about allowing Covid-positive colleagues to return to work stressed that the advice was given in an unofficial capacity, as managers were left with few other options to ensure patients could be cared for. The nurses requested their names and employers remain confidential to avoid identifying them. The revelation comes days after Guardian Australia obtained a leaked memo that revealed critically understaffed public hospitals in NSW were planning to fly in nurses from overseas. Desperate attempts also included managers begging local staff to cancel leave and offering $250 daily incentives on top of public holiday penalties. Meanwhile, the western NSW LHD is offering nurses $823 a week on top of their wage to work in the region during January. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has said the health system “remains strong”, and his health minister, Brad Hazzard, has also defended the system. On Monday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, backed up these comments, insisting Australia’s health system could manage the “very different virus” of the Omicron variant. However, the NSW Nurses and Midwives Association general secretary, Brett Holmes, accused governments of presenting an overly optimistic version of the state of the health system. Holmes said reports of Covid-positive nurses returning to work “shows the level of desperation we’ve got into our health system”. “To try and force potential sick and infectious staff into the hospitals to work, that places everyone at risk.” Holmes told Guardian Australia he was “absolutely opposed” to allowing Covid-positive nurses to return to work before finishing their isolation and testing negative – but noted such a policy had occurred in parts of Europe and the United States during the peaks of their outbreaks. “There has been discussion about this here, because it’s been done overseas, and talk of the idea is no doubt rife amongst desperate managers looking for staff. They might well be preparing for this,” Holmes said. Holmes added the practice risked spreading Covid to vulnerable patients in hospital for unrelated reasons. “We know these types of patients can die with Covid. If nurses [are] knowingly being told to go in there and play a bit of Russian roulette as to whether their PPE is perfect all the time, it’s an extraordinary expectation to work in those circumstances,” Holmes said. Do you know more about pressure in the healthcare system? Contact elias.visontay@theguardian.com. You can remain anonymous.Disability groups say the Morrison government’s proposed religious discrimination bill will erode the rights of people with a disability and allow legally protected “hurt and humiliation”. In a submission to the parliamentary joint committee on human rights, more than two dozen disability support organisations have urged the Coalition to abandon the bill in its current form, saying there is widespread concern about its “harmful impacts”. “We support religious freedom as essential to a thriving democracy, but not at the expense of the rights and freedoms of others,” the group’s submission states. “The religious discrimination bill will encourage prejudice, stigma, denigration, division, and discrimination against people with disability, and undermine all efforts to build and sustain an inclusive Australia.” The organisations – which include peak advocacy groups People With Disability Australia and the Australian Federation of Disability Organisations – raise particular concern about the bill’s controversial statement of belief clause. This part of the proposed legislation says “statements of belief” do not breach discrimination laws, giving legal protection to statements of religious belief or “a belief that the person genuinely considers to relate to the fact of not holding a religious belief”. Examples given in the submission include a person with a disability being told they are suffering a “punishment from God” for their, or their parents’, sins. Or being told they may be “healed” by prayer or by “living virtuously”. Disability advocates say this clause, which would override existing state legislation aimed at protecting people with disability, will result in more discrimination. It warns that a “power imbalance” already exists between people with a disability and the large proportion of disability support services that are faith-based and control the delivery of personal care, housing, community access and emergency relief. “We are concerned the religious discrimination bill will allow people with disability to be demeaned by statements of religious belief that are permitted under this bill, creating an unsafe and harmful environment,” it states. A separate submission from Disability Voices Tasmania says the proposed bill, which was first promised in 2018 and is now in its third iteration, “introduces the right to discriminate in the name of religion”. “People with disability constantly experience ridicule, offensive assumptions, bias, and intimidation. It does not matter whether this arises from hate, prejudice, misguided assumptions, and attitudes towards disability, or because of religious belief – or one person’s interpretation of religious belief,” the group’s chair, Michael Small, said. “What matters is the hurt, humiliation, and long-term impact we experience as a result of it.” Small said the legislation would override the Tasmanian Anti-Discrimination Act which prohibits conduct that a reasonable person would anticipate would offend, humiliate, intimidate, insult, or ridicule another person on the basis of disability. The proposed overriding of state and territory anti-discrimination laws has also been criticised by equality advocates, who fear protections for the LGBTQ+ community would also be undermined, including state laws banning conversion practices. The Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, told federal parliament’s human rights committee in December that the proposal to override state laws would weaken equal rights. “It’s anathema to our democracy that state laws could be overridden in this way and that these hard-fought-for protections that have existed for decades, in many cases, could be unwound and overridden and undermined by this bill.” The proposed legislation is being scrutinised by two parliamentary inquiries due to report by 4 February – shortly before the scheduled resumption of parliament. The government was unable to pass the legislation in the final sitting of 2021 given deep divisions within the Coalition party room over the bill. Labor is reserving its position on the legislation until the inquiries are completed. But the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has said any new religious discrimination laws should not come at “the expense of discriminating on the basis of other people’s characteristics”.A positive Covid case has been recorded at the Newmarch House aged care home in Sydney, where 19 people died during an outbreak in 2020, amid growing concern at the strain on the sector’s workforce. As of Monday, there were 1,180 active Covid-19 cases in aged care homes across Australia, with more than 550 each in New South Wales and Victoria. In the past seven days, the NSW health department has reported the deaths of eight aged care home residents as a result of coronavirus infections acquired inside the facilities. Federal government data suggests a rise in deaths in aged care has coincided with the move by most states to relax restrictions. In 2021 91 people died with Covid in aged care across Australia up to 22 October. By 17 December that figure had more than doubled to 206. At the same time the workforce in NSW, which has experienced record-breaking case numbers, has come under increasing pressure. The Guardian spoke to three aged care workers in the state, all of whom did not wish to be named out of concern for their employment situation. Those in metropolitan areas described a feeling of “desperation” and burnout, with workers in some facilities pulling 16-hour shifts to cover gaps in the workforce and nearby hospitals refusing to take new Covid-positive patients unless “absolutely necessary”. One worker at a regional facility in the state’s north said six staff had quit due to low pay and burnout, leaving them woefully unprepared in the event of an outbreak. “I think we’re going to get Covid in the facility,” they said. “I think we’re going to lose more staff. I think the current staff who are willing to stay are going to burn out and get sick themselves. I think we’re going into a state of disaster. People will die.” On Sunday the operator of Newmarch, Anglicare, notified residents’ families that a staff member had tested positive for the virus after a “community exposure”. Newmarch said another member of staff and a resident had been identified as close contacts, but that no further positive cases had been identified as yet. “Our highest priority is the safety and wellbeing of residents and staff, while providing the best possible care to residents in the home,” Newmarch said in its email to the families. “As a further precaution, PCR testing of [the] staff and residents will take place today.” The case has put the families of residents on high alert, prompting memories of the devastating outbreak in which 37 residents tested positive and 19 died after a staff member worked a shift while infectious in April 2020. At the time it was the deadliest outbreak of the pandemic in Australia. “My heart sank, it really did,” Elizabeth Lane, whose mother is a resident at Newmarch, told the Guardian. “My mum is at the end of life and the idea that there could be another outbreak and I wouldn’t be able to see her or be with her if she passed away, nothing would break my heart more. “I don’t know if people realise the impact of what happened on the residents there, the decline in a lot of the older people. Because of the lockdown and everything that has happened, you go in there and the atmosphere is just so quiet.” Gerard Hayes, the national president of the Health Services Union, said he believed the situation was going to get “dramatically worse” around the country over the next few weeks. “I would usually have an optimistic view that if we apply this or apply that, we can manage through. I don’t have an answer this time,” Hayes said. “This problem manifested itself some time ago [and] we chose to do very little about it. “Both the government and opposition have been talking a big game on aged care until it’s come to now. What are [the] Labor and Liberal [parties] going to do for the people who actually built this country, who put us in a position we are in today? “I need answers – from both sides of government. At the moment all I’m hearing about in the federal sphere is nuclear submarines and bullet trains.” Hayes said the low pay in the industry, with a base rate of $23 an hour, was not enough to attract and keep new workers under normal conditions, let alone during a time of crisis. Paul Sadler, the chief executive of Aged and Community Services Australia, said pay was one of a number of issues that had not been addressed since the royal commission and the first wave of the pandemic. “What we are seeing now is federal and state governments warning all businesses they could be losing 10 to 25% of their staff, to a period of time when they’re Covid-positive and can’t come into work,” Sadler said. “I think our members feel like it’s an impossible situation on a daily basis for the moment. They’re trying to balance the risk; they’re trying to enable residents to have the best life possible; they’re trying to keep out a deadly disease; they’re trying to manage staff rosters when there’s immense pressure on the availability of staff.” “It’s the toughest time aged care services have ever been through.” • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for the federal health department said it was working closely with states and territories to provide surge workforce support when needed. “As soon as the department is notified of a case in an aged care worker or resident, a case manager will be appointed to support the facility,” the spokesperson said. “This includes facilitating access to commonwealth programs and supports such as PPE and surge workforce. “In addition, surge workforce support continues to be provided to supplement aged care providers’ strategies. This includes access to dedicated nursing staff and support from agency workers, as well as agreements with private hospitals to provide support if states seek to utilise this resource.” The federal government changed guidelines on Saturday to allow employees who are close contacts to return to work earlier from isolation where a lack of staff was having a “high impact” on services. A national cabinet meeting on Wednesday is expected to address the issue of staffing in aged care.The roulette wheel is spinning, the ball already rattling towards its final destination. Boris Johnson has bet the house on his Omicron gamble and now there’s no going back. The bullishness of ministers insisting over the weekend that they see no case for further restrictions glosses over the fact that it may now be too late for that anyway, given an estimated one in 25 people in England already had the virus before New Year’s Eve. Double or quits it is, then, as a country drags itself back out to work and school after the Christmas hibernation period. We’re about to find out exactly what it means to experience unprecedented levels of Covid infections, but from a strain that may be less dangerous, at least in the fully vaccinated. Once again, a virus we thought we’d got to know has abruptly shapeshifted and once again, history isn’t necessarily a reliable guide to the present. We’re all back on the seesaw, lurching between hope and fear, never knowing quite what to expect. The novel threat this time is not death on the biblical scale forecast during the first wave – although sadly there will be too many deaths, hospitalisations and cases of long Covid disabling people for months to come – but knock-on chaos and disruption caused by the potential mass infection of key workers, leaving them unable to do their work. We’ve entered an unpredictable world of people who have heart attacks waiting for well over an hour for an ambulance, critical incidents being declared by hospitals that can’t maintain safe staffing levels and large organisations being warned to plan for up to a quarter of their people being off sick or self-isolating. Now imagine what that worst-case scenario might do to the everyday grind of supermarket deliveries, bin collections and bus timetables, let alone to policing or critical infrastructure such as the power and water industries. Education ministers have meanwhile vowed to keep schools and nurseries open wherever possible – rightly given the profound impact we now know closures had on poorer children’s education, and on a vulnerable few who are sadly safer with their teachers than with their parents – but are simultaneously letting heads know they can send year groups home if they have to. For secondary schools in England and Wales hit by serious staff shortages, in practice that would probably mean prioritising GCSE and A-level classes for pupils who need to sit their mocks this term but switching to home schooling for other years if necessary, something already happening in some parts of the country before Christmas as Omicron hit. Nurseries and primary schools catering for pupils too young to be vaccinated will meanwhile be flinging windows open to the January air and crossing their fingers, knowing that (at least according to the Office for National Statistics) about one in 15 children aged between two and 11 had Covid before Christmas. Since many key workers are also parents who can’t easily do their jobs if their child gets sent home sick, we’re probably about to be reminded that childcare is the fourth emergency service, without which the other three would struggle very quickly. In other words, it’s time to prepare ourselves at least for the possibility of things getting messy; of everyday life becoming harder and more volatile as Covid jams its spokes into wheels that in good times you barely even notice turning. With luck, that upheaval could be mercifully brief. But any country that nearly ground to a halt overnight thanks to a temporary post-Brexit shortage of fuel tanker drivers and a panicky stampede for petrol should probably have learned by now not to get cocky. Over and over again this virus has reminded us of just how much happens unseen beneath the surface of a functioning society; of how complex our just-in-time modern lives with all their endlessly interconnected moving parts have become, but also how fragile, dependent on things and people we mostly take for granted until brutally reminded not to do so. And that’s why learning to live with this or any other virus, the mantra of those who never want their liberties restricted by government diktat again, doesn’t mean quite what some hope it does. It’s not about ripping off your mask and gleefully forgetting that any of it ever happened, but about building in resilience and learning from the weaknesses exposed by Covid. Rubbing along successfully through what might hopefully be the tail end of a pandemic should mean investing not just in vaccines and antivirals but in more hospital beds and people to staff them, creating enough slack in the system to absorb seasonal Covid surges without having to throw up tent wards in NHS car parks. It’s going to mean well-honed contingency plans for critical industries, better ventilation in schools, and more imaginative answers to the question of protecting people who are shielding or clinically vulnerable than are so far forthcoming from lockdown sceptics bellowing that it’s time everyone was left to get on with their lives. But it may also take something of a shift in national attitudes. Living successfully with Covid-19 will require not just a virus obliging enough not to mutate in more lethal ways but the maturity to self-police sometimes – as plenty did last month by voluntarily side-swerving parties or the pub so they could have Christmas with their families, and as Swedes have always quietly done in what was the unsung element of their country’s no-lockdown policy – and the resilience to live with a degree of unpredictability in life, which is infinitely easier said than done for some. Low-income families especially are likely to need help absorbing the sudden shocks and disruptions this virus is still capable of delivering, even as it hopefully burns itself out. The silver lining to the Omicron cloud is, of course, that it could pass relatively quickly. It’s risky reading too much into data collected over the Christmas holidays when reporting was potentially patchy, but all hopes are now pinned on Britain following the same path as South Africa, where infections seemed to peak relatively quickly before falling back. A rocky few weeks, so the cabinet’s argument goes, beats months of economic and personal misery; better to rip the plaster off and get it over with. Whether that gamble was uncharacteristically shrewd or lethally reckless will become clear enough in the next few days as Omicron spreads from London to the rest of the UK, with hospitalisation rates doubling already across much of the north of England. But right now, the wretched roulette wheel is still spinning, and all most of us can do about it is hold our breath. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistAustralians in regional areas with severe mental health problems will go without help, after “devastating” changes to the telehealth system, psychiatrists warn. Recent federal government reforms removed a 50% loading for some rural psychiatric services, meaning some types of consultations providers will no longer be able to bulk-bill. They will have to absorb the costs or pass them on to patients. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dr Vivienne James, a psychiatrist at Sydney’s Gordon Clinic, says she is “devastated” and her patients will be “distressed” about the changes, which came into effect on 1 January. “It is simply not financially viable for us to continue seeing these patients,” she said. “This will leave many patients distressed and, dare I say it, suicidal, as some of these people are extremely isolated and have little support. They will not be able to pay to see us and will have to be discharged back to their GPs. “Personally, I am devastated by these changes.” Grahame Gee, a credentialed mental health nurse, said it was “unethical” that he and his colleagues were “blindsided” by the changes, which were announced a couple of weeks before Christmas. His patients have complex mental health needs and many also have histories of physical and sexual abuse and intimate partner violence. “Most have limited financial means and struggle to pay gap fees,” he said. “Their recovery depends upon access to this service … I had patients in tears … Others said they would have to cancel their appointments.” On 13 December the federal health department announced $106m to make telehealth a permanent part of primary healthcare. On 16 December it announced changes to the Medical Benefits Scheme, including two new telehealth items, 17 amended items and the scrapping of 128 items, which included item 288 for video psychiatric consultations through GP referrals. Guardian Australia revealed how other changes would affect patients, particularly those with cancer. Assoc Prof Vinay Lakra, the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists president, said most of the reforms were welcome, but that fixing some gaps meant others appeared. “People living in a rural area couldn’t afford to see a psychiatrist, but [the rural loading] allowed them to see a psychiatrist without paying a gap. If you’re bulk-billing and that loading is removed, some providers will pass on the cost to the patients and patients might cancel their appointment.” The rural loading was introduced about 10 years ago to encourage the use of telehealth in country Australia, an incentive the health department says is no longer needed. Lakra said that before Covid, the psychiatric community wanted it phased out rather than removed and only phased out if there was another system in place to ensure affordability and accessibility. Covid “hasn’t gone”, he said, and the college wants the MBS item extended for another year. “Twelve months is enough time to prepare a plan … With item 288 there was not enough time,” he said. In a statement, the health department said the new arrangements consolidated telehealth into a single national program, “ensuring universal and equitable access”, and that rural patients will have access to other bulk-billing options. The loading was to encourage the take-up of video consultations and help practitioners adopt new technologies. But according to the statement, there are about 10 times more telephone consultations than there are consultations that attract the loading and more than twice as many video consultations that do not attract the loading. “This is about improving access to video and telephone services provided by GPs, medical specialists and other health professionals that reflect clinical best practice and provides greater flexibility in the healthcare system, depending on the services required,” the statement said. “It is backed by an additional $106m over four years and part of a $308.6m investment by the government to support Australia’s primary care system.” • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636This is not a unique story. I’m trapped in a house with my husband and two teens, and we’re all sick. My 19-year-old son was the first to go down on Tuesday, 28 December. In the morning he developed stomach cramps, vomiting, a migraine and a high fever. I bought him the last rapid antigen test at the local servo. It came up as positive. And so began our efforts to be included in New South Wales’ latest Covid figures. A week later and we are still not part of that count. I live in northern NSW and last Tuesday was a public holiday. I rang three public hospitals to find out which testing centres were open and learnt that every testing centre was overrun and our chances of getting in were Buckley’s. I was undeterred. My son had severe asthma as a child. Would Omicron trigger his asthma? I’m probably an anxious mother, but I wanted an official diagnosis in case he needed hospital care. I also believe that the state and federal governments need to chart the spread of infection because it’s their job to deliver resources to hospitals and tighten pandemic restrictions to slow infection. I was determined for us to be included in the Covid count. On Tuesday afternoon we drove to the Byron drive-through testing clinic – the security guard said they couldn’t test any more people. We then headed to Ballina only to be turned away. Lismore and Casino’s drive-throughs were also closed. We went home. My son’s temperature was above 38C that night despite the Nurofen and Panadol. The headaches also started for me. At 6am on Wednesday, my feverish son dragged himself out of bed and I drove him back to a drive-through testing clinic. It was almost 20C, but he wore a hoodie, and brought a blanket and box of tissues. By 9am we’d crawled to the front of the drive-through queue. I told the nurse he had a positive RAT and a history of severe asthma. She said his results would be fast-tracked and back in 50 hours. I was surprised that 50 hours was considered fast, but still grateful he was a priority. We drove home from the testing centre and into the twilight zone. The whole family became unwell, and days of high temperatures, strange dreams, headaches, dizziness and exhaustion followed. Since the summer influx of visitors to the northern rivers, one member of my family has received a Covid exposure site alert every second day. It has been like playing dodgem cars with Covid. We got hit. Our region is popular with tourists so they add to rapidly increasing case numbers, but it also has a high percentage of elderly and First Nations residents and a limited number of ICU beds. I hope our health system holds in coming weeks. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has told journalists: “We will tailor our response to the situation that comes. If evidence changes, we will have targeted restrictions in place.” For seven days, we have been trying to contribute to “the evidence”. Yesterday – 122 hours after being swabbed – my son and I received our positive results so I anticipate we will be in today’s figure, exactly a week after he became sick. My husband and daughter will surely be added to the numbers having also been tested. The questions I keep coming back to now are: is the testing system so slow because labs are under-resourced, and the state government did not plan for a contagious new variant and Christmas travel and celebrations causing a surge in cases? Or are numbers rising so quickly it’s simply impossible for labs to keep up? Should we consider Victoria’s lead and look at allowing people to upload RAT results? What is clear though is the latest numbers being given out by government clearly do not reflect daily infection rates. I’ve come to think of the NSW Covid-19 figures as being like a Hubble space telescope – reporting back what happened light years ago.Royal Chant – Sowing Doubt in Magnetic Fields For fans of: The Verve, Slowdive, the Warlocks Port Macquarie two-piece Royal Chant are the type of perennially on-tour rock band that no longer exists outside of rock docos about Midnight Oil. They’ve been tirelessly working the pubs and clubs of every cranny of Australia while spitting out excellent albums without any lapse in quality or spirit. Sowing Doubt in Magnetic Fields is a mighty shoegaze epic, with huge synths and guitars draped across a dreamy vocal, echoed to infinity and mixed as if performed from atop a mountain. Across eight albums, Royal Chant have proven they can tackle any style in the wider rock canon – and this more expansive sound is a very welcome juncture. Let’s hope they stay on the mountain awhile. For more: The band’s entire catalogue is worthy of your time. Just dive in. Augie March – Clay For fans of: Holly Throsby, Antony and the Johnsons, Leonard Cohen Glenn Richards weaves the most delicate melodies on which to drop his weighty lyrical concepts: on love, life, loss and all the other big Ls that have concerned poets for millennia. Augie March has never betrayed a sense of their own time, with ornate arrangements, antiquated language and songs that slowly unfurl as if being pedalled out through a dusty pianola roll. The basic tracks for Clay were recorded in January 2020, before being shelved for all the obvious considerations. Throughout 2021, Richards pieced together the rest of the song, which he confessed had “been pretty much in the ground as far as I was concerned” before he revisited it. The result is a masterful next chapter for one of Australia’s true treasures. For more: Augie March are touring their debut record, Sunset Studies, in March, in celebration of its 20th anniversary. New album Bloodsport &amp; Porn is out now. Tame Impala – No Choice For fans of: Late Night Sessions, Phoenix, Ty Segall Recorded during the sessions for The Slow Rush and held back due to reasons of taste or timing, it’s not surprising that No Choice slots firmly into the album it was born of: another slice of space-R&amp;B that finds Kevin Parker floating further still into the pop realm, now as much a student of Donna Summer as Donovan. With Parker’s favourite flange setting skipping across the entire track, and guitar solos so fuzzed out they resemble vuvuzelas, this is three-and-a-half minutes of smoked-out bliss. Detractors may point out this is more of the same; fans will love it for this very fact. For more: The Slow Rush deluxe edition is out 18 February. Georgia Maq – Joe Rogan For fans of: Robyn, Doja Cat, Camp Cope Since a very public romantic breakup (at least in indie rock circles), Camp Cope’s Georgia Maq has made no secret of her “historically bad taste”, as she puts it. The song Joe Rogan is not an ode to the divisive bobble-headed podcaster, but a slight on the specific types of men who hero-worship him: who lecture women during first dates; who are turned off by women with opinions; who mansplain perceived inadequacies via lengthy, angry text messages (one of which appears to be captured on the cover art to this single). Music-wise, this is sparkling synth-driven pop, much in the vein of Maq’s solo debut Pleaser, with a sharp message – “there is nothing more dangerous than a man who thinks consent is lame” – and a chorus of friends echoing Maq’s bad taste via a series of voice messages. It’s both fun and frightening. For more: Listen to 2021 single Someone Stranger, with Alice Ivy. Babe Rainbow – Smash the Machine For fans of: Treetops, Donovan, MGMT Babe Rainbow deal sun-drenched, lysergic-dripping psychedelia from the back of their touring VW bus, the type of music that casts a bloodshot eye back at the 1960s without ever slipping into parody or pastiche. Smash the Machine goes heavy on the flange and social commentary, bemoaning the ever-whirling machines that seem to be taking bigger bites out of our everyday lives. Like label mates King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard, the Byron band are maddeningly prolific; this single follows four quick-fire quality albums. A little more whimsical than the tunes on last year’s Changing Colours, this is the perfect breath of wild sea air to inhale as you enter the new year. For more: Listen to Changing Colours, or 2019’s Today album. Alannah Russack – Places You Love For fans of: The Hummingbirds, Jodi Phillis, Love Positions During the late 1980s, Sydney’s the Hummingbirds were part of a pre-grunge movement that saw acts like the Clouds, Ratcat and the Falling Joys brighten the corners of the country with gleeful pop music: breezy but punchy, developed in garages and small pubs. Vocalist Alannah Russack is still peeling off joyous tunes in the same vein, and fans of her familiar sound will instantly fall for Places You Love – the crystalline guitars, the immediate, effortless melody, and her clear, spirited lilt are all in full flight. Like many songs written in the past few years, this one is about perseverance in the face of adversity – with a hefty dose of nostalgia thrown in for good measure. For more: Russack’s album As Memories Pass Each Other will be out soon. Blackbirds FC – Transport Planes For fans of: Flying Nun, the Church, late 80s the Saints Transport Planes is a song of liminal states, which drifts like a daydream transporting you back to the days of 1980s FM radio, with Jeremy Gronow’s voice a dead ringer for Steve Kilbey, a chorus that will stick in your brain for days, perfectly placed backing vocals, references to truckers and Tasmania and transport planes, all driven stick-shift by guitar tones so bright and sunny you need 15+ fluoro zinc to protect you (this is an 80s daydream, remember). For more: Listen to previous single, Island of the Dogs. Hoodoo Gurus – Carry On For fans of: The Sunnyboys, Cheap Trick, Redd Kross Sounding suspiciously vital after 40 years, Hoodoo Gurus’ latest single leaps from the speakers, an immediate power-pop anthem that joins a run of recent one-off singles which suggest that maybe Faulkner and co are gearing up for album number 10 – their first in 12 years. The calls for resilience in the chorus make for a fitting pandemic rallying cry, but this song was actually written pre-Covid (although annexed to a fitting video showing frontline workers struggling with the demands). Hoodoo Gurus are still one of this country’s most underrated gems. For more: Check out recent singles Get Out Of Dodge, and Hung Out to Dry. Wilsn – You Know Better For fans of: Amy Winehouse, Gin Wigmore, Lanie Lane There’s no shortage of smoky vocalists who have cemented themselves in the post-Amy Winehouse neo soul world; students of Ella Fitzgerald, Etta James and Billie Holiday. Ivy League Records’ latest signee, Wilsn, stands above the pack with You Know Better, which sports a truly jaw-dropping vocal and one hell of a killer chorus, making for the type of rare tune that already sounds like a standard. Horn blasts and propulsion drums help set the mood, but it is the singular talent at the centre of things that makes this more than just another diet-Winehouse offering. For more: Wilsn plays 10 February at the Vanguard, Sydney and 19 February at Lulie Tavern, Melbourne. D Henry Fenton – Ruby (Days Gone By) For fans of: Weddings Parties Anything, Ryan Adams With a voice that has shades of Ryan Adams and Roy Orbison in its pure yearning magic, and a story about a heartbreaking custody disrupt, Ruby (Days Gone By) is both a simple, loving ode to a daughter not seen enough and a dark shot at an embittered ex-lover. The first strums sound unmistakably like To Her Door before the track breaks into its own emotive tale of fractured family life and a protagonist that cannot seem to get out of his own way. For more: Check out 2019 album Autumn Sweet for more heartbreakers.Human bodies have a second line of defence against Covid that offers hope in the global fight against the Omicron variant, Australian researchers say. University of Melbourne research, done in conjunction with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, has found T-cells should be able to tackle the virus. Omicron has a higher number of mutations than other variants, which means it can sometimes slip past the antibodies produced by vaccination or infection. But if it does enter the body, the T-cells – white blood cells that originate in the marrow – will attack. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The research has just been published in the peer-reviewed journal Viruses. Co-leader of the research, the University of Melbourne’s Matthew McKay, said while it was a preliminary study, it was “positive news”. “Even if Omicron, or some other variant for that matter, can potentially escape antibodies, a robust T-cell response can still be expected to offer protection and help to prevent significant illness,” he said. “These results overall would suggest that broad escape from T-cells is very unlikely. “Based on our data, we anticipate that T-cell responses elicited by vaccines and boosters, for example, will continue to help protect against Omicron, as observed for other variants. We believe this presents some positive news in the global fight against Omicron.” The team studied fragments of Covid’s viral proteins – called epitopes – from patients that had been vaccinated or infected. Among the epitopes that had the Omicron mutation, more than half were predicted to still be visible to T-cells, HKUST research assistant professor and study co-lead Ahmed Abdul Quadeer said. “This further diminishes the chance that Omicron may escape T-cells’ defences,” he said. The paper’s authors warn that T-cell responses alone do not block infection and therefore prevent transmission. However, the T-cell immunity provides hope of a protection against severe disease. Dr Stuart Turville, from the University of New South Wales’ Kirby Institute, has been studying samples from people infected with Omicron. He said T-cells represent a “pretty good backup” in the immune response. That response is multi-factorial, he said, as both T-cells and B-cells (which produce antibodies) develop a “memory” of the virus that attacks the body. “At the beginning, what gives them that memory is the primary encounter,” Turville said. “If you’re lucky, it’s a vaccination; if you’re unlucky, it’s the first time you’re infected.” University of Sydney’s Prof Robert Booy, who is also a director of the Immunisation Coalition, said T-cells were an “important backup” to antibodies because they recognise different parts of viruses to produce a response to entire cells, not just their proteins. Australia has a long history of T-cell research, he said. Prof Peter Doherty – the patron of the Peter Doherty Institute, which has been providing Covid modelling – won the Nobel prize in 1996 for his work on T-cell-mediated immunity. Booy also pointed to world-first work being done at the Westmead Institute for Medical Research on how long-term immunity to Covid works, and the possibilities of a T-cell vaccine. The new University of Melbourne research also adds to existing international work that shows the importance of T-cells. South African researchers have found that T-cells can robustly protect against Omicron after it has evaded antibodies. A small South African study that has not yet been peer-reviewed also suggested T-cells have a role to play.While 5 million Australians go hungry each year, an estimated 7.3m tonnes of food is wasted. In Australia, up to 25% of all vegetables produced never leave the farm, often because they are too oddly shaped for the grocery store. All the while, these reject fruits and vegetables – also known as “imperfect produce” – remain perfectly good to eat. Though the numbers sound overwhelming, a solution may emerge from the world of small-scale startup subscriptions. Subscription shopping exists not just for the makeup-lovers and book-fanatics. Buying a subscription box of imperfect groceries may just be the most convenient way to simultaneously offload your weekly shop for fresh produce and reduce waste. Good &amp; Fugly, a produce subscription service based in greater Sydney, delivers boxes of fresh produce direct from the farm. Each box includes staple ingredients – such as potatoes, onions and leafy greens – as well as a variety of changing seasonal produce. A small box of fruit and veg, feeding two people for up to five days, sells for $39. A larger box, feeding five people for up to five days, sells for $59. Farmer’s Pick, a Melbourne-based service, has found a home for more than 100 tonnes of fresh, oddly bent and sometimes blemished produce. Straight from local farms, the produce varies week-to-week, and subscription options cater to single and family households, with boxes starting at $35. The service also partners with Alex Makes Meals, donating up to seven meals to Victorians facing food insecurity for every box sold. Harris Farm, the family-owned NSW market chain, offers their own imperfect produce service at a discount of up to 50% off on fresh produce through their Imperfect Picks range online. Or, if you want a curated box to save you the trouble of adding to your cart, buy their Imperfect Picks Value Box for $40. Give the strangely-bent carrot or bumpy potato a try and you’ll support local farmers, reduce your contribution to a growing volume of wasted food each year, and you may just find you consume more fresh produce than ever.Back pain is the most common form of chronic pain, with about 4 million people living with it in Australia. The most effective way to manage chronic back pain is with a multidisciplinary approach, of which exercise is a key component. “Any single treatment in low back pain is never enough by itself,” says Associate Prof Michael Vagg, a pain medicine physician and dean of the faculty of pain medicine at the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists. “But exercise is a fundamental part of recovering from low back pain and managing it if it becomes persistent.” But people who have suffered from back pain for a long time might feel fearful of moving. Dr Matthew Bagg, a physiotherapist and pain scientist at Curtin University, says the first big challenge for people with chronic back pain is understanding that pain is not an accurate indication of the robustness of their body. “Regardless of how they feel, they are not broken, damaged or falling apart.” “If it hurts to do something, people are likely to do less of it,” Vagg says. But those who remain active tend to have better outcomes in the long term. “Even when we experience back pain, it doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t be moving.” “Pain itself isn’t an issue,” agrees Dr Rob Laird, a musculoskeletal physiotherapist. But increasing pain during and after exercise is a red flag, he says. “Exercise should reduce, not increase, pain.” There is limited evidence to suggest that one type of exercise is better than another when it comes to chronic back pain. “The best exercise is one that you will keep doing and enjoy,” Vagg says. Laird says physical activity for chronic back pain should include three domains: strength, mobility, and cardiovascular fitness. Consulting a GP or a physiotherapist before starting an exercise routine for chronic back pain is strongly recommended. But here are some practical tips that can help you stay active. The class: pilates In a study published in October in the Journal of Physiotherapy, Bagg and his colleagues conducted a statistical analysis that combined the results of multiple clinical trials of exercise therapies for people with long-term back pain. They found some evidence suggesting that pilates exercise might have the most significant effects on pain intensity. Pilates classes include a series of exercises that focus on the stability and mobility of the body, particularly the spine, core and pelvic area. It emphasises the “neutral spine position” – the natural curves in our spine that provide stability and mobility for taking on the weight and pressure of our bodies. Pilates exercises also help strengthen legs and gluteal muscles, shoulders and arms. The move: single knee squat Laird advises strengthening lower limb and gluteal muscles because these are the muscles we use when we bend or move from sitting to standing. “If they are underdone, the back muscles have to work harder.” Because exercising legs and glutes does not involve excessively recruiting back muscles, he says, most people feel safe doing it. Laird suggests beginning with the classic pilates roll down and progressing to single knee squats. To start a roll down, imagine standing against a wall, then think of peeling your spine off the wall one vertebra at a time, beginning by tucking the chin in, rolling the neck and slowly going down to the pelvis. Your knees are slightly bent, and you might feel some pressure in your hamstrings. To come back up, roll the pelvis first, then the spine, one vertebra at a time. Neck and head come up last. The second part of the exercise targets the gluteus maximus. Roll down again one vertebra at a time, place one hand on a chair to balance and lift one foot off the ground. Bend the knee of the standing leg, then push through the heel and come back up. Aim to five to 10 repetitions and change side. Reduced mobility of the spine has a poor impact on back function, Laird says. A simple exercise that can help improve back mobility is the cat-cow stretch. Start in a four-point kneeling position with your hands under your shoulders and knees under your hips. Breathing in, allow your stomach to drop down slowly and tilt your pelvis forward. As you exhale, arch your back up by tucking your tailbone in and pulling your belly button in towards your spine. The activity: walking, cycling, swimming Laird says brisk walks, cycling or swimming are great ways to include cardiovascular fitness in your training. These are all activities most people with chronic back pain can do, he says. “Cardiovascular fitness is essential. If you are not fit enough to walk around the block easily, you are going to struggle with life in general, and pain is still going to be a real problem.” The hard pass: running Laird does not encourage taking up running. “Running is not recommended at the start of a recovery plan but can be used in younger patients towards the middle to end of their recovery plan,” he says. “It’s less useful in older patients – over 60 approximately, although there are always some exceptions – because of the impact loading when there is significant degenerative change already present.”It’s 4 July 1987: the Go-Betweens are playing the Roskilde festival in Denmark – one of the largest festivals in Europe; the one you want to play. As a B-grade cult band, we are excited. We’ve been on the road for eons, on an endless European tour for our fifth album Tallulah, before veering to the US and Australia. We’re booked to play at 6pm on one of the smaller stages. I wander around the backstage village and share a cookie with another band member. I had bought the cookie from an ingratiating post-punk hippie. My musician mate disappears. I lean against a tent post. Usually I see many variables, yet I’m fixed. I wonder who might rescue me as time stands still. Crew, musicians and caterers walk past me in slomo. Eventually the ritual of making it to the stage takes over. I find my way to our lot which looks like the dining room of a train carriage. I flop beside three band members. Bob Johnson, our long-serving manager, berates me for looking like a grub. “Look at your T-shirt, it’s covered in stains.” I look down at my mucky white tee and I am Eliza Doolittle picked from the street. The gig is exhilarating. We play with our usual love to a crowd that stretches for ever and who gets us. And after, Chrissie Hynde from the Pretenders walks on to the stage and kisses it because Bob Dylan once stood there. I avoid Geoff Travis from Rough Trade Records – I don’t care that he dropped us for the Smiths; I’m incapable of the cleverness he expects from me. We hang out backstage with the Woodentops and Voice of the Beehive. Fellow Australian band Hoodoo Gurus are on the bill and drive us back to the hotel in Copenhagen. Many musicians are milling in the large, ultramodern foyer of glass, tiles and bulky pot plants. A large staircase descends from the floors above, giving the room a sense of grandeur. Then a commotion. The Hoodoo Gurus’ crew are stuck in the elevator on the first floor. I rush up the stairs, peering in. The Gurus’ tour manager is a large man and he’s struggling. I’m talking him through it when another crew member arrives and we stand, peering in, together. “I want one thing,” says the tour manager trapped in the lift. “Just get her away from me now.” I thought my counselling skills were good but they are not on this day; somehow, they elude me this day. Back in the foyer, Clyde Bramley, bass player with the Gurus, demands that something be done. Where is that firetruck that was called 20 minutes ago? Clyde is maddened. The crew in the lift are disturbed. The foyer is a mass of competing energies – the staff calming, the musicians agitating. Clyde is done. He picks up an enormous pot plant and smashes it to the ground. “Get them some help,” he bawls. With minutes, hurtling down the stairwell, is Michael McMartin, the Gurus’ manager, catching Clyde in a headlock, holding him tight to his chest on the stairs till he calms. Robert Vickers, the Go-Betweens’ bass player, whispers to me: “I know what that feels like?” I ask: “What do you mean?” He replies, face as dead as a dead pan: “The pressure of touring. Late nights, early mornings, hurry up and wait, always trying to do your best, I know how Clyde feels.”Getting caught in the rain is depicted on screen with near-comic frequency. From make-out scenes in Nicholas Sparks film to the drama of Shawshank Redemption and Point Break, stormy skies have long been a marker of heightened emotions, desperate declarations and a willingness to well, get wet. With La Niña weather patterns already making this a particularly wet Australian summer, on the upside, we can plan grand romantic gestures with a little more oomph. But this doesn’t mean our clothes have to suffer. Here’s how to care for your outfit after that dramatic downpour pash. The 101 When you get home after being caught in the rain, assess what you’re wearing and how drenched it is to determine what to do next. Corey Simpson, a communications manager for clothing company Patagonia, says: “Some material may not need any care after being caught in the rain; others, like natural fabrics, may need to be dried.” Garments like coats and jackets that have natural water resistance can just be shaken out or wiped off, while t-shirts, jumpers and pants that have absorbed rainwater will require more attention. Once you’ve taken wet clothes off, it’s best not to leave them sitting in a pile or inside a clothes basket, as this can result in mildew and smells. Damp clothes should be hung on a rack to dry or washed straight away. If you’ve been particularly adventurous (or unlucky) and your clothes are dirty as well as wet, Simpson says to “wipe off chunks of mud and debris” first, “then wash the garment according to the manufacturer’s instructions”. For delicate fabrics like fine wool and silk, a trip to the dry cleaner may be in order to prevent water stains. Re-upping repellence Simpson says synthetic fabrics coated “with a durable water repellent usually fare best in the rain” but they also require special treatment to maintain their performance. Unfortunately, water repellence doesn’t last forever. It can be affected by dirt, your skin’s natural oils, sunscreen and smoke, so it’s important to keep your raincoat or puffer jacket clean. Simpson says: “Be sure to wash and dry your garment often – this helps remove oils and anything that can hinder the performance of your puffer or raincoat.” Check the care instructions, but most nylon or polyester rain jackets and waterproof shells are machine washable. Use a performance wear-specific cleaner (Simpson recommends Grangers). Proper drying is also important to maintain water-repellent properties. Raincoats should be run through the dryer on medium heat for at least half an hour, he suggests. If care instructions permit, ironing can also improve water-repellent properties, but this should be done over a towel on a very low heat to avoid melting your jacket. For less technical rain garments – like waxed cotton parkas or poly-cotton trench coats – it is best to follow the care instructions on the label. Ironically, some rain-repellent trench coats can be dry clean only. Puffer jackets should be washed with a down-specific detergent, and can take a long time to dry. They should be left to drip dry for between 24 to 48 hours, while being given the occasional fluff to prevent the down from clumping. When almost dry, put the puffer in the dryer on a low heat with some dryer balls to completely break up any remaining clumps. If the water-repellent properties of your outerwear have diminished after a few years of wear, the good news is you can apply a fresh layer. Patagonia recommends the wash-in or spray-on products from Nikwax – which also work on waxed cotton. Special care for shoes Getting caught in the rain is the number one reason to waterproof your shoes and sneakers when you first buy them. Jenny Velakoulis, the owner of Evans Leather Repair, says to apply three coats of a waterproofing spray to your leather shoes, then reapply every six months. The same goes for sneakers. Eugene Cheng, the founder of Sneaker Laundry, a maintenance service in Melbourne, says the first and most important step is protection. A waterproofing spray will form a barrier around the sneaker, making it easier to care for. If the rain has already got to your shoes, before drying them out, make sure they’re clean. Use a material-specific shampoo to prevent dirt from drying into the shoe, then place leather shoes somewhere dry, away from heaters and out of direct sunlight to dry off. Once dry, apply a balm to nourish the leather. For sneakers that have been soaked, take out the laces and insoles and leave them outside in the sun. Cheng warns that sneakers can get mouldy if they’re put in closets or left indoors while wet.“Every disruption is a point of potential growth,” says associate professor Terry Bowles of the University of Melbourne. And we have experienced quite a period of disruption. Unprecedented change overwhelmed us in 2020 and 2021. Enduring the Covid pandemic has meant living through drastic adjustments to social and professional environments, an intense restriction of movement and choice, and prolonged bouts of social distancing and isolation. “What this disruption does is pressure us to make decisions we otherwise wouldn’t make,” Bowles says. Covid has “literally made us step up” to make changes in our lives that are “quite radical”. “Covid, for a lot of people, will be a new opportunity.” Guardian Australia asked readers to share how the pandemic made them rethink their life. Alongside more than 100 reader responses, leading experts on mental health and wellbeing say Covid has transformed people’s sense of self, and the way wellbeing, priorities and identity are being though about. Experiencing major change that makes us reassess our sense of self is “part of normal life”, says Dr Amy Dawel, a clinical psychologist and senior lecturer at the Australian National University’s College of Health and Medicine. “From divorce to a major move, having children or starting a new job – they are usually personal disruptions that make you reassess parts of your life and identity,” Dawel says. What is unusual about the disruption of the past two years, she says, is that it has been “forced upon us” on a mass scale. “There is less autonomy, and a much greater sense of uncertainty.” At first, Australians felt “distant” from and “unaffected” by the Covid pandemic, Bowles says. “Unfortunately, that slowly changed” Now, almost two years on, a widespread social disruption caused by Covid still permeates with “elements of distress at a universal level”. Skewing lives socially, professionally and financially, adapting with Covid “grinds people down to fatigue and distress”, Bowles says. “And it has prompted changes that have altered entire identities.” Such involuntary change and loss of control has a “massive impact” on wellbeing, says Prof Nicolas Cherbuin, head of the Australian National University’s Centre for Research on Ageing, Health and Wellbeing. “When a person has a sense they can control their lives, they tend to flourish more. And what we experienced with Covid was a generalised loss of control. “We were told to go home, to change the way you socialise, change the way you work.” Simultaneously, “the way a person defines themselves” with markers of identity – such as roles in a family, workplace or community group – were upended. Some academics have observed this as “social role disruption”, alongside the more general disruption in society. “This all has a major impact on our agency, and who we think we are,” Cherbuin says. Suddenly, one’s perception of self is very different, Dawel says. “Changing dramatically the context we are living in changes the way we fit in it.” Bowles says that while some adjust quickly, others will need “serious support”. However, amid the disruption has come the potential for personal development. In an attempt to regain agency, Bowles says, “people have been adapting”, albeit at varying rates. ‘A mass redirection of priorities’ A discontent during Covid times has encouraged people to “reflect on what they want out of life, study, retirement”, Bowles says. “People will ask themselves a lot of questions about values. We will ask ourselves why we do things.” Cherbuin calls it a mass redirection of priorities. Many responses from Guardian Australia readers reflected Cherbuin’s observation that people are quitting jobs and reassessing work, “because they realise their work habits are unsustainable”. Various other themes emerged as well. Popularly, realisations about relationships. Some readers wrote of new appreciation for social connections. “I don’t need a lot of stuff to be happy, but I do need connection to people,” one said. Others wrote of “reassessing” whether certain relationships are “worth it”. Many shared the experience of ending a long-term relationship or marriage in the midst of Covid. For one reader, following the end of their marriage, “lockdowns actually gave me pace to process this, reclaim my home and heal”. Cherbuin says that, similarly, lifestyles have been reassessed and “people have taken up new activities”. Many respondents wrote of learning to bake, growing a vegetable garden, starting yoga and and getting into running. For many, during the last years of disruption, personal health became a bigger focus. Studies by the Alcohol and Drug Foundation, for instance, suggest 23% of Australians started to exercise more and 25% fit in more hours sleep. As well, 13.9% of people said they increased alcohol consumption during lockdowns in 2020, while slightly more (14.7%) said they were drinking less. Readers reflected this mix but shared healthier habits, such as reducing alcohol consumption or stopping smoking during Covid, with one respondent writing: “I no longer want to go to events where drinking alcohol is the main activity.” The rethinking of priorities, and the logistical opportunity for white-collar workers in particular to not need to live near their workplaces, prompted the biggest migration from cities to the regions in Australia’s history. Considering relocation, particularly to areas outside the boundaries of a city, was another lifestyle change considered by some readers for whom cities had begun to lose appeal. “I would like to leave Melbourne and live in a more rural environment,” one respondent wrote. “I moved to Melbourne for the music scene and arts culture but now it’s not as important to me as it was before the pandemic.” With lockdowns, disconnection from friends and loved ones and generalised anxiety during the pandemic, psychological distress increased overall. So too did attention to one’s own mental health, and that of others around us. Mental health and wellbeing has emerged as an important priority for readers, with multiple respondents sharing that, during the pandemic, they reached out to mental health professionals for the first time. While self-harm among teenagers increased, the feared increase in suicides in society as a whole did not come to pass as individuals were encouraged to take care of their mental health by everyone from the prime minister to kindergarten classroom teachers. “Covid has given people a reason to say: it is OK to feel not OK,” Dawel says. “It has legitimised seeking help for mental health reasons.” Cherbuin echoes this: “Now, more people are going to see mental health as not just a distant problem some people have. What Covid has done is prompt this broader realisation of what mental health and wellbeing means to anyone and everyone, including myself.” “I think it is one of the really positive things to come out of Covid,” Dawel says. Into the future Across every facet of people’s lives, both major and minor changes have been assessed and adopted. Underlying them are important shifts in mindset. One reader, who left her job, ended a long-term relationship, adopted animals and plans to start a company in 2022, writes: “I changed nearly everything.” For Brian Mulquiney, 70, from Queensland’s Gold Coast,“the pandemic created the catalyst to reassess what is important in life”. Bowles says it comes down to a simple explanation: “We have all become closer to death. Out of Covid, the next most obvious thing to think is: what to do with what we have left of a finite life?” While Bowles says Covid has given some people a “platform from which you’d leap when you otherwise wouldn’t”, others will just be “breaking even” and “trying to sustain themselves”. Universally, however, he says Covid has “supercharged” disruptive experiences. “We all went through the changes. Everyone can identify with it.” In the past, world wars have prompted structural changes, such as introducing women to the workforce. Dawel says she is interested to see what sticks post-pandemic, particularly when it comes to people “figuring out who they are, and their perception of how the world works”. Cherbuin thinks it is less likely people will “click back into old ways”. “I think there will be positive health and social consequences in the long term.” From structural changes in the workplace to personal changes to lifestyle and habits, “all these changes have been demonstrated to be possible”, Cherbuin says. “It means that now things that couldn’t be done before can be done.”With fewer than 60 seconds remaining in regular time of Brisbane Roar’s clash with Melbourne Victory, Natalie Tathem – making her return from a 12-month ACL injury – drove down the right flank before delivering a low cross that Shea Connors, just, reached first to bundle over the goal line. After being 2-0 down at half-time from an own-goal and a fortunate Lynn Williams effort, the Queenslanders were finally on the right side of a late comeback, with a 3-2 lead that soon turned into 4-2 after Norrie added a 96th-minute sealer. In the aftermath of Connors’s goal, however, as the rest of her teammates moved back into position for kick-off, the lone, diminutive figure of Katrina Gorry hobbled off: spent after putting in a player-of-the-match performance that had not only inspired the Roar to their first win of the season but reminded everyone that, for all the excitement surrounding a new generation of Matildas being brought through by Tony Gustavsson, a potential answer to the national team’s midfield predicament may lie in the re-establishment of the 2014 AFC women’s player of the year. Less than six months after giving birth and fewer than three after writing that she was unsure if she was going to be available for round one, Gorry has quickly re-emerged as one of the Roar’s most important figures during the nascent 2021-22 A-League Women season and, assuming she continues on her current trajectory, one of the best players in the competition. After coming off the bench in her side’s first two games and managing only 45 minutes in the round-three defeat to Victory, Gorry got through 90 minutes in each of the past two rounds. Funnily enough, those two fixtures were the first in which Roar picked up points this season. Despite her limited action and role in the midfield, she ranks eighth in the league for shots on target per 90 minutes among qualified players. On Sunday, the 29-year-old proved integral to Roar’s attempts to advance the ball up the field, served as an important – and stabilising – touchstone for her side in possession, and delivered an equalising goal which not only demonstrated what she is capable of producing with the ball at her feet but also how she’s able to operate without the ball to make all that possible. Gifted extra space to operate in the midfield thanks to Kyra Cooney-Cross’s red card, she slid into a position to the right of Mindy Barbieri to show for a pass from Mariel Hecher, adjusting her alignment so she could receive a ball to feet – itself a rare request in tight areas in Australian football. Her Brazilian teammate found her, and she attacked the space afforded by a retreating Victory back four. Before Emma Robers had a chance to scramble across she let loose with a chipped effort that sailed perfectly over the head of Victory goalkeeper Melissa Maizels. She was mobbed by teammates, but not before a rock-the-baby celebration in the direction of daughter Harper in the AAMI Park stands – a dedication of her first goal since becoming a mother to her new baby. That Gorry’s star turn came in direct competition with Matildas breakout player Cooney-Cross was fitting. Though both arguably perform better further up the field, the pair’s best path to national team minutes under Gustavsson heading into 2023 likely means competing for a deep-lying midfield role. And while Gorry’s performance wasn’t perfect – a lazy turnover in the 30th minute indicative of both some level of rust and a lingering preference to play the ball to a familiar teammate and fellow Matilda Larissa Crummer – she won the battle between the two on Sunday. Both bring their own strengths and weaknesses but, as Gorry has already begun to hint at in her return this season, she holds a rare skill set; a coolness under pressure and the ability to make good decisions rapidly. Such attributes set her apart from her contemporaries and make her considerably more press-resistant than most of Australia’s options in the midfield. When taking into account the Matildas’ issues playing against defences with the ability to prevent transition and force them to break down a low block, her ability to advance play by passing forwards rather than side to side, dribbling between the lines, or simply by taking positions that force a defensive reaction – and, by extension, open up space for others – shapes as a potentially crucial weapon for when the world descends on Australia and New Zealand for the 2023 World Cup. Is it a case of one or the other? Absolutely not. At just 19, Cooney-Cross represents the future of the Matildas and, as she matures and gains more exposure to top-flight football – potentially in a major European league – she can only improve on an already-impressive base. But in an environment of considerable hype over Cooney-Cross, Mary Fowler, Clare Wheeler, and more, do not forget about Gorry. This month’s Asian Cup may prove a bridge too far, but 2023 – a goal she herself has set – looms large.School leaders in England are warning of weeks of disruption owing to high levels of staff Covid absences, which could lead to children being sent home to learn remotely. One secondary headteacher said he and 26 of his staff had tested positive for the virus, while others were having to stay at home to look after their own children as nurseries were closed, also because of Covid absences. As the impact of the spread of Omicron over Christmas becomes apparent in Covid data, heads said it was inevitable that some classes and year groups would be sent home to learn remotely because schools would not have sufficient teachers or supply cover. A number of headteachers and one leading education union have expressed concern about new government advice to combine classes in the event of staff shortages, warning that it risks spreading Covid further and increasing disruption. In an email sent to schools on Sunday, the Department for Education (DfE) advised heads to deal with staff absence by teaching larger groups, but school leaders said this was not a workable long-term solution, with one warning it could lead to something “like a scene out of Mad Max”. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “Schools and colleges desperately want to be able to maintain face-to-face teaching on a consistent basis, but the reality is that if large numbers of staff are absent this will cause disruption, which may include having to send home classes or year groups for short periods of time to learn remotely.” Meanwhile, heads are preparing for “difficult conversations” with some parents after the government called for masks to be worn in classrooms, while others are dealing with time-consuming subject access requests and freedom of information requests over vaccination programmes from anti-vaccination groups. Boris Johnson said on Monday he was not happy about calling for masks in classrooms but it was a necessary step. “There’s an increasing body of scientific support for the idea that face masks can contain transmission. I don’t like the idea of having face masks in [the] classroom any more than anybody else does, but we won’t keep them on a day more than is necessary,” he said. With the risk of widespread disruption to schools, Oak National Academy, the national online classroom set up by government when the pandemic first hit, is preparing for increased demand. “Schools and teachers are doing all they can to make sure pupils have a smooth return to the classroom after the holidays,” said Oak’s principal, Matt Hood. “For those children who cannot be in the classroom, Oak National Academy stands ready to support them.” Dr Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said it was “alarming” that the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, was advocating combining classes of pupils to overcome staff shortages. “Collapsing classes will mix groups of pupils and risks providing the conditions for the virus to spread more rapidly, which will result in greater pupil and staff absence,” she said. ‘A sense of trepidation’ Ben Davis is the headteacher of St Ambrose Barlow RC high school in Greater Manchester, which opens to pupils again on Thursday with a phased return to allow each year group to be tested for Covid. “I do feel a sense of trepidation,” he said. Masks have been reintroduced into classrooms in his school twice previously on the recommendation of Public Health England because of high infection rates, and Davis had to send a number of year groups home before Christmas owing to staff absence. As the spring term gets under way Davis fears there will be more of the same and is worried about the impact on summer exams. “My expectation is there will be quite a lot of disruption over the next few weeks and we will have year groups working from home.” Glyn Potts, the head of Blessed John Henry Newman RC College in Oldham, has himself tested positive for Covid and will not be in school at the start of term. A further 26 staff have also tested positive and he is waiting to find who will be out of isolation and available for work when pupils begin to return to school on Thursday. “What we are going to get on our return are absences of staff and children and a large number of challenging conversations with parents – those who are for or against masks and vaccinations – all of which distracts and takes time,” he said.The bookmaker William Hill could be fined after it emerged that it submitted incorrect data to the Gambling Commission. The information forced the regulator to tear up its analysis of the impact Covid-19 has had on betting habits. Responding to concern that successive lockdowns could drive people to bet too much online, the Gambling Commission has published regular updates since March 2020 on how much customers of big firms such as William Hill are losing. But in an update published on 23 December, the regulator said it had discovered that William Hill provided “incorrect datapoints” for the 16 months between March 2020 and September 2021. As a result, the commission said it would have to re-analyse all its data and would not be able to publish correct information until February. The regulator’s statistical bulletins during Covid-19, which rely on submissions from firms with 80% of the UK market, are seen as a key resource for academics and health workers trying to assess how the pandemic affected gambling-related harm. The commission said it was now “reviewing any regulatory consequences of William Hill’s failure to submit accurate data”. The regulator’s powers allow it to suspend or revoke gambling operators’ licence, although in practice it does so only in extreme cases. However, it frequently reaches financial settlements with companies that transgress the terms of their licence to offer gambling services in Great Britain. The risk of a penalty comes as William Hill’s UK operation is in the process of a £2.2bn sale, after London-listed 888 Holdings bought it from the US casino operator Caesars Entertainment. William Hill’s data error means it is one of two major operators braced for the possibility of a financial penalty in early 2022, just as the government is putting the finishing touches to a review of how gambling is regulated, with proposals set to be announced in the spring. The Guardian revealed in November that the online casino SkyVegas, owned by Flutter, had sent “free spin” promotions to thousands of people trying to recover from gambling addiction. The Guardian has approached William Hill for comment.Only free and fair elections in which the loser abides by the result stand between each of us and life at the mercy of a despotic regime – one we had no voice in choosing and one that can freely violate all our rights. So everything is at stake in the peaceful transfer of power from a government that has lost its people’s confidence to its victorious successor. It was that peaceful transfer that Trump and his minions sought to obstruct and almost succeeded in overthrowing when Joe Biden was elected president. A year has passed since Donald Trump’s attempted coup and his supporters’ violent storming of the United States Capitol on 6 January 2021, in a nearly successful effort to prevent Congress from certifying Trump’s decisive loss of the election to Biden. Watching the images that day of the seat of US democracy overtaken and defiled, it was impossible not to viscerally feel the grave danger that confronted the republic. In the tumultuous year since, the immediacy of that sensation has waned – and the magnitude of the stakes has receded from memory. In the rubble of the insurrection, the sheer shock of the moment jarred loose hints of long-lost bipartisanship and national unity and rekindled an appreciation of why a successful coup would have meant the end of all we care about. The House of Representatives expeditiously moved to impeach Trump for his role in fomenting the attack and 57 senators, including seven Republicans, voted to convict him on 13 February after a masterful presentation led by Representative Jamie Raskin, a Democrat of Maryland. After Trump had become the first American president to be impeached twice, the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, delivered a blistering rebuke of Trump from the Senate floor, justifying his and many other Republicans’ votes to acquit only on the thin reed that, by the time of his Senate trial, Trump was no longer president. Alas, the moment was short-lived. With Trump himself out of office and in exile at Mar-a-Lago, public attention quickly faded, Republicans abandoned their increasingly half-hearted search for accountability, and the leaders of their party began planning their next bite at the poisoned apple of power, an apple they told themselves had been stolen from them despite all evidence to the contrary. Rewriting history and turning reality on its head, Republicans in Congress and their allies in rightwing media began absurdly to describe the deadly insurrection as a “mostly peaceful” protest, described rioters who brutally beat Capitol police as “political prisoners”, and suggested that any violence was attributable to some unidentified group of leftwing “antifa”. To be sure, we have seen the rise of a veritable cottage industry of commentary warning sharply that America remains subject to what some have called a “slow-motion insurrection” or that “Trump’s Next Coup Has Already Begun”. Yet the vast majority of Americans have turned their attention back to other concerns – from new and more infectious variants of the Covid-19 virus, to burgeoning inflation and increasingly palpable signs of global warming, to the myriad other problems that bedevil our nation and the world. But for those of us who have continued to investigate the sources and facets of the assault on constitutional democracy, a sobering realization has become unavoidable: our country, and the legal and political institutions that prevent it from descending into despotism, are in even greater peril today than they were at the time of last November’s election. That assault began in the runup to the 2020 election, when Trump and his cultlike followers spread the corrosive view that American elections had become inherently untrustworthy as demographic changes broadened the eligible electorate and thus that any outcome other than victory for Trump would necessarily be the result of fraud and must therefore be rejected by all means necessary. With each passing day, more details about the means Trump’s team devised to undo the results of the November 2020 election have cascaded into public view, even though Republicans in Congress have made concerted efforts to obstruct the work of the special House committee created to uncover the sources of the attempted coup and the ensuing insurrection. The committee was charged to propose legislation to reduce the danger of a repeat performance, but because curing a disease requires diagnosing its cause, Republicans have seized on the committee’s search for causes to claim that its purposes were solely vindictive and not legislative. In the course of designing possible remedies, the committee has uncovered evidence of a conspiracy broader, more far-reaching and better organized than was initially thought. That conspiracy featured deceptive PowerPoint presentations and duplicitous talking points designed to propagate the big lie that Democrats had indeed stolen the election and to lay out a blueprint for “stopping the steal”. Understanding that blueprint requires appreciating the byzantine constitutional structure dating to our founding, a structure in which the presidency is awarded not to the winner of the national popular vote but to the candidate receiving the most “electoral votes”. Those votes are allocated among the states according to a formula slanted toward less densely populated states – states that have tended over time to favor the Republican candidate – with each state’s legislature determining the method for deciding how its electoral votes will be awarded. As Representative Raskin, a leading member of the special House committee, described it to me, the basic plan for Trump to seize power despite his loss of both the popular vote on 3 November and the electoral vote on 14 December had been to pressure various officials to “find” enough nonexistent votes to flip the results of several key states in which the election’s outcome had been the closest. Failing that, the plan was to pressure Vice-President Mike Pence, presiding over the 6 January joint session of Congress required under the constitution to count the certified electoral votes, to reject and return the slates of electoral votes certified by Arizona, Georgia and Pennsylvania, depriving both candidates of the requisite majority of the electoral votes cast. At that point, the choice of president would fall “immediately” to the US House of Representatives, with each state’s delegation casting a single vote in the resulting “contingent election”. That in turn would have made Trump the president-elect despite having lost the election, because more state delegations in the House were in Republican hands at that point than in the hands of the Democrats. Part of the plot, we are now learning, featured Trump’s invocation of the Insurrection Act to declare something like martial law to put down the chaos and bedlam he and his inner circle would by then have unleashed on the Capitol, all the time blaming the speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, for not keeping order, a form of sinister gaslighting the Republicans have deployed ever since 6 January. Talk of that military option led the CIA Director to predict that “we are on the way to a right-wing coup”. But most terrifyingly, we have learned over the past year that the Republican party plans to do it again. Some retired generals are warning that, without decisive action to hold all the wrongdoers to account, we will witness a march to another coup attempt, and one more likely to succeed, if Trump or another demagogue runs and loses. Trump’s Republican party has all but erased or openly embraced the violence of 6 January. And the party faithful have already set out to use state-level elections and legislative processes to better set the table to steal the 2024 election should that be necessary to their return to power. And why wouldn’t they? Those involved in the last attempt have – at least as of today – faced few if any social, political or legal penalties. Only the foot-soldiers, those who physically invaded the Capitol, have faced criminal punishment. And even they have been charged with no offense more serious than corruptly obstructing an official proceeding. As I have elsewhere argued, it would seem more fitting to charge those who organized, funded, and otherwise led the nearly successful overthrow of our government with insurrection or sedition. Indeed, in the topsy-turvy world of Trumpian logic, the political base of the Republican party now appears by a large majority to believe that the real coup and insurrection took place not on 6 January 2021 but on 3 November and 14 December 2020, when Joe Biden and the Democrats supporting him were guilty of a “big steal” of the national election. Students of how democracies fail and tyrannical regimes arise from the dust they leave behind uniformly teach that such groundless myths of wrongful defeat at the hands either of enemies within or of enemies without are invariably part of the demagogue’s narrative and of its hold on popular consciousness. The specter of another coup attempt in 2024-25 may, at first blush, seem counterintuitive. After all, whether Donald Trump or another aspiring despot runs next time as the Republican party’s nominee, that candidate will have no access to the powers of the presidency when the national election occurs. But the corrupt actions that threaten soon to bring our constitutional republic to an ignoble end sadly do not require either an exercise of presidential power or the abdication of presidential duty. They require only that the cult of Trump repopulate with party hacks the bureaucracy of honest vote-counters and nonpartisan election personnel at the state and local levels, and that Trump-backed lawmakers elected to state legislatures rig the voting rules to dilute the influence of all who might oppose a Republican victory. Because these steps are well under way, we face a challenge more daunting than we did even when the powers of the presidency were in Trump’s hands. Nor can we count on the congressional voting integrity measures brilliantly designed with the help of Adam Schiff and Jamie Raskin, the Democratic representatives who led Trump’s two Senate impeachment trials, to save us from what the growing number of Republican state legislatures seem only too eager to do. For one thing, even before the 2022 midterm elections, Democrats control too few seats in the Senate to overcome the antiquated filibuster rules that make enactment of such voting rights measures with fewer than 60 votes an impossibility. For another, the US supreme court, as packed by means of dubious legitimacy by Trump during his presidency, is poised to hold unconstitutional virtually any meaningful voting protection or electoral reform Congress might enact even if that 60-vote obstacle could be carved away in a limited class of cases. Even if something should derail another Trump run at the presidency, the means for another coup exist, and the temptation to seize power, this time cementing it more permanently, will surely tantalize a political party that seems openly hostile to the very premises of democracy. Of particular concern to students of fascism – a governing form that almost always comes wrapped in violence – was the violence woven through the rise of Trumpism to the siege of the Capitol which was, of course, brutally violent. Participants came armed with body armor, firearms, knives, bear mace, Tasers and everything in between. They brought a gallows and chanted that they were going to hang the sitting vice-president. They brutally beat Capitol and DC police officers. Nor was the violence limited to that day. Leading up to the 2020 election, Trump supporters had run a Biden campaign bus off the road in Texas, plotted to kidnap the Democratic governor in Michigan and stirred up brutal attacks across the country. In the period after that election, they physically surrounded and intimidated senators on an airplane and in an airport, calling them “traitors” and promising consequences for their perceived defection from Trump. They showed up at state capitols armed to the teeth and threatening retribution if state legislators did not allocate their electoral votes to Trump, or at least pursue fraudulent “audits” of the election results. Far from being condemned, in the intervening year that sort of violence has been increasingly glorified by the mainstream conservative movement. In recent weeks, a congressman posted a Photoshopped video of himself murdering a Democratic colleague. A Fox News host discussed – to a crowd of radicalized anti-vaxxers – how they might most appropriately assassinate our nation’s chief epidemiologist with a “kill shot” in “an ambush”. Large crowds venerated a juvenile vigilante who shot three people on an American street. The base is being primed for more violence in the run-up and aftermath of the next election. And the Trump-packed supreme court is poised to do its part by gutting what is left of America’s laws against carrying guns anywhere and everywhere – including maybe in courthouses, polling places and the like. It is no accident that the 6 January hotel command center of the group led by Steve Bannon and Roger Stone was christened the “war room”. So what is to be done? We must resist state-level attempts to make voting more difficult. Instead, we must make vote-counting easier and use all legal means at our disposal to challenge publicly and in state and federal courts legislative district maps designed to dilute minority voters’ influence or to amplify the power of incumbency, as well as laws empowering state officeholders to designate presidential electors at odds with their state’s popular election results. We must use boycotts and grassroots political organizing to oppose the replacement of honest with corrupt election officials and the enactment of anti-democratic state laws. We must encourage the 6 January committee to complete its work thoroughly but quickly, including holding public hearings that spotlight the damning details of the plot that nearly succeeded, and making criminal referrals to the Department of Justice of all public officials – from members of Congress to the former president – suspected of such federal crimes as obstructing an official proceeding, aiding and abetting an insurrection or conspiring to commit sedition. We must fight back against suggestions that the justice department’s criminal investigations of the highest-ranking public officials should await any such criminal referrals from the committee. We must redouble our determination to hold criminally accountable, and potentially disqualify from ever again holding public office in the United States, everyone involved in the obscene trashing of constitutional democracy. We must publicly repudiate whatever misguided notions have led the Biden administration’s attorney general, Merrick Garland, to exercise extraordinary restraint in the pursuit of such full accountability, effectively placing the highest officeholders above the law. Above all, we must not let the difficulty of the task ahead turn realism into resignation and sap the energy we will need to bring to this mission. As the distinguished Yale historian Joannne Freeman recently wrote, “Accountability – the belief that political power holders are responsible for their actions and that blatant violations will be addressed – is the lifeblood of democracy. Without it, there can be no trust in government, and without trust, democratic governments have little power.” And when democracy loses its grip as a guiding ideal, despotism fills the void and liberty is lost. This is a battle we must not, cannot, will not lose. Laurence H Tribe is the Carl M Loeb University professor emeritus and professor of constitutional law emeritus at Harvard University and an accomplished supreme court advocateWhen Nadia Popovici spotted a small mole on the back of Brian Hamilton’s neck last October, during an NHL game between the Vancouver Canucks and the Seattle Kraken, she was unsure if the Canucks’ assistant equipment manager was aware it was there. Gaining Hamilton’s attention, she wrote a message on her phone and pressed it against the plexiglass dividing the crowd from the ice. “The mole on the back of your neck is possibly cancerous,” the 22-year old fan wrote. “Please go see a doctor!” “Mole”, “cancer” and “doctor” were picked out in bright red letters. Popovici later told the Seattle Times that she had volunteered at hospitals, “surrounded with a lot of melanomas”. So when she saw the diameter, raised shape and “irregular border” of the mole on Hamilton’s neck, she knew she had to alert him. Hamilton looked at the message. He later said that he thought: “Well, that’s weird.” He rubbed the back of his neck and continued walking. But later that evening, he asked his partner if she could see the mole. When she said she could, Hamilton consulted a team doctor – who “didn’t like the looks of it either”. Hamilton had the mole removed and tested. It proved to be a type 2 malignant melanoma, a skin cancer that is curable if caught early. Within a week, Hamilton was cancer-free. On Saturday, Hamilton posted a call-out message on the Canucks Twitter page. “I am trying to find a very special person … [who] changed my life,” he wrote. “That evening, 23 October, and the message you showed me on your cellphone will forever be etched into my brain and has made a true life-changing difference for me and my family.” Hamilton added his thanks for the fan who went “to great lengths to get my attention from the stands while I did my job on the Canucks bench. We are looking for this incredible person and we need you to share this with your friends and families to help us find a real-life hero, so I can express my sincerest gratitude.” Within hours, Popovici was found. She had been asleep at home in Tacoma, Washington, after working overnight at a suicide crisis center in Seattle. As a Kraken season ticket-holder, she had already planned to attend that night’s game between the Canucks and Kraken. Both teams invited her to meet Hamilton. “It was your effort and your persistence … the way you wrote it on your phone,” Hamilton said during an emotional meeting. “I owe it to this person to get checked, if she went this far. I don’t know her, I don’t know anything about her.” Popovici told Hamilton: “What an amazing way to start my journey to med school. It’s pretty priceless.” During a timeout in Saturday’s game, the Canucks and Kraken announced a $10,000 scholarship for Popovici, towards medical school tuition. Popovici, who sat in the same seat from which she spotted Hamilton’s mole, was overcome with emotion. The Canucks won 5-2. They later tweeted a picture of Hamilton and Popovici taking a selfie together. The caption: “The biggest win tonight.”One of the UK’s biggest care home operators is calling on the government to lift visiting restrictions after it recorded one Covid death in the last fortnight. Four Seasons Healthcare, which operates 165 care homes, said close to 4,000 residents were living under strict lockdowns because of outbreaks, but the Omicron variant was proving so mild in a well-vaccinated population that limits on seeing family and friends were in “total imbalance” with the risk. Of 132 deaths among the chain’s residents in the last two weeks, just one was attributed to Covid, but because two or more staff or residents have tested positive in 86 homes, indoor visits are now largely banned. That is in step with government guidelines imposed before Christmas amid uncertainty about the danger of the latest coronavirus variant. “We are depriving people of their right to visitors, which is an absolute outrage,” said Jeremy Richardson, the chief executive of the UK’s third largest care home provider. “The government restrictions at the moment are making it very difficult to give people a quality of life.” He added: “We run care homes. We do not run prisons.” Residents and relatives have been left distraught by the further restrictions. Before Christmas the health secretary, Sajid Javid, announced that in England any care home in outbreak should shut its doors to indoor visitors for up to 28 days after the last positive case, except for people designated as essential care givers or if a resident is at the end of life. Movements out of the care home should also be minimised, Javid said. It has meant thousands of families have only been able to see loved ones through windows or in visiting pods. MHA, one of the largest not-for-profit providers, said on Monday that about half of its care homes had had outbreaks that had restricted visiting. The Public Health Agency in Belfast reported that 120 care homes in Northern Ireland currently had outbreaks. The reports suggest care home outbreaks in England are likely to jump sharply, from 250 as of 19 December, in the next UK Health and Security Agency figures. But deaths from Covid in care homes in England, which accommodate 350,000 people, stood at 40 in the week to Christmas Eve, compared with a peak of about 1,800 in a week in January 2021. The latest NHS figures show 95% of care home residents in England have had two vaccine doses and 81% have been boosted. Jenny Morrison, a co-founder of Rights for Residents campaign group, said: “The impact of loneliness and isolation has far outweighed the impact of Covid in the later part of the pandemic, so are we going to continue with these strict visiting policies? It’s completely disproportionate to what we are facing.” Richardson said that since March 2021, 2,320 Four Seasons residents had died from all causes, and only 29 of them (1.25%) from Covid. Over that period the overall death rate has been below the four-year average prior to Covid. Nadra Ahmed, the executive chair of the National Care Association, which represents independent operators, said more than a quarter of her members were facing staffing shortages because of the requirement to isolate for seven days after a positive PCR test. One operator has reported half of its staff off with positive tests or off sick. “The other 50% of staff are exhausting themselves covering the shifts,” she said. Finding agency staff over Christmas was often impossible, and hourly rates had risen as high as £75, she said. Nicola Richards, the chair of the Sheffield Care Association, said PCR test results were taking six days for staff at some local homes, which was “causing huge issues”. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “Our priority continues to be the safety of care home residents and staff. We are doing everything we can to support care providers to facilitate safe visits.”Giovanni Trapattoni carried a bottle of holy water with him, blessed by the sister who actually was his sister. In 2009 the Espanyol manager Mauricio Pochettino hiked to Montserrat to visit the black virgin, enlisting her help in avoiding relegation, salvation delivered soon after. And Raúl Madero, the Argentinian national team doctor, twice visited the wailing wall. The first time, before the 1986 World Cup, he asked for them to be champions; when he went back four years later, he thought that would be pushing it, so requested runners-up. True story, and when it comes to football you’ll try anything. Sometimes it even works. Some turn to God, others turn their back on Him. Coco Basile tells of the priest he kicked out of the San Lorenzo dressing room. His name was Jorge, a fan who loved his team and prayed with them; he was also a jinx, Basile said. Fifteen years later, Jorge became Pope Francis. Meanwhile, up in A Coruña, Deportivo have been known to cast a pagan’s spell,: “Beelzebub’s fire, burning corpses and farts from infernal bottoms” thrown into a bubbling cauldron. Like many rituals, it doesn’t always work, but you’ve got to have something to turn to: some source of solace or inspiration, even if it’s not so much Papa Francisco as Pape Souaré, more Delaney than divine. And so it was that Getafe turned to Crystal Palace. Which might sound a bit weird, but while there’s no sign of the Messiah they did have Fosu-Mensah, and Getafe were desperate. They were also pointless and you can insert your own joke here. “One point would give us life,” the striker Jaime Mata insisted, but their vital signs were fading fast, each defeat crueller and more inevitable than the last. Seven games in, they had lost all seven, already adrift at the bottom. “You get the feeling you’ve seen this film before,” Míchel González, their then-manager, had said, and it didn’t have a happy ending. “Anxiety is inevitable.” No one had ever started a top-flight season as badly, after all. No one in Spain, anyway. Not long ago there was a team in south London that were even worse and somehow they survived, rescued by Roy Hodgson. Seven weeks into the 2017-2018 season, Crystal Palace had lost all seven games. In the eighth, they defeated Chelsea and eventually finished 11th. Getafe made a motivational video, all dramatic music and headlines, drawing on Palace’s experience to declare: “When results don’t come … when you try but don’t succeed … history shows it’s still possible.” It was too. Andros Townsend moves in mysterious ways. That day, Getafe had no points and were bottom. On Sunday, they defeated Real Madrid 1-0 at the Coliseum, the afternoon spent singing in the sun, welcoming in the new year. “Liberation,” the goalscorer Enes Unal called it. This was their first win against Madrid in almost nine years, but it wasn’t a one-off or a fluke. Yes, they were gifted the goal, Éder Militão robbed by Unal – the perfect illustration of Carlo Ancelotti’s line about preferring “pessimistic” defenders who fear the worst – and sure, Ancelotti insisted the visitors “were still on holiday”. But that probably overplayed their passivity and this wasn’t only about Madrid, it was about Getafe too. Seemingly down then, they now have 18 points and are five places and 10 points off the bottom. Unbeaten in six, they’ve lost only one in nine. “The mental state is different now,” their coach said afterwards. “It’s interesting watching a team convert negative energy into positive, how horizons can change, how a group is transformed.” Which is exactly what he came for. There was a moment earlier this season when the pitchside reporter helpfully pointed out that the fans were still chanting Míchel’s name, which indeed they were; it was just a pity it was followed by the words go and now. When now arrived and Míchel was sacked in October, Getafe had actually just got their first point with a 1-1 draw against Real Sociedad but he was replaced by Quique Sánchez Flores, returning for his third spell 16 years after the first. Forty years old when he led Getafe’s debut in primera, at 56 his mission now was to keep them there. He couldn’t turn them down: “Getafe is a family, and the family has problems,” he said. Under Míchel, Getafe earned one point from 24. Under Quique, they earned 17 of 33. A table of his time there has them fifth in La Liga. Those stats probably make it sound more clear-cut than it really is. The night Getafe finally picked up a point, Real Sociedad manager Imanol Alguacil insisted: “I have no doubt Míchel’s a great coach. If you have patience with him, Getafe will climb the table.” Míchel had waited a year to take over and brought a new, possession-based style that was always likely to take a little time and luck, plus the players to play it, but he didn’t get that. Even Sánchez Flores admitted: “Míchel’s a great guy who didn’t get the luck he deserves.” And if fortune always feels empty as an explanation, there was definitely something in that. Against Valencia on the opening day, Getafe had lost 1-0 to a ropey penalty. A 93rd-minute Érik Lamela goal defeated them the following week in Seville. They were unfortunate to lose 2-1 at Barcelona, were beaten 1-0 by Elche, and were 1-0 up against Atlético until Carles Aleñá was sent off, losing 2-1 to a last-minute Luis Suárez winner. In the opening six games only Rayo beat them by more than one – and even then they had hit the post at 0-0. “It’s a question of time,” midfielder Florentino Luís said, but time passed and they kept losing, confidence crumbling. The Elche match brought 20 minutes as bad as anything you’ve seen, like the players’ legs had been put on the wrong way round, like some mental block had taken hold and wouldn’t let go. “You just have to go back to the cinema and hope this time the good guys win,” Míchel said, but they never did. Perhaps they had to stop being the good guys. Quique changed the mentality and the approach was altered too. He had to break that run somehow, rid them of the fatalism, clear heads and offer a clear plan. Get closer to what they had been with Pepe Bordalás, perhaps: tough, defensive, resistant. Unal soon talked about a side getting its identity back. It wasn’t always pretty, it is true, and it’s not done yet either. Against Levante, the 0-0 felt inevitable. Against Celta, they played four central midfielders and a fifth, Nikola Maksimovic, up front – and lost, heavily. Against Granada, they conceded in the 97th minute to draw 1-1, but it was a miracle the goal hadn’t come sooner and been followed by more. Luis Suárez’s penalty traced an almost impossible vertical trajectory over the bar, David Soria slapped one off the line and Getafe, moving to a back five, had 23% of possession and faced 18 shots. “We didn’t feel good with the ball so we decided to defend,” Quique said. Those were his first three games. After a 0-0 draw with Mallorca in November, Jaume Costa accused Getafe of constant fouling, complaining: “The linesman said they’re smart. Smart? No. Book one and it stops.” But things had shifted, signs of life and rebellion. “We need a big heart and a hungry mind but things only change with a win,” Quique said after Granada and three days later it came, Unal scoring two beauties against Espanyol and Erick Cabaco stumbling down the touchline with the coach in his arms at full-time. “We needed this jubilation to justify the effort,” Quique said. “It’s going to be long and we’re going to suffer: it’s battle for the broken-hearted.” A week on they lost against Villarreal but haven’t lost since. A 4-0 win over Cádiz followed, then three draws: 0-0, 0-0, 1-1. Next, a 93rd-minute Darío Poveda goal defeated Osasuna and finally lifted them out of the relegation zone, 4,772 fans going wild. “We’re a single mind: we’re overcoming small barriers, which makes us freer and braver,” the coach said. “I feel emotional because I feel what I felt 16 years ago.” Sunday felt even better: victory against Madrid, previously unbeaten in 12 games. “You don’t look at the stats in advance because they can depress you,” Quique said. “Instead, games require an artisanal process that generates enthusiasm as you see what you can do.” Getafe, he said, had to know where to “strangle” Madrid. And although Luka Modric hit the bar and Soria made a superb late save, they did so successfully. Stefan Mitrovic’s insistence that their mentality has changed was echoed in Unal saying he smelt blood on the goal, someone else’s weakness revealed instead of theirs. “We have an important combative spirit; we needed resilience and still do: this has only just begun,” the coach said. In the stands they were jumping about singing, an old favourite adapted for new times. “Bordalás, I loved you,” it runs, “but now I love Quique.” Carry on like this and there might just be a little soft spot for Wilfried Zaha, too.European shares bounded to record highs in the first day of trading in 2022 as markets bet on a steady economic recovery despite the rising number of Covid-19 cases caused by the Omicron variant. Europe’s benchmark stock index, the Stoxx 600, rose to a record intraday high of 491.73 points on Monday, surpassing its November peak of 490.58, as global oil and equity markets climbed. It later closed at 489.99, up 0.45%. The Stoxx 600 recorded a 22.4% jump last year, its second-best yearly performance in over a decade, after the global rollout of Covid-19 vaccines and government stimulus spending encouraged investors to pour money back into the markets. The share price of airlines Lufthansa and Air France KLM were two of the biggest climbers across Europe’s equity markets after analysts at Citi forecast that the reopening of travel routes to Asia could help bolster the beleaguered travel sector. Lufthansa shares rose by almost 8.9% to €6.73 a share, and Air France KLM rose by 4.9% to €4.06. Europe’s record start to the new year set the stage for US markets to continue their late 2021 recovery. The opening of the S&amp;P 500 index, which climbed by 26.9% last year, was bolstered by a 9% jump in Tesla shares after the company’s quarterly deliveries exceeded expectations. In another boost to US markets global oil prices, which last year recorded their biggest annual rise since at least 2016, resumed their rise towards $80 a barrel as fears that emerged late last year over the impact of the Omicron variant waned. The oil price helped shares in US oil majors Chevron and ExxonMobil climb by 1% each. The global surge in market optimism triggered a slump in the price of gold, which is considered a “safe haven” commodity during periods of equity market volatility. The spot price of gold was on track for its biggest one-day percentage decline in more than a month on Monday afternoon after the price dipped 1.6% to $1,798.97 an ounce. The London Stock Exchange (LSE), which has lagged behind its European and US rivals by climbing 14.3% last year, was closed on Monday for the New Year’s bank holiday. The FTSE 100 has been criticised as “old-fashioned” due to its dearth of tech companies and a glut of oil and bank stocks. It remained 6.5% below its May 2018 peak last year while the US, German and French markets all hit record highs. Sean Darby, a global equity strategist at Jefferies, said: “Although Covid-19 variants permeated the global economy, 2021 was the year of records with many bourses closing at or near record highs, while inflows into equities surpassed their largest accumulation ever. Peering into 2022, we expect volatility to rise.” Global oil markets are also expected to face ongoing volatility in the year ahead as traders balance the risk that the Omicron variant may stall a rebound in demand for transport fuels, against uncertain supplies from the world’s biggest oil producers. The oil price retreated at the end of 2021 following the discovery of the new variant, from just over $85 a barrel in October to narrowly below $70 a barrel a month ago. However, analysts believe that Brent crude could be on track to reach $90 a barrel in the year ahead as Covid-19 restrictions continue to fall away. Tamas Varga, from the oil broker PVM, said: “Infection rates are on the rise globally, restrictions are being introduced in several countries, the air travel sector, among others, is suffering, yet investors’ optimism is tangible. “It seems that the current strain produces less severe symptoms than its predecessors, which might just help us to struggle through the fourth wave of the pandemic.” The rising oil price is likely to spell further financial hardship for hard-pressed households in the UK, which face record high petrol pump prices and further hikes to the cost of gas and electricity bills in the months ahead. British households and businesses can expect to be hit by the highest rate of inflation for a decade, owing to the rising cost of raw materials and ongoing disruption to global supply chains, after the consumer prices index measure of inflation surged to 5.1% in November. The Bank of England has said inflation could peak at about 6% in April – three times its target rate of 2% – as energy bills are expected to almost double from record levels this winter. • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. The S&amp;P 500 index rose by 26.9% last year, not a record 47.7% as an earlier version said. The latter figure relates specifically to the S&amp;P 500 energy index.A proposal to insert a statue of the first woman in the world to earn a PhD among the 78 dedicated to notable male figures on a prominent square in northern Italy has stirred controversy. Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia received her doctorate degree in philosophy from the University of Padua in 1678. But she was not included when Padua officials devised a project in the late 18th century to erect statues in Prato della Valle – the largest square in Italy – dedicated to illustrious historical figures who were either from the city or had links to it. Originally there were 88 statues adorning the central island of the 90,000-sq-metre square, all paying tribute to men, including the Italian scientist Galileo Galilei, the sculptor Antonio Canova, and several popes. But 10 statues dedicated to Venetian doges were destroyed by Napoleon’s army after it conquered the republic of Venice; eight were later replaced by obelisks, while two of the pedestals remained empty. Although a statue honouring Piscopia already exists at the University of Padua, two local councillors, Simone Pillitteri and Margherita Colonnello, proposed celebrating her with another on one of the empty pedestals at Prato della Valle. “Perhaps it is not so well known that the figures to whom the stone effigies are dedicated are all, without exception, men,” the pair wrote in a motion presented to the city’s council. The suggestion came after Mi Riconosci, an association of professionals working in the cultural heritage sector, undertook a census of all statues of Italian figures erected in public spaces across the country and found that only 148 were dedicated to women. Federica Arcoraci, an art historian with Mi Riconosci, said Prato della Valle’s male-only line-up had “an impact on our lives and collective imagination”. She said: “The Prato della Valle regulation of 1776 forbade having statues of saints, living people and people with no ties to the city, but never prohibited the representation of women. “Obviously, that was the result of a particular trend in history. But today it is possible to create a project that is connected with the history of the square in its entirety.” Nevertheless, the proposal immediately sparked debate, with detractors arguing that placing a statue of Piscopia in the square would be “out of context” with its history. Carlo Fumian, a history professor at the University of Padua, said the “expensive and bizarre” idea was “a bit trendy, but culturally inconsistent”. “Moving monuments as if they were Lego is a dangerous and unintelligent game,” he told the local newspaper, Il Mattino di Padova. “Instead, we should help people discover the original [statue], triumphantly seated at the university.” Art historian Davide Tramarin said the two empty pedestals should remain empty as they represented a symbol of the historical destruction by Napoleon’s troops. Fabrizio Magani, the superintendent of Padua’s cultural heritage, is open to the idea, but suggested a female figure from more recent history ought to be celebrated in the square. “It’s shocking that even just the proposal to have a statue representing an important figure of the city has caused such a debate,” said Leonardo Bison, a Padua-based journalist. “But it’s surprising that Piscopia is not there when other less important male figures are.” • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. Prato della Valle covers about 90,000 sq metres, not 90 sq metres.The Sydney Football Stadium in Moore Park serves a decent reminder Australia is a country that rarely stands still. Originally built in 1988, what appeared to be a serviceable venue has been bulldozed since the last Ashes tour four years ago and in its place an eye-catching new AU$828m replacement is approaching completion. Barely a stone’s throw from the latest sporting UFO to land on Australian soil sits the wonderful Sydney Cricket Ground, which despite being upgraded and swollen by way of capacity over the years still retains a sense of history. Its green-roofed 19th century ladies’ and members’ pavilions are untouched through their heritage listing. So, too, the old clock tower and an array of statues that denote past greats of the game. It remains a truly evocative place to watch Test cricket. Inspiration has been in short supply for England’s cricketers since they arrived for this pandemic-era Ashes tour in November and their issues have been myriad en route to 68 all out and 3-0 down with two Tests to play. But as they step out onto the cambered baize outfield, Joe Root hopes his men take in the surroundings, think of the charity angle to proceedings, remember past English success stories and realise how fortunate they all are to be representing their country during admittedly tough times. “It’s obviously a special Test match,” said Root, before training on Monday. “You’ve got the McGrath Foundation [raising funds for breast cancer support] and you look at some of the performances on previous tours, like the 2010-11 team winning here, how special that was and how it will live long in the memory of fans and players. “It was here [Darren] Gough got his hat-trick in 1999, too. It’s a venue where a number of special things have happened for England players and it’s an opportunity to do just that. For me personally, I’d love more than anything to walk away with a win. Personal achievements make you proud and it means you are pulling your weight. But nothing compares to winning a Test match and I’m desperate to do that.” If there is a positive to be found beyond the red lines on various lateral flow tests during a disrupted buildup, it’s that the tourists appear to have just about held together off the field while disintegrating on it. There has been grumbling about the Covid lifestyle and Stuart Broad has gone public with his annoyance at missing out on green surfaces in Brisbane and Melbourne. But any serious angst is yet to bleed out of the dressing room while Australia have been tearing them up with barely a sledge to be heard. Perhaps this should be a concern; a sign that a team which has been forced to plough through 21 Test matches since the start of the pandemic, compared to seven for their hosts, has now entered a dazed fug of mere fixture fulfilment. Australia are on a heady roll, their series win one of contributions throughout the team, and will be hard to stop now. Either way, performances in this fourth Test, followed by a fifth still slated for Hobart, may provide an answer as to the state of various minds among Root’s troupe. They may also serve to inform how much substance there is to all the private and public support for Root’s continuation as captain as he passes Alastair Cook’s record of 59 Tests in charge. The 31-year-old once again insisted it was a topic to be discussed at the end of the tour, but stressed his pride at being given the opportunity to lead “has not wavered from day one”, adding: “I’ll keep throwing everything I can into trying to give England the best chances of winning and give the best account of ourselves.” In the past week this has involved Root literally throwing everything he can at teammates in the nets due to the Covid-enforced absences of the head coach, Chris Silverwood, and three members of his staff. England’s opponents, though forced to bring in Usman Khawaja at No 5 after Travis Head tested positive for the virus, have had far fewer issues with which to contend, even if they have been ticked off for not drinking the official beer sponsor of Cricket Australia during the celebrations in Melbourne. Two days out from the toss Root did not give much away selection-wise, although the peripheral roles of Rory Burns and Ollie Pope at training pointed to more 12th man-duties and an unchanged England top seven. Gone are the days of Sydney being the ground where spinners lick their lips, however, with Nathan Lyon, one of a number on the books of New South Wales, averaging 40 with the ball here in Test cricket. As such, and with some rain forecast over the coming days, recent talk of the Queensland leg-spinner Mitch Swepson coming in to join him as a pairing in preparation for the upcoming tour of Pakistan always felt optimistic. Instead, beyond a return for the experienced Khawaja, and with little reason to press Josh Hazlewood into service too soon after the side strain picked up during the first Test, Australia’s final decision was whether to retain Scott Boland after his remarkable six for seven in Melbourne or return to the established pecking order by recalling Jhye Richardson. Boland got the nod on Tuesdaythis morning, instantly dashing local predictions of a one-cap wonder/future quiz question. England, meanwhile, were lining up a return for Broad in place of Ollie Robinson, who for all his obvious skill has looked heavy-legged at times. But ultimately the question will be whether their batting lineup can finally stand up to an attack that has been relentless from ball one of this uncompetitive series or find itself once again unsentimentally razed to the ground like the old football stadium next door.I was horrified to read your article (‘I’m always tired, Miss’: the sleepless children of Leeds’ bed poverty crisis, 2 January) about children whose education is suffering because they do not have access to a bed of their own. What sort of society do we live in when a young and no doubt overworked teacher needs to take this on herself by delivering beds to her deprived pupils? I hope the country’s multimillionaires and billionaires, some of whom enjoy the benefit of tax avoidance schemes, can sleep in their many beds in their many properties. Margaret Woolacott Lancing, West Sussex • Re Tim Dowling’s article (Escape your comfort zone: My voyage through the foods I’ve avidly avoided – from baked beans to Marmite, 25 December), the best snack ever is a thin slice of toast or bread, topped by a thin spread of Marmite, topped by thin slices of peeled cucumber. Cut the crusts off if you really want to enter foodie heaven. Delicious. Dr Mary Poulter London • My father, a serving non-commissioned officer in the army, was posted to Hong Kong in the early 1950s. He caught sprue, a wasting disease, and lost about five stone in weight. The diet prescribed to build him up was brown bread and Marmite. He lived another 50 years after that. Ben Cardwell Halesworth, Suffolk • I have a memory of my younger brother pleading, during the Lord’s Prayer, for God to “deliver us from eagles” (Letters, 2 January). Trevor Hedges Hyssington, Powys • Is it premature to blame Brexit for the absence of Easter eggs from supermarket shelves? Dr Mark Wilcox New Mill, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jonathan Freedland is right to say we fight shy of the “why” question when faced with extreme acts of cruelty or abuse (The Ghislaine Maxwell case raises a question some may think naive: why? 31 December). But he pulls up short. We do know a lot about the explanations. There is a small group of clinicians who work with such people in prisons and special hospitals, and their findings can be simply summarised. Every one of them has their own history of childhood emotional brutality at the hands of parents or carers. What they take into themselves is this relationship. Some re-enact this in later life, expelling their experiences on to others. Others keep it internalised, then inflict injury and cruelty on themselves. Fortunately, many will have ameliorative experiences that protect others and themselves from the worst consequences. True, not everyone has a “Maxwell-style father”, but delve into the backstory of any cruelly troubled individual and you discover an intergenerational history. No one is born inherently evil, or good. It’s about innate dispositions and their nurturing over time. Between the initial conditions and the later destructive behaviours there will be twists and turns of complex causality. It’s these we need to understand better to avoid resort to theology or just throwing up our hands in despair. Prof Andrew Cooper Tavistock Centre, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I am a landowner with 9,000 acres. I am probably in the minority of landowners because I encourage walkers on my land. There are, however, additional barriers to access aside from the “prejudice, traffic, locked gates, signs with the dread words ‘private – keep out’” mentioned by John Harris (Walking is a glorious, primal pastime – and far more radical than you think, 26 December). There is the planning department of our national parks to consider. I was recently encouraged to apply for a grant to create additional footpaths on my land. Indications were that some grant would be forthcoming, and I was told that the next step would be to apply for planning permission, which I did. Several months later I got a reply from the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park indicating that permission was highly unlikely to be granted. I was staggered by this. The right hand clearly does not know what the left hand is doing. The desire to improve access to my land is entirely altruistic. I do not charge for entry on to the land, my business is not dependent on access to the hill, and I have no tea shop or other commercial outlet dependent on passing traffic. I genuinely believe that more people should get out and walk for the benefit of their health and life. If your newspaper would like to support a campaign to change the planning policy guidelines in this regard I would be delighted. Pelham Olive London • One wintry day in the 1970s, I took my two small children out, intending to walk in the grounds of a nearby stately home. But the tall gates were locked, with a “private – keep out” sign. We climbed over them and started our walk. As we came in sight of the house, a window opened and a voice said: “I say, do you know this is private property?” “Oh, yes,” I replied, “we saw your notice when we climbed over the gates.” “Well, don’t come too near the house,” the voice said, closing the window. We had a lovely walk. Morag Stuart London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In its response to the staffing crisis in schools (Combine classes in case of Covid staff shortages, DfE tells teachers in England, 2 January), there’s one resource that the government has yet to tap into – the inspectorate. If Ofsted is not going to inspect “secondary schools or colleges in the first week of term”, why not deploy the inspectors to teach in them, and why not for as long as the health crisis affects staffing levels? Instead of telling teachers that their provision is “inadequate” or “requiring improvement”, the inspectors could lead by example and show staff how “outstanding” teaching can be done. There are clearly not enough inspectors to fill all the vacancies that will be caused by the pandemic, but Ofsted has around 1,800 employees across eight regions, most of whom could be redeployed to where the need is greatest, in those schools and colleges serving the most deprived communities. This policy would cost nothing, it would be hugely beneficial to those institutions and pupils in improving the quality of their education, and it would also act as a useful means of updating inspectors about the challenges of working in them. Politicians are forever claiming that they don’t have a magic wand to solve complex problems, but this measure is the closest they are likely to get to a partial solution that could be enacted immediately. What’s not to like? Frank Coffield Emeritus professor of education, UCL Institute of Education • Nadhim Zahawi has told schools to “utilise all your available teaching and non-teaching workforce to maximise on-site education for as many pupils as possible”. It would seem that schools are being seen by the Department for Education as simply holding places to keep children off the streets and away from homes so that their parents can go to work. Few state schools have classrooms large enough to “merge classes”, but since five of the current six ministers in the DfE went to independent schools, they may not realise this. “For a classroom to qualify for a government air purifier, the DfE says it must show a ‘sustained’ CO2 reading of 1,500 particles per million or higher for a week when occupied,” your report says. So, while teaching a merged class, a non-teacher needs to count air particles. Help! Michael Bassey Emeritus professor of education, Nottingham Trent University • If Robert Halfon is really concerned about children’s “wellbeing, mental health and anxiety”, he will get behind evidenced-based measures, such as mask-wearing, to help keep them in schools. Disruption caused by illness, school closures and a succession of unfamiliar teachers is bound to be extremely damaging to young people. To date there has been no serious government effort in the UK to improve ventilation in schools. However, the evidence is incontrovertible: masks help to cut transmission. Many students will be relieved to be in classrooms where others are wearing masks, especially those in clinically vulnerable families who carry the burden of knowing they could bring home a virus that could kill. None of this is ideal; pandemics aren’t. As adults we have to stop undermining measures that will help protect students and staff and keep schools open. Caroline O’Dwyer London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Romelu Lukaku is in line to return to Chelsea’s squad after holding productive talks with Thomas Tuchel over the striker’s controversial interview. Tuchel is expected to restore Lukaku to his side when Chelsea host Tottenham in the first leg of their Carabao Cup semi-final on Wednesday after the £97.5m forward expressed regret over going public with his unhappiness about life at Stamford Bridge. The Belgian was left out entirely against Liverpool on Sunday, but he trained with the first team before holding talks with his manager on Monday and there is a desire on all sides to move on from the episode. It is understood that Marina Granovskaia, the powerful Chelsea director, was involved in helping Lukaku and Tuchel clear the air. Tuchel had the backing of the club’s hierarchy and his squad when he decided to drop Chelsea’s record signing against Liverpool. Sources close to Lukaku hope that he offers a public apology over his comments. Chelsea fans were left fuming after Lukaku questioned Tuchel’s system and said that he hopes to return to Internazionale one day in an unauthorised interview with Sky Italia last week. The 28-year-old has no intention of leaving Stamford Bridge, but Tuchel was unimpressed with his actions. Tuchel said that he did not feel personally attacked, but the German is believed to be unhappy that Lukaku allowed doubts over his commitment to Chelsea to bubble up before a huge game against Liverpool. The Tottenham manager, Antonio Conte, said he hoped Lukaku, with whom he won Serie A at Internazionale last season, would play. “I think it’s always a good thing to play against a team that has all the players are available,” he said. “For the people that watch the game, I think it’s good to see the best players on the pitch.” Meanwhile, Thiago Silva has eased Chelsea’s defensive concerns after signing a one-year contract extension. Thomas Tuchel is facing the prospect of having to reshape his defence in the summer, with César Azpilicueta, Andreas Christensen and Antonio Rüdiger out of contract. Chelsea are yet to agree extensions with the trio but there has never been any prospect of Silva leaving the club on a free. Tuchel values Silva’s leadership and will be happy to have the 37‑year‑old for another season. The Brazil centre-back, who has impressed since joining on a free from Paris Saint-Germain in the summer of 2020, helped Chelsea to win the Champions League last season and hopes to go to the World Cup this year. “To play here with Chelsea is a real pleasure,” Silva told the club’s website. “I never thought I would play for three years here in this great club so I’m very happy to stay for another season. I will continue to give everything for this club and for the supporters, who have always been by my side since I arrived. “It’s amazing to have this relationship with the fans and not only that but the players, staff and the whole club. I’m going to give everything to keep playing at this level in the most important league in the world.” Chelsea are aware that Azpilicueta, Christensen and Rüdiger can negotiate pre-contract agreements with foreign clubs now. Real Madrid are leading the race to sign Rüdiger, who is not satisfied with Chelsea’s offer of £140,000 a week. The Germany centre-back is also of interest to Bayern Munich, Juventus and PSG. Tuchel recently revealed frustration at the uncertainty over Christensen, who has twice changed his mind after agreeing new deals. Barcelona are interested in Azpilicueta but it is understood that the captain will stay if given a suitable offer. Chelsea have mounting injury problems before the first leg of their Carabao Cup semi-final against Tottenham on Wednesday. The defender Trevoh Chalobah went off with a hamstring injury in the 2-2 draw with Liverpool on Sunday and is awaiting the results of a scan.At the core of Boris Johnson’s Brexit is a conflict between ideology and geography. The purpose of the project is divergence – a competitive leap away from Europe into other markets. But that impulse to move is thwarted by the permanence of Britain’s location. No matter how much sovereignty the Eurosceptics claim over national regulation, governing a medium-sized power 30 miles from the coast of France will always require some accommodation with the interests of neighbouring states. EU membership was not the only possible way to manage those relationships, but it worked better than anything that had been tried in the preceding centuries, and nothing has been arranged to replace it. The Brexit withdrawal deal offers only a technical framework for economic partnership, and even that is unstable, as is clear from the ongoing negotiations over customs checks for Northern Ireland and operating licences for French fishers in UK waters. The two issues are not equivalent in scale. Much more is at stake on the island of Ireland, given the history of sectarian violence. But they flow from a common Brexit delusion, which is the belief that “taking back control” is a unilateral assertion. In reality, borders have two sides. The folly of ignoring that strategic geometry has been routinely demonstrated, most recently in a silly exchange of recriminations over migrant boat crossings in the Channel. The Home Office, being unable to stop the vessels, has tried blaming French authorities for failing to stop embarkations. France replies that the draw factor is lax British labour regulations that act as a magnet for refugees seeking a new life. French agenda Tensions on that front predate Brexit. The UK was not part of the Schengen common travel area, and policing of the Anglo-French border is governed by the bilateral Le Touquet accord. But the capacity for escalation is higher now that Britain has no seat around the EU table where other continental leaders meet. As it happens, France sets the agenda at that table for the first six months of 2022, as holder of the rotating council presidency. That means also that President Emmanuel Macron’s hawkish view of Britain’s obligations to uphold the Brexit agreement it signed will set the tone in Brussels. Since Mr Macron is seeking re-election in April, his attention will be more than usually focused on domestic matters. To the extent that those issues overlap with Brexit – as in the fisheries dispute – there will be pressure to take a hard line with London. There is a tendency in Downing Street to see Mr Macron’s stance as punitive to the point of spite. The Tory Eurosceptic view is that France, affronted by the temerity of Britannia in choosing freedom, is determined to prevent her from enjoying its benefits. That analysis contains a truth, filtered through a jaundiced lens. Mr Macron, in common with other EU leaders, understands that Brexit is a deliberate strategic challenge to the European project, based on the false premise that Britain could retain benefits of proximity to continental markets while using deregulation to outcompete EU businesses. Plainly, it is in the economic interests of member states for that not to happen. It is also in the interest of politicians who are committed to the logic of supranational solidarity that Euroscepticism be seen as a strategic cul-de-sac. Mr Macron is less patient than some of his continental counterparts for that point to be proven. As German chancellor, Angela Merkel took the view that British noses should not be rubbed too hard in the folly of Brexit, lest they be put out of joint. She feared Britain sliding even deeper into populism. Her successor, Olaf Scholz, is closer to Mr Macron’s position. Anglo-French relations are not helped by the low opinion that the French president has of Boris Johnson. He has been quoted describing the prime minister as “un clown”. He believes Mr Johnson is a deceitful and unreliable partner. A run of poor judgments and conspicuous dishonesties have made that assessment of Mr Johnson’s character indisputable. It is a settled view among many voters and formerly loyal Tory MPs that he is a liar. Provoking Brussels The resignation of David Frost, Johnson’s Brexit negotiator, compounded the domestic crisis engulfing No 10, but will not change the underlying dynamics in relations with the rest of Europe. Lord Frost was a zealot in pursuit of pure sovereignty and, in quitting, he signalled displeasure at compromises imposed from Downing Street. But the prime minister’s room to compromise is limited when so many of his MPs have lost faith in his judgment, already feel betrayed and are winding themselves towards a regicidal frenzy. That is also a consideration for Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, who inherits Lord Frost’s portfolio. She was a remainer in 2016, but her ambition to succeed Mr Johnson is a more salient factor for 2022. She, too, will be wary of alienating the hardliners. The incumbent prime minister’s insecurity might give him cause to prefer provocation in Brussels, on the ancient but shabby premise that foreign quarrels can galvanise domestic audiences. The threat of using Article 16 – the emergency brake in the Brexit deal – has receded while the government deals with another pandemic wave, but a prime minister with few other options keeps his finger on the trigger. Alternatively, he might calculate that a trade war with Brussels would be too expensive and compound the impression of a slide into chaos when what people crave most is a period of sustained, stable and grown-up government. In neither scenario is it likely that the prime minister will be thinking beyond short-term survival or acting with a strategic concept for Britain’s evolving relations with its neighbours. If there was ever such a capacity in Mr Johnson’s regime, it has been swept away in a cascade of crises. When the only purpose left for the prime minister is getting from one day to the next, there is no room for coherent foreign policy. And, since incoherence with regard to Europe is intrinsic to Brexit, there is no imminent prospect of restored stability in relations with Britain’s nearest neighbours. For that to happen, there has to be a resolution in the conflict between geography and ideology. Only one side can win, of course. The facts of Britain’s place in the world beat the fantasies of escaping it. Mr Johnson and his party might continue to postpone their own comprehension of that defeat. They cannot ultimately avoid it.Democrats are seizing on this week’s anniversary of the deadly US Capitol riot to renew a push for voting rights legislation to safeguard democracy. Majority leader Chuck Schumer announced on Monday that the Senate will vote on changing its own rules on or before 17 January, the federal Martin Luther King Jr Day holiday, if Republicans continue to obstruct election reform. The deadline appears part of a concerted effort to use Thursday’s commemorations, marking a year since a mob of Trump supporters stormed the Capitol, seeking to overturn Joe Biden’s election win, to give fresh impetus to the long-stalled legislation. In a letter to Senate Democrats, Schumer argued that the events of 6 January 2021 are directly linked to a campaign by Republican state legislatures to impose voter restriction laws. “Let me be clear,” the New York senator wrote. “6 January was a symptom of a broader illness – an effort to delegitimise our election process, and the Senate must advance systemic democracy reforms to repair our republic or else the events of that day will not be an aberration – they will be the new norm. “Much like the violent insurrectionists who stormed the US Capitol nearly one year ago, Republican officials in states across the country have seized on the former president’s Big Lie about widespread voter fraud to enact anti-democratic legislation and seize control of typically non-partisan election administration functions.” Sweeping voting rights reforms have stalled in the evenly split 50-50 Senate, repeatedly blocked by a Republican-led filibuster, leaving Democrats unable to find the 60 votes needed to advance. Schumer went further than before in calling for a filibuster exception for voting rights. “We must ask ourselves: if the right to vote is the cornerstone of our democracy, then how can we in good conscience allow for a situation in which the Republican party can debate and pass voter suppression laws at the state level with only a simple majority vote, but not allow the United States Senate to do the same? We must adapt. The Senate must evolve, like it has many times before.” He added: “We hope our Republican colleagues change course and work with us. But if they do not, the Senate will debate and consider changes to Senate rules on or before 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, to protect the foundation of our democracy: free and fair elections.” Although Schumer’s words were ostensibly aimed at Republicans, there is little prospect of any members of that party shifting their position. On Monday, Republicans swiftly condemned what they described as a threat. Senator Mike Lee of Utah said: “Senator Schumer’s rash, partisan power grab should be seen for what it is – desperation and a failure to do what Joe Biden and Democrats ran on: unify. “If this rule change were to pass, the people of Utah and the United States would suffer immeasurably as the Senate devolves into a strictly majoritarian, Lord-of-the-Flies environment. Senator Schumer and his disastrous plan must be stopped.” But Schumer’s true target, amid blanket media coverage of this week’s anniversary, is likely to be Democratic holdouts Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, who have resisted abolishing or changing the filibuster. The senators from West Virginia and Arizona contend that if and when Republicans take control of the chamber, they could use the lower voting threshold to advance bills Democrats oppose. Schumer’s announcement is likely to set up 6 January vigils and Martin Luther King Jr Day events as rallying points for voting rights activists who have criticised Biden and the party in Congress for failing to prioritise the issue. But the president has become less cautious and more direct. Last month, he told ABC News: “If the only thing standing between getting voting rights legislation passed and not getting passed is the filibuster, I support making the exception of voting rights for the filibuster.” Schumer’s announcement was welcomed by Martin Luther King III, son of the civil rights activist and chairman of the Drum Major Institute. “There is no better way to honor my father’s legacy than protecting the right to vote for all Americans,” he said. “The King holiday is historically a day of service, and we hope the United States Senate will serve our democracy by passing the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. “We applaud Senator Schumer for his commitment to expanding voting rights, but we won’t halt our plans for action until legislation has been signed.” Also on Monday, the US Conference of Mayors sent a letter signed by 146 bipartisan mayors to Schumer and the minority leader, Mitch McConnell, urging them to act this month. It noted that in the past few months alone, 19 states passed 34 laws that made it harder to vote. The mayors wrote: “American democracy is stronger when all eligible voters participate in elections. Yet voting rights are under historic attack and our very democracy is threatened. “These bills would stop this voter suppression. They would create national standards for voting access in federal elections that would neutralize many of the restrictive voting laws passed in the states.”The attorney general of New York state has subpoenaed Donald Trump Jr and Ivanka Trump as part of its fraud inquiry into Trump’s businesses, the New York Times reported on Monday, citing a court document. The document was filed by lawyers for Trump in response to Letitia James’s decision to subpoena the former president himself. Trump alleges that James’s investigation is politically motivated. The Times said the subpoenas for Ivanka Trump and Donald Trump Jr “were served on 1 December, according to a person with knowledge of the matter”. The paper also noted that Eric Trump, another of Trump’s adult children, was questioned in the case in October 2020. James’ office went to court to enforce a subpoena on the younger Trump brother and a judge forced him to testify after his lawyers abruptly canceled a scheduled deposition. James’s civil investigation is focused on tax affairs at the Trump Organization, specifically whether assets were inflated or understated to influence tax valuations. In one such alleged instance, in 2016, the Guardian reported on differing valuations of a golf club outside New York City. The headline: How Trump’s $50m golf club became $1.4m when it came time to pay tax. Trump denies wrongdoing. The former president’s business and tax affairs are also the subject of a criminal investigation in Manhattan, in progress for more than three years and joined by James last May. Last year, the then Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr, gained access to Donald Trump’s tax records after a multiyear fight that twice went to the US supreme court. Before he left office at the end of last year, Vance convened a new grand jury to hear evidence as he weighed whether to seek more indictments in the investigation, which resulted in tax fraud charges in July against the Trump Organization and its longtime chief financial officer, Allen Weisselberg. Weisselberg pleaded not guilty to charges alleging he and the company evaded taxes on lucrative fringe benefits paid to executives. Both investigations are at least partly related to allegations made in news reports and by Michael Cohen, Trump’s former personal lawyer, that Trump had a history of misrepresenting the value of assets. James’ office issued subpoenas to local governments for records pertaining to Trump’s estate north of Manhattan, Seven Springs, and a tax benefit Trump received for placing land into a conservation trust. Vance issued subpoenas seeking many of the same records. James’ office has also been looking at similar issues relating to a Trump office building in New York, a hotel in Chicago and a golf course near Los Angeles. Her office won a series of court rulings forcing Trump’s company and a law firm to turn over records. James and the Trump Organization did not immediately comment on the subpoenas for Ivanka and Donald Trump Jr.Bins across parts of England are reportedly “overflowing” with rubbish from the festive period due to Covid-related staff shortages. London, Manchester, Somerset and Buckinghamshire are among the areas where councillors have warned that bin collections are being scaled back because of staff sickness. In Enfield, Conservative councillor Stephanos Ioannou said: “I’ve been driving round my ward and seeing bins overflowing and Christmas trees are left outside.” He said he had received double the number of complaints about missed collections that he would usually receive at this time of year. “Over the Christmas period, usually I get on average 30 emails a week on waste services. I checked my inbox yesterday … and had about 50 or 60.” Chelmsford city council said 23 members of staff were absent and that three days of food waste collections were cancelled. North Somerset council, meanwhile, said it was unable to collect 1,000 recycling bins on New Year’s Eve because crews remained “stretched due to staff sickness”. Several London boroughs have announced there may be delays in their services in the future. Haringey council warned that “uniquely challenging times” had affected its workforce and Newham council has temporarily suspended bulky waste collection as a result of “higher than normal levels of staff absence”. In Manchester, green food and garden recycling bin collections have been halted until further notice because of staff isolating. Residents have been told to put food waste into general waste bins and to keep hold of garden waste until collections start up again. In Birmingham, the city council apologised for missed collections over the festive period, blaming crews being affected by Covid. Earlier, ministers had requested that public sector leaders set up contingency plans for worst-case scenarios of up to a quarter of staff being off work. Asked whether such shortages were likely, health minister Edward Argar told Times Radio: “We model a range of scenarios up to things we think are highly unlikely, but you still do it because that’s what a responsible government does in preparing for all eventualities.” A spokesperson for Enfield council said: “Despite very challenging circumstances, Enfield council continued to deliver an uninterrupted bin collection service throughout the festive period. Staff elected to work tirelessly, even on bank holidays, so that no residents had a change to their bin collection days. “However, staff shortages related to Covid-19 remain a concern for all local authorities, across several services. Enfield council has reviewed its business continuity plans and is ready to redeploy staff to keep priority services operating as close to normal as possible.” Meanwhile, the Local Government Association (LGA), which represents councils across England, said crews have been strongly affected by the rise of Omicron and warned the problem “may get worse”. An LGA spokesperson said: “As cases of Covid-19 rise in light of the Omicron variant, councils are concerned that these existing staffing issues may get worse.” They also called for workers to be prioritised for Covid tests. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022 to remove references to bin collections in Gloucester as having been scaled back, and to add a statement from Enfield council that was received after publication.The family gatherings have disbanded, the new year’s hangovers have lifted. Despite record Covid infection figures over the holiday period, evidence that the rate of increase in cases may be slowing has prompted speculation that London, at least, may be close to reaching “peak Omicron”. Boris Johnson is said to be obsessed with this hypothetical time point, seeing it as crucial to how the Covid variant may play out nationwide. If hospitalisations follow the same trajectory and peak without the NHS being overwhelmed, the prime minister’s decision not to impose lockdown-style restrictions before the holiday period may be vindicated. Johnson is correct that peak Omicron, when it comes, will be an important moment. “The reason it matters when it peaks – and particularly when cases peak in the over-50s – is it’s likely that a week later we’ll see the peak in hospitalisations, and roughly two weeks later, we’ll see a peak in the number of deaths. It’s helpful, because it helps us to plan ahead,” said Dr Raghib Ali, a senior clinical research associate at the University of Cambridge’s MRC epidemiology unit. In London, cases appear to have stabilised, or even fallen during the past two weeks. New hospitalisations also appear to have stabilised in recent days, with 319 people admitted with Covid-19 on 31 December, compared with 450 the day before, and 511 the day before that. “We would guess, based on what case numbers are doing in London, that the peak in hospital admissions should be this week, and nationally, maybe a week later,” Ali said. This is roughly in line with the scenarios outlined in modelling studies, which suggest Omicron cases will peak in early-mid January. However, the magnitude of the peak appears to be significantly lower than some of the worst case scenarios predicted. For instance, according to modelling data published by the University of Warwick on 30 December, hospital admissions should by now be approaching about 5,000 a day in England. Yet, according to the latest figures, the number of Covid-19 patients admitted on 1 January was 1,819, down from 2,370 three days earlier. This does not necessarily mean we should disregard such models, as some hawkish MPs have suggested. Ali said: “Modelling, post-vaccination has become extremely difficult. And trying to predict people’s behaviour, well, they don’t even try to include that in the models, so, inevitably, they’re not going to be able to predict what’s going to happen. “Instead, they give a variety of scenarios, which are necessary because we have to have some idea of the range of possibilities. But when the range is so wide, it doesn’t really help policymakers, because the difference between 100 deaths a day and 6,000 deaths a day is just so huge.” Although the gloomiest predictions may have not come to pass, experts caution that we are not out of the woods yet. Some of the slowing could be a reflection of altered behaviour in the run-up to Christmas, when concern about escalating Omicron cases and a desire to spend the festive period with older relatives prompted many to scale back social activities and behave more cautiously. They may also have been less likely to get tested in the run-up to Christmas – assuming they could access a test. Now Christmas is over, some of us may have relaxed our behaviour. Whether we will see a surge in cases as a result of new year’s celebrations will not become apparent for about another week, as it takes five to six days on average after exposure to the virus for symptoms to develop, and then a further couple of days for people to seek a test and receive the results. The return of children to schools this week – many of whom remain unvaccinated – may also lead to a surge in cases owing to increased mixing. Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said: “The Warwick model suggested that cases would peak early January. But it is still impossible to say. We will probably only really know in retrospect a couple of weeks later. “What we can say is that the rate of increase has slowed dramatically for early mid-December, otherwise we would be seeing several millions of infections a day by now and that would have been impossible.” “Taking all this together, I don’t think we have peaked yet, but I think we are not that far away – or at least I hope so,” he added. A further fly in the ointment is that younger age groups accounted for the majority of Omicron cases during early-mid December, but increased intergenerational mixing over Christmas could yet trigger a surge of infections in older adults. Also, because Omicron is better at infecting people who have been vaccinated than Delta, proportionately more vulnerable older people are likely to fall ill. The good news is that most of these people have now received a booster dose, and their levels of immune protection should remain high for a few months yet – though we will not yet know whether they will require yet another dose. The ramped-up booster programme has been under way for several weeks, meaning many younger individuals should also soon have additional layer of immune protection, if not already. The combination of this vaccine-induced protection and so many people having been infected means we will eventually we will hit peak Omicron, after which cases should begin to fall. This will be cause for celebration, but for as long as significant numbers of people around the world remain unvaccinated, the global death toll from Covid will continue to rise, and the chances of further variants emerging will remain. So, although the battle with Omicron may be beginning to turn in the UK’s favour, the wider war against coronavirus continues.There were 157,758 new Covid cases confirmed in England and Scotland in the past 24 hours, government data showed on Monday. Cases were up 50% in the week from 28 December and 3 January compared with the week before. Monday’s figures for Wales and Northern Ireland will be updated after the bank holiday. The government said a further 42 people had died in England within 28 days of testing positive for Covid. Deaths last week were up 17% on the previous seven days. Last Wednesday there were 11,918 patients in hospital with Covid, 868 of whom were on beds with a mechanical ventilator. On Sunday another 12,121 people in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland received a first dose of Covid vaccine, 15,893 had a second dose and 106,665 had a booster or third dose. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 174,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate.Mikaela Shiffrin is set to return to the women’s World Cup at a slalom on Tuesday, eight days after a positive Covid-19 test that forced her out of two technical races in Austria last week. Shiffrin had a negative test on Monday afternoon before the American’s name appeared on the official start list for the race released by the International Ski Federation. “See you tomorrow, Zagreb,” Shiffrin wrote on Instagram. Shiffrin, who has won the event four times since 2013, will wear bib No 7. The first run starts at 12.30pm local time; the second run at 4.05pm, and this course will be set by Shiffrin’s coach, Mike Day. However, Shiffrin’s American teammate, Nina O’Brien, is among a group of racers missing Tuesday’s race as the coronavirus is increasingly affecting the women’s circuit, less than five weeks before the Beijing Olympics. The group sidelined for Tuesday’s race also includes at least three Swiss skiers – Camille Rast, Aline Danioth and Mélanie Meillard – as well as two Austrians, a Norwegian, and an Italian. One of the Austrians, Franziska Gritsch, said in November it was her “personal decision” not to get vaccinated against the coronavirus. She was not allowed to travel to the 27-28 November tech races in Killington, Vermont, for that reason. Shiffrin missed a giant slalom and a slalom in Lienz last week but remained in the lead of the overall World Cup standings, 93 points ahead of Sofia Goggia. The Italian speed specialist, who has not competed in slalom for five years, is absent in Croatia. Petra Vlhova, who is Shiffrin’s main rival in slalom, won the race in Austria last week and increased her lead over the American in the discipline standings to 120 points after four of nine races. Vlhova, who will open the slalom on Tuesday, has won the floodlit race in Zagreb for the past two years. No spectators will be allowed at the race on the outskirts of the Croatian capital, which usually is among the best-visited races on the women’s calendar.Court papers unsealed on Monday revealed that Virginia Giuffre received $500,000 in a legal settlement with Jeffrey Epstein, the late financier and convicted sex offender whom she accused of sexual abuse. The unsealing stemmed from Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against Prince Andrew, which she filed on 9 August in Manhattan federal court. Giuffre has long accused Epstein and his sometime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell – now a convicted sex trafficker, after her New York trial – of forcing her into sex with the royal when she was 17. He vehemently maintains his innocence. Andrew filed Giuffre’s settlement with Epstein as part of his attempt to dismiss her case, arguing that it shields him. Lawyers for the prince contend the settlement contains provisions that bar Giuffre from taking legal action against many Epstein associates. The unsealed settlement states that upon receipt of the stipulated sum, Giuffre, referred to under her maiden name, agrees to “remise, release, acquit, satisfy and forever discharge the said second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant … from all, and all manner of, action and actions of Virginia Roberts, including state or federal, cause and causes of action”. Andrew is not mentioned. Nor is the lawyer Alan Dershowitz, who Giuffre has accused of sexual misconduct facilitated by Epstein, which he has repeatedly denied. In a court filing on 29 October, Andrew’s attorneys said: “Giuffre settled her sex-trafficking and sexual-abuse claims against Epstein in 2009. In doing so, she provided Epstein with a general release of all claims against him and numerous other individuals and entities. “To avoid being dragged into future legal disputes, Epstein negotiated for this broad release, insisting that it cover any and all persons who Giuffre identified as potential targets of future lawsuits, regardless of the merit – or lack thereof – to any such claims.” The attorneys also said: “Because Prince Andrew is a senior member of the British royal family, he falls into one of the expressly identified categories of persons, ie, royalty, released from liability under the release agreement, along with politicians, academicians, businessmen and others allegedly associated with Epstein. “As a third-party beneficiary of the release agreement, Prince Andrew is entitled to enforce the general release contained therein.” Lawyers for Andrew will argue for dismissal on Tuesday. Giuffre’s settlement is discussed extensively in their motion to dismiss. Attorneys for Andrew did not comment on Monday. A representative for Giuffre’s lawyers said the release was “irrelevant to Ms Giuffre’s claim against Prince Andrew” as it “does not mention Prince Andrew”. “He did not even know about it. He could not have been a ‘potential defendant’ in the settled case against Jeffrey Epstein both because he was not subject to jurisdiction in Florida and because the Florida case involved federal claims to which he was not a part. The actual parties to the release have made clear that Prince Andrew was not covered by it. “Lastly, the reason we sought to have the release made public was to refute the claims being made about it by Prince Andrew’s PR campaign.” The settlement with Epstein has also come up in Giuffre’s lawsuit against Dershowitz. On 16 April 2019, she filed a defamation suit over his denials of sexual misconduct. Dershowitz filed the Epstein settlement agreement in his fight against that suit. “Professor Dershowitz, as a third-party beneficiary of the 2009 settlement agreement, was entitled to rely upon and enforce the terms of that secret deal,” lawyers for Andrew said. On Monday, Dershowitz told the Guardian the settlement prevented Giuffre from legal action against him. “I’m delighted that this document was unsealed,” he said. “I want all documents, all photographs, all videotapes, I want everything unsealed so the whole truth comes out. “This document demonstrates that, in exchange for $500,000 … she agreed that she would not sue any of the following people, and they included anybody who she had accused or could accuse, including [academics] and royalty.” On 14 December, judges in the Prince Andrew and Dershowitz cases said: “Mr Epstein, as is well known, is deceased. The document is well known to Ms Giuffre and, although under seal, has been available to all parties in these cases for some time. “We question whether any proper purpose would be served by the continued secrecy of the document save, perhaps, the dollar amount of the settlement it provided for.” On 29 December, judges ordered the unsealing, saying nobody – including representatives of Epstein’s estate – had made an adequate showing otherwise. Lawyers for Giuffre have requested documents as part of her litigation, such as proof of Prince Andrew’s claim that he cannot sweat. Giuffre has claimed the duke was “sweating profusely all over me” at a London discotheque on a night when she alleges they had sex. Andrew told the BBC the allegation could not be true, “because I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time”. The prince also maintained that on the day cited by Giuffre he took his daughter Beatrice to a late-afternoon children’s party at a Pizza Express restaurant in Woking, Surrey. After that, he said, he was home with his children all night. Prince Andrew’s profile has been damaged considerably by his association with Maxwell and Epstein. On 29 December, a federal jury in Manhattan found Maxwell, the daughter of the late press baron Robert Maxwell, guilty on five counts for luring girls as young as 14 into Epstein’s orbit for him to sexually abuse. Maxwell, 60, says she is innocent. Her lawyers have said they plan to appeal. Epstein, who also counted former presidents Donald Trump and Bill Clinton among his associates, was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking teen girls. He killed himself about a month after his arrest in a New York jail, while awaiting trial.Multiple NHS trusts across England have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid-19, with health leaders saying many parts of the service are now “in a state of crisis”. Boris Johnson on Monday ruled out the introduction of new curbs “for now” but said he recognised that the pressure on the NHS and its hospitals, was “going to be considerable in the course of the next couple of weeks, and maybe more”. More than half a dozen trusts have issued alerts over “internal critical incidents” in recent days, it is understood, as concerns mount that some may be unable to deliver vital care to patients. Health leaders said the “rapidly increasing” number of absent NHS staff was piling “very serious” pressure on hospitals already struggling to cope with increasing Covid admissions and “huge wider pressure” on urgent and emergency services. They said pressure was increasingly spreading to hospitals outside London, with those in the north-east and Yorkshire reporting the most rapid growth in Covid patient numbers in recent days. Johnson said there was no question Omicron continued “to surge through the country”, adding it would be folly to think the pandemic was over. A further 157,758 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases have been recorded in England and Scotland as of 9am on Monday, the government said. However, speaking publicly for the first time this year during a visit to a vaccination centre in Aylesbury, Johnson said the UK remained in a much better position than this time last year thanks to vaccines and stressed Omicron was “plainly milder” than previous variants. NHS chiefs also expressed cautious optimism that after weeks of rising hospitalisations in London – the centre of the Omicron outbreak – the increases may have peaked and are starting to level off. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS hospital, mental health, community and ambulance services, said: “We were seeing increases in the number of Covid-19 patients in London hospitals go up by 9% a day, 15% a day …  in terms of 27, 28 and 29 December. “Interestingly, in the last two days the increases have only been 1% and 2%, so they’ve dropped pretty significantly, so there’s a hope we might have seen a possible peak and plateau.” Another piece of positive news, he added, was that hospitals were still not admitting large numbers of seriously ill older people with Covid. Hopson said it was striking that hospital bosses were “pointing to the fact” that outbreaks in care homes were not translating into hospital admissions. One of the UK’s biggest care home operators called on the government to lift visiting restrictions after it recorded one Covid death in the last fortnight. Four Seasons Healthcare, which operates 165 care homes, said close to 4,000 residents were living under strict lockdowns because of outbreaks, but Omicron was proving so mild in a well-vaccinated population that limits on seeing family and friends were in “total imbalance” with the risk. Hopson cautioned that the biggest challenge facing many NHS trusts – like many workplaces across the country in the first week of the new year – was mounting staff absences. Covid-related staff shortages are causing havoc in many sectors, with bins in some areas “overflowing” with waste from the festive period and schools scrambling to hire substitute teachers for the start of the new term. Hopson said a number of trusts across the country had declared “internal critical incidents” over the past few days. United Lincolnshire hospitals NHS trust declared a critical incident with “extreme and unprecedented” staff shortages resulting in “compromised care”. Critical incidents are declared by NHS trusts when they believe they may no longer be able to provide a range of critical services. Declaring an incident enables local health chiefs to call for help from staff and other organisations, and creates a formal interim emergency governance structure to make prioritisation decisions at speed, for example redeploying staff or reprioritising services. Joe Harrison, the chief executive of Milton Keynes University hospital, said while his trust was not yet declaring a critical incident, he expected the “very pressured” situation to get worse before it got better. Meanwhile, in Yorkshire, the ambulance service said: “The added challenge of Covid-19-related absence among staff … is having a significant impact on our frontline operations.” In a blog published on Monday, Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, issued a stark warning that many parts of the health service were “currently in a state of crisis”. “In the face of high levels of demand and staff absence some hospitals are having to declare a critical incident,” he wrote. “Some hospitals are making urgent calls to exhausted staff to give up rest days and leave to enable them to sustain core services. Many more hospitals are having to ban visitors to try to reduce the spread of infection.” Taylor also urged politicians “making optimism and complacency a kind of political virility symbol” not to turn Covid policy “into a new terrain for the culture wars”, but instead to focus on the facts and “listen to those trying to cope on the frontline”. Meanwhile, the Royal College of Nursing (RCN) has written to ministers calling for further measures in England amid “confusing and concerning” differences in restrictions across the UK. “Nursing professionals are questioning the level and nature of the variation between governments,” wrote the RCN’s council chair, Carol Popplestone, and its general secretary and chief executive, Pat Cullen. “We therefore ask that, as secretary of state for health and social care, you work with counterparts across government on a more cautious approach for England without further delay.” Parliament will return from its Christmas recess on Wednesday, when the cabinet is set to meet to review the plan B rules. Ministers are expected to keep restrictions – including mask wearing, Covid passports and home working – as they are. On Monday, Johnson rejected the idea that England’s relatively limited Covid restrictions amounted to a gamble. “The way forward for the country as a whole is to continue with the path that we’re on,” he said. “We’ll keep everything under review. But the mixture of things that we’re doing at the moment is, I think, the right one.”Manchester United appear to be a work not in progress but regression. Ralf Rangnick is overseeing a team who set out with a structure against Crystal Palace, his first game in charge, but have since slid slowly backwards. João Moutinho’s sweet 82nd-minute volley handed Wolves a first league win at Old Trafford since 1980 while starting an inquest into where United are headed under an interim manager whose two main tenets seem to have gone awol. First, the “godfather of pressing” seems, oddly, to have eschewed his beloved mode of intensive shutting down. Second, the 4-2-2-2 to which he adheres has become aimless and misshapen. Before Moutinho crashed home – from a Phil Jones headed clearance – Romain Saïss hit a free-kick off the excellent David de Gea’s bar. United had existed in a quasi-survival mode for the entire game, which is hardly how to prosper. This, though, is precisely what Wolves did, moving to eighth place, one behind Rangnick’s side, courtesy of scintillating team play and the brilliance of Moutinho who, at 35 years and 117 days, is the oldest player to score a Premier League winner at United. “What I want is to help the team,” he said. “Winning here at Old Trafford is amazing for us. Phil Jones headed out the ball – I said I need to shoot: a beautiful goal.” Jones’s first appearance since January 2020 – an FA Cup tie, 707 days ago – vied with Bruno Fernandes’s failure to be reinstated following a one-game suspension, as the headline team news. Jones, who suffered a string of injuries including a serious knee problem, was chosen because of the unavailability of Victor Lindelöf, Harry Maguire and Eric Bailly – the first two with knocks, the latter because of Covid – as the 29-year-old partnered Raphaël Varane in central defence. Fernandes’s non-selection was different: an uneven season featuring five goals, plus United’s win against Burnley here last time out, meant Rangnick felt neither Mason Greenwood nor Jadon Sancho should make way for a footballer who has, in essence, been the de facto captain. From the opening kick United were forced to ball-watch. And when they did wrest hold of it Cristiano Ronaldo, captain for the night, and Luke Shaw were both careless. But Greenwood showed the way: a Nemanja Matic chest-and-pass to the youngster was as slick as the latter’s skip infield and arrow into Sancho. This had him bursting in on goal, and though his shot disappointed – and ignored the overlapping Ronaldo – United hoped this might settle them. But no: the rest of the contest was dire from them, as De Gea again emerged as their finest performer. Jones – until the error that allowed the winner – also impressed, following one commanding header with an intercept of a Nélson Semedo crossfield ball. The former England man, though, was unable to stop Daniel Podence’s run-then-shot which forced De Gea into a sharp save. From the subsequent corner United’s goalkeeper next had to leap towards his top right-hand corner to repel Rúben Neves when he blazed from 20 yards out. Wolves were a blur of gold. Podence nipped in and Aaron Wan‑Bissaka toed the ball out for another corner. When United threatened a breakaway from this, Jones passed straight into touch. “Control” has been Rangnick’s mantra yet United enjoyed zero. After Semedo became the latest Wolves man to burn De Gea’s fingers from close range, a sequence involving Ronaldo, Scott McTominay and Wan-Bissaka ended in Sancho’s effort being blocked. Podence next slipped by Jones, swivelled, and tested De Gea’s reflexes with nothing close to the Rangnick high press in evidence. When Semedo did exactly this on Sancho suddenly Raúl Jiménez was keeping De Gea honest – once more – from distance. Remarkable, too, was how Edinson Cavani, McTominay, Wan-Bissaka and Ronaldo could commit schoolboy howlers. The right-back did so in a phase that allowed Wolves to break before Ronaldo’s intended backpass of a header went close to setting-up Jiménez for the opener. A Cavani 30-yard attempt that sailed over José Sá’s goal summed up United before the interval: toothless. Francisco Trincão being stymied at the death by Jones at close range was Wolves in microcosm: impressive. So the visitors continued in the second half. Podence and Jiménez were thorns up-front and a Saïss 50-yard surge from centre-back posed United another problem. Only Greenwood’s rapier thrusts appeared to offer the insipid home outfit a chance of what would be a shock strike yet when Fernandes came on it was the England youngster who was hooked. This caused boos and Rangnick’s thought-process baffled – Sancho had been far less effective. Still, Fernandes soon crashed the ball off Sá’s bar, and Ronaldo headed in – he was offside – then hit a chance wide when racing clear. These misses were costly – Fernandes had an added-time free-kick beaten away by Sá, too. By the final whistle, huge credit had to go to Bruno Lage and his team. But Rangnick now has to show what he possesses as this was the poorest outing yet under him. He may wish to point to the five unbeaten matches before this reverse, but all of these were against moderate opposition.Twins in Salinas, California were born 15 minutes apart but won’t share a birthday – or even the same birth year. Aylin Yolanda Trujillo was delivered at Natividad medical center at exactly midnight on 1 January. She was the first baby born in Monterey county in 2022, as the US west coast ushered in a new year. But her brother, Alfredo Antonio Trujillo, had arrived just before her, at 11.45pm on 31 December, as 2021 came to a close. “It’s crazy to me that they are twins and have different birthdays,” said Aylin and Alfredo’s mother, Fatima Madrigal. “I was surprised and happy that she arrived at midnight.” Aylin was born a healthy 5lb 14oz, while Antonio weighed in at 6lb 1oz. The twins, from Greenfield, California, have two older sisters and an older brother, who was said to be excited for another boy to join the family. Photos showed both babies with their eyes closed, swaddled in matching striped blankets and wearing pink-striped beanies. The chance of twins being born on different days, months and years is relatively low. While there were about 3.75m births in the US in 2019, only about 120,000 – or about 3% – were twins, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Twin deliveries that straddle the narrow window of time between the last seconds of December and first moments of January are even less common. “This was definitely one of the most memorable deliveries of my career,” said Ana Abril Arias, a family doctor at Natividad medical group. “It was an absolute pleasure to help these little ones arrive here safely in 2021 and 2022. What an amazing way to start the New Year!”“We didn’t play well at all individually or collectively,” he tells Sky Sports. “In the first half, we had big problems to keep them away from our goal. “In the second half we changed to a back three and had more control then a spell of 15 minutes where we could have scored. The goal we conceded, we had enough players in the box. The cross had been defended by Jones but the goal we conceded was like too many this season. “Moutinho could shoot unmarked with no problems, no pressure. We’re very disappointed about the result and parts of our performance. Wolves were playing with four or five central midfielders and we had problems to control that part of the pitch. We decided to change our formation and we had more control – they didn’t have as many chances – but we missed our chances and we have to admit they deserved to win. “Wolves were the best team we’ve played. We have more problems today than in other games.” “It is one more victory,” the Wolves boss tells Sky Sports. “This is a lovely stadium, a place with a lot of history but the most important thing is how we played. We played in our way, we controlled the first half and missed a lot of chances. We win three points, and have more chances than goals.” Premier League: João Moutinho’s sweet 81st-minute volley handed Wolverhampton Wanderers a first league win here since 1980 while starting an inquest into where United are headed under an interim manager whose two main tenets seem to have gone AWOL, writes Jamie Jackson from Old Trafford. “What I want is to help the team,” says the scorer of Wolves’ winner in a post-match interview with Sky Sports. “Winning here at Old Trafford against a big team is amazing for us. We came here to play football, play with the ball, that’s what we do. “We created a lot of shots in the first half. They changed a little bit to three centre-backs like us. We controlled everything. We only let them create one opportunity on the bar. We deserved it because of what we did over 90 minutes. I hope we can continue with this performance. “Phil Jones headed out the ball. I tried to see where it went. After my first touch I said I need to shoot. That’s what I need to do, to shoot more. A beautful goal.” The Premier League table: Wolves move one place up to eighth, three points behind Manchester United. Ralf Rangnick’s beaten side stay in seventh place, four points behind Arsenal in fourth having played one game fewer. View the Premier League table Wolves have beaten Manchester United: Joao Moutinho scored one of Wolves’s 19 attempts on goal to win the three points for his side and it’s a victory they thoroughly deserved. United were poor this evening apart from one impressive bombardment on the Wolves goal between the 65th and 70th minute. Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeeeeeep! It’s all over at Old Trafford, where Wolves have won for the first time since 1980. 90+6 min: Jose Sa saves well from Bruno Fernandes’s free-kick, which was on target. 90+5 min: Phil Jones is the victim of a high boot from Fabio Silva and United have a free-kick just outside the Wolves penalty area, straight in front of goal. 90+5 min: A Rashford cross from the right is put out for a United corner. 90+4 min: Jose Sa is booked for time-wasting. 90+3 min: United corner. Max Kilman shapes to head it clear but hears a shout from his goalkeeper, who gathers under pressure from Cavani, who fancies his chances of beating the Wolves goalkeeper to the ball. 90+2 min: A floated pass from Fernandes towards Rashford is cut out by Romain Saiss as United hunt for an equaliser. 90+1 min: We’re into five recommended minutes of added time. Max Kilman puts the ball out of play for a Manchester United corner. Nothing comes of it. 89 min: Dendoncker wins a free-kick for Wolves deep in United territory, kicking the ball out off Jones. 88 min: Wolves substitution: Leander Dendoncker on for the excellent Daniel Podence. 86 min: Wolves pile the pressure on United, with Daniel Podence advancing on the opposition penalty area. Phil Jones dispossesses him and plays the ball forward, where a promising move breaks down on the back of a terrible Marcus Rashford pass towards Wan-Bissaka. 84 min: That was a decent goal from Moutinho, who took a touch before sending a perfectly placed shot into the corner. David De Gea saw it late and couldn’t get near the ball. There was good work from Adama Traore in the build-up – it was his cross from the right that was headed towards Moutinho by Phil Jones. Wolves go ahead after Joao Moutinho pounces on a headed clearance from Phil Jones on the edge of the penalty area and rifles a low drive into the bottom left-hand corner. 80 min: Daniel Podence optimistically appeals for a penalty after running into Raphael Varane and falling over. Referee Mike Dean isn’t having it. Wolves substitution: Fabio Silva on for Raul Jimenez. 79 min: Adama Traore tries to send a cross in from the right but Shaw intercepts and the ball is deflected high into the air and into the hands of David De Gea. 77 min: Marcal whips a cross to the far post towards Jimenez, who shapes to volley the ball past De Gea. Luke Shaw heroically gets the block in, hurting himself in the process. He’s OK to continue. 76 min: Manchester United substitution: Marcus Rashford on for Jadon Sancho, who has had a quiet night. 75 min: Romain Saiss clips the crossbar with his curled effort. David De Gea had it covered. 75 min: Adama Traore gallops into space and is brought down by Nemanja Matic on the edge of the United penalty area. Yellow card and a free-kick for United in a great position right of centre, a yard or two outside the box. 70 min: With over an hour played, Manchester United have finally sparked into life. Now Scott McTominay gallops forward and has his rasping shot blocked by Coady. 69 min: Ronaldo runs on to a long ball forward from Fernandes and steers a shot wide of the far upright under pressure from Conor Coady. 68 min: Ronaldo heads home a Bruno Fernades free-kick from wide on the right but is correctly flagged for offside. 67 min: So close! Bruno Fernades runs on to a pull-back and thumps the ball off the cross-bar from about eight yards out with the goal gaping. That is an awful, awful miss! 66 min: Wolves substitution: Adama Traore on for Trincao. Traore is still looking for his first goal of the season and has only seven career Premier League goals to his name. It’s a poor return. 64 min: A Daniel Podence cross towards Jimenez on the edge of the six-yard box is put out for a corner by Luke Shaw. Good defending. Jimenez got his head to the ball but Shaw was able to intercept. Nothing comes of the set piece. 63 min: A low cross drilled into the penalty area by Wan-Bissaka fails to beat the first man and Wolves clear through Conor Coady. 62 min: A Fernandes pass towards Cavani in the Wolves penalty area fails to reach its intended target and Sa dashes off his line to gather. 61 min: Jose Sa leaps to catch another poor Aaron Wan-Bissaka cross into the Wolves penalty area. 59 min: Manchester United substitution: Bruno Fernades on for Mason Greenwood. Edinson Cavani’s number had been punched into the board by the fourth official originally before Ralf Rangnick had a change of heart. 58 min: Shaw blocks a Nelson Semedo shot from distance after Trincao had dummied the ball and let it run through to the wing-back. 56 min: Having played an advantage for Wolves after a Luke Shaw foul which earns the left-back a booking, Mike Dean brings play back for a free-kick from which notning comes. Along with McTominay, Shaw will miss United’s next Premier League game too. 54 min: Marcal cuts out a low Wan-Bissaka cross from the right. Actually no, on second view - he doesn’t. The United right back actually kicked the ball against his own standing leg and sliced it wide. That about sums United’s performance up in a nutshell. 53 min: Luke Shaw becomes the latest United player to give the ball away cheaply. The home side are dominating possession in the early stages of the second half but doing next to nothing of note with it. 52 min: Trincao fouls Cavani on the halfway line and concedes a free-kick. 51 min: Like all United’s forward players, Mason Greenwood has been quiet tonight but gets on the ball for long enough to send a shot high and wide. 49 min: Wolves win a free-kick wide on the right for a daft McTominay foul on Podence. The United midfielder gets booked and will miss his side’s next game. Standing over the dead ball, Moutinho sends a cross to the near post but fails to beat the first defender. 48 min: Another wayward pass, this time from Sancho to Edinson Cavani. Ruben Neves mops up for Wolves. 47 min: Manchester United attack with Jadon Sancho taking on his man on the inside left and trying to pick out Ronaldo just inside the penalty area. His pass goes astray and Romain Saiss boots clear for Wolves. 46 min: Play resumes, with Manchestrer United needing to stamp some home side authority on proceedings. They’ve been pretty pedestrian and sloppy so far. No changes in personnel on either side so far. Peep! An absorbing half comes to a close and Wolves’ inability to get the ball in the opposition net is in danger of costing them again. They’ve controlled the game and had 14 or 15 shots but failed to score. Ruben Neves missed the pick of the chances, a splendid volley that David De Gea performed heroics to keep out. 45+2 min: Neves has a shot blocked by Phil Jones and the ball breaks to Raul Jimenez, who shoots over the bar. 45 min: Daniel Podence threads a lovely ball into the path of Jimenez in the United penalty area. His touch is poor. Wolves recycle the ball and Semedo squares the ball, but Phil Jones sticks out a leg to deny Podence. Wolves have a corner, from which they win another. 44 min: Raphael Varane hacks clear as Trincao tries to pull a cross into the United penalty area from the byline. 43 min: Edinson Cavani sends a wild shot high over the bar from just outside the Wolves penalty area. 41 min: Trying to shoot on the turn from a tight angle, Jimenez has an effort blocked. 40 min: Daniel Podence tries to escape down the left wing but runs into a stout wall of resistance in the form of Scott McTominay. 37 min: Wolves enjoy a sustained spell of possession and eventually win a free-kick wide on the left for an Aaron Wan-Bissaka foul on Marcal. Trincao’s inswinger is met by the head of Romain Saiss, who can’t steer his effort on target. Another chance goes a begging for goal-shy Wolves. 35 min: Raul Jimenez misses with a near post header from close range following an ill-advised header back towards his own goalkeeper by Cristiano Ronaldo. Offside. 33 min: A heavy pass from Edinson Cavani fails to pick out Ronaldo, who was in a good position in the Wolves penalty area. 32 min: Romain Saiss heads a Luke Shaw cross clear. 31 min: Neves picks out Semedo with a long, low pass to the right flank but he’s forced backwards by Luke Shaw. 29 min: There’s a break in play as Ruben Neves receives treatment for an injury following a coming-together with Scott McTominay. He seems OK. 28 min: Greenwood and Wan-Bissaka combine down the right and the full-back sends a cross towards the far post from the byline. Not for the first time this evening, it’s too high for Ronaldo. 27 min: Wolves tenth attempt at goal comes and goes as Raul Jimenez sends a shot high over the bar from distance. 26 min: Marcal is penalised for a foul on Ronaldo and United win a free-kick halfway inside the Wolves half. They play the ball forward but Ronaldo is flagged for offside. 24 min: Trincao and Neves combine down the right for Wolves but are forced into retreat. Moments later, Daniel Podence forces David De Gea into action with a shot to the near post from inside the United penalty area. 24 min: Ruben Neves miscontrols a Mason Greenwood pull-back into the Wolves penalty area with a heavy touch but gets away with it. Wolves clear. 21 min: Luke Shaw sends a wayward cross wafting across the Wolves penalty area and goalkeeper Jose Sa takes possession. Wolves are undoubtedly having the better of proceedings but there’s not a great deal between the sides. 19 min: An Aaron Wan-Bissaka cross from the right is too high for Cristiano Ronaldo to connect with. 18 min: A constant thorn in United’s side, Nelson Semedo cuts in from the right with Luke Shaw backing off him. The Wolves man ubnleashes a shot that stings the palms of David De Gea. 16 min: Podence, Semedo and Neves combine down the right. Neves unleashes a shot but sends his rising effort high and wide of the United goal. 15 min: From the right flank, Semedo sends another cross through the Manchester United penalty area but there’s nobody in a Wolves shirt present to capitalise. The Wolves wing-backs are causing United all sorts of bother, getting in behind Luke Shaw and Aaron Wan-Bissaka on the counter whenever they venture up the field. 13 min: My word! From a Wolves corner, the ball finds its way to Ruben Neves outside the United penalty area. He chests it down and volleys towards the top corner. De Gea saves superbly. What a goal that could have been! 12 min: Podence gets a shot off from a tight angle but David De Gea gets down to save at his near post. 10 min: Facing his own goal, Phil Jones does well to stretch and cut out a curled cross into the centre towards Podence from Nelson Semedo. 9 min: No chances of note for either side so far but Wolves have started brightly and are on the front foot, attempting to take the game to United. 7 min: Jadon Sanchez takes a quick pass upfield from Greenwood and bears down on the Wolves penalty area as United counter. Rather than play Ronaldo in to his left, he elects to shoot and has his effort blocked. He should have passed but Ronaldo keeps his counsel for now. 6 min: Ruben Neves sends Jimenez on his way down the inside right but his delivery towards Podence is put out for the first corner of the game. Manchester United clear at the second attempt. 5 min: Wolves go forward but a crossfield ball towards Daniel Podence on the left touchline is cut out by the head of Aaron Wan-Bissaka. 3 min: United play out from the back, eventually lofting the ball towards Ronaldo in the penalty area. He miscontrols and loses it. Wolves clear their lines. 1 min: Raul Jimenez sends a cross into the Manchester United penalty area from the right and Phil Jones thumps it clear with a header. His clearance is greeted by a loud roar of approval from those in the Stretford End. 1 min: Wolves get the ball rolling courtersy of Raul Jiminez, looking for their first win at Old Trafford for 40 years. Crikey! Not long now: Conor Coady leads Wolves out and the visitors are followed moments later by Cristiano Ronaldo and his Manchester United teammates. Both sets of players line up either side of Mike Dean and his match officials, and kick-off at Old Trafford is just seconds away. Cristiano Ronaldo: With Harry Maguire out, the Portuguese striker will skipper Manchester United this evening for only the second time in his two spells at the club. Ralf Rangnick on the inclusion of Phil Jones in Manchester United’s starting line-up. “I can only judge him from the last four weeks in training,” he tells Sky Sports. “And he has always been very professional, very much involved in all the things that happen on the pitch and since the other three centre-backs are all out for injury or Covid reasons, for me he was the logical choice for tonight’s game.” Championship: In a big game at the lower end of the second tier, Derby County defender Curtis Davies has just powered a header home in the third minute of added time to rescue a point against Reading. It’s finished 2-2 at the Madejski Stadium, where rock bottom side Derby have come from two goals down. Meanwhile at Stoke, Preston have beaten their hosts by the odd goal of three. View the Championship table Those teams: It’s a huge night for Phil Jones, who makes his first appearance for Manchester United in 707 days, starting alongside Raphael Varane in the heart of the home side’s defence in the absence of Harry Maguire, Victor Lindelof and Eric Bailly. The defender, whose last appearance was in a 6-1 FA Cup win against Tranmere on 26 January 2020, comes into defence along with Raphael Varane, replacing Harry Maguire and Eric Bailly. Francisco Trincao and Nelson Semedo come in to the Wolves starting line-up. Man Utd: Dde Gea, Wan-Bissaka, Varane, Jones, Shaw, McTominay, Matic, Greenwood, Sancho, Cavani, Ronaldo. Subs: Rashford, Lingard, Fred, Bruno Fernandes, Dalot, Henderson, Alex Telles, Van de Beek, Elanga. Wolves: Jose Sa, Kilman, Coady, Saiss, Nelson Semedo, Trincao, Neves, Joao Moutinho, Marcal, Jimenez, Daniel Podence. Subs: Hoever, Ait Nouri, Bruno Jordao, Silva, Ruddy, Dendoncker, Traore, Cundle, Bueno. Referee: Mike Dean (Wirral) Manchester United: Ralf Rangnick has told Edinson Cavani that he “desperately” wants the striker to stay at Manchester United and will not allow him to leave in January despite reported interest from Barcelona. Read on ... Something of a defensive crisis for Ralf Rangnick has prompted exciting chatter that Phil Jones could make his first appearance for Manchester United in two years. With Harry Maguire and Victor Lindelof absent for Covid-related reasons and lingering doubts over the fitness of Eric Bailly, Jones could partner Raphael Varane in the heart of United’s defence. While midfielder Paul Pogba is absent with a thigh problem, Un ited can welcome Bruno Fernandes back from a spell on the Naughty Step. Wolves left-back Rayan Ait-Nouri could miss out with a groin injury, while Hwang Hee-chan, Pedro Neto, Yerson Mosquera, Jonny and Willy Boly are all absent. The festive football schedule rumbles on, with Old Trafford the setting for today’s Bank Holiday fixture between Manchester United and Wolves. The hosts sit seventh in the table having played just 18 games, the same number as Wolves, who are six points and two places further back. A win for United this evening would move them to within a point of Arsenal in fourth. Kick-off is at 5.30pm (GMT) but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.Five of the world’s most powerful nations have agreed that “a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought” in a rare joint pledge to reduce the risk of such a conflict ever starting. The pledge was signed by the US, Russia, China, the UK and France, the five nuclear weapons states recognised by the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) who are also the five permanent members of the UN security council. They are known as the P5 or the N5. Such a common statement on a major issue of global security has become a rarity at a time of increasing friction between Russia, China and the west. With Moscow threatening to invade Ukraine and China signaling its readiness to use military force against Taiwan, the joint statement represents a renewed commitment to prevent any confrontation turning into a nuclear catastrophe. A senior US state department official said the wording of the statement had been hammered out at P5 meetings over several months, despite the high-tension environment. “At the base level to be able to say that this is how we think about these risks, and this is an acknowledgement that it is something that we want to avoid, particularly during a difficult time, I think is noteworthy,” the official said. The release of the statement had been timed to coincide with the five-yearly review conference of the NPT, but that conference has been postponed amid the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, and disagreements on whether the session could be held virtually. “We affirm that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought,” the statement said, echoing a joint declaration by Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev at a 1985 summit in Geneva. The NPT was a bargain between states without nuclear weapons, who pledged not to acquire them, and the five nuclear-armed states, which promised to disarm. The review conference, originally planned for 2020, was expected to be contentious as a result of the stalling of momentum towards disarmament and the moves made by the five weapons states to modernise their arsenals. Four other countries with nuclear weapons not recognised under NPT – Israel, India, Pakistan and North Korea – have also shown no signs of reducing their stockpiles. Meanwhile, the breakdown of the 2015 nuclear agreement with Iran and the deadlock so far in attempts to salvage it, have raised the risks of nuclear proliferation, particularly in the Middle East. Monday’s joint statement was aimed at improving the atmosphere at the NPT review conference. China’s vice-foreign minister, Ma Zhaoxu, welcomed Monday’s statement as “positive and weighty”, adding it would “help increase mutual trust and replace competition among major powers with coordination and cooperation”. It took several months of negotiation over the wording of the declaration before all five powers were ready to agree. France in particular had concerns that such a statement would undermine the deterrent effect of its arsenal. “France has a nuclear doctrine reserving the right to use nuclear weapons as a “final warning” to warn off an aggressor or even a state sponsor of terrorism”, said Oliver Meier, senior researcher at the Institute for Peace Research and Security Policy. Meier said the UK’s reservations were not so clearly expressed but he believed them to be similar. A line in the joint statement saying that “nuclear weapons – for as long as they continue to exist – should serve defensive purposes, deter aggression, and prevent war,” was added to address French concerns. The five nuclear weapons powers also stated that the “reduction of strategic risks”, making sure global tensions never lead to nuclear conflict, was one of their “foremost responsibilities”. “We underline our desire to work with all states to create a security environment more conducive to progress on disarmament,” the statement said. A senior US official said the declaration was the result “of a good and substantive and constructive conversation about how to reduce nuclear threats and eventually eliminate them”. “Given the security environment, I’m pretty shocked that the P5 could agree to this much,” Heather Williams, a senior lecturer in defence studies at King’s College London, said. Williams and other nuclear experts have urged the nuclear weapons powers to improve their channels of crisis communications as one of the ways of reducing risks of an unplanned clash escalating into nuclear conflict. Arms control advocates widely welcomed the declaration but called for it to be backed up by a return to disarmament. “With nine nuclear arsenals currently being enhanced, and Covid problems besetting nuclear-armed submarines and facilities, this statement from five of the nuclear-armed leaders is welcomed, but does not go far enough,” said Rebecca Johnson, the vice president of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, and the first president of the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons. “As long as nuclear weapons continue to be advertised and wielded by some, we are all put at risk of nuclear war.”Good morning. Covid-positive nurses are being recalled to work in NSW hospitals. Scott Morrison is resisting calls to make rapid antigen tests free. And Prince Andrew accuser Virginia Giuffre’s legal deal with Jeffrey Epstein has been released. Covid-positive nurses are being ordered to work in breach of NSW health protocols as hospital managers resort to desperate measures to staff their facilities that are buckling under the Omicron outbreak. As 2,500 health workers are in isolation across the state, Guardian Australia has been contacted by multiple nurses working across several hospitals who are alarmed at finding themselves working alongside Covid-positive colleagues. All of the nurses say they had received unofficial, verbal advice from their hospitals that Covid-positive nurses could leave their mandated isolation to work, provided they were asymptomatic and wore personal protective equipment. A near-dozen-year-old legal settlement between Virginia Giuffre and Jeffrey Epstein has been released. Giuffre has long accused Epstein and his sometime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell – now a convicted sex trafficker – of forcing her into sex with the royal when she was 17. Court papers reveal Giuffre received $500,000 in her lawsuit against Epstein. The unsealing stemmed from Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against Prince Andrew, which she filed on 9 August in Manhattan federal court. Andrew filed Giuffre’s settlement with Epstein as part of his attempt to dismiss her case, arguing that it shields him. He vehemently maintains his innocence. Scott Morrison has resisted calls to make rapid antigen tests free across the country as he insists the health system can manage the “very different virus” of the Omicron variant. Despite growing pressure to provide free tests more widely – including to vulnerable and low-income groups – the prime minister said subsidised tests would remain limited to people who were close contacts with symptoms. Australia Australians in regional areas with severe mental health problems will go without help after “devastating” changes to the telehealth system, psychiatrists warn. Federal government reforms removed a 50% loading for some rural psychiatric services, meaning some types of consultations providers will no longer be able to bulk bill. Disability groups say the proposed religious discrimination bill will erode the rights of people with a disability and allow for legally protected “hurt and humiliation”. A positive Covid case has been recorded at the Newmarch House aged care home in Sydney, where 19 people died during an outbreak in 2020, putting families of residents on edge amid growing concern at the strain on the sector’s workforce as case numbers explode around the country. People in NSW are struggling to be counted as a Covid case as the state falls behind in its reporting. Here is one person’s testimony. While 5 million Australians go hungry each year, an estimated 7.3m tonnes of food is wasted and up to 25% of all vegetables produced never leave the farm, often because they are too oddly shaped for the grocery store. But new subscription services across the country are addressing this problem. The world Feminist campaigners in France are calling for tougher government action to combat violence against women and girls after three women were allegedly killed by their current or former partner on the first day of 2022. A man who was abducted at the age of four and sold into a child trafficking ring has been reunited with his family after drawing a map of his home village from his memories of three decades ago and sharing it on a popular video-sharing app. Haiti’s prime minister, Ariel Henry, has been forced to flee the northern city of Gonaïves after a shootout between his security forces and an armed group that had warned the leader not to set foot in the city. An estimated 12 people a day died or disappeared while trying to reach Spain in 2021, more than double the total for the previous year. The 4,404 refugees who perished included 205 children, according to Caminando Fronteras (Walking Borders). A hockey fan saved a Canuck staffer’s life after spotting a cancerous mole on his neck. Recommended reads Films about the end of the world are on the rise. It’s no longer the preserve of megabudget disaster movies or bleak survivalist thrillers. The mainstream movie industry has now made sure that even the most casual filmgoer will be well used to witnessing humanity’s spectacular destruction. Unprecedented change has overwhelmed 2020 to 2021. Enduring the Covid pandemic has meant living through drastic adjustments to social and professional environments, an intense restriction of movement and choice, and prolonged bouts of social distancing and isolation. Now, almost two years on, many are rethinking what they want out of life and considering changes, from mental health to reshaping their identities. When Donald Trump caught the coronavirus, the artist Zorawar Sidhu found himself refreshing his phone for updates. Waiting anxiously for the 2020 presidential election result, he was glued to flashing screen again. We are all doomscrollers now, compulsively absorbing a constant flow of negative news, with untold psychological and social consequences. Sidhu and a fellow artist, Rob Swainston, have responded with an exhibition about what it feels like to be bombarded with news. Listen One of Full Story’s best episodes in 2021 was about Isaiah. As a kid, Isaiah couldn’t escape the police. He went on to spend his teenage years in and out of youth detention. Now this young Dunghutti man is trying to change how our justice system treats Indigenous children. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport The Matildas should not forget about Katrina Gorry before the 2023 World Cup. As a midfielder, Gorry holds rare attributes that set her apart. Media roundup Australia set a new daily Covid case record of 37,100 confirmed infections, the Age reports, with experts believing the number is much higher. Support has begun arriving for farmers affected by a New Year’s Eve fire in Poolaijelo in western Victoria, according to the ABC, which is responsible for the decimation of at least 4,500 livestock and 7,000-plus hectares of land. Coming up The man charged over a fire at Old Parliament House is due to appear in court in the ACT. And if you’ve read this far … Georgia Maq, Tame Impala, Augie March: these are some of the Guardian Australia’s most listened to musicians of the month. Read about 10 of our favourites here. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.On the morning of Monday 27 September, a crew member on board the Hsinlong 1 fishing vessel went to fetch his friend Arnold Latu for breakfast. Latu, in his mid-30s, was the monitoring officer of the Chinese-owned, Fiji-flagged vessel, employed by the Tongan government to check that the amount of fish caught on its three-week voyage was legal and correctly recorded. The Hsinlong 1 had almost completed its work and was berthed close to Pangaimotu Island, off the shores of Nuku’alofa, awaiting the OK from local authorities to berth at the Tuimatamoana fishing wharf. “We were just about to have breakfast and get ready for the vessel to go in to the wharf to berth and one of the crew members had gone to call Latu to come and have breakfast,” said a senior crew member onboard the vessel at the time, who did not wish to be named. “The crew member shouted to us that Latu was not responding to his calls and was lying on his bed. We went in and touched his body which was already cold. We were shocked and did not know what to do.” Latu’s friends remember him as a hard worker, a friendly person who got along with everyone, and a “good listener and one who is always keen to help anyone”. He was also described as a “marine man” who loved the seas and his job at Fisheries. His longtime friend Benny Jagroop, who was not on the vessel, described him as a “little brother” who came from a tough neighbourhood, but worked with a local group called Falepiliki (brick house) to try to support young men to stay in school, and stay out of trouble. “Latu’s death is still a mystery for us,” said Jagroop. “So if you ask what [is] the speculation around Arnold’s death, for real I have no idea.” After they found him dead, crew members alerted the ship’s captain, and Tongan police were contacted. But nearly three months later and despite calls for a transparent investigation from international bodies, there are no answers about what caused the apparently healthy man’s death, and neither police, nor the government of Tonga were willing to speak about the case. Dr Tuikolongahau Halafihi, chief executive of Tonga’s Ministry of Fisheries, said they were not able to release any information because the case was still being investigated by Tonga police. “I won’t be able to give you any information about this case as we are still awaiting the report from police and health. We are still after this report but it’s still with the police,” he said in an email response to questions from the Guardian. Tonga police did not reply to requests for comment. Despite calls from non-government organisations like WWF and the Association of Professional Observers (APO), the cause of death and results of the postmortem examination have not been revealed by authorities. The WWF wrote about Latu in its December position paper, saying that there had been no report of the cause of death, nor was there any information to “suggest he was sick or injured” before his death. Bubba Cook, WWF western and central Pacific tuna programme manager, called for transparency and a thorough investigation of any reported deaths or incidents involving fisheries observers. “In the case of any missing human, from a vessel, [if] there’s a death of anyone, whether it’s crew member or a fisheries observer, there should be an investigation into that fatality. And it should be a thorough investigation and the information about that should be made public,” he said. Hsinlong Fisheries Ltd, the owner of Hsinlong 1, did not respond to detailed questions from the Guardian. Nor did Tonga police. ‘If you’re not protecting all, you’re not protecting any’ There is no evidence of foul play in Latu’s death, however the uncertainty as to how he died has attracted the attention of the WWF and the APO, which monitor the safety of fishing observers around the world. Being an observer, which involves monitoring fishing practices and catches to make sure boats follow the rules, is a dangerous job that can put observers in conflict with the crews on the vessels on which they are working – often hundreds, or even thousands, of kilometres from the nearest port. According to the Association for Professional Observers, there have been more than a dozen cases of observers dying on the job since 2009 alone, including a number from the Pacific. Eritara Aati Kaierua from Kiribati died onboard a fishing vessel in 2020. His family have serious concerns about the investigation conducted into his death. Antin Tamwabeti, also from Kiribati, died on another boat in May 2019, in circumstances which have not been reported, though his case was ruled a suicide. According to the company that hired him, he was harassed and threatened by the crew of the Taiwanese-flagged boat he was on shortly before his death. The WWF has argued that Latu’s death has “exposed a significant potential weakness in regional observer safety and security measures related to jurisdictional ambiguity”. Because Latu’s deployment was classified as a national trip and the vessel was fishing in Tonga’s waters, Latu was not given safety equipment that he would have been given if the trip had been in international waters and had fallen within the context of a Regional Observer Programme trip. But the WWF says this should not matter. “We’ve made good advancements to addressing the safety issues with observers … but they didn’t go far enough,” said Cook. “And I think that’s evidenced by Arnold Latu’s situation, because he was on a national trip, there was some jurisdictional ambiguity around who was responsible, on what rules are subject to with respect to safety. And our position is, if you’re not protecting all of the observers, you’re not protecting any of them.” In a document shared with the Guardian by the Association for Professional Observers (APO), Samuela Bulimetuira, the manager of safety compliance and response at the Maritime Safety Authority of Fiji, wrote that since Latu’s death occurred in Tongan waters, Tonga was responsible for investigating. Tonga and the company that owned the vessel “have an obligation to report all incidents especially deaths onboard to the Flag State Authority [Fiji] as soon as is practicable”. Bulimetuira did not respond to questions from the Guardian.Apple became the first US company to be valued at over $3tn on Monday as the tech company continued its phenomenal share price growth, tripling in value in under four years. A pandemic-era surge in tech stocks has driven the major US tech companies to new highs, pulling US stock markets with them. Apple became the world’s first trillion dollar company in August 2018, passed $2tn in 2020 and hit its new high as trading began after the holidays and its shares passed $182.80 a piece before dipping lower to end the day valued at over $2.9tn. Apple alone is now more valuable than the combined values of Boeing, Coca-Cola, Disney, Exxon-Mobil, McDonald’s, Netflix and Walmart. Its shares have risen 38% since the beginning of 2021, one of the largest gains on the Dow Jones industrial average stock market index. The company released its last quarterly earnings in October and made a profit of $20.6bn over the previous three months despite suffering from Covid-related supply chain issues. It is unlikely to remain the only $3tn company as analysts expect Microsoft will also hit the mark later this year. The news came as US markets edged higher and European shares bounded to record highs in the first day of trading in 2022 as investors bet on a steady economic recovery despite the rising number of Covid-19 cases caused by the Omicron variant. Europe’s benchmark stock index, the Stoxx 600, rose to a record intraday high of 491.73 points on Monday, surpassing its November peak of 490.58, as global oil and equity markets climbed. It later closed at 489.99, up 0.45%. The Stoxx 600 recorded a 22.4% jump last year, its second-best yearly performance in over a decade, after the global rollout of Covid-19 vaccines and government stimulus spending encouraged investors to pour money back into the markets. The share price of airlines Lufthansa and Air France–KLM were two of the biggest climbers across Europe’s equity markets after analysts at Citi forecast that the reopening of travel routes to Asia could help bolster the beleaguered travel sector. Lufthansa shares rose by almost 8.9% to €6.73 a share, and Air France KLM rose by 4.9% to €4.06. Europe’s record start to the new year set the stage for US markets to continue their late 2021 recovery. The opening of the S&amp;P 500 index, which climbed by 26.9% last year, was bolstered by a 9% jump in Tesla shares after the company’s quarterly deliveries exceeded expectations. In another boost to US markets global oil prices, which last year recorded their biggest annual rise since at least 2016, resumed their rise towards $80 a barrel as fears that emerged late last year over the impact of the Omicron variant waned. The oil price helped shares in US oil majors Chevron and ExxonMobil climb by 1% each. The London Stock Exchange (LSE), which has lagged behind its European and US rivals by climbing 14.3% last year, was closed on Monday for the new year bank holiday. The FTSE 100 has been criticised as “old-fashioned” due to its dearth of tech companies and a glut of oil and bank stocks. It remained 6.5% below its May 2018 peak last year while the US, German and French markets all hit record highs. Sean Darby, a global equity strategist at Jefferies, said: “Although Covid-19 variants permeated the global economy, 2021 was the year of records with many bourses closing at or near record highs, while inflows into equities surpassed their largest accumulation ever. Peering into 2022, we expect volatility to rise.” Global oil markets are also expected to face ongoing volatility in the year ahead as traders balance the risk that the Omicron variant may stall a rebound in demand for transport fuels, against uncertain supplies from the world’s biggest oil producers. • This article was amended on 5 January 2022. The S&amp;P 500 index rose by 26.9% last year, not a record 47.7% as an earlier version said. The latter figure relates specifically to the S&amp;P 500 energy index.A large cleanup effort is under way in Los Angeles county after an estimated 8.5m gallons of raw sewage flooded through a neighborhood in the city of Carson, closing beaches and leaving toilet paper, feces and toxic residue strewn across nearby streets and sidewalks. The spill occurred last Thursday when a 60-year-old sewer line failed, spewing sewage from a manhole and into the Dominguez Channel, a 15-mile flood-control waterway that eventually pours into the Pacific Ocean. The failed 48-inch sewer main was due to be replaced within the year and was probably strained after strong rainstorms pelted southern California. LA county supervisor Janice Hahn has called for a full investigation into the cause of the spill, the largest on record for the area. “A sewage spill of this magnitude is dangerous and unacceptable, and we need to understand what happened,” Hahn said in a statement. “The recent storm undoubtedly contributed to the spill but we need infrastructure that doesn’t fail when it rains.” City officials said Monday that beaches in nearby Long Beach will remain closed as water quality testing continues. Several beaches in Los Angeles and Orange counties were closed over the weekend after the spill and surfing, swimming and holiday events like the annual Polar Bear Swim – where locals have enjoyed a frigid New Year’s dip at Cabrillo beach for the past 70 years – had to be canceled. Hahn, who called the event a “treasured local tradition”, added that “canceling it is a terrible way to start off the year”. The spill occurred just months after another environmental disaster affected the residents of Carson, a city that sits just north of Long Beach and south of downtown Los Angeles. The Dominguez Channel was recently plagued by an overpowering odor, described by residents as “the stench of death”, that caused headaches, respiratory problems and other health problems. Officials have attributed the odor to a warehouse fire that leeched chemicals into the 15-mile canal, killing plants and unleashing high amounts of hydrogen sulfide, also known as sewer gas. The sewage flow has been stopped according to the Los Angeles County Sanitation District, and abnormal hydrogen sulfide levels were not detected in the area. The agency said that the affected streets and storm drains had been cleaned, and it will reimburse residents for car washes. Meanwhile, crews are still working to repair the pipe. As of Sunday, LA County Sanitation District said plans were in place to “slip-line” the pipe, a process where a smaller 42-inch corrosion-resistant pipe is placed inside the 48-inch sewer, but that the materials wouldn’t be delivered until later in the week. The process has been complicated by the line’s position near a freeway, which has also caused offramp closures. This wasn’t the first time sewage spilled on to these streets of Carson. Resident Cesar Casillas told Fox11 Los Angeles it was the second spill that he and his neighbors have dealt with in five years. “It’s something you don’t want to see ever,” Casillas said, describing the noxious smell that lingered days into the cleanup effort. “There is still toilet paper smudged into the soil,” he added. “My children can’t play out here – I don’t think it’s safe.”• The headline of an opinion piece should have referred to “Ubuntu”, an African ethical philosophy, rather than “Bantu” (Can white South Africa live up to Tutu’s Bantu ideals?, 1 January, Journal, p4). In the context of South Africa, the term “Bantu” is considered offensive because of its strong association with the apartheid era, when it was used as a designation for the country’s black population; it is now used only when referring to a specific group of African languages. • Other recently amended articles include: Further Covid restrictions in England would be ‘last resort’, says Sajid Javid ‘Risky levels’: Australia is the drunkest country in the world, survey finds Why seed-banking threatened species in Madagascar is vital Ministers know which masks provide the best Covid protection – why not tell the UK public? Southern cancels London Victoria trains for two weeks over Covid Will Australian university campuses ever be the same again post-pandemic? Denver gunman who killed five in shooting rampage knew victims Welsh government loans England 4m more Covid tests Covid exposures force Queensland restaurants to shut during ‘busiest week of the year’ Early modern witch-hunts ‘left Britain with collective wound’ Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Even with the Ashes gone, the inquests under way and his future under the spotlight, Joe Root was talking a good game ahead of the Sydney Test. “For us it’s a must-win game,” he said. “I know the series isn’t winnable, but it’s a good opportunity.” On the Australian side, meanwhile, Steve Smith was urging his team to turn the screw by making it 4-0. “We’ve wrapped up the series which is great, and we want to continue winning,” he said. “That’s important.” So far so routine, although in the spirit of transparency it seems fair to point out that the above quotes were taken not from the current series, but from the corresponding mismatch in January 2018, four years ago to the day. Well, they do say one of the best things about Test cricket is its timelessness. And so once again the Ashes circus arrives in Sydney smelling faintly of rust, ennui and elephant shit, as players and broadcasters desperately try to inject a little jeopardy into this long-moribund series. Nathan Lyon insists there is no such thing as a “dead rubber when you’re wearing the baggy green”. There are World Test Championship points at stake, after all, and places for the forthcoming tour of New Zealand to be contested. As for England, the quadrennial fit of introspection and ritual bloodletting, the comforting fixation on County Championship schedules and ball manufacturers, has perhaps obscured the wider implications of another hopelessly unequal encounter. This is, we are constantly told, a flagship series: a yardstick for the health of the game as a whole. What, then, does it say when India and South Africa are currently serving up a more compelling show than anything seen in Australia over the last month? This is hardly a new phenomenon, either. It is 39 years since a men’s Ashes series in Australia reached its final Test with the fate of the urn in the balance. In England it has happened just twice in my lifetime – in 2005 and 2009. The lack of alarm over this should be alarming in itself. The bare minimum we demand of sport is that it has consequence. Yet by the end of this series, 27 of the last 88 Ashes Tests will essentially have been cold product, nothing riding on them but pride and broadcasting contracts. Is there not a better way of doing this? Part of the issue is that Test cricket itself has changed. Five-match series made sense in previous eras because of the frequency of draws and washouts. No such need exists these days. The last 23 Ashes Tests have produced two draws. That drops to one from the last 32 in Australia, home of some of the most favourable batting conditions in world cricket. Increasingly a five-match series – particularly where one team is demonstrably worse than the other – feel like an elaborate form of torture, a way of forcing imploding teams to keep imploding until there is nothing left. Even a theoretically-close series gains little from being drawn out over its full length. Both the 2015 and 2019 series felt pale and drained by their conclusion, and not in a good way: flawed sides taking wild swings at each other, exhausted players desperately trying to cling to the precipice. The virtue of a long series used to be in their ebb and flow, the possibility of redemption and learning. But with schedules trimmed to the skeleton and warm-up games hunted to extinction, that hardly happens any more. The simplest solution would be to cut the Ashes down to three or four Tests, perhaps with an optional decider in the case of a tie. But there is a more radical alternative out there, taking its inspiration from the women’s Ashes, which has flourished since switching to a multi-format competition in 2013. Three Tests, three one-day internationals, three Twenty20s: the overall winner being either the first to a certain number of points, or to win two series. Fewer days of cricket overall, but a more varied and textured challenge, and arguably a truer test of systems and cultures, which at its heart is what the Ashes was originally supposed to be about. Teams would be forced to strike a balance between red and white-ball structures, between specialists and all-format players. Bigger squads and more rest days would give the series a chance to breathe in a packed calendar. At least once a decade we would probably be treated to the sight of the Ashes being decided in the final over. And really, we need to decide what we want this cherished and venerable competition to be in the modern age. A museum piece, a fading heritage tour, a sort of fancy dress historical re-enactment that bears less and less resemblance to the cutting edge of the sport with every passing iteration? At the very least, it’s time to consider whether five compressed five-day Tests every couple of years really is the best way to settle and sell this oldest of rivalries. (You could, if you were feeling particularly daring, even combine men’s and women’s Ashes under a single banner.) Or, alternatively, we can keep rocking up in Sydney every four years with empty platitudes and crossed fingers, hoping that things will be different this time. And maybe they will. Doing nothing is certainly an option. But as the game fractures and old certainties erode, it’s increasingly hard to argue it’s the best one.Ralf Rangnick hit out at Manchester United for their individual and collective failure during a 1-0 defeat against Wolves on Monday night, with the interim manager admitting he cannot guarantee a top-four finish, while Luke Shaw questioned the unity of senior players. United’s first defeat in the German’s sixth match in charge meant the visitors broke a 42-year sequence without a league win at United due to João Moutinho’s 82nd-minute winner. While it lifted Bruno Lage’s side to eighth, United are only a place higher, four points behind Arsenal in the final Champions League spot. Rangnick said: “We didn’t play well at all individually or collectively. Today we showed similar problems the team had three or four weeks ago before I arrived. It is not an easy job to develop a DNA with and without the ball.” The 63-year-old was asked if United can finish in the top four. “I cannot make any guarantees,” he said. “Look at today’s performance: if I say we are 100% convinced we will finish in the top four I don’t know if people will believe that. It is about taking the next steps and getting better. I knew this could be hard. “I knew it would be difficult – that’s the reason why they brought me. I knew it wouldn’t be easy to find a balance between offensively and defensively. We didn’t press at all. We tried but we were not able to get into those pressing situations.” Shaw was scathing, questioning the togetherness of a core of senior players in the XI that included him, Cristiano Ronaldo, Edinson Cavani, Raphaël Varane, Bruno Fernandes, and Nemanja Matić. “Us players [who] we have been here a long time, maybe tonight we struggled,” the defender said. “I didn’t think we were all there together. You look at the players we have, we have unbelievable quality but sometimes quality is not enough. “They were miles better in the first half. We let them take control of the game, we weren’t aggressive, we needed to bring more intensity. Maybe we lacked that today. We need to bring the intensity and more motivation. “Inside the dressing room we know what we want but out on the pitch we need to give 100%. To win these types of games we all need to be 100% committed. It is tough and disappointing.” Rangnick was noticeably booed when he removed Mason Greenwood in the second half. “The question was shall I take off Mason or shall I take off Edi [Cavani],” he said. “We decided to keep Edi as the more offensive. “It shows how high the fans like Mason as a homegrown player. His effort and performance was not outstanding but he was one of the better players today,” he said. Moutinho, who celebrated his goal in the style of Bebeto, said: “I have a baby that is three months old and the goal is for my wife and two daughters. I had to wait nine months and three months more to be able to do this celebration.”Tuesday marks the end of an era: BlackBerry will discontinue service on its classic smartphones. So for those still holding on to their QWERTY keyboards, be warned. In a 22 December statement, the company reminded users of the development, which will affect services for all of its devices not running on Android software, including the BlackBerry 10, 7.1 OS and earlier. “As of this date, devices running these legacy services and software through either carrier or Wi-Fi connections will no longer reliably function, including for data, phone calls, SMS and 9-1-1 functionality,” the statement says. Boasting a physical keyboard and BBM instant messaging, the BlackBerry was once a powerplayer in the cell phone world. In the first decade of the 2000s, the devices were toted with pride by white-collar professionals and then-President Barack Obama alike. At its peak in 2009 and 2010, BlackBerry owned nearly 20% of the global smartphone market – with an even higher percentage in the US – selling more than 50m smartphones a year. But with the rise of the iPhone and Android touchscreen devices, the phone eventually fell out of style. And unless it warrants a reboot like the T-Mobile Sidekick or Motorola Razr, it seems that BlackBerry’s moment in the sun has passed. When the iPhone first launched in June 2007, it didn’t immediately overtake BlackBerry’s reign. With an elite status and user-friendly reputation, businesspeople especially, stayed loyal to the product. BlackBerry’s BBM instant messaging system also remained a user favorite feature, boasting the same cachet and ease of iMessage today. Soon, though, BlackBerry’s technology fell behind and users began to make the move away from physical keyboards. BlackBerry launched a series of poorly received devices as the iPhone leveled up and Androids became viable alternatives. After the release of the iPhone 4, Apple’s phone sales passed BlackBerry’s for good. By the time BlackBerry’s technology began to catch up, it was out of fashion. Working professionals, one of BlackBerry’s core customer bases, began to make the switch to iPhones and Androids. In September 2012, Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer snubbed the devices by asking that employees transition “from BlackBerries to smartphones”. By 2016, BlackBerry announced it would outsource its product and no longer manufacture its own phones. Instead, the company made a move to pivot into software, similar to Nokia, another former cellular giant. Today, BlackBerry bills itself primarily as “an enterprise software and cybersecurity company” developing software solutions for corporations. The company still employs thousands of workers and pulled in about a billion dollars in revenue in 2020, according to Statista.I spent a lot of time this past week googling “UTI” and “kidney infection”. Not because I got an enviable amount of action over the festive period but because my ailing 87-year-old dad with advanced Parkinson’s disease received the diagnosis and Mum and I were tasked with the impossible decision of sending him to an understaffed Sydney hospital riven with Covid or try to keep him alive at home ourselves. Dad fell ill at the worst possible time: just as GPs were going on holidays, pathology labs were turning off their lights for a few days, thousands of New South Wales healthcare staff were furloughed with Covid or as close contacts, and as the state’s coronavirus infections jumped 90% in 24 hours to a new daily high of 21,151. So when, last Thursday afternoon, Dad’s GP took one look at his symptoms and cloudy, blood-speckled urine sample and declared he had a kidney infection, our hearts went into freefall. With no time before the pathology lab shut for the holidays to determine which antibiotic would best treat his infection, his doctor gave him a prescription for something generic and potent, and told my elderly Mum with no medical acumen to “monitor his pee”. “If it still looks bad in 24 hours, call an ambulance and admit him to hospital.” This was not my dad’s first brush with a misbehaving bladder – only four weeks before this he was admitted to a major Sydney hospital with a UTI where he was pumped with IV antibiotics, fluids and subjected to regular blood tests and imaging to ensure the meds were working and the infection hadn’t spread to the danger zone: his kidneys. UTIs often present differently in the elderly compared with younger people, with symptoms including vomiting, falls and major personality changes (see Logan Roy’s deranged response to a UTI in the last season of Succession). These infections can also quickly become deadly. Four weeks ago Dad received good care and was discharged in less than a week. Oh what a difference a few weeks, a new Covid variant and a mask-averse premier can make. The 24 hours after the GP’s ominous instructions were fraught. No one in the family could sleep and, as the last day of 2021 dawned, we monitored Dad’s pee like mad scientists. Friday evening rolled around and, as Sydney was gearing up for New Year’s Eve celebrations, it became apparent Dad’s urine was not improving and neither was he. So we called an ambulance. With visitors now shut out of hospitals and no phones beside patients’ beds, we feared these could be our last moments with Dad. We hastily sourced a simple mobile and tried to teach him how to use it but, having never used a computer before, let alone a touch-screen phone, he struggled to understand. His poor eyesight, his inability to control his fingers, his decimated short-term memory and the delirium from the infection made the task near-impossible, and I tried not to choke up as I repeated: “Just tap on the screen gently, don’t jab it.” The paramedics arrived and tried to put on a cheerful front. One of them was remarkably frank. He took one look at Dad, all shrivelled and gaunt in his wheelchair at the kitchen table, and said: “To be honest, I don’t want to send any geriatric to a Sydney hospital right now. Covid is everywhere – in staff and patients, and the staff shortages mean he won’t get the care he needs.” The paramedic suggested Mum and I try treating him at home, even though most GPs were closed until Tuesday, no one was answering calls on the national home doctor service line, and we had nothing but Google to guide us. He explained that because Dad had a kidney infection, he would initially be placed in the “hot room” of the hospital’s emergency department, where patients with any sort of infection, headache, diarrhoea, cold symptoms and fever were placed. AKA, the Covid room. (The “cold room”, the paramedic explained, was reserved for ailments such as broken limbs and heart attacks.) Mum and I glanced at each other, alarmed. The paramedic offered to call the triage nurse at the hospital’s emergency department to beg her not to place Dad in the room full of potential Covid patients. The nurse was sympathetic but explained it was hospital protocol. Also, given the number of patients in emergency that evening, Dad would be waiting in the hot room “for at least five hours” before he could be moved (provided he tested negative to Covid on arrival – we had performed a negative RAT test on him the day before). Dad sat there in the kitchen, not understanding what was going on, the N95 mask we had placed on him slipping off his nose and down his face. I imagined him sitting in the ED’s “hot room” with the mask half off, confused and tired and unable to sit upright in the chair or access a toilet or water. In that moment, Mum and I agreed to keep him at home. The past few days have been a nightmare. Armed with tap water, oral antibiotics, a thermometer and Google, we have monitored Dad’s every symptom or behavioural change. Sometimes he seems better; the next moment he is worse. We feel guilty that we are not giving him the care he needs, guilty for keeping him out of hospital, but also horrified as we read the news stories about overwhelmed wards and mounting Covid cases. We don’t know yet if we have done the right thing. His GP is back on Tuesday, when the pathology labs reopen. We will know then whether our decision to keep him home has kept him safe or will kill him. I wonder how many other families are in the same position right now; how many other elders, vulnerable people, everyone who thought they were invincible but are not, are making these decisions about whether to put their lives in the hands of NSW hospitals.We’re getting to the point, surely, where television drama could be named the sixth estate. In the last year alone, we have had Deceit, probing the police ethics around the Rachel Nickell investigation, Frank Cottrell-Boyce’s Stephen, about the ongoing mishandling of the Stephen Lawrence case, Jimmy McGovern’s look at the prison system’s failures in Time, and Jack Thorne’s Help, telling, almost in real time, the story of care homes abandoned by government policy and the inhabitants left for dead as a result. All brought terrible injustices by those supposedly sworn to uphold the law and protect us – risibly old-fashioned though such phrases feel – to greater public prominence, and hopefully add to the pressure for holding to account those whose dereliction of duty at best, and corruption at worst, does society so much harm. Anne, a drama about the mother who fought through police denials and obstructions for the eventual unlawful killings verdict for the Hillsborough victims, is currently airing. And there are surely more in the works – perhaps on the murders of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman and the two officers sent to guard the scene, who took photos and shared the images on WhatsApp, or the murder by another officer of Sarah Everard (possibly including the breaking up of a peaceful vigil for her thereafter). The thin blue line refuses to run unerringly straight. And so to Four Lives (BBC One), about the murders of four young men by serial killer and rapist Stephen Port (a fine and chilling performance by Stephen Merchant) and a police investigation so fundamentally flawed that an inquest jury recently found that it probably contributed to three of the four deaths. The drama does a good job of making the victims – Anthony Walgate, Gabriel Kovari, Daniel Whitworth, Jack Taylor (portrayed with depth, vigour and sweetness by Tim Preston, Jakub Svec, Leo Flanagan and Paddy Rowan, respectively) – live again. It shows them with the families and friends who will come to be the ones who follow leads and pull together most of the evidence necessary for Port’s eventual conviction, giving space to their relationships, and shape to everyone’s loss when it comes. Anthony, a fashion student who occasionally worked as an escort for extra cash, is the first to cross paths with Port. He is found dead outside the man’s flat after Port himself – posing as an anonymous citizen concerned about the apparently drunk young man – calls an ambulance. Beyond that, and despite the usual great work of Sheridan Smith (as Anthony’s mother, Sarah) and others, the drama never catches fire. It is doomed perhaps by the extremity of the police failures. News reports of the inquest jury findings are compelling reads – the list of things the police did not do, chose to ignore or failed to follow up is mind-boggling. Some of the most egregious examples (in a competitive field) make it into Four Lives. The Met’s insistence that there can be no link between the deaths of four young gay men by the same means and in the same locality – two of them found in the same graveyard, one with a suicide note the family says it (contrary to police claims) never identified as being in their son’s handwriting. No testing of the bed sheet he was found on. And, above all, no full interrogation of Stephen Port after a mobile phone trace revealed he was the anonymous caller, who also owned the flat Anthony’s body lay outside and gave a variety of inconsistent statements about how he came across him. Dramatically, it leaves the main characters little more to do than shout down the phone at disinterested officers and boggle at their unwillingness to chase what seems to them and us obvious leads and suspects. There seems to have been no coverup – just a long line of people who didn’t care enough how or why these young men, these sons, these friends, these lovers died. And, presumably, there was an element of deep-seated homophobia (though you also wonder, even if we take only recent headlines as our touchstones, just for whom the police do still bestir themselves and deem worthy of justice), which is of course awful – if not exactly shocking. Very few of the tangible failings are even mentioned in the first episode and we never see any behind-the-scenes work (or lack thereof) by the police. We are limited to the investigating officers’ inability to remember how to pronounce Anthony’s name (with the ‘th’ audible) and assumptions about his lifestyle, based on his occasional escort gigs and poppers found in his flat, to infer their lack of professionalism and humanity. But this kind of drama thrives on detail, not mere gesturings towards motive and should not depend on assumptions that right-minded viewers will draw the right conclusions.Good morning to everyone except those just returning from annual leave, to whom I offer my condolences instead. This is Five Great Reads, a weekday summer story wrap that does what it says on the tin, selected by me, Guardian Australia’s canned food, candles and courtship editor, Alyx Gorman. You might be getting this as an email – but if you’re not, you could be. Just pop your details in the box below. Usually, at this point I’d be giving you a brief summary of today’s biggest headlines before moving on to the reads. But fortunately – for me at least – my colleagues at the Morning Mail have returned to work, so I’ll gladly leave that task in their expert hands. Spoiler: a lot of not-great stuff happening. But also, some great reads. Let’s talk about them! 1. Camera pans across a smouldering ruin. The year is 2022 For decades, directors have selected 2022 as a particularly ill-fated year. What can we learn from old movies, set in the present? Which directors? What movies? Richard “Soylent Green is people” Fleischer, for one. Also the original Purge film, which actually came true a year and two days earlier than expected. Best descriptive phrase: “Admirably dumb eco-spectacle.” Bonus read: What with it feeling so close to home, contemporary apocalypse films are delivering a cinematic experience that’s less spectacular and more intimate. 2. A mysterious death at sea Arnold Latu was found dead in his berth. His is one of more than a dozen cases of fisheries observers dying on the job since 2009. Notable quote: “Latu’s death is still a mystery for us,” said his longtime friend Benny Jagroop. “So if you ask what [is] the speculation around Arnold’s death, for real I have no idea.” How long will it take me to read? About three minutes. 3. Exercising through back pain It helps! But it’s hard. Here’s a guide to getting started, from core-strengthening classes to moves you can do at home. Notable quote: “Any single treatment in low back pain is never enough by itself,” says Assoc Prof Michael Vagg, a pain medicine physician. “But exercise is a fundamental part of recovering from low back pain and managing it if it becomes persistent.” My back doesn’t hurt. Lucky you! But, if you are one of the millions of Australians living with another form of ongoing pain or illness, keep your eyes peeled. This story is part of a series How to move, and there’s more advice on exercise and chronic conditions coming. The first, which ran yesterday, tackled rheumatoid arthritis. 4. ‘The Hoodoo Gurus’ crew are stuck in the elevator’ The Go-Betweens’ Lindy Morrison on the gig she’ll never forget: Roskilde, 1987. Setting the scene: “I had bought the cookie from an ingratiating post-punk hippie. My musician mate disappears. I lean against a tent post.” I’m intrigued. How long is the read? Only two minutes or so. 5. An easy win: eating ugly fruit Why an imperfect produce box will get you eating fresher for less. But it’s a weird shape! A weird shape that fights food waste.Shares in China’s Evergrande Group have been suspended from trading after the embattled property developer was told to demolish 39 buildings in a huge resort-style development in the southern province of Hainan. After initially giving no reason for the share halt, Evergrande confirmed late on Monday that it had received an order from authorities at Danzhou city in Hainan on 30 December telling it to demolish 39 under-construction buildings at the Ocean Flower Island project. It did not disclose the reason for the demolition order but local Chinese media reports said building permits for the lavish development on an artificially created island had been illegally obtained. The buildings cover 435,000 square metres and have been under construction for eight years, the reports added, citing an official notice to Evergrande’s unit in Hainan. Regulators in Danzhou city said in November that they would block Evergrande’s plan to repay debts to contractors and other creditors by giving them properties, Caixin reported. Evergrande is struggling to repay more than $300bn (£222bn) in liabilities, including nearly $20bn of international market bonds that were deemed to be in cross-default by ratings firms last month after it missed payments. The property developer missed new coupon payments worth $255m due last Tuesday though both have a 30-day grace period. In common with a succession of incidences of missed payments in the final quarter of 2021, the company has not made any comment. The firm has set up a risk management committee with many members from state companies, and said it would actively engage with its creditors. On Friday, Evergrande dialled back plans to repay investors in its wealth management products, saying each investor in its wealth management product could expect to receive 8,000 yuan ($1,257) per month as principal payment for three months irrespective of when the investment matures. The move highlights the deepening liquidity squeeze at the property developer. Shares of Evergrande shed 89% last year, closing at HK$1.59 ($0.20; £0.15) on Friday. Its electric vehicle unit, China Evergrande New Energy Vehicle Group, plunged as much as 10% in early trading on Monday, while property management unit Evergrande Services declined 2.3%. Evergrande is not the only Chinese property developer engulfed by a liquidity crisis. Altogether the sector owes $19.8bn in US dollar-denominated offshore debt in the first three months of 2022, analysts at Nomura said last month. In the second quarter of this year, they must find another $18.5bn, while also meeting billions of repayments in local yuan debt. Other developers at risk of default include Kaisa, which missed a huge repayment in December and which has twice suspended its shares in recent months. Its stock has lost 75% in value in the past year. Analysts at S&amp;P have estimated that one-third of Chinese developers could face a liquidity crunch in the next 12 months. Developers must also find 1.1tn yuan ($172bn) in backdated pay owed to construction workers before the lunar new year starts at the beginning of February.Keir Starmer will launch his plan to maintain the momentum of Labour’s poll lead in the runup to the next election, accusing Boris Johnson of losing voters’ trust due to numerous sleaze scandals and treating power like a “branch of the entertainment industry”. Keen to progress from criticising the government to presenting his own team as a viable alternative, Starmer is expected to flesh out how Labour hopes to spend 2022 climbing closer to power. In a speech in Birmingham on Tuesday morning, the Labour leader will stress the importance of security, prosperity and respect, contrasted with months of what he called incompetent and untrustworthy behaviour by the prime minister. Johnson has been blighted by fury over alleged Downing Street Christmas parties in defiance of Covid rules, his botched bid to save a disgraced MP who broke lobbying rules from suspension, and an investigation into payments covering the renovation of his Downing Street flat. Labour has spent a month ahead in the polls for the first time in a year, while the Conservatives’ fall has sparked nervousness among Johnson’s ministers and backbenchers. Starmer’s party was also put 16 points ahead in a Deltapoll survey of 57 key “red wall” constituencies in its traditional heartlands, seen as crucial to winning back the keys to Downing Street. Starmer will seek to paint himself as a patriot, saying 2022 will show off “all that the British have to be proud of” in a bid to neutralise Johnson’s rebuttals that the Labour leader should get behind the government when criticising its handling of Covid. “I don’t think you cease to be a patriot because you notice your country has flaws,” Starmer will says. “On the contrary, the reason we in this party want to correct those flaws is precisely because we are patriotic. I came into politics to make things happen, not just to talk about them. “I don’t think politics is a branch of the entertainment industry, I think it’s the serious business of getting things done. Heralding a “new phase” for the country, Starmer is expected to warn of a looming cost of living crisis, with energy bills set to rise, wages stagnant and tax rises on the horizon, with the national insurance rise coming into effect in the spring. He will also claim that many people feel unsafe on the streets and that they have to rely on “good luck” to get a quick GP appointment. Starmer will also acknowledge that a lapse in support for the Conservatives does not mean voters will automatically feel they have good reason to switch to Labour. He is set to say: “I am well aware that just because the Tories lose the public’s trust, it doesn’t mean Labour simply inherits it. Trust has to be earned. I am confident but not complacent about the task ahead.” Ahead of May’s local elections, and what Labour figures think could be the final party conference in September before the next general election, Starmer will stress that “the best still lies ahead for this country – but only if we have the courage to create a new Britain”. Johnson has been bullishly optimistic about the UK’s fortunes despite concern over whether fresh restrictions will be imposed due to the Omicron coronavirus variant. In his new year message, the prime minister insisted the country was in an “incomparably better” position than at the start of 2021.Jeopardy! champion Amy Schneider scored her 23rd consecutive victory last week in a historic run that has made her the top-winning woman in the show’s history. But that’s not the only milestone Schneider has achieved on the show. The Oakland, California, resident is the fourth-best all time winner, with $855,600 in earnings, and the first transgender person to qualify for Jeopardy’s Tournament of Champions, an annual event with the game’s top players. Schneider’s victories have catapulted her into the spotlight and made the engineering manager a beacon for LGBTQ+ visibility. “2021 wasn’t the best year for the world, but it turned out to be the best year I’ve ever had! Not only have I had this Jeopardy run, but I’ve heard from so many wonderful people,” Schneider said on Twitter. The 42-year-old, originally from Dayton, Ohio, said that since her victory streak had begun in November, people had recognized her at the grocery store. “It’s a fun feeling,” she said in an interview with Yahoo Entertainment. “I’m not going to be, like, Tom Hanks–level famous or anything! So, I think it’ll be manageable.” Schneider has said she’s dreamed of being a contestant on the show since age five. “I’ve always watched it and I’ve also always been interested in learning facts and stuff,” Schneider told Yahoo. “And as I mentioned on the show, in eighth grade I was voted most likely to be on Jeopardy! one day. It was always sort of in my mind that it might be something I did at some point.” Schneider has used Twitter and Instagram to chronicle her experience on the show, detailing the techniques she uses to tackle questions and recall facts about everything from the sinking of the Titanic to Major League Soccer teams, and her fashion choices, such as wearing a sweater to honor another high-ranking female Jeopardy! winner. The majority of her interactions online are positive, Schneider said, but she’s also faced anti-trans comments, to which she recently responded: “I’d like to thank all the people who have taken the time, during this busy holiday season, to reach out and explain to me that, actually, I’m a man. Every single one of you is the first person ever to make that very clever point, which had never once before crossed my mind.” Schneider has said she doesn’t “actually think about being trans all that often, and so when appearing on national television, I wanted to represent that part of my identity accurately: as important, but also relatively minor”. But her run on the show has had a major impact, families and advocates say. “Amy Schneider’s incredible run on Jeopardy! allows families all over the country to get to know her as someone who is great at word puzzles, has in-depth knowledge on a range of topics, and who also happens to be a transgender woman,” Nick Adams, Glaad’s director of transgender representation, said in a statement last month. “Amy is using her history-making appearances and new platform to raise awareness of transgender issues and share a bit of her personal story too.”Here is the report. And that’s all from me this evening. Hope you enjoyed the match, which was certainly dramatic – if lacking in quality and consistency from both players. It was not quite the epic we expected, but Wright produced when he was on the back foot. Smith is visibly devastated after failing to get over the line, but he does look capable of winning it, if he can produce a little more consistency under pressure. Thanks for reading and see you next time. Wright, standing next to Smith: “It’s about the future of darts, this man ... he let me in today ... I feel so bad because I know as soon as he gets a major he will just trounce everybody, he will.” Smith: “I got five sets, instead of three, so ... I must have done something terrible in a past life because it’s doing my head in now ... I’ll have a bad night tonight, now, but I’ll definitely be back on that board and I’ll be getting ready for the nex one. “I think I have matured as a player ... I kept fighting back and fighting back ... in the end that bullseye wouldn’t go in .. that’s darts I guess.” Wright: “Obviously I’m over the moon ... I done it ... but, you know ... obviously me and Mike didn’t perform how we can. I can’t explain what went wrong for 90 per cent of that match. I just kept swapping darts, trying to find something. The atmosphere in here just affected my darts so badly, it affected Michael’s as well ... but, you know, it will be Michael’s turn soon. “I was playing so bad ... we both were ... we had patches of two or three legs and that was it ... the atmosphere in here was really strange tonight and my darts were going in everywhere ... luckily enough I won ...” Wright takes the trophy and holds it aloft, one-handed, roaring with delight ... and the crowd react. You got the feeling the majority of the crowd would have liked to see Smith win that. But he can have no complaints about the result. Smith, shaking his head in disbelief, takes his runner-up trophy and a handy £200,000 prize money. Michael Smith looks devastated, almost in tears, but he sportingly applauds his opponent after the winning dart. He had a chance there, in a match in which both players struggled for consistency, but when he really needed to, Wright turned it on. A stunning shot for treble 20 sets up double 32 finish for ‘Snakebite’ at the next visit ... and he nails it at the first time of asking! That was an incredible spell of darts from Wright when he needed it most. And he is world champion for the second time in his career, claiming a 7-5 win from 5-4 down. Smith hits back for 2-1 in the 12th. That could be big ... but now Wright has the darts and will throw for the title. And that’s 2-0 to Wright - he is one leg away from glory! He has really brought his ‘A’ game in the past few minutes. As the great Sid Waddell once said: he looks as focused as a hitman with a bag of cement and a map to the river. Wright breaks at the start of the 12th! He seals a stunning 12-dart leg with a bullseye. Smith looks shell-shocked. Wright has won seven legs in a row. It’s 1-0 to ‘Snakebite’. Wright, he of the spectacular hair, has turned it on. He seals a 3-0 win in the latest set and Smith is seriously on the back foot here. If Smith can’t respond now, this is looking all but over, all of a sudden. Wright breaks for 2-0 in the 11th! He is the one who is moving through the gears now ... and he has fashioned a significant lead in this set. Smith looks a bit annoyed with how he’s playing right now. Wright hits tops to hold, opening up the 11th set. Is Smith going to find another gear in response to that remarkable comeback by Wright in the previous set? “It might not have hit the heights, but there’s always drama at the darts,” emails Simon McMahon. Very true. “Whoever loses will have nightmares about how either set 9 or set 10 ended. Will take a brave person to call this one now.” Five apiece, indeed. What a script! Well, sort of. Great stuff from Wright, who reels off three legs in a row to roar back from 2-0 down and force it to 5-5. How will Smith react? If he’d closed out that set, he had one hand – or at least a couple of fingers – on the trophy. Now he’s back in a proper scrap, against this tenacious opponent who may not be at his best, but is so hard to beat. Annnnd it’s now 2-2 in the 10th. Smith with the darts, throwing for the set, which would put him within one of world title glory. Wright strikes back for 2-1 in the 10th. A bit of sloppiness creeping into the Smith game again, while Wright hit a ton-80 at a crucial juncture there, to put the leg out of reach of his opponent. Smith holds for 1-0 in the 10th set ... and then breaks with another smooth leg, for a 2-0 lead in the 10th! Smith is the player with the rhythm and the scoring right now. It’s worth remembering that Wright was nursing a knee injury last night, although he insisted it would be OK for tonight. Perhaps that is the reason he is not producing his best. Another nervy set from both men. Wright ends up missing at madhouse (double one, in layman’s terms) and leaves the door ajar for Smith. Smith forces that door open and he leads again! All square at 2-2 now – massive leg coming up. The tension is rising considerably ... A 14-dart hold for Wright, with two shots at double top. Again, it feels like it’s all gone a bit flat, with neither player producing their best darts. Smith, in turn, holds his throw and we are locked at 1-1 in the ninth. Wright holds to open up what promises to be a pivotal ninth set. Smith holds for 2-1 ... then he hits consecutive 180s to put Wright under tonnes of pressure on his own throw ... eventually, Wright hits his double nine, having missed a shot at double 18, and we are all square in this final. As a spectacle, even though it’s been a ding-dong battle, it feels like it hasn’t really taken off yet. But that is probably about to change, locked as they are at 4-4. Wright holds for 2-0 in the eighth! The 2020 champion, who just changed his darts, has a poor shot first up at double nine, but then hits one / double four to win the second leg and he looks on course to even this final up at 4-4. Wright breaks at the start of the eighth! He now has the darts to try and take a 2-0 lead in and stem the flow of success for his opponent ... Five legs in a row took Smith into the lead in the match for the first time ... “Bully Boy” Smith has hit back from 2-0 down to lead 4-3. This time, Smith closes out a 93 finish with a treble 19 and a double 18. He’s warming up now, really warming up, and the crowd respond as he is starting to produce the darts which has got him to this advanced stage of the tournament. Smith holds in style for 2-0 in the seventh! He’s on the verge now of moving into a 4-3 lead. Just in case you need reminding, it’s first to seven. Smith breaks at the start of the seventh! First, he misses a chance at tops as the nerves appear to creep back in ... but Wright then misses THREE darts at the double 11 ... Smith gets a chance again, and nails double top, to move into the lead in the match overall! It’s 1-0 to Smith in the seventh set. Smith breaks! He fluffs a chance at an initial finish, but with Wright on 184, he comes back to the oche and nails a double 16 to force it to 3-3 in sets, taking the sixth set by three legs to one. Smith holds again for 2-1 in the sixth. He’s finding a lot more rhythm now with his throwing, but is still being put under considerable pressure by his opponent. Smith holds, then Wright holds, and it’s 1-1 in legs in the sixth set. The standard is much higher now, with Wright holding that 3-2 lead overall. Smith butchers an attempted 106 finish, leaving Wright to close out the leg, and the set, with a comfortable hold. The 2020 champion, Peter Wright, edges back in front having previously seen his 2-0 lead in sets evaporate. Smith holds with a nerveless, smooth shot at double six at the first time of asking. It’s 2-2 in legs in the fifth set – a huge leg now coming up. Smith breaks! He hits his 172nd 180 of the tournament, beating Gary Anderson’s previous record of 171 ... and now produces an 11-dart leg of his own to break straight back for 2-1. Wright breaks! The players trade 180s, one after the other, but Wright keeps the pressure up with an 11-dart leg, hitting double nine to take the leg, and he leads 2-0 in legs in the fifth. Wright holds, with double eight, for 1-0 in this crucial fifth set. Here we go. This final has come to life with Smith and Wright locked at 2-2. Can Smith turn it around and forge a 3-2 lead from 2-0 down? Drama. Looking out of the leg and hence the set, Wright digs out a 180 to leave himself a 46 finish. Smith then has a shot at tops to win it, but misses ... Wright is back on the oche can’t hit his double, and Smith nails a double 10 to level up the final at 2-2 in sets! It’s 2-2 in the fourth. Wright holds with a strong leg - and we have a decider in the fourth set. This is a hugely significant leg now ... will it be 3-1 or 2-2 in sets? Smith holds, and leads 2-1 in the fourth. Wright has a 141 to try and break – but can’t make it and Smith then hits double 16 to lead 2-1. Smith has now hit a 180 in each of the last six legs ... Wright holds now and it’s 1-1 in the fourth, with the darts. Smith now holds in style at the start of the fourth, hitting double 10, and bringing a big roar from the crowd, who are also starting to warm up a little now. The averages for both players are now creeping up towards 100, despite that shambolic second leg of the match. A settler for the St Helens man, he closes out the third set and takes it 3-1. He’s just starting to warm up ... Wow! Smith takes out a 167 finish for 2-1 in the third set ... a fantastic effort - treble 20, treble 19, bull. That’s more like it. Wright looks a little peeved at that. Smith holds for 1-1 in the third set. A 12-dart leg and a step in the right direction. Wright leads 2-0 in sets. Wright holds for 1-0 in the third. He only needs two darts to hit a single three and a double four. Smith still looks distressed, he’s not doing himself justice this evening, but can he find some consistency – and start hitting some doubles? The crowd sounds a bit flat at the moment, considering this is a world final. It’s as if that farcical 28-dart leg has taken the shine off things a bit. Anyway, here comes the third set. Can Smith get on the board? Another exemplary finish from Wright, of 124 this time, and he’s really taken a grip of this final. He leads 2-0 in sets. Wright breaks - a 148 finish! He buries a double 14 finish and Smith looks ashen-faced with the way this is developing ... both players averaged 82 in that messy first set, by the way. As it stands, Wright it taking his chances. Wright holds by hitting double top, but Smith again had a chance to break there and move into a 2-0 lead in the set ... but his head drops again when he misses it – he had three darts and only 40 to get. It’s poor stuff from the losing finalist in 2019 so far. Smith holds for 1-0 in the second set. He opens in confident fashion, nailing a ton-80. He then goes on to have a 65 finish and fluffs it, getting the outer bull, but missing tops. He makes no mistake second time, though, and he now leads 1-0 in the second set. Wright breaks for the first time and takes the first leg. Smith looks concerned, as well he might, because he’s consistently missing his finishes. He had one shot at double top and one at 10s there, to force a deciding leg in the set and missed both. Early nerves for Smith or something more lasting. We’ll see. Peter Wright leads, 1-0 in sets. Wright holds for 2-1, nailing a double four, so we are with the darts, although it’s hardly been textbook stuff so far. Smith holds for 1-1! Wow. That was a mess. Now it’s Wright’s turn to miss two attempts at double top ... Smith has just seven and fluffs it ... and then a quite incredible series of missed finishes ensues ... I’ve never seen anything like this! A 28-dart leg. Smith finally nails ‘madhouse’, double one, much to the delight of the crowd. Nervy, poor darts there but it will get better. Wright holds! But only just, in a remarkable first leg. Smith hits consecutive 180s to leave himself 41 for a very handy opening break. He has two attempts at tops, misses both on the high side, and Wright duly seals his opening hold. Here we go, Wright with the darts in the first leg of the first set. Michael Smith takes the stage. He stops on the way there to give his wife and kids a kiss, then applauds the fans after climbing the stairs. And here comes Peter Wright, with a fetching red mohican, along with a greenish alligator skin design on the right side of his head. He does a little dance to get the crowd going even more ... Wayne Mardle predicts Wright to win 7-5 ... as does his fellow pundit, Part. Don’t forget, you can email me or tweet @LukeMcLaughlin with any thoughts on the match ... we should be getting started in five minutes or so. Sky Sports Darts are currently having a little recap of these players’ paths to the final. “Something’s gotta give,” observes the Sky Sports pundit John Part. Which is unarguable, really, as someone is going to have to win and someone is going to have to lose this. The stage is set. Ally Pally is packed full of noisy fans in fancy dress enjoying a couple of shandies. The atmosphere is already electric and we are still a few minutes from the start of the PDC World Darts Championship final. “What kinda dosh are these guys playing for?” asks Dean Kinsella. “I thought the $600,000 Carlsen won for defending his world champion’s crown seemed kinda small fry.” Tonight’s winner gets a cool £500,000. The losing finalist can console themselves with £200,000. The losing semi-finalists bagged £100,000 each. “Both these players are exceptional dartists, and more than capable of winning tonight, which will hopefully make for a classic encounter,” emails Simon McMahon. “I think Wright is the steadier player, less likely than Smith to blow hot and cold, or play the occasion rather than the board. Though if he blows more hot than cold, Smith will be hard to live with and could easily win 7-3 or 7-4. I’m going for Wright 7-5 though, I think. Game on!” The real question is ... what is Peter Wright going to do with his barnet tonight? “I said two weeks before the Matchplay that I was going to win that and the World Championship so I have got to back my big mouth up and try to win it,” Wright is quoted in a story on the official PDC website. “I knew that I’d hit a lot of 180s [in the semi-final] but didn’t know it was 24. To be honest, I’m capable of hitting a lot more. “The semi-final was the best game I’ve ever played in. Especially against somebody who is hitting back at me like Gary did. Michael has been smashing in the 180s as well so hopefully we can both keep doing that and break records in the final again. I think both of us are capable of blowing the record for 180s in the final out of the water.” Fingers crossed for a thriller. Michael Smith lost the 2019 final 7-3 to Michael van Gerwen. But is tonight his night? Over at Old Trafford, Wolves are a couple of minutes away from beating Manchester United 1-0. Barry Glendenning has the latest: Head-to-head final stats from PDC’s Twitter. Smith’s average of 100.65 across the tournment is .001 behind Wright’s. Smith’s checkout percentage of 48% is considerably superior to Wright’s 40%. Both have won 22 sets. “Purity, passion, drama”. Here’s Sean Ingle with some thoughts on darts renaissance: The 2020 PDC champion, Peter Wright, played through the pain of a knee injury to beat Gary Anderson and book a place in tonight’s final against Michael Smith. The quality of that performance will be hard to top – Wright threw an astonishing 24 180s, a tournament record, with a three-dart average of 104. “I knew that I’d hit a lot of 180s but didn’t know it was 24,” Wright said. “To be honest, I’m capable of hitting a lot more.” In his semi-final win against James Wade earlier yesterday evening, Smith averaged 101, registering a relatively modest 16 180s. It would be exaggerating to say the nation’s streets are going to be deserted during this hotly anticipated final, but this tournament has cut through like few others, capturing the imagination of devoted darts-watchers across the world and doubtless winning the sport thousands of new fans. The past few days have been littered with memorable matches and high-quality arrows, and the smart money is on Wright and Smith to round off a compelling tournament with a fittingly dramatic final. TV coverage begins at 8pm, and the action starts at 8.15pm. Pre-match reading and more coming up.Covid-19 cases in Florida have risen by 948% in just two weeks, as the highly transmissible Omicron variant drives a huge wave of infections and hospitalizations across the US. Even as Dr Anthony Fauci – Joe Biden’s top medical adviser – cautioned the public to look at hospitalizations and not infections in order to gauge Omicron’s severity, the seven-day average for US patients hospitalized with Covid-19 increased by more than 40% during the week between Christmas and New Year’s Eve. Cases have risen by more than 100% nationally, despite tests being in short supply in many areas, and infections have doubled in the last seven days to an average of 418,000 a day, according to a Reuters tally. In Florida, local and state officials warned that residents were waiting hours in sometimes miles-long lines just to get a test. Some accused the state health department and the governor, Ron DeSantis, of being missing in action. “It’s every man/woman for themselves, because leadership is MIA,” tweeted state senator Shevrin Jones. Evidence suggests Omicron is a more mild if highly infectious variant. But it “will still do terrible damage among the unvaccinated in both the US and worldwide”, according to the New York Times. Only 62% of the US population is fully vaccinated, with numbers especially low in the south and many of the mountain states. Boosters are available for people 16 and older, but only about a third of fully vaccinated Americans have opted to get one – despite Fauci saying the extra dose represents “optimal” protection from Omicron. The Food and Drug Administration decided on Monday that 12- to 15-year-olds should also be eligible for a booster, although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still needs to give the green light. Some immunocompromised Americans are going back for fourth or fifth shots, though it is unclear whether doing so is safe or effective, the New York Times reported. Dorry Segev, a transplant surgeon at Johns Hopkins University, told the paper that hundreds enrolled in a study he is working on have received unauthorized doses. “They’re acting out of desperation,” he said. “Rather than say, ‘Shame on them,’ I would say, ‘Shame on the system we’ve created.’” In Washington DC, meanwhile, Congress is experiencing an unprecedented rise in Covid-19 cases, with the seven-day positivity rate at a congressional test site surging to 13% from just 1% in late November, the Capitol’s attending physician said on Monday. Most coronavirus infections on Capitol Hill have been occurring among the vaccinated, with the Omicron variant representing about 61% and the Delta variant 38%, based on a limited sample as of 15 December, Dr Brian Monahan told lawmakers and staff in a 3 January letter. Some school systems around the US have extended their holiday break or switched back to online instruction because of the explosion in cases. Others pressed ahead with in-person classes amid a seemingly growing sense that Americans will have to learn to co-exist with the virus, armed with the vaccines that help prevent the spread and mitigate the severity of illness and the evolving range of tested treatments. Covid-19 has killed more than 820,000 people across the US. It has upended lives and livelihoods, disrupted education, left Americans feeling isolated, and at times sent the economy into free-fall. Mass holiday travel was a predictable recipe for yet another surge, similar to last winter. But nearly two years into the pandemic, the US was still woefully ill-equipped for such conditions and the Omicron variant, sending Americans scrambling to even find tests. Over the holiday season, thousands of flights were canceled because of Omicron-caused staffing shortages. Last week, the US smashed its record for Covid-19 infections reported in one day. Major companies are having to reconsider plans for employees to finally return to offices. Yet some experts and analysts still hope that Omicron will ultimately represent a move toward normalcy, where Covid-19 becomes a long-term reality but causes less devastation. “I think it’s likely that we’ll see this wave come and go and that the spring and summer will look a lot better than right now looks to us,” Ofer Levy, director of the Precision Vaccines Program at Boston Children’s hospital, told CNN. “There will be fewer cases, and then again, next fall and winter we’ll see a spike of viral illnesses, coronaviruses, influenza and others, but that it’ll be more like an endemic cycle.” Also on Monday, it was reported that the Manhattan district attorney has closed its investigation into former New York state governor Andrew Cuomo’s handling of nursing homes during the pandemic. The New York state health department said that Cuomo’s Covid-19 task force altered an official report and omitted 9,250 nursing home patients killed by coronavirus. Elkan Abramowitz, an attorney for Cuomo, said an investigation had concluded no laws were broken.Eyes moist, red mohican sparkling in the lights, scalp painting glistening with sweat, Peter Wright won his second PDC world championship in one of its tensest and most absorbing finals. He did so not by outscoring Michael Smith but by outlasting him, not by blowing him off the board but simply by resisting, holding his nerve and holding his throw against one of the heaviest and most relentless treble-hitters in the sport. As an exhausted Wright celebrated a 7-5 victory, Smith stood at the back of the stage: distraught, disconsolate, destroyed. He looked up at the lights, down at his feet, off to the side. He buried his face in his shirt. He turned and stared at the blue sponsor’s backdrop. Anything to avoid glancing at the Sid Waddell Trophy that was being placed on a plinth in front of him, the trophy that has now twice eluded him at the final hurdle. He believed it was his time. We all felt it, too. He had beaten the defending champion Gerwyn Price, the dangerous James Wade, the breakthrough star of the year in Jonny Clayton. When he is on song and in rhythm, when the 180s flow from his fingers like piano music, there is barely a player on the planet who can live with him. And perhaps, ultimately, only a player like Wright could have thwarted him. Late in the game Smith was 5-4 up with a break of throw, an advantage that felt decisive. Instead Wright endured, much as he has been enduring his whole career. Darts never came easy to him. Life never came easy to him. Even in his moment of triumph, the boos from an uncharitable Alexandra Palace crowd continued to sting his ears. But here he was, the last man standing and now legitimately one of the greats of the sport. Long before a dart had been thrown in this final, Alexandra Palace was already a heaving hive of fervour and festivity, as grown men bellowed their viral load across the Palm Court arena and the old songs were revived with relish. You were reminded again just what a befuddling challenge it must be to throw pinpoint darts in this environment, amid the pounding music and the hollering of the referee and the ambient smell of lager and takeaway. Many wither on the big stage. For those who succeed, it must be akin to performing open heart surgery on a nightclub dancefloor. But both men had been here before. Wright had broken his duck by winning the title two years earlier, and at 51 years of age was somewhere near the peak of his powers. An introvert dressed as an extrovert, Wright is a creature of paradoxes and contradictions: the showman with a chronic shyness, the court jester who throws with a sniper’s precision, the relentlessly consistent scorer who changes his darts between tournaments, between matches, sometimes even – as here – in the fifth set of a world championship final. Three years earlier, Smith had been demolished on this stage by Michael van Gerwen, breaking a hand midway through after punching a door in frustration. And for a while it felt like the experience might be a terminal one. His scoring had always been peerless. But in times of stress the arm would tense and the doubles would drift. As if he couldn’t quite take the final step. As if he was finally being forced to contemplate what it meant to win. Such was the fate that befell him here. He has now reached seven major televised finals, and lost the lot. The action was as loose and easy as ever, but the body language looked a little strained, the gaze a little pained. The canny Wright was taking his time between visits, forcing Smith to think as much as possible. The contrast between them was stark. Smith flings his darts as if they’re laughing emojis: one, two, three, who cares? Wright, by contrast, throws them as if he’s trying to construct the three parts of a perfect sentence. The first two sets were scrappy, and Wright won them both. But as Smith settled, his sheer weight of scoring began to impose itself. He swung himself back into the match with a sumptuous 167 checkout. Two-all became 3-3 became 4-4 became 5-5. One hour became two. Even the crowd seemed to tighten a little, as if aware that the time for frivolity had passed. On the stage, both players were betraying barely a flicker of tension or nerves, even as they knew – as we all did – that they were fooling absolutely nobody. And finally it was Smith who cracked, missing a crucial bullseye to hold throw in the 12th set. Wright checked out 81 for a 12-dart finish, and before long the last rites were being administered. Smith had recorded a higher average (99 to 98). He had hit 24 180s to Wright’s 17. But as the old truism goes, darts is not simply a game of scoring but of timing. And as Smith blinked into the Palace lights, pyrotechnics lighting his face, he could be forgiven for wondering when his time might come again.