Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Swapping their pastures for the concrete jungle, hundreds of Britain’s farmers will take off their wellies this week and head to a conference centre in central Birmingham for the annual shindig of the National Farmers’ Union (NFU). Nearly 1,500 food producers will meet to discuss the “blueprint for the future” of British farming, against the backdrop of the biggest upheaval in a generation in agriculture, following the UK’s departure from the EU and the pandemic, and amid discussions about future land use in the face of the climate crisis. Farmers insist Covid only increased consumers’ appetite to “buy British”, especially at a time when global supply chains were disrupted. But the past two years have shown it’s not always easy for food producers to get their produce from field to fork. The industry is grappling with worker shortages following Brexit and Covid, when many European workers went back to their home countries. A shortage of workers has already resulted in unpicked fruit being left to rot in fields, and a cull of healthy pigs on farms because of a lack of staff at slaughterhouses. An estimated 35,000 animals have been killed and won’t enter the food chain. All this is taking place before farmers feel the impact of the UK’s post-Brexit trade deals with food-producing nations Australia and New Zealand, which will see their exporters theoretically able to send limitless amounts of lamb, beef and dairy produce to the UK within 15 years. These are bitter pills to swallow for an organisation which backed staying in the EU before the Brexit vote. While the focus of the conference will be on the future, and life beyond the EU’s subsidy scheme – known as the common agricultural policy (CAP) and worth £3bn a year to UK farmers – food producers are, like most other businesses, bearing the brunt of rising costs. The most pressing concerns for most farmers are the three Fs – feed, fuel and fertiliser – all of which rocketed in price, leaving many wondering how much fertiliser they can afford to buy for the spring planting season. Agriculture makes only a very small contribution to the UK’s annual economic output – approximately 0.5% – yet it is the lifeblood of many rural communities, and inflation will be a major worry for people in some of the regions which are at the heart of the government’s levelling-up ambitions. NFU president Minette Batters – who is seeking re-election for a third term representing the interests of around 55,000 English and Welsh farmers – is clear on the importance of farming for ensuring domestic food supply and sustaining rural ways of life. TV presenter Jeremy Clarkson’s attempts to reinvent himself as a farmer may have proved TV ratings gold, and his Clarkson’s Farm series has been recommissioned for a second series, but Batters recently told the Observer that she doubted whether the current crop of politicians understood the importance of agriculture. So you could be forgiven for thinking that George Eustice, secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, and himself of Cornish farming stock, might receive a rather frosty reception from the assembled food producers when he gives a speech at the conference. In recent months, many farmers have criticised the apparent disconnection between Eustice’s resoundingly positive portrayal of the opportunities for British agriculture and the current realities of farming life. Access to seasonal workers remains a thorny issue, with the government keeping the number of permits at the 30,000 allowed in 2021, resisting calls from producers for a significant increase in the quota. Industry insiders criticise Defra, Eustice’s department, for having little influence in cabinet, and say it is the Home Office calling the shots when it comes to setting the numbers for post-Brexit visa allocation for seasonal workers. Far from their fields, expect farmers this week to issue some stark warnings over how continued worker shortages will impact domestic food production, and how “taking back control” could lead to Britons eating more imported food.Thousands of homes were left without power on Saturday night, as forecasters predicted gusts of up to 80mph were set to batter again Britain on Sunday. The Energy Networks Association said that about 155,000 customers remained without electricity in the south and east of England and Wales after Storm Eunice, while new yellow weather warnings were announced across the UK. The yellow warning for wind will be in place in England and Wales from midday on Sunday until 3pm on Monday. In Northern Ireland, north-west England, and south-west Scotland, another warning will be in place until midday on Monday. For rain, the yellow warning remains in place from midnight on Saturday until 6pm on Sunday in Cumbria, Lancashire and West Yorkshire. Met Office forecaster Simon Partridge told the Guardian we can expect “wet and windy weather” to continue well into next week which will likely impact recovery. “Eunice is gone, but unfortunately things are not settling down,” he said. “There is another area of low pressure up near Iceland, and that will bring very strong winds again through Sunday. As well as that we’ve got reasonably heavy rain as well. “There’s also a fair bit of snow, and the rain is going to melt it. There could be some issues with surface water and flooding in certain areas. “There is not a great deal of respite in terms of lighter winds at all this week, which will really set back clear-up operations.” Rail services across most of the UK suffered major disruption as operators fought the elements to clear fallen debris from the tracks. Most continued to advise customers not to travel unless essential and ran limited services. Meanwhile, airport operations were mostly back to normal at Gatwick, Heathrow and Manchester. More than 500 flights to and from the UK were cancelled on Friday. Four fatalities have been confirmed due to Storm Eunice, including a female passenger in her 30s who died after a tree fell on her car. The driver was taken to hospital. In Merseyside, a man was killed by debris hitting the windscreen of the car he was a passenger in. Two men in a pickup truck were crushed by a falling tree in Alton, Hampshire, killing the passenger at the scene and leaving the driver with serious injuries. In Co Wexford in Ireland, a county council worker was killed by a falling tree as he worked to clear debris locally. Emergency services across the country were reportedly overwhelmed with calls from members of the public through Friday and Saturday. Insurance network PwC estimated that insurance losses for Storm Eunice will be between £200 and £300m. Mohammad Khan, general insurance leader at PwC UK, said: “It was expected that Storm Eunice would be severe and we’ve seen the strongest gusts impacting coastal areas as well as travel disruption with airlines and train operators cancelling flights and entire rail lines impacting travel across the country. “As with Storm Dudley, insurance losses will mainly be in respect of damage to homes, commercial properties and vehicles from falling trees and flying debris.”Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, has declared a laser incident involving a Royal Australian Air Force aircraft last week is an “act of intimidation” by China. Australia’s defence department reported a laser emanating from a People’s Liberation Army Navy vessel illuminated a P-8A Poseidon surveillance aircraft last Thursday when the Chinese ship was sailing east through the Arafura sea. On Sunday, the prime minister characterised the episode as “a reckless and irresponsible act that should not have occurred”. Thursday’s incident in waters to the north of Australia followed days of domestic political contention about national security. Morrison said Australia would be “making our views very clear” to the Chinese government through defence and diplomatic channels. Morrison said China needed to provide an explanation “as to why a military vessel in Australia’s exclusive economic zone would undertake such an act – such a dangerous act”. “I can see it no other way than an act of intimidation, one that was unprovoked, unwarranted,” Morrison told reporters on Sunday. “Australia will never accept such acts of intimidation.” With a federal election looming, Morrison is attempting to paint his political opponents as being weak on national security, and has declared the authoritarian regime in Beijing wants Labor to replace the Coalition in the coming contest. The strident nature of the Coalition’s partisan attack prompted the current director-general of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Mike Burgess, to observe publicly that the weaponisation of national security was “not helpful to us”. A former Asio chief, Dennis Richardson, backed the observation by Burgess, and went further. Richardson, who was appointed to run Australia’s intelligence agency in the Howard era, argued last week the Morrison government was serving China’s interests, not Australia’s, by politicising national security and “seeking to create the perception of a difference [between the major parties] when none in practise exists”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The public pushback by Australia’s national security establishment is highly unusual. But thus far Morrison and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, have ignored the warnings. Persisting with his political framing, Morrison declared on Sunday the Coalition had always “stood up” to acts of aggression by China. “What I can tell you is the way Australia stands up to coercion, bullying, and intimidation and threats – that is what my government has been doing,” the prime minister said. “You’ve got to take a strong stance on these issues. It’s not just about what you say, it’s about what you do, and what our government has been doing is protecting Australia’s national interest and protecting us from such threats and intimidation.” Morrison said the laser incident “highlights why, as a government, we have made this such a significant issue”. He said the Coalition had “demonstrated our credentials on national security”. The prime minister said the Coalition had increased funding for defence and intelligence gathering, and “did not abandon our borders as Labor did”. He said the laser incident strengthened his “resolve” to boost Australia’s resilience. Morrison said the Coalition would not be “taking an appeasement path” when it came to China’s militarisation in the region. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, characterised China’s actions as an “outrageous act of aggression” and “a reckless act”. “I condemn it,” he said. The shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong, said: “These are not the actions of a responsible actor. We expect the government to convey Australia’s strong bipartisan condemnation to Beijing.” The shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, told the ABC on Sunday the episode was “a really concerning and really dangerous and reckless incident” that should be condemned “in the strongest possible terms – as the prime minister has”. But Chalmers added: “I don’t think what we’ve seen during the week though has strengthened our national security, I think it’s undermined it”. “At a time when we need a prime minister to be strong and calm and rational, instead we’ve had a prime minister who has been panicked and political and desperate. What we really need here, is we need unity … because if we are divided, then that risks our national security and it makes Australians less safe rather than more safe.” In a statement Australia’s defence department said incidents like Thursday’s “have the potential to endanger lives”. The department strongly condemned the “unprofessional and unsafe military conduct”. The Chinese embassy in Canberra has been contacted for comment.The chair of parliament’s joint committee on intelligence and security, the Liberal senator James Paterson, has rebuked the defence minister, Peter Dutton, and other parliamentarians for referencing classified information during last week’s hyper-partisan brawling over national security. Paterson told the ABC on Sunday he was not “being critical” of either Dutton or the Labor senator Kimberley Kitching, who both referred to classified intelligence during last week’s confrontations in the House of Representatives and Senate estimates. Paterson said politicians had a right to “speak freely in the parliament” and he said Dutton had not divulged classified material, just referred to its existence. But the Liberal senator added: “I think we should all heed the warning of the Asio director general [Mike Burgess] – all of us – we should be careful in referring to classified information.” “I’m very careful about what I do with the information I have access to,” Paterson said. Last week, Dutton and Scott Morrison unleashed swinging partisan attacks on Labor, declaring Anthony Albanese was weak on national security, and alleging the ALP would not stand up to aggression from China. The blatant politicisation drew a rare public rebuke from Burgess. He said pre-election weaponisation of serious issues made it harder for Asio to do its job. A former chief of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Dennis Richardson also argued in a series of interviews last week that the Morrison government was serving China’s interests, not Australia’s, by politicising national security ahead of the election, and “seeking to create the perception of a difference [between the major parties] when none in practice exists”. Labor has characterised last week’s rhetorical assault as substantively reckless and politically desperate. But Dutton on Sunday was unrepentant about the government’s tactics. The defence minister told Sky News he disagreed with the assessments of the national security establishment that there was demonstrable bipartisanship on defence and security in Australia. Dutton said Burgess and Richardson were first class public servants: “I have the utmost respect for both men and I know both of them very well.” But he added: “I disagree with the conclusions they are drawing. I think there is a big difference between the Coalition and Labor. “I think the public recognises that,” Dutton said. “I think the public has seen the actions of the Labor party when they were in government, when they lost control of the borders. “If you can’t stare down the people smugglers, how can you stare down the acts of aggression coming from the Chinese government?” During his appearance on the ABC on Sunday, Paterson, a China hawk, echoed Dutton’s broad political critique of Labor’s record. He also said he had no intention of apologising to Richardson after questioning his judgment last week. Paterson publicly criticised Richardson in an interview with Sky News last Thursday. He said Richardson had advocated that the Chinese telco Huawei should be involved in the 5G rollout – a position the Coalition rejected on advice from intelligence agencies – and had taken leave “to negotiate on behalf of the Canberra Raiders a lucrative sponsorship agreement from Huawei for the Canberra Raiders” while he was secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Richardson suggested in 2018 that Australia should follow the UK’s lead and establish a cybersecurity unit to manage risks and safeguard Australia’s national interest, rather than banning the Chinese company outright. But the former spy chief told Guardian Australia last week he had never advocated for Huawei’s unmitigated involvement in 5G. He accused the Liberal senator of engaging in a “grubby” and “despicable” attempt to blacken his name. On Sunday morning, Paterson acknowledged Richardson had not negotiated the sponsorship agreement, but had “made an initial pitch to Huawei on behalf of the Canberra Raiders for that lucrative sponsorship agreement”. But the Liberal senator said he did not owe Richardson an apology. “I didn’t use any emotive language in my contribution,” Paterson said. “I just pointed to information that was already on the public record.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Asked whether he acknowledged some of his facts were wrong, Paterson said: “Well, I said that he negotiated and I should have said that he pitched, but otherwise I think it was very accurate references for information on the public record. “Dennis and I have agreed that we should catch up for a beer and I look forward to that,” Paterson said. Given he echoed Dutton’s negative commentary about differences between the Coalition and Labor on national security on Sunday, Paterson was asked on Sunday why he had previously valued the importance of bipartisanship in his role as chair of the intelligence committee. One year ago, Paterson told Guardian Australia in an interview: “It’s very powerful for us to be able to stand shoulder to shoulder across the political spectrum and send a very strong message to the world that we won’t be separated on these issues of national interest.” Asked whether the proximity of the looming election had prompted a change of heart, Paterson said: “I don’t just talk about bipartisanship, I’ve delivered it. “On my watch in the last 12 months on the [committee] we’ve handed down 17 bipartisan reports on issues as diverse as critical infrastructure, high-risk terrorist offenders and the dark web – and many of those reports have required hours of painstaking negotiations with my Labor counterparts. He added: “In a liberal democracy, we are absolutely entitled to examine their record and make competing claims about what we think they’ll do in office. It’s up to them to meet the high bar that we’re setting for bipartisanship. If they’re not comfortable meeting that standard, well, then they can justify that to the Australian people.”Thanks for following along. We will be closing this blog for now but you can follow all the latest updates from me, Samantha Lock, at the new blog here: Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison has warned Russia the world will be moving together to counteract any violence it inflicts on Ukraine. The Australian Associated Press reports the prime minister told reporters in Melbourne on Sunday: It is unacceptable because it is unwarranted, it’s unprovoked in terms of the threats of terrible violence that Russia is imposing on Ukraine. He said while there has never been any contemplation of Australian troops being deployed to eastern Europe, the government has been working with its allies to directly support Ukraine, whether it be in cyberspace or things of that nature. The world will be moving together to seek to counteract what would be a terrible act of violence. Should they follow through on their acts of violence against Ukraine, we will follow through with sanctions together and in partnership with all of our other allies and partners.” US President Joe Biden’s confidence about Russian military action came from US intel about an order given to Russian subordinates to proceed with a full-scale attack, according to senior administration officials. The Washington Post writes: US intelligence that provided Biden with the confidence to make the assertion came from an order given to Russian subordinates to proceed with a full-scale attack, according to several people familiar with the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the matter’s sensitivity. The United States obtained intelligence on the order as Russian military and security officials were taking steps to implement it, and did so very recently, the people said.” Some European allies have questioned the United States’ conviction that Moscow will launch an attack, saying that they have not seen direct evidence suggesting Putin has committed to hostilities. Zelenskiy continues to assert Ukraine will not respond to any provocations from Russia after speaking with reporters from the Munich security conference. We’re not panicking. We’re very consistent that we are not responding to any provocations. We’ve been in this tension for many many years now. We do not think we need to panic. While the Ukrainian president acknowledged that the risks posed by the build-up of Russian forces encircling his country was “indeed very high”, he asserted it would be a “very big risk if we respond [to provocation].” We need to preserve our stability. We need to keep calm and be adults. In these terms, the Ukraine army is more adult than others. We are not really living in delusion. We understand what can happen tomorrow ... just putting ourselves in coffins and waiting for foreign soldiers to come in is not something we are prepared to do.” Zelenskiy has also asked Nato partners to clarify a timeline on which Ukraine could join the military alliance. Ukraine needs security guarantees. We are smart people, we are not narrow minded. We understand there are lots of different risks because of Nato, there is no consensus around other allies, everyone is saying there is some distance that we need to go between Ukraine and Nato that we need to walk. All we are saying is tell us how much time does it take to complete this distance?” Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said that sanctions on Russia should be made public before and not after a possible invasion of Ukraine occurs. In an interview with CNN’s Christiane Amanpour, he said: Even the question of just making it public, preventably, just a list of sanctions for them, for us and to know what will happen if they start the war, even that question does not have the support. We don’t need your sanctions after the bombardment will happen and after our country will be fired at or after we will have no borders, or after we will have no economy or part of our countries will be occupied... why would we need those sanctions then?” Josep Borrell, high representative on behalf of the EU, says there are “no grounds for allegations” coming from the Russian-backed Donetsk and Luhansk regions of a possible Ukrainian attack. The EU council also said it is witnessing an “intensification of information manipulation” efforts to support such objectives. The EU sees no grounds for allegations coming from the non-governmental controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of a possible Ukrainian attack. The EU urges Russia to engage in meaningful dialogue, diplomacy, show restraint and de-escalate.” The European council has called upon Russia to de-escalate and withdraw military forces, while commending Ukraine’s “posture of restraint in the face of continued provocations and efforts at destabilisation”. In a statement, Josep Borrell, high representative on behalf of the EU, said: Russia’s massive build-up of armed forces in and around Ukraine remains of grave concern. The EU urges Russia to de-escalate by a substantial withdrawal of military forces from the proximity of Ukraine’s borders. Borrell writes the escalation is now “compounded by the increase in ceasefire violations” in eastern Ukraine in recent days. The EU condemns the use of heavy weaponry and indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas, which constitute a clear violation of the Minsk agreements and international humanitarian law. We commend Ukraine’s posture of restraint in the face of continued provocations and efforts at destabilisation. The EU is extremely concerned that staged events, as noted recently, could be used as a pretext for possible military escalation. Hostilities in eastern Ukraine have disrupted water services to more than 1 million people in the region, according to the international committee of the Red Cross. The committee called on all sides to spare infrastructure that is essential for the survival of communities. A statement reads: The recent intensification of the fighting in eastern Ukraine has again put certain key essential services at risk of coming to a full stop. In the last two days, at least two major pumping stations in the Donetsk region serving more than 1 million people on either side of the line of contact with water, including hospitals and other crucial services, were “rendered inoperable by the hostilities”, the ICRC said. Civilian infrastructure providing essential services are protected under International Humanitarian Law, Florence Gillette, the ICRC’s head of delegation in Ukraine, added. Sir Richard Branson has come out in support of Ukraine, denouncing Russia’s “unacceptable aggression” and urging the world to “stand up for Ukraine’s sovereignty”. The British billionaire and Virgin founder writes in a recent blog post: The world must support Ukraine. We must not abandon a country that voluntarily gave up its nuclear weapons in return for peace, and is now on the verge of being invaded by the very country that persuaded it to do so.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as my colleague Lauren Gambino signs off. US state department spokesperson Ned Price says more evidence of Russian disinformation is being used for false-flag operations aimed at discrediting the Ukrainian government. “We are seeing more evidence of Russian disinformation being used as pretext for a potential Russian attack on Ukraine. Today, locals in Donetsk reported calm despite Russian claims of a car bomb,” Price said. From Munich to Moscow, it’s been a turbulent day of warnings and preparations, statements and speeches. Here’s what’s happened this evening. British foreign minister Liz Truss told Munich security conference on Saturday that Ukraine could face the “worst-case scenario” of a Russian invasion as soon as next week, and Europe faced one of its most perilous security situations since the early 20th century. Speaking in Munich, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy called on Vladimir Putin to meet with him to find a resolution to the conflict. “I don’t know what the president of the Russian Federation wants, so I am proposing a meeting,” he said. Nato has relocated staff from Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, to Lviv and Brussels, according to multiple reports. It follows decisions by several countries to move their embassy operations out of Kyiv amid rising tensions with Russia. Joe Biden will convene the national security council on Sunday to discuss the evolving situation in Ukraine, the White House announced on Saturday. A joint statement from the foreign ministers of the G7 nations urged diplomacy but warned it would “judge Russia by its deeds”. A Reuters journalist reported hearing explosions overnight in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine. Annalena Baerbock, the German foreign minister, said it was unhelpful to try to predict what Russia might do. She said it remained unclear whether Putin had yet made a decision about Ukraine. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on Saturday he had an “urgent” phone call with French president Emmanuel Macron to discuss the potential for immediate “de-escalation &amp; political diplomatic settlement” in eastern Ukraine. Observers from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on Saturday reported more than 1,500 ceasefire violations in east Ukraine in a single day, the highest number recorded this year. That’s all from me, Lauren Gambino. Over to my colleagues. Thanks for reading. Joe Biden will convene a meeting of the national security council on Sunday to discuss the situation in Ukraine, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said in a statement on Saturday evening. The US president received regular updates from his national security team about events on the ground in Ukraine, amid mounting reports of ceasefire violations on Saturday. His security team “reaffirmed that Russia could launch an attack against Ukraine at any time,” Psaki said. Biden maintained a relatively low public profile on Saturday, while Kamala Harris and Anthony Blinken represented the US in Munich. He left the White House to have lunch with his granddaughters in Washington and later to attend mass. Shaun Walker files this moving report from Stanytsia Luhanska, once a suburb of the city Luhansk, but since the war, has been separated from it by a frontline. Raisa Malashenko was trundling her rusty bicycle, laden with bags of food, through the centre of Stanytsia Luhanska on Saturday afternoon. The 81-year-old did not flinch as booms of artillery sounded in the distance. Her five children have all left this frontline town, some for Russia and others for safer parts of Ukraine. “It’s just me and my cow now,” she said mournfully. Like many older people in eastern Ukraine, Malashenko said she missed the Soviet period, and said she blamed the Ukrainian army and Kyiv’s western backers for the current escalation. But she also said she was terrified of a Russian invasion. “God forbid the Russians come, and then with them their Cossacks and Chechen fighters will come. Imagine what a hell it will be then,” she said, a tear glistening in one of her eyes. Walker was among a group of journalists who joined the Ukrainian military on a visit to the town. Their goal was to help dispel what Ukraine has said is a false Russian narrative that the Ukrainian army has been behind the recent uptick in violence. There they observed rubble still scattered on the floor of the Fairy Tale kindergarten, which was hit by fire on Thursday, injuring two people. Multiple explosions could be heard overnight in the centre of the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine, according to a Reuters journalist in the area. The origin of the explosions was not clear, the agency said. There was no immediate comment from separatist authorities or from Kyiv. Ukraine’s interior minister was forced to dive for cover during a visit to the frontline of the eight-year conflict with pro-Russian separatists on Saturday. Reporters accompanying the minister, Denys Monastyrsky, said the area came under “surprise mortar barrage” during the visit to meet with troops and inspect the trenches near Novoluganske, in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine. According to AFP, Monastyrsky, his entourage and reporters scrambled for cover as several mortar shells landed in nearby fields. No one was hurt and Monastyrsky later said he did not believe he had been targeted. The tour was intended to underscore for journalists the escalating danger along the frontline. Their experience left little doubt. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on Saturday he had an “urgent” phone call with French president Emmanuel Macron to discuss the potential for immediate “de-escalation &amp; political diplomatic settlement” in eastern Ukraine. International observers and the Ukrainian government have reported a sharp rise in ceasefire violations by Russia-backed separatists as the US and UK warn that a Russian invasion of Ukraine could be imminent. In a tweet, Zelenskiy said he informed Macron of the “aggravation on the frontline, our losses, the shelling.” The G7 foreign ministers on Saturday said they remain “gravely concerned” about the build up of Russian forces along its border with Ukraine. The statement, signed by the foreign ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK, the US and the High Representative of the EU, urged diplomacy and de-escalation, but warned: “We will judge Russia by its deeds.” “Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified massing of military forces, the largest deployment on the European continent since the end of the Cold War is a challenge to global security and the international order,” the statement said. It continued: “While we are ready to explore diplomatic solutions to address legitimate security concerns, Russia should be in no doubt that any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences, including financial and economic sanctions on a wide array of sectoral and individual targets that would impose severe and unprecedented costs on the Russian economy.” Observers from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on Saturday reported more than 1,500 ceasefire violations in east Ukraine in a single day, the highest number recorded this year. The report covered attacks on Friday, in which monitors registered 975 breaches in Luhansk and 591 in neighbouring Donetsk, two regions partly controlled by the pro-Russian separatists. The observers also said it had logged 860 explosions in Luhansk and 553 in Donetsk. The OSCE confirmed one civilian was injured in the government-controlled area of Donetsk. The eight-year conflict has seen a sharp uptick in violence over the last week, as the west fears Russia is creating false pretexts for an attack on Ukraine while amassing troops on the Ukrainian border. The Ukrainian military said on Saturday two soldiers were killed and four wounded in shelling by pro-Russian separatists, while Russia opened a criminal investigation into reports that Ukrainian shells exploded in Russia’s border region of Rostov, charges Kyiv has flatly denied. During a frenetic day of speech-making and behind-the-scenes negotiating in Munich, US secretary of state Antony Blinken sat for an interview with Dozhd TV, an independent Russian TV channel, to denounce the Kremlin’s claims that it is Ukraine, not Russia, acting as the aggressor. “Unfortunately what we’re seeing is playing out exactly as I said a few days ago at the United Nations security council,” Blinken told Ekaterina Kotrikadze of Dozhd TV. “There is the fabrication of provocations that would be then used as a justification for Russian military intervention in the Donbas and in Ukraine more broadly.” Blinken called claims by Moscow of a “genocide” in Donbas “absolutely wrong and frankly offensive”. He said Ukraine had eight years to try to recapture Donbas and said it “defies any logic” to accuse it of trying to do that now with 150,000 Russian troops massed at the border. Blinken said he is still prepared to meet his Russian counterpart, foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, next week in Europe, assuming that “Russia does not invade Ukraine in the meantime”. Asked if there was anything the US could offer that would de-escalate tensions, Blinken said there were many areas where the two world powers could work together to “improve everyone’s security”. “But doing that as well with a gun pointed to Ukraine’s head – 150,000 Russian forces to the north, to the east, to the south – it’s very difficult to make progress in that environment,” he said. Questioning the quality of information Putin was receiving, Blinken said public sentiment in Ukraine had shifted sharply away from Russia since it invaded Crimea in 2014. “If [Putin] believes that Russian forces would be accepted with open arms in Ukraine, I think he’s profoundly wrong,” Blinken said. Citing “concerns and confusion” within Russia about the US’s recent assessments, Kotrikadze, asked Blinken to describe the “level” of intelligence the country receives. “All I can tell you is this,” he replied. “We’re very confident in the information that we have.” Ukrainian defence minister Oleksii Reznikov on Saturday thanked Canada’s military for sending rifles, machine guns and surveillance equipment. “Thank you for this important &amp; timely decision,” Reznikov wrote on Twitter. Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth is on the ground near the Russian border with Ukraine, where tents have been set up to house evacuees from the Donbas. Nato is relocating staff based in Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, to Lviv in the west of the country and to Brussels for safety reasons, according to Reuters, citing a Nato official. The decision was first reported by Norwegian daily VG. “The safety of our personnel is paramount, so staff have been relocated to Lviv and Brussels. The Nato offices in Ukraine remain operational,” the official to Reuters, without providing an estimate of the people and positions that had been moved. This follows decisions by the US and the UK to relocate their Ukraine embassy operations from Kyiv to Lviv. Several other nations have moved diplomats and services out of the capital as well. The World Bank Group is prepared to quickly disburse up to $350m to Ukraine, action that will be considered by the group’s board before the end of March, according to a statement from the organisation on Saturday. According to a readout of a meeting between the World Bank president, David Malpass, and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Malpass said the group will continue to support the Ukrainian people and economy for its “short and long-term financing needs”. The statement said the $350m disbursement “would be followed by further budget support and additional reforms, including in the energy and climate areas.” Malpass and Zelenskiy also discussed the World Bank’s “robust pipeline of planned projects for Ukraine, including energy efficiency, infrastructure, railways, and strengthening the economy and job opportunities in eastern Ukraine,” it said. Annalena Baerbock, the German foreign minister, warned that it remained unclear whether Vladimir Putin had yet made a decision about Ukraine, tamping down Washington’s urgent warnings of an imminent invasion. “We do not know yet if an attack has been decided on,” she told reporters on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference, according to AFP. She added that the “threat against Ukraine is very real”. On Friday, Joe Biden said he was “convinced” that Putin had “made the decision” to attack Ukraine. Pressed on whether Germany shared the US assessment, Baerbock replied: “In crisis situations, the most inappropriate thing to do is to somehow guess or assume.” “My urgent appeal to all is that we look closely at the facts on the ground,” she continued, warning against the risk of “targeted disinformation”. According to the news agency, Baerbock made her remarks after hosting a G7 foreign ministers’ meeting, which has been dominated by the Ukraine crisis this year. She said the nations were “united” and prepared to respond in the event Russia invades Ukraine. To Putin, she said: “Pull your troops back, avoid damage to Russia and Ukraine and let us talk.” China has seized on the crisis in Ukraine to criticise Nato, which last year branded Beijing as a “systemic challenge”. Speaking at the Munich Security Conference on Saturday, Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi said of Nato’s expansion: “If Nato keeps expanding eastward, is it conducive to maintaining peace and stability in Europe?” He also called on Nato to “adapt”. “Since the cold war is long gone, Nato, a product of the cold war, needs to adapt itself to the changing circumstances,” he said. At the same time, Wang said “all countries’ sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity should be respected and safeguarded”, and that “Ukraine is no exception to the principle”. He also urged a return to the Minsk II agreement “as quickly as possible”. Wang’s comment did not go down well with Nato. “[F]or the first time, we now see Beijing joining Moscow in calling on Nato to stop admitting new members,” said Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg. “It is an attempt to control the fate of free nations. To rewrite the international rulebook. And impose their own authoritarian models of governance.” But perhaps there’s another reason why Beijing is keen to talk about Nato, analysts say. Last year, Nato leaders declared China presents a security risk at their annual summit in Brussels. It was the first time the traditionally Russia-focused military alliance had asserted the need to respond to Beijing’s growing prowess. Beijing was furious. Read Vincent’s analysis for a deeper look at the complicated relationship between China and Nato. Amid the grim assessments and growing fears of an imminent Russian invasion that have consumed the security conference in Munich, the Ukrainian president offered an unexpected moment of levity. Tapping his headset, Volodymyr Zelenskiy joked that it might have been hacked by Russia. “I think, cyberattack,” he said with a wry smile, before explaining that the translation had stopped working. As he waited for a replacement, he deadpanned: “See, Russia’s not here, but they’re here.” The audience roared with laughter. Speaking on a panel at the security conference in Munich, Truss also warned that the “global security architecture that we have at the moment isn’t sufficient to deal with the new challenges we face”. She said there must be more advancements in the areas of space and new technology, such as hypersonic weapons. Looking ahead, she said it was imperative to make the current system of collective security more global. “Any future arms control needs to also include China,” Truss said. “We can’t be in a situation where only one part of the world that is constrained and the rest isn’t.” “Euro-Atlantic security is not divisible from Indo-Pacific security,” she added, pointing to the joint statement from Putin and Xi. The Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy challenged the west to explain why it had not done more to protect Ukraine, not just now that the country was under the threat of invasion by Russia, but during the onslaught over the past eight years. Describing the policy as one of appeasement, he called for world leaders to meet to create a new security architecture. He also called for Nato to give an indication of how long it would take for Ukraine to be given membership, and in the meantime for the country to be given security guarantees. Flying to Munich from Kyiv with America warning a Russian attack on his capital was imminent, Zelenskiy said he had left his country in good hands with its soldiers and people. “I had my breakfast in Ukraine and I will have my dinner in Ukraine,” he reassured the audience. He used much of his 20-minute address to challenge the west about what had happened to its promise of Nato membership, and asked what message the west had for the two soldiers killed on the frontline on Saturday. He said he did not know what Vladimir Putin wanted, which was why he proposed a meeting, saying he was willing to discuss the Minsk agreements with him. “We do not need your sanctions after our country has been bombarded and we have lost our borders.” He added that if Russia pulled back its troops there would be no sanctions, but then said he feared “if the west cannot even disclose what will happen to whom when the war starts then I doubt it will be triggered at all after it happens”. He insisted his army was keeping calm, resilient and adult in the face of cynical Russian attacks on the territory it controls, he nevertheless acknowledged that the risks were high and one provocative shell fire could yet spark war. He said his country could not secure stability if there were constant predictions of war the next day. “Ukraine is longing for peace. Europe is longing for peace. The world is saying it does not want any war and Russia is claiming it does want to intervene. Someone here is lying.” He said: “We are told that the doors of Nato are open but for the moment we are told that it is not possible. Are these doors really open? You have an open door but strangers do not seem to be allowed. “Open doors are good, but we need answers,” he said. “If you don’t want to see us there, be honest about it. All these questions require answers.” Recalling the recent attacks on a kindergarten in eastern Ukraine, he said the “kids were not turning to Nato, they were going to their classrooms”. He opened by asking: “Has our world completely forgotten the mistakes of the 20th century and where does the appeasement policy usually lead to? These are horrific history lessons. How did we get to this point in the 21st century where the war is being waged and where people are dying how did we end up in the biggest security crisis since the end of the cold war?” He added: “The security architecture of our world is brittle, obsolete and the rules that were agreed dozens of years ago are no longer working. The security system is slow and failing us time and time again.” He blamed “egotism, arrogance and irresponsibility at the global level. Some countries resort to crime and others resort to indifference”. “It is too late to fix the current architecture. It is high time for a new one before we pay with millions of casualties.” He vowed his country would support itself with or without the help of its partners. Ukraine could face the worst-case scenario of a Russian invasion as soon as next week, and Europe faced one of its most perilous security situations since the early 20th century, British foreign minister Liz Truss told Munich security conference on Saturday. “We need to prepare for the worst-case scenario and that worst case scenario could happen as early as next week,” she said. “The reality is that Russia does want to turn the clock back – they want to turn the clock back to the 1990s and before.” She continued: “In the last week alone, we’ve seen a doubling of disinformation, and we’ve seen false-flag operations in the Donbas region. I’m afraid that Russia has shown that they are not serious about diplomacy.” She added: “We need to be strong because that is the only thing that Russia understands.” It’s been a hectic day of developments on the Ukraine crisis. Here’s Saturday’s top headlines so far. The US defence secretary Lloyd Austin said Russia is “poised to strike” Ukraine, echoing president Joe Biden’s comments yesterday that he believed the decision to invade had already been taken. US vice-president Kamala Harris warned of “significant and unprecedented economic costs” if Russia invades, telling Russian president Vladimir Putin not to underestimate the strength of the west. Ukraine’s military reported intense shelling on Saturday morning from Russian-backed separatists against Ukrainian civilians. They released video footage showing shelling in areas close to rebel-held territories, saying there was a “gross” violation of ceasefires. Russia, meanwhile, is accusing Ukraine’s military of shelling Russian territory, claims Ukraine dismisses as false – as western leaders warn of potential Russian false-flag plots and disinformation campaigns as a pretext for invasion. Russia tested nuclear-capable ballistic missiles on Saturday – as part of annual drills that were pushed back – which many interpreted as a display of strength warning Nato not to get involved in Ukraine. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said “no matter what, we are going to protect our beautiful land”, and blasted the international security architecture as fragile and needing reform. UK prime minister Boris Johnson said an Ukraine invasion would “echo around world”, in a speech warning of “a long and hideous period of reprisals and revenge and insurgency” if Putin invades. He said Russia was seeking to sow confusion for its own sake, but also said he still held out hope for a diplomatic resolution. The German foreign office called on all German nationals to leave Ukraine immediately. Meanwhile, airline Lufthansa suspended flights to Kyiv. The Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis called for stronger military defence of the Baltic states and Poland, amid fears over potential Russian aggression in the region. Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz said Putin would be making a “severe error” if he invades Ukraine, adding he hoped a diplomatic solution could still be reached, and dismissed Russian claims of genocide in the Donbas region as “ridiculous”. Russia hit back at Scholz on that last point – as western leaders warned of Russia disinformation and staged grievances before invading. Russian officials said evacuated civilians have arrived in Russia’s Rostov region from the Donbas – after accusing Ukraine of an imminent invasion, which it dismisses – but western officials warned Moscow was seeking to create a pretext in eastern Ukraine to invade its neighbour. Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, said international “peace cannot be taken for granted” and warned that Putin “will only get more Nato” on his borders amid aggression against Ukraine. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew. I’ll be back tomorrow, over to my colleague Lauren Gambino. Bye for now. The European Union has delivered emergency medical equipment to Ukraine following a request from Kyiv amid an escalation of the crisis with Russia. Reuters reports the details from Brussels: The request was made by Ukraine on Tuesday, amid rising fears of an imminent Russian invasion. So far emergency aid has come from France, Romania, Slovenia, Ireland and Austria, the commission said. France has sent a field hospital, medicines and hundreds of tents, blankets, sleeping bags. Additional aid, including medical equipment and power generators, were deployed by the other EU countries. More help is expected in coming days. “Following a request from the government of Ukraine for emergency assistance due to the threat of further escalation, the European Commission is coordinating the delivery of essential supplies to support the civilian population,” said an EU statement. When the scale of an emergency overwhelms the response capabilities of a country, it can request assistance via the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, which coordinates assistance from EU and other European countries. Speaking now at the Munich Security Conference: the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, Finland president, Sauli Niinistö, Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, and the US senator Amy Klobuchar. More to follow. In Stanytsia Luhanska, a Ukrainian-controlled town on the outskirts of Luhansk, one of the Russia-backed separatist capitals, repeated thuds of incoming fire were audible on Saturday afternoon Ukrainian officials in the town said there had been frequent bursts of incoming fire over the past few days. The Ukrainian military took a group of journalists into Stanytsia Luhanska by helicopter and armoured vehicles on Saturday to help dispel what it said was a false Russian narrative that the Ukrainian army has been behind the recent uptick in violence. A kindergarten in the town was hit on Thursday morning while children were inside, and misinformation about the attack quickly spread on social media, with some pro-Russian accounts claiming the kindergarten was inside separatist territory and had been shelled by Ukrainian forces. “Please only use verified information, especially when it comes to things that could cause panic and distress,” said deputy prime minister Iryna Vereschuk, speaking to journalists inside the kindergarten on Thursday. “We don’t want escalation, we want peace,” she said. “It’s very important for everyone to understand that it’s the Russian Federation that’s behind this. Ukraine has no offensive plans,” she said. Confusion over the kindergarten attack increased after observers from an international monitoring mission run by the Organisation for Security in Europe (OSCE) said in their daily report that they had been denied proper access to the site by a law enforcement office. “This is incorrect. Our military says this did not happen,” said Vereschuk. Serhiy Haidai, governor of Luhansk region, said plans had been drawn up to arrange for the evacuation of Stanytsia Luhanska and other settlements close to the front, however they would not be put into place unless there was a significant escalation of violence, despite the increased shelling in recent days. “I’ve been getting a lot of calls in recent days from western Ukraine offering hotels and other places for evacuees to stay. We are thinking about it, and maybe in the coming days we will order an evacuation. But if we do it too quickly it will cause panic”. Ukrainian military personnel said they, like everyone else, were left guessing what Putin will do next. “I dont know what’s going on in his head. It’s very hard to tell,” said colonel Oleksiy Vukolov, deputy commander in charge of the Luhansk section of the front line. Russia opened a criminal investigation on Saturday into reports that Ukrainian shells exploded in Russia’s region of Rostov, as the west and Kyiv warn Moscow is looking to create a pretext to invade its neighbour. A number of reports carried by Russian state news agencies earlier in the day said that at least three shells exploded in Russia’s border region of Rostov on Saturday. Russian prosecutors said in a statement that according to their investigation “on 19 February 2022, from 5 to 6am, unidentified persons on the territory of Ukraine, using a multiple launch rocket system, shelled the border area of the Tarasovsky district of the Rostov region”. Ukraine, which has repeatedly stated it had no intention to attack the pro-Russian separatists in the Donbas, quickly denied it was responsible for the shellings, calling for an independent investigation into the incidents. “Ukraine did not carry out any such attacks. We call for an immediate and impartial international investigation into the incidents reported by the Russian media,” the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said. One of the shells hit a Russian village house near the Ukrainian border, damaging its roof but hurting no one, the TASS news agency said. No casualties have been reported. A group of international journalists came under artillery fire this afternoon during a visit to Novoluganskoe, just north of the rebel-held city of Horlivka. The village has been shelled since morning. The journalists took refuge in a basement. No one was hurt. Ukraine’s joint command escorted reporters to several locations which have come under separatist fire, including a kindergarten hit on Thursday by a shell, which injured three people. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said on Saturday “no matter what, we are going to protect our beautiful land”, striking a defiant tone as tensions with Russia reach unprecedented levels. Zelenskiy, speaking at the Munich Security Conference, said he wanted a diplomatic resolution to the crisis, but called the global security architecture “cough syrup” compared with a vaccine and demanded a less fragile system. The president also spoke of “massive shelling” in the last two days, in violation of the Minsk agreement, and said it was important that access for OSCE observers to occupied territories was not disrupted. The president called on Nato members to be honest about whether they want Ukraine to become a member. Zelenskiy said he did not know Russian president Vladimir Putin’s intentions, and proposed to meet him. Ukraine’s joint command has released video footage showing shelling at the Shchastia crossing point north of the rebel-held city of Luhansk this morning. Several puffs of smoke can be seen as missiles land at and on the road. The footage was taken at 11.30am local time. The foreign ministry in Kyiv said Russia was targeting a humanitarian convoy from the office of the United Nations commissioner for refugees, as it returned from separatist-controlled territory. The attack represented a “gross violation” of ceasefires agreements, it said. On Saturday, the Ukranian foreign ministry also said armed formations have unleashed provocative firing along the entire length of the contact line in the Donbas region, significantly aggravating the already tense security situation. It said the following Ukrainian areas had been shelled from the Russian-backed rebel-held occupied territories, damaging civilian infrastructure and causing injuries to civilians and Ukrainian military: Stanytsia Luhanska, Shchastia, Pivdenne, Svitlodarsk and Bohdanivka six times or over, and Novotoshkivske, Zolote, Popasna, Pisky, Mariupol and Hranitne five times or under. The German Foreign Office has called on all German nationals to leave Ukraine immediately, as western fears of a Russian military invasion into Ukraine continue. “Warnings are given against travelling to Ukraine. German nationals are urged to leave the country now,” the Foreign Ministry said in a statement posted on its website. A raft of other countries have previously urged their citizens to leave the country. The country’s flagship airline Lufthansa also announced that it was suspending flights to and from Kyiv. “This affects all departures from Monday, 21 February until 28 February 2022,” Lufthansa said. Austria on Saturday also urged all of its citizens to leave Ukraine immediately, with the exception of those currently residing in western Ukraine. The Kremlin has hit back at earlier comments from Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz, when he blasted Russia’s claim of genocide in the eastern Ukrainian Donbas region as “ridiculous”. “This is not for German leaders to make a joke of genocide issues,” the Russian foreign ministry said, according to Interfax. It comes after western leaders including the UK prime minister Boris Johnson and US vice-president Kamala Harris said at the Munich security conference on Saturday that Russia would attempt to spread disinformation and stage provocations as a pretext for invasion. Shaun Walker, the Guardian’s central and eastern Europe correspondent, has taken a trip with the Ukrainian military to Stanytsia Luhanska, on the outskirts of the separatist capital of Luhansk. Walker says: “It’s been receiving artillery fire for the past few days. We flew by helicopter landing in a field outside town and drove in.” He quotes Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereschuk, speaking to journalists inside a kindergarten that was damaged, apparently by a strike from the other side of the lines, on Thursday. Vereschuk said: We don’t want escalation, we want peace. It’s very important for everyone to understand that it’s the Russian federation that’s behind this. We have no offensive plans. Russia’s top diplomat has told France’s foreign minister that ignoring Moscow’s security demands was bad for stability in Europe and elsewhere, Russia’s foreign ministry said. Reuters reports that in a phone call today Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, warned France’s Jean-Yves Le Drian that all countries should comply with their commitments to ensure the principle of “equal and indivisible security”, the ministry said. In a statement it said: Ignoring Russia’s legitimate rights in this area adversely affects the stability not only on the European continent, but also in the world. Le Drian said that dialogue was still possible and that France was committed to work for it, but it was up to Russia to make that choice. “Today, Russia’s actions and words are out of step,” Le Drian’s ministry said in a statement. Boris Johnson reiterated the UK’s “unequivocal support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” during a meeting with the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in Munich. The two insisted there was “still time for President Putin to choose the path of peace and diplomacy”. According to PA Media a Downing Street spokeswoman said: The leaders discussed the increasing tensions on Ukraine’s borders. The prime minister condemned recent Russian aggression including shelling in Donbass and cyberattacks against the Ukrainian government. The prime minister underscored the UK’s unequivocal support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. President Zelenskiy thanked the prime minister for the UK’s assistance, including through Operation Orbital and financial support to Ukraine. The prime minister told Zelenskiy that the UK continues to cooperate closely with international partners to make clear that any Russia incursion will be met with strength, including significant economic consequences. The leaders agreed that any further Russian incursion into Ukraine would be a profound miscalculation which would be met with fierce resistance from Ukraine. They agreed there was still time for Putin to choose the path of peace and diplomacy. Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said Ukraine and the US would spare no diplomatic effort to protect Ukraine, after Kuleba met US secretary of state Antony Blinken at the Munich security conference. Reuters reports that Kuleba tweeted: Grateful to @SecBlinken for sharing additional data and assessments on Russia’s aggressive plans,” Kuleba tweeted. “Ukraine is now even better prepared for any further scenarios. Ukrainian and American diplomacy will spare no effort to protect Ukraine. The US stands by Ukraine resolutely. Russia successfully test-fired its nuclear-capable ballistic and hypersonic missiles as part of the annual strategic Grom exercises on Saturday, the Kremlin said, which some observers say was intended to send a message to Nato. “All the missiles hit their targets, confirming their performance objectives,” a statement read, adding that the drills included nuclear submarines and Tu-95 bombers. Russian state news agency Ria Novosti on Saturday published a photograph showing Putin watching the drills from a command centre alongside the Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko. Ria Novosti also published a number of videos showing the test launch of the Kinzhal hypersonic missile hitting land-based targets as well as the test launch of a RS-24 Yars intercontinental ballistic missile. Russia’s defence ministry announced a day earlier that the Grom drills would take place “under the supervision of Russian armed forces supreme commander-in-chief, Vladimir Putin”, amid the worst tensions between Russia and the west in decades. Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said on Saturday that the Russian president was not expected to make any statements following the drills. While the drills are annual with Putin frequently overseeing them, observers pointed to the fact that Russia this year delayed the exercises to a later date. “The timing of the exercises this year is significant,” said Rob Lee, a Russian military expert and fellow at the Foreign Policy Institute. “It looks the Grom exercises are a signal to Nato not to interfere if Russia decides an attack,” Lee said. Russia must fail and be seen to fail if it overruns Ukraine using brute force, UK prime minister Boris Johnson said on Saturday, adding the omens for an imminent disaster at this 11th hour are grim. Giving a sombre vision of the consequences of invasion – including the loss of thousands of lives and a protracted conflict – he said if Russian president Vladimir Putin invades Ukraine, the “shock will echo across the world”. In the most hardline speech given to the Munich security conference, Johnson said: “If dialogue fails and Russia chooses to use violence against an innocent and peaceful population in Ukraine, and to disregard the norms of civilised behaviour between states, and to disregard the charter of the UN, then we at this conference should be in doubt that it is in our collective self-interest that Russia should ultimately fail and be seen to fail.” Johnson warned if Putin invaded “the war would be followed by a long and hideous period of reprisals and revenge and insurgency”, adding: “Russian parents would mourn the loss of young Russian soldiers, who in their way are every bit as innocent as the Ukrainians now bracing themselves for attack. “After a generation of freedom in Ukraine we are now staring at a generation of bloodshed and misery. I believe Russia would have nothing to gain from this catastrophic adventure, and everything to lose.” Johnson vowed that if Russia invades, it will no longer be able to raise finance on London’s capital markets. He also promised to open up the Russian dolls of shady corporate entities to find the ultimate beneficiaries within. “We have to steel ourselves for a protracted crisis and we must together refuse to be worn down,” he said. “What Europe needs is strategic endurance. “We will open up the Matryoshka dolls of Russian-owned companies and Russian-owned entities to find the ultimate beneficiaries within,” he vowed, in a pledge to clean up so-called “dirty” Russian money in Britain. Johnson added: “Every time we have visited Ukraine we say we stand foursquare behind them, how hollow, how meaningless, how insulting those words would seem if at the very moment their sovereignty and independence were threatened we looked away.” The speech was well-received, but Johnson immediately faced questions about his call for unity given the breakaway symbolised by Brexit. The prime minister said an invasion would be a shock that echoed around the world – including in east Asia and Taiwan – saying the effect will be felt in every domain. The conclusion that would be drawn is that might is right and aggression pays. He said if Nato’s forces are closer to the Russian border it is because it is a response to Vladimir Putin and the tensions he has created. “We all agreed legal obligations to protect the security of every country in Europe,” he went on, saying the fall of the Berlin wall was an incredible moment. Countries at the heart of our continent “regained their liberty” and the “sovereign right to control their own destiny and seek their own alliances. We will not abandon the hope and impulse of that era made possible by the courage of millions of Europeans.” He said the West cannot allow Nato’s open door to be slammed shut. The Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis has called for stronger military defence of the Baltic states and Poland, amid fears over potential Russian aggression in the region. Landsbergis met US defence secretary Lloyd Austin in the Lithuanian capital Vilnius today, with Austin warning Russia is “poised to strike” Ukraine. Reuters reports from Vilnius: Lithuania’s foreign minister called on Saturday for a stronger military defence of the Baltic states as well as Poland amid fears in the region of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. “We have to be serious not about deterrence but about defence, we have to be ready to defend Baltic states and Poland,” Landsbergis told a joint news conference with US defence secretary Lloyd Austin in Vilnius. Significant, swift and unprecedented costs will be placed on Russia’s finance houses, strategic industries and those Russian complicit politically if any invasion of Ukraine occurs, Kamala Harris, the US vice-president, vowed on Saturday. Speaking at the Munich security conference she asserted the west was at a defining moment, with the foundation of European security under direct threat, saying: “life sometimes challenges us with reasons for being”. Harris said: “I hope diplomacy does not lead to a dead end, but we are clear eyed there will be consequences and they will be swift and severe. “I can say with absolute certainty if Russia further invades Ukraine the US together with its allies and partners will impose significant and unprecedented economic costs”. Making a rare foray into the field of foreign policy, Harris said: “the economic measures will be swift, severe and united. We will impose far reaching financial sanctions and export controls. We will target Russia’s financial institutions and key industries and we will target those who aid and abet this unprovoked invasion. Make no mistake, the imposition of these sweeping and coordinated measures will inflict great damage on those that must be held accountable.” Harris also vowed to strengthen Nato’s eastern flanks. Giving a message on behalf of the US President that Europe and the US are in absolute lockstep over the threat posed by Russia she insisted “we have engaged in good faith. Russia continues to claim it’s ready for talks whilst at the same time it narrows the avenues for diplomacy, Their actions simply do not match their words”. She said Russia was following a familiar playbook of Russian aggression. “Russia will plead ignorance and innocence. It will create false pretexts for invasion. It will mass troops and fire power in plain sight. We now see reports of provocations and we see Russia spreading lies, disinformation and propaganda”. Her primary message was to reassure Europe of America’s “ironclad” commitment to Nato’s Article 5 – that demands all its members will commit themselves to the principle of collective self-defence. She said: “You should not underestimate our strength,” which is based on the west’s unity. Out of the second world war she said “a consensus had been created “in favour of order, not chaos; security not conflict ... so laws and treaties we together established - a set of rules norms that have governed ever since”. It meant “Europe has enjoyed unprecedented peace and security through a commitment to these principles including that “people have a right to form their own government, that nations have a right to choose their own alliances and there are inalienable rights that governments must protect.” The US defence secretary Lloyd Austin on Saturday appeared to compare Russia’s military to a snake that was uncoiling and preparing to strike Ukraine, after a massive military buildup that has stoked the biggest east-west crisis since the cold war. Austin, speaking on a trip to Lithuania, said he agreed with president Joe Biden’s Friday assessment that Russian president Vladimir Putin has made a decision to stage a new invasion of Ukraine. “They are uncoiling and are now poised to strike,” Austin told a news conference in the Lithuanian capital, Vilnius, ahead of talks with increasingly anxious Baltic leaders. It is unacceptable that Europe is facing a war about an issue that is not even on the agenda, the German chancellor Olaf Scholz said – underlining Russian president Vladimir Putin had no reason to believe the entry of Ukraine into Nato membership is likely. Scholz said he did not understand why Russia had decided to make Ukraine’s potential membership of Nato as a casus belli since the issue was not even “pending” or on the table. “It will not happen the next time. It will not happen in the near time. Putin knows that,” he said. But he said the West had to be open about this fact whilst on the other hand the EU and Nato could never reject the principle that its organisations are not closed to new eligible members. Referencing the chances of new members joining Nato he predicted “there will not be too many movements in the future” pointing out that in principle the US is open to new members, but said apart from Puerto Rico this was unlikely. Scholz has landed himself in trouble with some Nato partners in the past by speaking frankly that Ukraine’s chances of joining Nato are remote. Only four months into the job, and largely schooled in economic affairs, Scholz has found himself thrust into a massive geostrategic crisis. He added Germany will not be naive in calling for further diplomacy in a bid to stop a war in Europe in its tracks. He said “there is nothing that justifies the deployment of well over 100,000 soldiers on Ukraine’s borders. Scholz described Putin’s story that there was a genocide in Donbas as ridiculous, adding he refused to take seriously Putin’s historic claims that Russia and Ukraine are one people. He said if he took Putin’s claims seriously there would be little reason for optimism, but he did not. Speaking at the Munich security conference on Saturday, Scholz said he urged “as much diplomacy as possible”, but he would not accept the Russian imposition of changed borders. “No country should be the backyard of another”, he said He said western actions did not give Putin any reason to claim he was threatened by Nato, revealing that ijn his discussions last week in Moscow Putin kept citing Nato aggression in the Balkans, something Scholz said he had rejected. Scholz added he had told Putin he would be making a severe error if he invaded Ukraine. He told Putin “any further violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty would come at a high price in political, economic and geostrategic terms”. His watchword , he said, was “as much diplomacy as possible without being naive - that is what we strive for”. He added the West “had to have the confidence to differentiate between untenable demands and legitimate security concerns” by which he meant Nato should be prepared to negotiate with Russia over arms controls, and transparency, but not rolling back the borders of Nato. He defended Germany’s decision not to send arms to Ukraine saying Germany is the largest supplier of economic help to Ukraine, adding “it would be nice that if more countries that acknowledged this fact in private would do so in public”. Referencing the rise of China he said a new multilateral order is inevitable and welcome, but only so long as it is based on a willingness to cooperate with “everyone even strong play by the rules”. Democracy, he insisted, was “not an exclusive western aspiration but a deeply universal human one”. Russian officials said on Saturday morning that more than 1,600 people have so arrived in Russia’s Rostov region from the Donbas, as part of the mass evacuation of citizens announced by the leaders of pro-Russia proxy states in eastern Ukraine on Friday evening. Separatists of the two pro-Russia unrecognised republics on Friday evening called for the evacuation of women and children in the region, citing fears of an imminent Ukrainian military invasion, while western officials warned Moscow was seeking to create a pretext in eastern Ukraine to invade its neighbour. Shortly after the evacuation announcement, photographs from Donetsk posted by Russian state media showed buses lined up for the evacuation. State Duma deputy Viktor Vodolatsky told Russian state news agency Tass that he expected “the arrival of around 25,000 civilians evacuated from the Donbas” in the Rostov region by Saturday afternoon. Leaders of the two pro-Russia separatists proxy states said they plan to evacuate more than 700,000 people in total. Russian state media on Friday released a number of videos showing temporary shelters set up for the citizens arriving from the Donbas in the Rostov region. Long traffic jams on border checkpoints into the country have also been reported overnight. While the majority of the Donbas citizens will be placed in the southern Rostov region, a number of other regions across the country said they were ready to accommodate the evacuees. Russian President Vladimir Putin also announced on Friday his government would pay 10,000 rubles (£95) to every “refugee” arriving in the country. Some Donetsk residents said they were confused by the orders to evacuate and did not intend to leave for Russia. “I am staying put. Donbas is my home. I have three small children, we don’t know what awaits us in Rostov,” Donetsk resident Kseniya Vasilyeva told the Guardian on Saturday. Others said they decided to leave following a number of explosions in the two breakaway proxy states on Friday night. Kyiv denied taking any hostile action in the Donbas and Ukrainian intelligence had earlier said infrastructure in the Donbas regions had been mined to provide a pretext for a Russian invasion. “I am scared for my family, I have no choice but to leave,” said Oksana Pulkova who was planning to take a bus to Russia later in the day from Donetsk. The evacuation comes as observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) have said there was a “dramatic increase” in the number of attacks along the frontline in eastern Ukraine. On Saturday morning, Ukraine’s armed forces and Moscow-backed rebels accused each other again of ceasefire violations. Ukraine also announced that one soldier has been killed during the fighting with Moscow-backed rebels. Ukraine’s joint forces command is reporting intense shelling on Saturday morning from Russian-backed separatists against Ukrainian civilians. It released photos showing artillery strikes in the past hour on the village of Novoluganskoe, in the Donetsk region, just north of the rebel-held city of Horlivka. A cloud of white smoke can be seen above houses and a line of trees. The separatists attacked with 122mm artillery shells, Ukraine’s military said. Its joint forces command said it had to deal with 17 incidents caused by shelling over the past 24 hours. It had put out multiple fires. There were 74 cases of artillery attacks across the line of control from the separatist side, with 39 settlements affected in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts or regions, it added. Five villages had lost electricity, it said. Reuters is reporting that multiple explosions could be heard on Saturday morning in the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk. The origins of the blast in the north of the city was not clear. There was no immediate comment from the Moscow-backed government in the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR). The explosions follow repeated warnings by the Biden administration that Russia is preparing “false flag” operations to justify an invasion of Ukraine, including an attack on the capital, Kyiv. Ukraine foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has said the country’s forces are acting with restraint, despite intensive artillery bombardment since Thursday across the frontline in the east from separatist positions. In a further development, Russian state media claimed a Ukrainian shell had landed inside Russian sovereign territory in the Tarasovsky district of the Rostov region, close to the village of Mityakinskaya. No one was hurt. Kremlin media photos showed a small crater, about a kilometre from the international border with Ukraine. Overnight the DNR accused the Ukrainian military of opening fire on the southern Donbas water pipeline. Kyiv denies the claim. Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, said international “peace cannot be taken for granted” and warned that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, “will only get more Nato” on his borders amid aggression against Ukraine. Speaking at the Munich security conference, Stoltenberg said: “If the Kremlin’s aim is to have less Nato on its borders, it will only get more Nato. And if it wants to divide Nato, it will only get an even more united alliance.” “Nato is a defensive alliance, we are not threatening Russia or anyone else. But we will take all necessary measures to protect and defend all our allies,” he added. He went on: “The current crisis is about much more than Ukraine,” it is about “how we wish to organise relations between states. Moscow is attempting to roll back history and to stop admitting new [Nato] members,” an attempt by Russia to exert control over western security strategy. Here’s who’s speaking later today: 9.30am GMT – Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz 10.30am GMT – US vice-president Kamala Harris 11.45am GMT – UK prime minister Boris Johnson 2.30pm GMT – Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy 3pm GMT – UK foreign secretary Liz Truss, Finland president Sauli Niinistö, Poland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki and US senator Amy Klobuchar. Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said “we cannot let this stand” but there is “still hope that peace will prevail and that diplomacy will take us there.” She said western leaders are ready to respond with financial and economic sanctions against a Russian invasion, and that gas reserves are “on the safe side” even in the event of full Russian gas supply disruption. Von der Leyen said western allies are aligned and united, supporting democracy in Ukraine against its seven-year onslaught from Russia, she added, such as disinformation, cyber attacks and hybrid war. Lithuania’s president called for boosting the security of the Baltic states with US troops, Reuters reports, after meeting with US defence secretary Lloyd Austin in Vilnius on Saturday. “The Russian military buildup at the eastern Nato border is changing the security situation,” president Gitanas Nauseda said in a statement published after the meeting. “It is critically important to strengthen the (Baltic states) regional security with additional troops from the United States and quicken cooperation in military procurement,” he added. Here are the latest key events you need to know. US president Joe Biden said on Friday he’s “convinced” Russian president Vladimir Putin has “made the decision” to invade Ukraine in the coming days. “We believe that they will target Ukraine’s capital Kyiv, a city of 2.8 million innocent people,” he said. It marked a change in rhetoric from Biden and top national security aides who previously said they were not sure Putin would follow through. Meanwhile, the UK said it is continuing to reserve judgement about whether Putin has decided to invade. Prime minister Boris Johnson has urged western leader to show unity, ahead of his speech in Munich, Germany Saturday afternoon. “There is still a chance to avoid unnecessary bloodshed, but it will require an overwhelming display of western solidarity beyond anything we have seen in recent history,” Johnson said. (Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and US vice-president Kamala Harris will also attend.) The US said on Friday Russia’s troop build up is between 169,000 and 190,000 near Ukraine’s borders. That’s compared to 100,000 on 30 January. The assessment, from the US mission to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, is “the most significant military mobilization in Europe since the Second World War.” Russia has repeatedly said talk of invasion plans are western “hysteria,” and said some of its military drills were over and troops were returning to their bases. (Western powers saw no evidence of withdrawal.) Russian-backed separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine have ordered a full military mobilisation. It comes after separatists called for evacuation of women and children in the region, citing fears of an imminent Ukrainian military invasion. Ukraine’s ministry of defence said that claim was a false ploy intended to provide Russia with a pretext to invade. This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the Ukraine crisis blog for today. Do get in touch via email or Twitter with tips and thoughts. Here is the Guardian’s latest report on the Ukraine crisis: The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, will travel to Germany for the Munich security conference on Saturday, his office confirmed to Reuters. He will return the same day. Joe Biden said last night that it may be wise for Zelenskiy to instead remain in Ukraine, given the mounting fears Russia is preparing to mount an offensive. There was earlier some uncertainty over whether Zelenskiy would chose to travel. Zelenskiy will meet with various Western leaders in Munich, including US Vice President Kamala Harris. The Kremlin has confirmed that Russian leader Vladimir Putin and French President Emmanuel Macron will speak by phone on Sunday, the TASS news agency reported. A second separatist leader, Leonid Pasechnik of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic (LNR), has signed a decree calling for a full military mobilisation, according to Reuters. Denis Pushilin of the pro-Russian separatist government in the Donetsk region issued a similar call earlier. The Ukrainian military said it had recorded 12 ceasefire violations by pro-Russian separatists in east Ukraine on Saturday morning, after 66 cases over the previous 24 hours. Separatists opened fire on more than 20 settlements, using heavy artillery, which have been prohibited by Minsk agreements, the military said on its Facebook page. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine said in an earlier statement that it has observed “a dramatic increase” in ceasefire violations over recent days. A separatist leader in eastern Ukraine has ordered a full military mobilization, Associated Press reports. Denis Pushilin, the head of the pro-Russian separatist government in the Donetsk region, released a statement on Saturday announcing a full troop mobilization and urging reservists to come forwards. “I urge my fellow citizens who are in the reserves to come to military conscription offices,” Pushilin said in a video statement. On Friday, separatist authorities in Donetsk and Luhansk announced a mass evacuation of women, children and the elderly to neighboring Russia. Shortly after the evacuation effort started, several explosions hit the rebel-controlled areas. US Vice President Kamala Harris is expected to warn Russia that it will face huge financial costs if it further invades Ukraine when she speaks at the Munich security conference on Saturday, Associated Press reports. The vice president will argue that the West has “strength through unity” and that an invasion would likely lead to an even bigger NATO footprint on Russia’s doorsteps, according to a senior administration official who briefed reporters on Harris’ diplomatic efforts. Here is AP’s report: In addition to talking to European allies and Americans at home, Harris has a message intended for Putin: step back from the precipice of war or suffer the most severe sanctions ever levied against Russia. But as the brewing crisis gets more complicated by the day, Biden and other administration officials have offered increasingly dire warnings that the window for diplomacy is narrow. Biden on Friday told reporters he believes Putin has decided to invade in the coming days, taking military action that could go far beyond the disputed Donbas region and include the capital of Kyiv. As Harris makes a late-inning push to Putin to pull back, she aimed to hit hard on the argument that the US will emerge stronger from a conflict while Russia will emerge weaker, a Biden administration official said. Ahead of the speech, Harris sought to rally allies. In addition to her meeting with the Baltic leaders, the vice president on Friday met with Nato Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, briefed a bipartisan group of US lawmakers attending the conference about the rapidly changing situation, and consulted with Secretary of State Antony Blinken, who was also in Munich. Harris was scheduled to meet after her speech on Saturday with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. As mentioned previously, it is not yet clear if Zelenskiy will travel to Munich. The Russian embassy in the US has rejected US allegations that it is behind cyber attacks on Ukraine, calling them “purely anti-Russian” and baseless. The White House and the UK government said on Friday they believed that Russia was behind cyber attacks this week that temporarily shut down the websites of two of Ukraine’s biggest banks and its ministry of defence. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister said at the time that the denial of service attack – attempts to overwhelm a website by flooding it with millions of requests - were the largest of its type ever seen. “Russia has nothing to do with the mentioned events and in principle has never conducted and does not conduct any “malicious” operations in cyberspace,” the Russian Embassy in the US said. It is not yet clear if Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy will go ahead with plans to travel to Germany for the Munich security conference on Saturday. He was expected to meet with various Western leaders to build support, including with US Vice-President Kamala Harris. On Friday night, Joe Biden said that it was up to Zelenskiy to choose whether or not he would leave the country to travel to Germany. But he added that “in the pursuit of a diplomatic solution, it may be the wise choice” for him to stay. Zelenskiy was still considering his travel plans last night, according to reports. The Munich security conference was founded in 1963 as a way for Western leaders to discuss the most pressing international security issues. Russia is not attending this year’s gathering - the first time it has missed the conference since 1999. Leading gas producers will meet in Qatar from Sunday to discuss how to meet frantic world demand, but Russian president Vladimir Putin is expected to stay away as Ukraine tensions escalate. Here is a report from AFP on the developments: The 11-member Gas Exporting Countries Forum will hold its annual summit as the Ukraine crisis sends prices ever higher, and Europe fears for its supplies from Russia. The group that includes Russia, Qatar, Iran, Libya, Algeria and Nigeria - accounting for more than 70% of proven gas reserves - has faced mounting pressure as Europe has sought alternative suppliers to Russia. But most say they are already at or near maximum production and can only send short term relief supplies to Europe if existing customers agree. Diplomats who took part in preparatory meetings said the group - which does not include key producers Australia and the United States - will discuss ways to increase production in the medium term. “But their hands are tied, there is next to no spare gas,” said one, speaking on condition of anonymity. Putin is not expected to take up his invitation to attend despite his country’s importance, diplomats said. Thierry Bros, a professor at the Institute of Political Studies in Paris who specialises in the gas industry, said Russia has a dominant role in the industry as its Gazprom giant is the only enterprise with spare capacity. “So it is Putin who decides and he decides at the Kremlin.” More than 40 percent of the Russian forces on the Ukraine border are now in position for attack and Moscow has begun a campaign of destabilization, a US defense official said on Friday, according to a report by Agence France-Presse. The official, who spoke to reporters anonymously, said the US had observed significant movements since Wednesday. The US estimates that Russia has stationed more than 150,000 troops near Ukraine’s borders. “Forty to fifty percent are in an attack position. They have uncoiled in tactical assembly in the last 48 hours,” the official told reporters. Here is some further detail from AFP’s report: Tactical assembly points are areas next to the border where military units are set up in advance of an attack. The official said Moscow had massed 125 battalion tactical groups close to the Ukraine border, compared to 60 in normal times and up from 80 at the beginning of February. The increase in clashes between pro-Russian separatists and Ukraine government forces in the southeastern Donbas region of Ukraine, and inflammatory claims by officials in Russia and Donbas, show that “the destabilization campaign has begun,” the official said. Washington has warned for weeks that Russia could provoke or fabricate an incident in the area to serve as a pretext for invading Ukraine. Hello everyone. I’m Rebecca Ratcliffe and welcome to our rolling coverage of the Ukraine crisis. Vladimir Putin is expected to personally oversee major military drills along Ukraine’s borders on Saturday, amid intensifying fears of an looming Russian invasion. Meanwhile, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy is reportedly considering travelling to Germany for talks with Western leaders - though Joe Biden has cautioned that it “may not” be wise for Zelenskiy to leave his country. Here is a recap of the key events so far: Biden warned in a speech late on Friday that he is “convinced” Putin has decided to invade Ukraine and target its capital, Kyiv, which he said would be a “catastrophic and needless war of choice”. Biden said that until the attack began “diplomacy is always a possibility”. The invasion could come in the next days or week, he said. Biden said that the US and its European allies were ready to impose “severe” economic sanctions on Russia in response to an attack, but that it would not send troops to fight in Ukraine. His comments on Friday evening followed a day of fast-moving events in and around Ukraine. Leaders of Russian-backed breakaway regions of Luhansk and Donetsk claimed to be under attack from Ukraine and ordered the mass evacuation of civilians. As the US and its allies warned of “false flags” that would give a pretext for a Russian attack, a gas pipeline in Luhansk caught fire after explosions, and a second blast hit the city about 40 minutes later. Earlier on Friday, a car bomb detonated in an empty lot in Donetsk. Biden called out Russian “disinformation” and said that claims in the Russian media that Ukraine was the aggressor and planning a major attack “defies basic logic” of what a country would do with over 150,000 troops arrayed at its borders. Satellite imagery showed new Russian military movements, with helicopters and tanks moving closer to the border in multiple sites around the Ukraine border.Secret discussions are under way between western allies over how to arm what they expect to be fierce Ukrainian resistance in the event of a Russian invasion that topples the Kyiv government. Boris Johnson laid bare the case for such a move in a dramatic speech to the Munich security conference where he stated it was in the collective self-interests of the west for any Russian invasion to “fail and be seen to fail”. He said that any invasion would lead to “a generation of bloodshed and misery” as Ukrainians would fight a fierce campaign to resist Russian forces. The message was underscored in a meeting between Johnson and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on the margins of the Munich conference where the two men predicted a fierce resistance to an invasion. Similar discussions have been taking place in the US, where reports suggest the country’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, has told senators that the US is willing to arm a resistance and is not going to accept a Russian military victory that erases the principles of national self-determination. At the crucial gathering in Munich, Johnson warned of a protracted battle after any invasion that Russia could not contain. He said: “A lightning war would be followed by a long and hideous period of reprisals and revenge and insurgency, and Russian parents would mourn the loss of young Russian soldiers, who in their way are every bit as innocent as the Ukrainians now bracing themselves for attack. “If Ukraine is overrun by brute force, I fail to see how a country encompassing nearly a quarter of a million square miles – the biggest nation in Europe apart from Russia itself – could then be held down and subjugated for ever.” It came as Zelenskiy demanded greater support from the west in the face of Russian aggression and the immediate imposition of tough sanctions on Russia, which leaders have vowed to impose should an invasion take place. Ukraine’s military said two of its soldiers had been killed and four injured in enemy shelling on Saturday. It said there were 70 ceasefire violations as of 5pm local time. Civilians living close to the frontline with separatist-controlled territory experienced another day of intense shelling and bombardment. Ukraine’s foreign ministry said “armed Russian formations” had unleashed “provocative firing” all across the 155-mile (250km) frontline in the east of the country. Meanwhile, there was growing suspicion that Russia was behind a series of seemingly coordinated “false flag” attacks, designed to give Vladimir Putin a pretext for a possible invasion. They included a car bomb on Friday evening outside the administration building in separatist-run Donetsk, an “attack” on a water station and a shell that landed just over the border in Russia’s Rostov region. In Stanytsia Luhanska, a Ukrainian-controlled town on the outskirts of Luhansk, one of the Russia-backed separatist capitals, repeated thuds of incoming fire were audible on Saturday afternoon. Ukrainian officials in the town said there had been frequent bursts of incoming fire over the past few days. The Ukrainian military took a group of journalists into Stanytsia Luhanska by helicopter and armoured vehicles on Saturday to help dispel what it said was a false Russian narrative that the Ukrainian army has been behind the recent rise in violence. Ukraine’s military intelligence service said on Saturday the Kremlin was planning further destabilising operations, which could even see civilians killed, with an attack blamed on Kyiv. The Ukrainian capital was also a possible target, it indicated. The service said that leaflets circulating in the Donetsk and Luhansk rebel republics, purporting to come from the Ukrainian army, were fakes. The flyers claimed Ukraine was preparing to attack. Ukraine’s pro-western government said it was committed to dialogue and had no intention of launching an attack, or carrying out acts of sabotage in the Donbas region. Meanwhile, Nato said it was moving its personnel from Kyiv to the western city of Lviv. The British embassy relocated to Lviv on Saturday. Until now, public discussion has been limited to the massive economic sanctions the west will impose on the Russian economy – and Putin’s circle. Steps have also been taken to protect Nato’s eastern flank, principally in Poland, Romania and the Baltics. Joe Biden has ruled out American troops being sent to Ukraine since the US has no legal obligation to help Ukraine that extends to providing military assistance. However, in his speech to the Munich security conference, Johnson made it clear that the west must stand by Ukraine by ensuring Russia was ultimately repelled. “If dialogue fails and if Russia chooses to use violence against an innocent and peaceful population in Ukraine, and to disregard the norms of civilised behaviour between states, and to disregard the charter of the United Nations, then we at this conference should be in no doubt that it is in our collective interest that Russia should ultimately fail and be seen to fail,” he said. He presaged the possibility of further military help when he added: “We have to steel ourselves for the possibility of a protracted crisis, with Russia maintaining the pressure and searching for weaknesses over an extended period, and we must together refuse to be worn down.” The degree of military assistance and the extent to which it is overt is still under discussion. Its scope in part depends on events on the ground. In public, Johnson has so far only said it is possible arms would be supplied, adding he would not rule it out. The west would not wish to be seen to be fomenting a futile and bloody resistance that was risking a wider conflict between Nato and Russia. In the US, the Biden administration has approved about $650m (£480m) of military equipment to Kyiv in the past year, and more recently, it authorised a $200m package to Ukraine that included Javelin anti-tank missiles, other anti-armour systems, grenade launchers and munitions. The US has also allowed the Baltic states to send weapons, including anti-aircraft missiles. Last night, Johnson said that Russia’s plans were “in motion”, but that Putin could still pull back and call off his military operations. “In the course of the next few days if there is a violent kinetic phase of this in Ukraine, that is the moment when the west, when Nato, will be truly tested,” he said. “If there’s still a path for diplomacy, for negotiation, then let’s go down it.”The first tourists are on their way to Australia in nearly two years, but tourism operators say it could be more than a year before they truly return to business as usual. Speaking at Melbourne airport ahead of the international border reopening on Monday, Morrison said flights would begin to ramp up in the coming weeks. “They can come and we start building once again our very important tourism economy right across the country, from our biggest cities, where I am today, to our far north, Queensland, regional locations and all around the country and the Top End, where I was yesterday, up in Darwin, in central Australia, in Alice Springs,” he said. “We are going from Covid cautious to Covid confident when it comes to travel.” While many in the tourism industry say they are hopeful and relieved to see the border opening, they don’t necessarily share the prime minister’s Covid confidence. “I’m excited but I’m not excited thinking that everything’s going to change tomorrow,” said Deb Zimmer, the chief executive of Sydney Harbour’s BridgeClimb tour company. “I think it will be heading towards the end of the year before we really start seeing any international tourism volume, and that’s really because we’re a long haul aspirational destination. “People don’t just plan their holiday to Australia and are hopping on the plane instantly.” While the US, UK and Europe fall into this “long haul” category, there are a number of key tourism markets closer to Australia, such as China, Japan and New Zealand, that are more likely to be the first to return. But many of these countries have their own travel restrictions to Australia in place that will delay their residents’ down under adventures. According to the prime minister, 56 international flights are expected to touch down in Australia in the next 24 hours, more than half headed for Sydney Airport. Zimmer said prior to the pandemic, international tourism made up 80% of their market, so the last two years of closed international borders have been “devastating”. Bookings had not yet increased substantially, Zimmer said. “We’re not seeing a massive uptick in bookings [yet], because I think what most people do is – their first priority is to visit friends and relatives that they haven’t been able to see. The babies that have been born or whatever it might be … we’re not getting the ‘I’m just here for a holiday and I want to do all the tourists things here’ crowd.” Although Zimmer fully supports the requirement for all international tourists to be fully vaccinated, she acknowledges that this rule will also have an effect. “The US I think they’re 65% vaccinated … so we are already cutting down the market that can come here. I understand the reason for it, that’s absolutely fine. But it’s just another little clip of your possible clients.” In Victoria, the chief executive of Phillip Island Nature Parks, Catherine Basterfield, who runs the famous Penguin Parade, says while they are also expecting a gradual return of international tourists they are still hopeful that next weekend will be noticeably busier than the last. “Even when the travel bubble with Singapore opened we noticed, notably, quite a large number of Singaporean visitors to all of our sites. So I do expect to see a real [uptake]. It might only be 10% or 20% of our visitation initially, but that’s a large chunk of people over time, and it will grow up,” she said. “I‘m hopeful that the international student market will come back strongly and will help to support that ‘visiting friends and relatives’ market as well.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Executive manager for the NSW Tourism Industry Council, Greg Binskin said jumpstarting the international tourism industry will be dependent on airlines increasing their capacity. “Many of the airlines are still running on low capacity, but once people can actually make a reservation and get a seat, that will be the dynamic that will start to make the change,” he said. However, even once flights ramp up, Binskin says there will still be one major piece of the puzzle left: cruising. “Now is the time for cruises to restart back into Sydney, and have people coming back into Sydney to get on a cruise.” Zimmer said cruises were “definitely a bit chunk” of BridgeClimb’s business given their proximity to the ships’ docking locations, but even tourism sites that are further removed say the return of cruises will be a major help. “Cruising was a growing market for Phillip Island,” Basterfield said. “We’re having really strong bookings still in the hope that the cruise market will continue, so we expect that to be a bigger part of our business going forward.”Actor Jim Broadbent, 72, was born in Lincolnshire and studied at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (Lamda). He was initially known for theatre and TV work before getting his film breakthrough in Mike Leigh’s Life Is Sweet. He won an Oscar for Iris, and Baftas for both Longford and Moulin Rouge. He now stars in crime caper The Duke – the true story of taxi driver Kempton Bunton, who reputedly stole Goya’s portrait of the Duke of Wellington from the National Gallery in 1961. The Duke is director Roger Michell’s final film [Michell died last September]. Was he a colleague who became a friend? Yes, Roger was delightful. Everyone in front or behind the camera, on stage or backstage, wanted to carry on working with him – that’s a measure of how lovely he was. In a way, it’s a pleasure and privilege to be in his final film, so we can show his story to the world and celebrate him. It’s sad he never got to see the The Duke released. No, but we premiered it at Venice [film festival in September 2020]. It went down very well and got five-star reviews, so he knew it was going to be well received. That made Roger very happy, which was fantastic because it wasn’t long before he died. The loss is immense. I still can’t quite come to terms with it. Were you familiar with the true story behind The Duke? I was a schoolboy when the theft happened, so it rang a distant bell. You couldn’t invent such a ridiculous tale. If you presented it as fiction, you’d never get away with it. Kempton Bunton is a delicious character. I wanted to play him from the first page. He’s a Robin Hoodesque revolutionary. Did you admire that? I like the idea of actors being anti-establishment, so I identified with that. I found him inspiring, especially his ability to keep his good humour in the face of disaster. He finds light even in the darkest moments. Helen Mirren plays his wife, Dorothy. How was working with her for the first time? Well, we’d been in the same film before [2008’s Inkheart] but not in the same scene. Helen’s terrific and we were completely on the same wavelength. I loved the scenes with us bickering and teasing each other. You have a dance scene together and reprised it at the premiere last week… We were on the red carpet and Helen suddenly said, “Let’s dance!”. Luckily, we had some steps up our sleeve. You might get a call from Strictly soon… I’ve already had that call. It was the easiest “no” I’ve ever given. Kempton Bunton didn’t watch the BBC on principle, instead campaigning vociferously for free TV licences for over-75s. Where do you stand? He got his wish 40 years later. Now the government have withdrawn it again, in their devious way. Ironically, now Kempton would be defending the BBC to the hilt against these wicked people trying to dismantle it by foul means. He’d have switched sides. If you could get away with it, what painting would you steal? I’d have a long list, but in my current mood, probably a Bruegel. The Peasant Wedding or Hunters in the Snow. Not one of the more Bosch-like Bruegels but one of real people enjoying themselves. Next up, you’re in Ten Percent, the UK version of Call My Agent!. How was that? I die very early, but I set up the storyline, so it’s not all bad. I’m currently watching the second series of the French original and loving it. You can’t quite imagine how the British one will compare but it felt very good. I enjoyed doing it enormously. Is it an accurate satire of what goes on behind the scenes? [Laughs] It’s not my experience. I’m not the sort of actor who goes in and creates havoc, but I’m sure it happens. You’ve made nearly 100 films. Of which are you most proud? The Duke, Topsy-Turvy, Iris and Moulin Rouge. Those last two came out the same year and I think that’s why I got an Oscar. People realised that one of them must have been acting. You played DCI Roy Slater in Only Fools and Horses, but were originally offered the lead role of Del Boy Trotter. What would have happened if you’d accepted? Either it wouldn’t have succeeded without David Jason or, if it had, I wouldn’t have wanted to stay beyond three series. I always say my greatest contribution to British culture is not doing Del Boy. Would you like to do more comedy? I always thought it would be the basis of my career. My childhood passion was watching Benny Hill, Dave King, Ted Ray, Charlie Drake, all those 1950s comics. But latterly, there hasn’t been so much comedy. The Duke feels like an old-fashioned caper. I laughed out loud reading it, which is very rare. The last time I did that was with Hot Fuzz. I’d missed out on [Edgar Wright’s previous film] Shaun of the Dead, then saw him at the Baftas and said, “I made a huge mistake”. He was kind enough to give me a part in Hot Fuzz instead. You’re president of the Broadbent theatre in your native Lincolnshire – a 100-seat venue co-founded by your father. Did it survive the pandemic? Some performances had to be cancelled, but it’s rolling on and thriving. The way it started is one of those family stories you take for granted [conscientious objectors formed an amateur acting troupe during the second world war], then you step back and realise how extraordinary it was. Theatre has taken a battering these past two years, but it will recover. People are desperate for shared experiences again. If you had your time again, would you still be an actor? Probably, yes. I gave myself until I was 30 and if it wasn’t working, I’d chuck it in. Here I am, 40 years later, so something must have gone right. Will you ever retire? I don’t think that happens. You either stop getting offers or find you can’t do it any more. I’ve become increasingly picky about things I do. Maybe I’ll choose my way into retirement [laughs]. We all have careers or paths untaken. What’s yours? An art teacher. I went to art college for a year before drama school. Some people say [adopts Cockney accent]: “If I hadn’t gone into acting, I’d be banged up by now. It was either that or crime.” With me, it was that or art. You wrote a graphic novel a few years ago. Do you still write? Not so much. For a while, it was my creative outlet when I wasn’t acting. I wrote a short film called A Sense of History. It’s the only time Mike Leigh’s directed a script written by someone else, which is an honour. Then I wrote this screenplay called Dull Margaret. I couldn’t get anyone to make it into a film, so I had the idea of contacting my favourite cartoonist, Dix, who I’d first spotted in the Guardian, and we created a graphic novel together. Lately, my creative hobby has been sculpture – carved or modelled figures in mixed media. I’m getting a website together so I can show them to people. What projects are in the pipeline? My next film is The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, from the Rachel Joyce novel. Funnily enough, I did The Winter’s Tale in Sheffield with Rachel, back in 1987 when she was an actress. She was Perdita to my Leontes, so it’s lovely to be working together again many years later. You declined an OBE 20 years ago. Would you still turn it down it today? Yes. When Richard Eyre accepted his knighthood and I asked why, he said “vanity”. If somebody asks me why I turned down an OBE, I’d say “vanity” too. It wouldn’t suit me, like wearing a bobble hat or something. The Duke is released in UK cinemas on Friday 25 FebruaryChloe 9pm, BBC One We first met conwoman Becky (Erin Doherty) with pity and a smidgen of disgust. But as the addictive thriller has charged on, we’ve come to champion Sasha, the alter ego she has adopted to infiltrate a new world and find out what really happened to Chloe, the object of her social media obsession (and estranged best friend from school). This tense rollercoaster ride is mostly thanks to Doherty’s terrific performance as such a complicated woman. In this week’s final two episodes (the finale airs 9pm Monday), the jig is up – but can there be any redemption? One thing’s for sure: we’re 100% rooting for Becky now. Hollie Richardson Louis Theroux’s Forbidden America 9pm, BBC Two “I’ve got a new toy to show you, Louis,” says rapper BrokeBaby while waving a gun around. “I’m in Florida, I need it.” He is just one of the emerging artists that Theroux meets in his exploration of rap’s new frontline, where MCs livestream their often violent and chaotic lifestyles, and play out gang politics on social media. Theroux is reliably on-brand, meeting diamond-toothed interviewees both in prisons and at their parents’ homes. HR Dance Passion 2022 8pm, BBC Four It’s a celebratory night of dance on the channel, starting with a highlights reel of this year’s UK-wide festival. Hosted by Josie d’Arby and Karim Zeroual, performances include a piece inspired by boxer Jack Johnson in Leeds. The well-reviewed dance documentary Firestarter: The Story of Bangarra follows at 9pm. HR Trigger Point 9pm, ITV The twisty-turny bomb disposal drama that really should have been called “Boom Town” reaches its penultimate episode. Harried expo unit veteran Lana (Vicky McClure) is scrambling to get back into the action after some personal and professional setbacks just as the targeted bombing campaign ramps up. Will a massive manhunt help? Graeme Virtue Murder in the Valleys 9pm, Sky Crime In 1999, three generations of one family were murdered in Clydach near Swansea. This deep-dive into the case, which many believe led to a wrongful conviction of David Morris, effectively unpicks the complexities and claustrophobia of a small village. In tonight’s third episode of the four-parter, we track Morris’s movements the night of the killing. Henry Wong The Curse 10pm, Channel 4 Matters become even more serious for the accidental bullion robbers as this terrific caper careers onwards. Co-creator and star Allan Mustafa has cause to make Albert even more tremulous, and the impeccable soundtrack hits the target again with a laugh-out-loud deployment of Joy Division. Jack Seale Film choice The Last of the Mohicans 6.55pm, AMC The multifaceted Daniel Day-Lewis nails the classic Hollywood hero type in Michael Mann’s sweeping adaptation of James Fenimore Cooper’s romantic adventure novel. Day-Lewis’s noble, hard-running Hawkeye – adopted son of a Mohican – is drawn into the British army’s frontier war against the French and their Huron collaborators, while falling for Madeleine Stowe’s sparky colonel’s daughter. Despite elements of “white saviour” in the plot, and shady historical accuracy, it’s visually arresting stuff, particularly in the chase sequences. Simon Wardell Live sport Premiership Rugby Union: Newcastle Falcons v Exeter Chiefs, 2pm, BT Sport 1 From Kingston Park Stadium. Premier League Football: Leeds v Manchester United, 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event At Elland Road. Followed by Wolverhampton Wanderers v Leicester City at 4pm. International Women’s Football: England v Spain, 2.30pm, ITV Both teams’ second match in the round-robin Arnold Clark Cup, from Carrow Road, Norwich.I found Nick Cohen’s opinions on the lack of honesty in this government both moving and profound (“Lies come in all shapes and sizes. This government is familiar with them all”, Comment). The most worrying part of this state of affairs is where is the public anger? What have we become, when, to many, a prime minister and his crew being economical with the truth are seen as just a joke? I fear for the future of our democracy, because the voting public tend to believe that all politicians are liars and in it for themselves; this government confirms their opinions, so they just shrug their shoulders and accept it. Mrs A Sturton Oakley, Basingstoke, Hampshire Nick Cohen’s article was an impressive free verse tour de force. I can’t be the only one reminded of Adrian Mitchell’s To Whom It May Concern (Tell Me Lies About Vietnam). It’s too much to expect Cohen to give a reading at the Albert Hall but it would be good to see it on an Observer wallchart, with a copy on the walls of every classroom, hospital, foodbank and GP waiting room in the country. Mike Hine Kingston upon Thames, London That parliamentary procedure forces the Speaker to dismiss Ian Blackford for correctly calling out the prime minister’s lies, while leaving him impotent to enforce either the truth or an apology from the PM, emphasises the anachronism and shamefully demeans the system. Jan Mortimer Lewes, East Sussex Better recruits, better police As a retired police officer with experience of recruiting, I agree with former chief officer Sue Fish’s analysis of the reform needed to outlaw bad behaviour in the Met and elsewhere (“Can the Met change?”, Focus). Structures that last and give best service use the best material available and continue to do so when properly maintained. She hits the nail on the head when she blames poor policing on the failure to identify decent, diligent and empathetic applicants and to continue monitoring performance using the same measures. If these qualities are being subsumed by the requirement for purely technical skills, then it’s about time some deeper thought was given to the personal qualities of those whose function is to deal fairly with the public. Tony Burnley Brampton, Cambridgeshire Racism is as racism does Michael Crick misunderstands the question of who is a racist (“‘I don’t think Farage is a racist but he does pander to racists’”, the New Review). Racism is as racism does: a politician who mobilises racist sentiments to win support, as Crick’s book shows that Farage has made a career out of doing and as Boris Johnson has also done, is as much a racist as a person who thinks people of a different ethnicity are inferior – and a more dangerous one to boot. Martin Shaw Seaton, Devon Megalomaniac Putin “The edge of war: what, exactly, does Putin want in Ukraine?” (News) hinted at the real cause of the artificial crisis in saying that Vladimir Putin regarded Ukraine “as an integral part of historical Russia”. Putin’s Russia has turned away from the Soviet recognition of a Ukrainian people and stagnated to a tsarist imperial definition of Ukraine (together with Russians and Belarusians) as one of the three branches of a pan-Russian nation. Russian media repeatedly deny the existence of Ukraine and Ukrainians. Why is the crisis artificial? Nato has never intended to offer Ukraine membership, the US never had plans to instal missiles and Ukraine’s military cooperation with Nato is three decades old. The root cause is Putin’s obsession with Ukraine as a “Russian land” and his megalomaniac view of himself as the “gatherer of Russian lands”. We should not forget that contemporary pan-Russianism is as dangerous as was pan-Germanism in the 1930s. Dr Taras Kuzio London SW1 “What’s so terrible about neutrality for Ukraine?” asks Simon Tisdall (“Macron fights to halt slide to war”, World). The answer is because neutrality means nothing to the Russians. At the outbreak of the Second World War, the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania declared their neutrality. They were occupied by subterfuge and then annexed by the USSR in 1940. It took until 1990-91 for those countries to regain their independence. Knowing the nature of their eastern neighbour, they began negotiating for Nato and EU membership, finally achieved in 2004. The Ukrainians know the region’s history, unlike many western commentators. They know neutrality is not the answer. Aleksas Vilcinskas London SW20 So much for ECHR ‘threat’ David Murray is right to suggest that the low estimation of politicians for the prison service “could be addressed by giving prisoners the vote, as most of the rest of western Europe does” (Letters). In fact, the European court of human rights has ruled that Britain’s blanket ban on votes for convicted inmates is a breach of their human rights. The response in 2013 of the then prime minister, David Cameron, was that prisoners “damn well shouldn’t” be given the right to vote. His short-sighted refusal to implement the ruling has remained without consequence for the UK. So much, then, for the so-called threat of the ECHR to parliamentary sovereignty. Professor Gwyneth Boswell Norwich Face the facts on flying Johan Lundgren, easyJet CEO, says it’s “intellectually lazy” to argue that not flying is the best way to cut aviation emissions (Business profile). I wonder if he has seen the academic analysis from UK Fires on this issue. It’s not light reading. Having reviewed all low-carbon options for aviation between now and the 2050 net zero deadline, it concludes that Lundgren’s industry has left it too late to develop enough new aircraft, renewable energy, carbon capture and carbon capture storage facilities to balance the carbon books in time. What is “intellectually lazy”, I’d argue, is to go straight from observing that aviation brings people benefits (of course it does) to concluding that we must, despite the climate emergency, carry on flying to get these benefits rather than, say, using video conferencing and taking domestic holidays to cut emissions from business travel and tourism. Lundgren says “we’ve done our job at easyJet on this whole thing”. But there is not a single commercial aircraft in operation that doesn’t emit CO2, and no scalable zero-carbon technology is on the horizon. It’s hard to say whether this is because of laziness, complacency, lack of regulation, or simply the barriers of physics. But if we want to find solutions, we need to face the facts. Cait Hewitt London, SE1 Scotland, land of dreams Can I advise Will Hutton that his imaginary country, supervised by a government that is gradually pulling its citizens together to create a new normal, actually exists and is not far away (“I relish life opening up. But this libertarian dash for the Covid exit is reckless”, Comment). It is Scotland, where, despite propaganda to the contrary, a largely contented population has been helped through this pandemic by a government that has acted on the whole in a careful and thoughtful way. Mistakes have been made, but generally admitted to, and it seems that the careful approach has been both popular and accepted. Brian Bannatyne-Scott Edinburgh• We said the New Zealand police played Barry Manilow songs to tackle protesters in Wellington. It was actually the parliament Speaker, Trevor Mallard, who took this action (Politics after the pandemic, 13 February, p37). • An article about David Hoffman’s new book, Whitechapel Markets 1972-1977, was illustrated with an image, supplied to us by the publishers, of Sclater Street Market, Shoreditch, London, said to be taken in 1977. In fact the scene was photographed in 1990 (The big picture, 13 February, the New Review, p2). • Owing to an error in information supplied by the Intergenerational Foundation, we said its researchers predict that a graduate earning £27,000 a year will see their “disposable” income drop by almost 30%. Disposable income is what remains after tax. In fact, the researchers were referring to that percentage drop in “discretionary” income, meaning the money an individual has left to spend or save after tax and essential spending (‘Tax by stealth’ will hit under-30s on low wages hardest, 13 February, p19). Other recently amended articles include: Lies come in all shapes and sizes. This government is familiar with them all NHS staffing levels are at crisis point, so why isn’t it allowed to plan for the future? Maria Friedman: ‘Sondheim was a kind man, but God, he could be very direct’ How DNA link could unlock mystery of cancer patients ‘wasting away’ Sugarcane London: ‘This is all comfort food’ – restaurant review Spain by train: a three city mini-break to Bilbao, Barcelona and Madrid Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736We arrive in Denmark to the mystery of molehills. An explosion of earth mounds picked out in the car headlights like a compound of pyramids. Henri is not happy. They are mobile, the moles, moving house from one corner of the meadow to another. An ancient Aztec city of soil. The nice neighbour is obsessed with them. He has an annual petanque tournament and is lined-lawn crazy. For him it is war. I don’t exactly welcome them, but figure they’re more resident than me. Anyway, the soil they unearth is useful today for topping Ina’s winter window box. Most I transport to the old fire pit and a few other spots around the border. Last year, these were a happy home to snaking nasturtiums, calendula and rampant borage. I cook food for the feral cat, a raggedy long-haired ginger tom abandoned at a year old a decade ago when another neighbour moved. I put out bowls of Christmas goose fat and make him chicken giblet stew. I figure as long as I draw the line at buying tinned food it’s fine. We are not here often enough to be a reliable source. We have come to see Ina, but there’s winter pruning to do. The fruit bushes: redcurrants and blackcurrants, the latter for Henri’s favourite jam. The redcurrants we leave for passing picking and the birds. The biggest jobs are the roses: two old Danish climbing varieties and multiple crimson and white rugosa that also grows everywhere along the shore. The Danes have a love-hate relationship with these. There was dark talk of the rugosa not being Danish enough – plans for uprooting them from the beaches. This, though, has receded. We arm ourselves with thick jackets and gloves and sharp secateurs. Henri is more fierce at pruning than me, so I content myself with wheeling away her cuttings. The low winter sun shines. It is good garden work. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comIn the ideal world of Buckingham Palace public relations, the most prominent headline about the royal family last week might have been a hurrah for the shortlist of the Queen’s platinum jubilee pudding competition, organised by Fortnum &amp; Mason and judged by Mary Berry. However, try as the Palace might to make this a celebratory summer of bunting and “God bless you ma’am”, the monarch’s offspring keep on trashing the party plans. No sooner, it seems, has a table been prepared for a royal tea than an inspector calls. It is said that the secret to great longevity is never to stop having novel experiences. Whatever the truth of that idea, one experience that the Queen might have preferred to avoid is the necessity, in her 95th year, of bailing out her 62-year-old child with reportedly up to £12m so that he could avoid appearing in an American court to defend himself against allegations of coerced sex with a trafficked 17-year-old. Andrew, of course, maintains his innocence and in settling the case with his accuser, Virginia Giuffre, accepts none of her accusations. We might have to wait for long distant episodes of The Crown properly to imagine how the conversations went that led to those funds being released, but it is to be hoped that the Queen’s second son did not offer his mother versions of his “incapable of sweating” and Pizza Express excuses. One result of those chats was that Andrew was stripped of his military titles. The city of York is now looking for ways to cut ties with its disgraced duke. Following hard on that shameful legal episode came the revelation that the heir to the throne may be questioned by the Metropolitan police in connection with alleged criminal corruption at one of his charitable foundations. Pending the inquiry, there is no reason not to cleave to the outraged faith of Prince Charles’s biographer Jonathan Dimbleby that his friend had no knowledge of those dealings: “If there has been some scam, some breaking of the law, you honestly think that he would have been party to that? It beggars belief!” The police will concentrate on the letter from the prince’s close aide Michael Fawcett, which allegedly offered to help Saudi tycoon Mahfouz Marei Mubarak bin Mahfouz upgrade his honorary CBE to a knighthood – and to support his application for British citizenship – in exchange for generous donations to Charles’s charitable efforts to restore £45m Dumfries House in Ayrshire. Fawcett has resigned and Clarence House repeated its statement that “the Prince of Wales had no knowledge of the alleged offer of honours or British citizenship on the basis of donation to his charities”. Still, as details have emerged of the visitors’ book of donors who lined up for candlelit dinners with the heir to the British throne in support of that project, one question is hard to avoid: what, you wonder, did Prince Charles imagine was in it for them? It’s only a surprise that the News of the World’s fake sheikh never discussed funding the panelling of a Georgian dining room or pored over plans for Knockroon, the “Scottish Poundbury”. In her long reign the Queen, aided by a tight grip on privy purse millions, has avoided even the most distant whiff of venality. She has made the wearing of a crown containing some of the world’s largest diamonds seem like a heavy cross she is prepared to bear. Though she and her late husband may have moved between gilded palaces, they convincingly did so with Thermos flasks and Tupperware. The idea that such a sense of rectitude can be reliably passed on between generations is, as Thomas Paine long ago observed, an idea “as absurd as an hereditary mathematician; as ridiculous as an hereditary poet laureate”. Whether, as might seem preferable but unlikely, the Queen decides that 70 years on the throne is long enough for anyone, and effects a smooth handover this summer, or whether she soldiers on towards her self-addressed centenary telegram, the events of last week are another reminder that it is not going to be an easy transition. When crises come, as crises surely will, Charles III will not be able to draw on the deep reserves of affection that the Queen has always enjoyed. Assuming the expected succession, the future king will inherit the problem of his brother, which may recede along with Andrew himself into the Palace shadows, and the problem of his younger son, which will not. The other snippet of news last week that can hardly have brought jubilee cheer to Clarence House was the announcement that Prince Harry’s “frank memoir” will be published before the end of the year. As his father will know, publishers don’t pay $15m for a book without some guarantee of explosive candour. For most of her reign, and certainly in the last 40 years, the steadfastness of the Queen has held together the rickety and anachronistic institution itself. Charles, for all his good intentions, shows negligible evidence of perhaps the most remarkable of his mother’s qualities, her apparent self-contained indifference to how she is viewed. Is there public appetite for an emotionally needy monarch? Time will tell. Most likely, the succession will demonstrate the abiding truth baked into the hereditary principle, just as surely Mary Berry’s currants are baked into her fruit cakes. The institution may have struck lucky in the integrity and grace of the three score and ten of the present incumbent’s reign. But luck is all it ever can be.The concept of a fragrance wardrobe, with a myriad of scents on rotation depending on mood, season, location and occasion, has always made sense to me. Some might call it greedy – I call it keeping my options open. That said, I’d be the first to admit that having a roster of fragrances on tap can be expensive – and confusing. So if you prefer scent monogamy, consider these. Violette FR’s oil perfume is predominantly vetiver, but lightened with ylang-ylang and bergamot. And it’s easy to cart around. Serge Lutens? Not so much, but the cult cedarwood and plum scent – which celebrates its 30th birthday this year, hence the special-edition bottle – is no less desirable. Rose lovers: Kilian’s offering is audacious; it includes bergamot and orange blossom as well as a dash of marshmallow. Tom Ford Rose de Russie is leather-infused and Loewe’s Templo de Debod adds coconut, oud and saffron for an unexpected twist. Prefer fruity but grown-up? Chanel No 1, Gabar’s Swim (blackcurrant meets mossy) and Hermès’ Rhubarb are exquisite options. Citrus scents have universal appeal: Jo Malone London’s Italian-inspired scent will have you booking a holiday. There’s also bergamot in Fragrance X by Trish McEvoy, however the myrrh, sandalwood, and amber give it a deliciously musky slant. All different but all unforgettable. Exactly what a signature scent should be. 1. Violette FR Avec Amour £50, violettefr.com 2. Chanel No 1 L’Eau Rouge £90, chanel.com 3. Jo Malone London Bitter Mandarin £76, jomalone.com 4. Hermès Eau de Rhubarbe £85, hermes.com 5. Kilian Love Don’t Be Shy Extreme from £140, bykilian.co.uk 6. Tom Ford Private Blend Rose de Russie £178, tomford.com 7. Gabar No III Swim £120, gabarmyanmar.com 8. Loewe Templo de Debod £191, perfumesloewe.com 9. Serge Lutens Feminite du Bois £110, harveynichols.com 10. Trish McEvoy Fragrance X £185, selfridges.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoPuiattino Pinot Grigio, Friuli, Itay 2020 (£10, Tesco) Much as I like to think of myself as a fair and objective critic of all things vinous, I have to admit to a few stubborn prejudices. I’m instinctively suspicious, for example, of any wine poured from a bottle with a bright animal cartoon on the label; of any wine selling for much more than £30 in its very first vintage; and of anything with the words oak, barrels, coffee or chocolate too prominent in the name or back-label description. I’m not saying that the prejudices are insurmountable. But in each case the wine has to be really quite exceptional if it’s going to break down a resistance built on years of disappointments. All of which is true, too, for another of my most resilient unconscious biases: supermarket pinot grigio. So dull and interchangeable are most examples of the popular dry white, that when a wine as fluent, pear-juicy and subtly honeyed as Puiattino’s crops up among the also-rans in a Tesco lineup I think I can be forgiven for doing a double-take. Cavit Rulendis Pinot Grigio, Trentino Superiore, Italy 2019 (from £14.99, aitkenwines.com; kwoff.co.uk) I said “supermarket pinot grigio”, but you can find plenty of examples of the bland, watery, industrial version of the grape in pubs, restaurants and independent wine merchants, too. In many cases these aren’t bad wines exactly, just not something to capture the imagination or provoke a shiver of pleasure or misty-eyed reflection like the best wines do. That pinot grigio has this reputation must be infuriating for the producers who use it to make wines full of distinctive personality and style. You can find these producers dotted throughout pinot grigio’s northeastern Italian homeland. Most of them are of the small, family-run, artisanal variety, but one of the most attractive pinot grigios I’ve tried recently is from one of Italy’s larger producers: the 4,500-grower Trentino co-operative, Cavit. The key is in the vineyards: steeply sloping, south-facing, high-altitude spots in the foothills of the Brenta Dolomites, producing a wine as coolly energetic as a mountain stream, and as fragrant as a spring meadow. Radikon Sivi Pinot Grigio, Italy 2019 (from £36, juicedwine; buonvino.co.uk) Many of the best pinot grigio producers ply their trade in the far northeastern Friuli-Venezia-Giulia region. In the west, I’d pick out the racy purity of Russolo Pinot Grigio Ronco Calaj 2020 (£14.01, shelvedwine.com). To the east, in Colli Orientali, you can find a combination of unforced depth of flavour with subtle spice, white flowers and that crucial driving freshness in a wine such as Livio Felluga Pinot Grigio 2020 (£27, petershamcellar.com). In Isonzo, in the southeast of the region, you can get a richer dose of mouthfilling spicy and exotic-fruited ripeness that is akin to the wines made from the same variety under its French alias, pinot gris, in Alsace in the shape of Lis Neris Gris Pinot Grigio 2018 (£35.90, hedonism.co.uk); and in Collio in the far east of Friuli, straddling the border of Slovenia, you get the intensely herby-nutty, tangy, subtly grippy swirl of Radikon’s Sivi orange wine, made with extended contact between the juice and pinot grigio’s pinkish-grey skins. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachBeckford Bottle Shop, 5-8 Saville Row, Bath BA1 2QP (01225 809 302; beckfordbottleshop.com). Snacks and small plates £3.75-£7, cheese and charcuterie sharing platters £13, desserts £3.50-£7.50, wines from £24 Anybody with a modicum of imagination dreams occasionally of another life. We find ourselves on a Greek island for a couple of weeks and quickly picture never leaving and becoming instead this sun-slapped, unshaven version of ourselves, forever squiffy on chilled glasses of something rough. Until we remember our addiction to flat whites, reliable broadband and that we actually like having our nose stuffed into the unwashed armpit of a stranger on the Northern Line during the morning commute. Or we wander the streets of Greenwich Village and decide that this is who we really are; that we should own a brownstone stoop and sit on it. If only it wasn’t for the health insurance thing, and the gun ownership thing. Each time I go to Bath, I have similar fantasies of other versions of me. I can imagine myself living in one of those high-ceilinged Georgian townhouses: wingback leather armchair, a glass of Madeira and a mildly dodgy collection of Victorian erotica. In this version of my life, I would be a regular at the Beckford Bottle Shop on the sweet, honey-stoned passageway that is Saville Row. I would be found on too many evenings in a state of mild disarray, overfilling one of the red banquettes that edge the room out the back of the wine shop. I would have a glass of whatever charming albariño they recommended, and then another and a third, while insisting that four plates of their anchovies on toast constituted dinner. The Bottle Shop opened here in 2017 and is an offshoot of the Beckford Group, which owns four country pubs in Wiltshire and Somerset. It presents itself as a wine merchant, but with the added joy of various rooms upstairs and down, where you can drink your purchases for an added £15 corkage, rather than some garish multiple mark-up. Although they told me, candidly, that there’s an increasing number of ostentatiously spendy types in the city who must be serviced with fatly priced bottles, they are big in the £15 to £30 range. God, but it’s civilised. It’s somewhere that can quiet all the bad thoughts. It’s exactly the place you’d want to be if, say, the Russians were facing off militarily against the whole of the Western world, the Antarctic ice shelf was crumbling into the sea and our moral blancmange of a prime minister had proved himself to be the shameless, truth-twisting, mendacious, oozing huckster we all knew he was. Thank God that’s not where we are, eh? But if we were, it’s good to know the grindingly pretty Beckford Bottle Shop would be there to make it all go away, one well-chosen glass at a time. At one end of the building is what they call the bistro. In the sense that the light-filled space has tables, chairs, waiters and a menu, the word does the job. The choice of dishes? Not so much. That’s less a criticism, and more an acknowledgment that what’s on offer here is not big plates of comfort food, but something to go alongside the thrilling wine selection. Everything on the two-dozen-strong bistro list, for example, is offered by the glass and carafe as well as the bottle. It kicks off with a Chateau Oumsiyat from Lebanon, works its way through French, Portuguese and Italian winemakers I’ve never heard of, and ends up somewhere in Greece. Recently, a journalist asked for my sagely thoughts on the sort of small plates that accompany this list: where had they come from? Where were they going? The latter was easy to answer. They are going nowhere. I might feel a queasy weariness each time I have to type the words for fear of repetition. Doubtless, others roll their eyes at the proposition. Generally, however, it seems that many diners and chefs like the opportunity to be unshackled occasionally from the tyranny of big main courses built outwards from a chunk of star ingredient. As to where they came from, we long ago stopped referencing tapas, because it seems too bloody obvious. Still, the menu at the Beckford Bottle Shop is the closest I’ve come to tapas with an RP British accent. Everything costs about £6 or £7. Obviously, there are those thumping anchovies on warm toast with rings of onion. With a nice nod to locality, there are Bath chaps; not the whole cured, pressed and breaded pig’s cheek the title describes, but precise square croquettes, demanding to be treated as finger food. There is a soft Bramley apple purée to lubricate the process. There are smoky pieces of cured mackerel, with smudges of black garlic, served warm so the oils run. They melt away to nothing on the tongue and are very much mourned when they are gone. A lot of the menu pushes forward vegetables. We have courgette fritti, as fat as chip-shop chips with a pungent aioli, and sweet carrots, both orange and purple, dressed with a few seeds and chopped herbs. Using the word “tartare” to describe the chopped beetroot on a muffin with goat’s curd and hazelnut, is to kick the English language in the shins when no one is looking. To be a tartare it should be uncooked. I really would hope they boiled the beetroot first. More importantly it’s all too much muffin and not quite enough beetroot. Roasted cauliflower comes slapped about with a bacon jam, which is cheating but given my overheated relationship with bacon I’m not going to object. Non-meat eaters might feel differently. Finally, there’s a big dollop of good whipped cod’s roe dribbled with herb oil the colour of a well-watered summer lawn, and toast with which to scoop it away. All of this, alongside chocolate mousse, or a plate of rhubarb with milk ice-cream with a sweet biscuit crumb, makes for more than a few nibbles and a little less than the full lunch. But that’s fine because this is the Beckford Bottle Shop, not the Beckford Kitchen. The whole offering is clear from the start. After all, that menu starts with cheese or charcuterie selections. Indeed, given this is drinking food, they deserve extra points for having put so much thought into it. If I ever do decide to buy that townhouse and that wingback chair and that interesting library, I can guarantee to show it all some love. That’s never going to happen. I’m happy where I am. But it’s good to know that if the identity crisis ever hits, the Beckford Bottle Shop will be there waiting for me. News bites The largest ever Greggs Café has just opened inside a branch of Primark in Birmingham. The 130-seater includes doughnut themed seating booths in shades of pink icing. At the same time the two companies have announced a collaboration on an 11-strong Greggs-branded clothing collection, including a hoodie with the legend ‘It’s a pastry thing’ along the sleeve, so you can literally wear your devotion to the steak slice (greggs.co.uk). Various bits of data on the impact of the pandemic on hospitality are emerging. A survey by analysts CGA and WiFi Solutions has found that Leeds currently has the healthiest sector of the UK’s most populous cities. In the four weeks to 15 January, it saw only a 0.2% drop in sales compared with the same period in 2019. In London it was a 19% drop. Meanwhile Pret a Manger has reported its City of London stores are trading at 78% of pre pandemic levels, while its suburban outlets are reporting sales a third higher than before March 2020. A new sushi restaurant in Leatherhead called Beluga has apologised profusely for a set of dress code terms and conditions which insisted women wore “sexy” outfits to gain admittance. It said “women can wear skinny jeans with sexy black ankle-strap heels and with a form fitting top”. The restaurant apologised via Instagram and said these rules had been added to the T&amp;Cs “mistakenly”. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1The question I am 32-year-old man with a successful career and a loving girlfriend. I’ve suffered my fair share of trauma in my childhood and adult life and have some health issues. The problem I have right now is that my anxiety levels are so high that every morning I am frozen in fear. I struggle to get washed and dressed and have no motivation to get up and go. But it isn’t really just that. I feel physically sick at the thought of leaving the safe confines of my bedroom. I tend to watch the same TV shows for escapism over and over again. The only time I truly feel safe is at night when everyone is asleep and I’m alone – the world is quiet and it’s just me. I fear disaster and fear people expecting things of me. I am scared I will be trapped in their expectations and I won’t be able to meet them. I’m so demotivated at work and struggle to actually perform as I should. I have a high-pressure job and feel deeply insecure all the time. What can I do? Philippa’s answer Telling me about this might not have been easy. I admire you for taking that step. Here is another: I want you to notice your breathing. Stop reading this for 10 seconds or so and notice how you breathe. OK, take 20 seconds now, and it doesn’t matter if it’s longer or shorter than that – I really want you to notice the in-breath and then your out-breath. This is you having contact with yourself in the present. When you notice how you are breathing, do you slow your breathing down? Before you get up in the morning, lie in bed being aware of your breath for a minute or two. Your attention will wander; bring it back to your breath. I don’t know about you, but I did this exercise as I typed and I felt the tiniest bit calmer – each bit of calming helps. You’ve discovered you need alone time to regain equilibrium, and this is OK. If you have a fear of the unknown, then replaying a TV programme where you know what is going to happen means you have control of the future: you can predict with accuracy the outcome. It’s understandable that you find this soothing as you’ve had trauma in your life. Trauma often means having shocks. When you can’t be alone in your room with the TV, it sounds as if you keep your body in a constant state of readiness. Your tense muscles are eager to prepare you so that you won’t be shocked next time “it” happens – whatever “it” is. This way of organising your body has also served you well, because you have a successful career and a lovely girlfriend, so there might almost be a subconscious superstition that you must always arrange yourself on this sort of precipice for good fortune to continue. We can get attached to worry in this way and it isn’t as helpful as we unconsciously assume. But it’s OK now to turn that high alert state down a few notches. When you are feeling anxious I want you to scan your body to notice which of your muscles are tight, which are loose. Then I’d like you to experiment tightening where you are already tight and collapsing where you are loose, one notch at a time, and notice how you feel as you do this. It’s easier to tense up more than it is to just relax, and when we become more aware of how we make ourselves tense, we can begin to learn how to disorganise that system. This exercise will also help you get out of your mind and into your senses. If you go to your doctor you can get medication for anxiety to tide you over while you do the work you need to get more control over your tension and it will be easier to do this if you work with a therapist. I would recommend a psychotherapist who works with the body as well as the mind for your issues. It is in our bodies that we hold anxiety and the traumas that gave it to us. There is more you can do. To stop anxiety whirling around in your head, get your fears down on paper in a numbered list. Make it as specific as you can. Then change all the what-ifs into so-whats and notice how altering your language like this makes you feel. Develop your observer part. Keep a journal of moods, sensations and observations. This part is not part of your gratitude, or your anxiety, or your love or your fear, it just observes the different emotions and sensations you have. Speak from this part. This means instead of saying, “I’m anxious” you’ll say, “I notice I am feeling anxious.” The former is a whole-body definition and the latter is you noticing that a part of you is anxious. You can even separate further from your anxiety by giving it a persona, calling it “Mr Anxiety” or whatever seems right. It’s a small tweak but you will find that it makes a difference. You have a successful career and a good relationship, which is great. This means that you have other sides to you that function well. You can learn to use these parts so that anxiety doesn’t keep the upper hand. Recommended reading: Bessel van der Kolk’s The Body Keeps The Score. For body psychotherapy, see eabp.org If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukWhen Volodymyr Zelenskiy sought to become Ukraine’s president he stood on a platform of peace. Zelenskiy promised to sit down with Vladimir Putin and to reach a deal with Russia. He would end the unpopular war in the east and concentrate on important domestic reforms. These included ridding the country of corruption and oligarchs. The plan didn’t work out. Nearly three years after winning a landslide victory, Zelenskiy is a president on the brink of war. About 190,000 Russian troops are poised on Ukraine’s borders. The US president, Joe Biden, has warned of an attack on Kyiv. A Kremlin military offensive – whether full-scale or more limited in scope – seems likely, possibly within hours or days. This existential crisis for Ukraine has brought Zelenskiy global attention. Boris Johnson, Emmanuel Macron and Olaf Scholz are among European leaders who have visited Kyiv and expressed support for its pro-western government. On Saturday Zelenskiy met the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, and Johnson at the Munich security conference, where Ukraine’s fate was discussed, and from which Russia was glaringly absent. But critics fear that by refusing to make concessions to Moscow, Zelenskiy is steering his country towards disaster. They argue he needs to find a pragmatic solution to the dangerous standoff with Putin – ruling out Nato membership for Ukraine, at least for now – a key Russian demand. The US and its allies would go along with such a declaration, privately breathing a sigh of relief, they argue. “The Russians will keep on until Zelenskiy gets the message,” Vasyl Filipchuk, a former senior Ukrainian diplomat and foreign affairs spokesperson said. “They want him to stop what they see as anti-Russian rhetoric. A statement on Nato would calm the situation down. Moscow and Nato would be happy. A few in Ukraine’s establishment would be displeased.” Filipchuk said he was increasingly concerned about the likelihood of a Russian attack, having discounted the threat up until last week. Since Thursday there has been intense artillery bombardment from separatist positions. Several allegedly false-flag events – a car bomb in Donetsk, a shell landing on Russian territory – have fuelled fears that a Russian offensive is inevitable. “The risks of direct military fire are there. It’s thinkable. I put the chances of a fully fledged war in the Donbas at 30%,” Filipchuk said. “Zelenskiy has had a very bad crisis. He doesn’t understand the depth of the problem. He’s badly advised. And he’s afraid.” The president’s refusal to compromise over Nato is based on his fear of unpopularity, observers suggest. They believe he is terrified of a backlash from supporters of Petro Poroshenko – Zelenskiy’s ambitious, hawkish predecessor – and rightwing nationalists. In recent months, Zelenskiy’s once high ratings have fallen, while his Servant of the People party has found itself mired in scandal. “Winston Churchill promised nothing but blood, sweat and tears. I’m afraid Mr Zelenskiy is not capable of that,” Evgeniy Kiselyov, a leading journalist and talkshow host, said. “A real politician is one who can speak at a moment of national emergency.” The president “lagged behind events” and was “too much” shaped by his previous career as a celebrity actor, Kiselyov suggested. In public, western governments have expressed solidarity with Zelenskiy, who received a standing ovation in Munich. The US, UK and Lithuanians have sent anti-tank weapons and defensive arms. Washington and London have cast Ukraine’s struggle with Russia as a civilisational fight between democracy and authoritarianism. At stake is a sovereign country’s right to make its own security choices and alliances, versus an outdated imperial model of spheres of influence, they recognise. But behind the scenes, there has been exasperation with Zelenskiy too. He has irked his allies, especially the Americans, by dismissing predictions of Russian invasion as panic-mongering and media hysteria. These scenarios have damaged Ukraine’s economy, devalued its currency and undermined business confidence, he has publicly complained in recent weeks. Zelenskiy has also faulted the US for closing down its embassy in Kyiv and relocating diplomatic personnel, including CIA officers, to the western city of Lviv. “We do not have a Titanic situation here,” he told the Guardian earlier this month. He pointed out that Ukraine has already been at war for eight years, ever since Putin annexed Crimea and organised a pro-Russia uprising in the Donbas region. “I don’t think it is a good strategy. You don’t bite the hand that feeds you,” Kiselyov said, of Zelenskiy’s US critique. “Some key members of his team are so much afraid of Putin and unprepared psychologically. They don’t know what to do if he strikes.” Would Putin invade? “Difficult to say. I think he is a madman. I don’t think he lives in the real world,” Kiselyov replied. Kiselyov said Zelenskiy might have been shrewder in his dealings with the White House, grumbling only in private rather than airing his grievances. “He could have said: ‘I will support you. But give me something in return such as a couple of bucks to help the economy.’ Instead, Zelenskiy is seen whining,” he said. Zelenskiy’s party colleagues, however, say the president is doing a good job in difficult circumstances. They point out he remains Ukraine’s most popular politician, according to polls. He has a good chance of winning reelection in 2024 – assuming, that is, Moscow does not remove him by force. His party, Servant of the People, is faring less well. It looks certain next year to lose its majority in Ukraine’s parliament, the Verkhovna Rada. “The president stays strong and calm,” Nikita Poturaev, a deputy in Zelensiky’s party and political consultant, said, speaking from his parliamentary office in Kyiv, across the road from Zelenskiy’s palace residence. Zelenskiy enjoyed meeting world leaders and was quick to build relationships with them, Poturaev added. He said Zelenskiy was not personally corrupt, unlike previous holders of the job. They include Viktor Yanukovich, Ukraine’s pro-Russia leader, who looted the state budget before fleeing to Moscow in 2014, after his security forces opened fire on unarmed protesters, killing 100 of them. Perhaps the greatest criticism of Zelenskiy is that he has failed to prepare his citizens for a bloody war. Ukraine’s army is in better shape than in 2014, when it suffered a series of humiliating defeats. Thus far, Zelenskiy has declined to hand out weapons to civilians, possibly fearing that they might be used to overthrow his administration. Instead, volunteers have organised training and national defence. Serhiy Leshchenko, a former MP and prominent journalist, said Zelenskiy had withstood pressure from Moscow to implement the “toxic” Minsk accords, signed in 2015 at a moment of Ukrainian military weakness. Under the deal, Kyiv would grant autonomy to the separatist regions – in effect handing Moscow a veto over foreign policy – in return for demilitarisation. “Zelenskiy didn’t betray Ukraine or give Putin what he wants,” Leshchenko said. “It’s just possible if he survives this crisis he can regain his political credibility.” “I think the threat is great. I’m more with our allies than the Zelenskiy side,” Olexiy Haran, a professor of comparative politics at the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy, said. He cited a recent poll by the Kyiv international institute for sociology which indicated half of Ukrainians thought Zelenskiy should have done more to get ready for a conflict with Russia. Haran added: “The rhetoric coming from Moscow is very dangerous. Putin has increased stress so high. It is difficult to see how he can back down now.” • This article was amended on 20 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to the Servant of the People party looking “certain next year to lose its Duma majority”. The intended reference was to the Ukraine parliament, the Verkhovna Rada.A flotilla of British-built heat-sensing satellites is to be launched into Earth orbit to pinpoint badly insulated buildings across the planet. Seven thermal-imaging probes are being constructed in Guildford, and these are intended to play a key role in the battle against global heating by showing how homes, offices and cities can be made more energy efficient. This week, the British space company Satellite Vu will announce that the first of its heat-sensing satellites is to be carried aloft early next year on a Falcon 9 rocket, the launcher operated by Elon Musk’s SpaceX company. A further six probes will be put into orbit over the next two or three years – and some may be launched from spaceports now under construction in Cornwall, Shetland, north Scotland and other parts of the UK. The aim of Satellite Vu’s programme is to create a fleet of probes that will be able to carry out a constant, worldwide survey measuring heat emanating from buildings. This will be achieved using high-definition infrared radiation detectors that will show where buildings are leaking significant levels of energy, and which are wasting power. “Our satellites are going to be fitted with unique infrared cameras that can measure heat emissions from any building on the planet,” said Anthony Baker, Satellite Vu’s chief executive. “At present, it is only possible to make broad surveys of heat being emitted in a neighbourhood. Our satellites will be fitted with super-high-resolution detectors, which will allow them to study individual buildings and show how much heat is escaping from them.” He added: “The crucial point is that a lot of people want to get to the stage where we can achieve net zero emissions of greenhouse gases. However, they face a lot of problems not just in generating power cleanly but in preventing heat being wasted from badly insulated offices, homes and factories. “We will provide the data that will show companies, governments and local authorities across the world where they need to act and how they can cut their energy bills.” Satellite Vu has raised £20m in venture capital to fund its programme and has received grants from the UK Space Agency and the European Space Agency. The company expects to make money by selling its data to organisations and companies that are looking for ways to cut power bills as the pressure increases on nations to cut their carbon emissions. The spacecraft that will carry out this monitoring are being constructed by Surrey Satellite Technology Limited, which is based in Guildford. Each one will be able to operate night and day while measuring heat output on the ground with an accuracy of 2C (3.6F). This data should have a wide range of applications, said Baker. It should help alleviate the effect of heat islands in cities, which can heat up far more severely than surrounding rural areas because of the prevalence of dense materials such as concrete and metal. The data should also help monitor river pollution from factories, cut heating bills by ensuring buildings are energy efficient, assess the activity status of solar panels and monitor wildfire outbreaks in open land. However, the company has not yet decided on a name for its satellite programme. “A lot of companies and authorities want to make improvements in the way we use energy and generate heat,” said Baker. “But they need to know exactly where to direct their efforts. By giving them precise data about where heat is being allowed to spill out of buildings into the open, we believe we can help them make a real difference and save energy.”The Biden White House has decided to stop tying inflation to corporate power. That’s a big mistake. I’ll get to the reason for the shift in a moment. First, I want to be clear about the relationship between inflation and corporate power. While most of the price increases now affecting the US and global economies have been the result of global supply chain problems, this doesn’t explain why big and hugely profitable corporations are passing these cost increases on to their customers in the form of higher prices. They don’t need to do so. With corporate profits at near record levels, they could easily absorb the cost increases. They’re raising prices because they can – and they can because they don’t face meaningful competition. As the White House National Economic Council put it in a December report: “Businesses that face meaningful competition can’t do that, because they would lose business to a competitor that did not hike its margins.” Starbucks is raising its prices to consumers, blaming the rising costs of supplies. But Starbucks is so profitable it could easily absorb these costs – it just reported a 31% increase in yearly profits. Why didn’t it just swallow the cost increases? Ditto for McDonald’s and Chipotle, whose revenues have soared but who are nonetheless raising prices. And for Procter &amp; Gamble, which continues to rake in record profits but is raising prices. Also for Amazon, Kroger, Costco and Target. All are able to pass cost increases on to consumers in the form of higher prices because they face so little competition. As Chipotle’s chief financial officer said, “Our ultimate goal … is to fully protect our margins.” Worse yet, inflation has given some big corporations cover to increase their prices well above their rising costs. In a recent survey, almost 60% of large retailers say inflation has given them the ability to raise prices beyond what’s required to offset higher costs. Meat prices are soaring because the four giant meat processing corporations that dominate the industry are “using their market power to extract bigger and bigger profit margins for themselves”, according to a recent report from the White House National Economic Council (emphasis added). Not incidentally, that report was dated 10 December. Now, the White House is pulling its punches. Why has the White House stopped explaining this to the public? The Washington Post reports that when the prepared congressional testimony of a senior administration official (Janet Yellen?) was recently circulated inside the White House, it included a passage tying inflation to corporate consolidation and monopoly power. But that language was deleted from the remarks before they were delivered. Apparently, members of the White House Council of Economic Advisers raised objections. I don’t know what their objections were, but some economists argue that since corporations with market power wouldn’t need to wait until the current inflation to raise prices, corporate power can’t be contributing to inflation. This argument ignores the ease by which powerful corporations can pass on their own cost increases to customers in higher prices or use inflation to disguise even higher price increases. It seems likely that the Council of Economic Advisers is being influenced by two Democratic economists from a previous administration. According to the Post, the former Democratic treasury secretary Larry Summers and Jason Furman, a top economist in the Obama administration, have been critical of attempts to link corporate market power to inflation. “Business-bashing is terrible economics and not very good politics in my view,” Summers said in an interview. Wrong. Showing the connections between corporate power and inflation is not “business-bashing”. It’s holding powerful corporations accountable. Whether through antitrust enforcement (or the threat of it), a windfall profits tax or price controls, or all three, it’s important for the administration and Congress to do what they can to prevent hugely profitable monopolistic corporations from raising their prices. Otherwise, responsibility for controlling inflation falls entirely to the Federal Reserve, which has only one weapon at its disposal – higher interest rates. Higher interest rates will slow the economy and likely cause millions of lower-wage workers to lose their jobs and forfeit long-overdue wage increases. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comHistoric England is launching a scheme to find overlooked, ordinary places that celebrate England’s working-class heritage. The public body, which manages the official register of historic listed buildings and nationally protected sites in England, is looking for council estates, factories, mines and other “overlooked historic places” that tell an important story about England’s past. On Wednesday, it will invite community and heritage organisations to apply for a new Everyday Heritage Grant scheme. Grants of up to £25,000 will be awarded to projects that highlight the hidden histories of local places and buildings, with a particular emphasis on those where “ordinary people” have worked, lived or socialised, such as terraced houses, pubs, clubs, farms, shipyards and railways. “This is about recognising places that mean a lot to people whose stories aren’t necessarily often celebrated,” said spokesperson Sean Curran, adding that rich and historic sites are all around us. “You don’t have to go and visit a castle to engage with heritage – you’re probably doing it everyday by visiting your local high street, going to the shop around the corner or the train station to get to work. These are places with really rich important heritage and social history. And sometimes we forget about them.” As far back as 2011, a survey carried out by Historic England found that 85% of respondents thought that England’s industrial heritage should be valued and appreciated, and four out of five (80%) believed that such heritage was as important to preserve as were castles and country houses. A 2017 survey had similar findings. “There’s definitely an appetite for celebrating working-class heritage,” said Curran. Previous buildings that Historic England has recognised through listing, or saved through grants, include the Salford Lads Club, a Grade II-listed leisure club for young men, and the Byker estate, where the BBC TV show Byker Grove, which launched the careers of Ant and Dec, was based. Curran said that the new grants scheme would enable Historic England to see how communities told their own stories. “I’m from a mining family in Sunderland, and I can imagine an interview project with people who remember their parents working in the mines,” they said. Grants are likely to be awarded for oral history projects of this kind and also proposals such as self-guided walking tours, artist collaborations and the creation of digital resources. The aim is to find ordinary everyday places, and then to find out what’s extraordinary about them, Curran said. “Hopefully, we will find out stories that we didn’t know about.” Historic England is also hoping to fund projects that provide innovative volunteering opportunities for young people, or for people facing loneliness and isolation, as well as to contribute positively to participants’ wellbeing. Only £300,000 of grant money is available in total, and the organisation is therefore keen to stress that it is particularly interested in funding smaller grassroots projects that need £10,000 or less. Nigel Huddleston, heritage minister, said: “Our heritage belongs to us all and should be accessible to everyone. I welcome plans for new community-led projects to tell the story of working people across the country, bringing our collective and shared history back to life.” The deadline for applications is 23 May. “We’re really looking forward to seeing the creative ways of recognising heritage that people come up with,” said Curran.Tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and the Canadian asset management giant Brookfield have launched an extraordinary joint bid to take over AGL Energy, Australia’s most polluting company, with the goal to shut its coal power plants earlier than planned. The unsolicited multi-billion dollar offer, lodged on Saturday, would see Brookfield and Cannon-Brookes’ Grok Ventures acquire AGL’s power generation and energy retail divisions, which include coal, gas and renewable energy generation assets. The AGL board was meeting to discuss the offer on Sunday. If successful, it is expected the new owners would aim to bring forward AGL’s exit from coal-fired power. It would also halt a planned demerger that would have broken off the company’s fossil fuel assets into a separate entity, to be called Accel Energy. The offer valued AGL only marginally above the company’s closing share price on Friday of $7.16. Including AGL’s debt, the bid is in the range of $8bn, a source said. The owners of Australia’s coal-fired generators are under increasing pressure, both economic due to the rise of cheap solar energy in the national grid, and from activist shareholders to act in line with the Paris climate agreement. Earlier this month, AGL brought forward the planned closure date of the Bayswater black coal plant in New South Wales to no later than 2033, and Loy Yang A in the Latrobe Valley to 2045. On Thursday, Origin Energy gave notice that the country’s biggest coal-fired power plant, Eraring, could shut seven years earlier than scheduled – in 2025, rather than 2032. Cannon-Brookes, a renewable energy investor and vocal advocate for greater action on the climate crisis, has previously expressed an interest in backing clean energy assets to replace AGL’s ageing Liddell coal plant, which is due to shut next year. AGL’s coal-fired plants make it Australia’s biggest greenhouse gas emitter. It is responsible for about 8% of the national total. Brookfield last November secured approval from the foreign investment review board for the $17.8bn takeover of transmission group AusNet Services. Given AGL’s role as a major energy generator and retailer – before the planned demerger – the new bid may attract attention from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. AGL’s demerger is being advised by Macquarie Bank, while the Brookfield-Grok duo is being advised by Citi. AGL, Brookfield and Cannon-Brookes declined to comment. After reports of the takeover bid broke on Sunday afternoon, Cannon-Brookes tweeted: “Might be an afternoon espresso kind of day.” Director of the Victoria Energy Policy Centre, Bruce Mountain, said if the AGL takeover went ahead Brookfield “would essentially be an investor, not a manager” and Cannon-Brookes would provide the strategy for the business. Mountain said AGL’s biggest asset was its energy retail business. Of its coal plants, Liddell is due to start shutting down its units later this year ahead of its scheduled closure by April 2023 and Bayswater, while profitable now, would be “a much less attractive asset” after its current low-price black coal subsidy ran out in 2024, he said. He said the fact the opening offer from Brookfield and Grok Ventures had apparently offered little premium above the share price was telling about AGL’s prospects as it struggled to engineer a new vision for the business while dealing with the legacy of old coal plants. The NSW Treasurer and energy minister, Matt Kean, said AGL’s future was a commercial decision. “The NSW government will continue to work with energy companies to maintain system reliability and lower power prices,” he said. Victoria’s energy and climate change minister, Lily D’Ambrosio, said businesses were ramping up their investments in renewable energy “because it’s where the smart money is going”. “It’s what the people want and it will further stimulate skills development and new local jobs,” she said.A first-past-the-post voting system is a phenomenally crude and democratically weak way of electing MPs. All the prizes go to the party that wins a minority of the votes, with other parties excluded – a route to unchecked, unbalanced, even corrupt, government. Elsewhere in Europe, only Belarus adopts it, backed by Vladimir Putin, as a way of ensuring that Russia’s puppet president, Alexander Lukashenko, has remained in power since 1994 to ensure Belarus’s fealty. The Conservative party’s dominance – it has been in power twice as often as Labour since 1918, notwithstanding it never winning a majority of votes – is because the opposition parties fight each other and divide their vote. The only rational response, if not an electoral pact to allow only one candidate against the Tories in each constituency, is some form of informal non-aggression pact. At the very least, Liberal Democrats and Labour should not campaign actively in those seats where neither has a chance of winning and give the other as free a run as possible. It was thus very welcome news last week that the two parties are discussing precisely that. Labour will not campaign actively in the Lib Dems’ top 30 target seats where they lie a good second, nor will the Lib Dems campaign actively in Labour’s top target seats. Only in Sheffield Hallam and Cambridge is the arrangement threatened, but not enough to imperil the wider enterprise. Given Labour’s challenge – it needs to win 128 seats to form a government – if the Lib Dems can win 15 seats in the Tories’ blue wall it makes a non-Tory government more likely. This is no more than scaling up what was done in the Batley and Spen byelection last summer, where the Lib Dems fought a limited campaign, so allowing Labour to hold a tough seat, and Chesham and Amersham and North Shropshire, where only the Lib Dems had the prospect of winning the seats. They duly won. Most party activists understand and support the argument, although for Labour the memory of Nick Clegg supporting austerity remains a blot on the Lib Dem record, while Lib Dems cannot easily forget or forgive Jeremy Corbyn. Both should relax. Most Lib Dem and Labour members share the same views of both. In the Lib Dems’ case, the prospect of another coalition is toxic: any arrangement will be confined to agreeing to support a minority Labour government on a “supply and motion” basis – voting through the budget and treating each legislative motion on its merits. Purists will say voters require a choice, that parties should not take their preferences for granted and that the policies are distinct. Wrong. Most voters understand the shortcomings of first past the-post and want to vote wisely, hence the recent byelection results and the growth of tactical voting websites. As for policy, the priorities are shared: clean up politics, repair our broken relationship with the EU, mobilise levelling up, bind our fractured society and reset capitalism. There will even be agreement on reforming the voting system, now trade union opposition that blocked it at Labour’s 2021 party conference has been dropped. But the parties cannot be too quiet in their non-aggression pact. Voters – and newspapers such as the Observer that have long championed tactical voting – need to know what the parties expect in different seats. The sample sizes to get accurate opinion poll predictions in hundreds of constituencies are too large and expensive and it is easy to make mistakes. Both parties urge open and transparent government. They are right. They should start with open and transparent communication with the electorate about which seats they intend fiercely to contest and those they don’t. Let’s do it properly this time.Mikaela Shiffrin will travel home empty-handed from the Beijing Winter Games after the United States missed the podium by 0.42 seconds in the mixed team parallel on Sunday afternoon. The 26-year-old American star, the headline attraction of a US team including River Radamus, Paula Moltzan and Tommy Ford, came tantalizingly close to a redemptive bronze after defeating a Slovakia team without star Petra Vlhova in their opening tie before upsetting Italy to reach the medal round. But the Americans were denied a shot at gold by Germany in the semi-finals, then bowed to Norway in a bronze-medal match-up on a tie-breaker to finish in fourth place and out of the medals. Top-seeded Austria won the gold in the mixed-gender team event, which debuted on the Olympic programme four years ago in Pyeongchang, edging a German team who settled for silver. The knockout competition represented Shiffrin’s last chance at a medal after she finished no better than ninth in five individual races while failing to cross the finish line entirely in three of them, an outcome that would have been unthinkable a fortnight ago when the three-time overall World Cup champion and two-time Olympic gold medalist arrived with designs on Janica Kostelic’s women’s record of four medals at a single Winter Games. “I am not disappointed,” Shiffrin said. “I have had a lot of disappointing moments at these Games. Today is not one of them – today is my favourite memory. “This was the best possible way that I could imagine ending the Games, skiing with such strong teammates.” The last alpine skiing event of the Beijing Games finally went off on Sunday morning, having been postponed for a day because of high winds, on the Ice River course that has been a house of horrors for Shiffrin at these Olympics. She entered Sunday’s curtain-dropper having not made it to the bottom of the course in the slalom, the giant slalom and the slalom portion of the alpine combined, skiing out three times in the technical races that are the foundation of her dominance. The Americans were seeded sixth in the bracket-style competition where each round consists of two men and two women going head to head on adjacent courses in a series of four heats. The team with the majority of wins in each matchup advances to the next round while 2-all deadlocks are decided by the lower combined time of each team’s fastest man and fastest woman. The course is shorter – most of Sunday’s runs lasted about 25 seconds – and even the competitors themselves admit the stakes are considerably lower. But there’s no question that a medal could have offered some consolation for Shiffrin amid the lowest period of a professional life defined by dizzying highs. Shiffrin completed four clean runs down the abbreviated giant slalom course on another morning of high winds and sub-zero temperatures on the south side of Xiaohaituo Mountain. But after winning her opening heat from the leadoff position to help the United States advance past Slovakia, she was placed on the slower red course for the final three matchups and lost each time. The full-day postponement due to Saturday’s roughly 65kph (40mph) gusts at the top of the course forced Shiffrin to alter her travel plans, a decision that she did not make lightly ahead of next week’s World Cup races in Crans Montana, Switzerland. But the American said the opportunity to cap an Olympic experience that hasn’t always been pleasant alongside her team-mates was worth the sacrifice. “Twenty-four hours makes a really big difference when I think about my individual goals, my personal goals, for the rest of the season,” said Shiffrin, who narrowly leads Vlhova atop the leaderboard in pursuit of her fourth overall World Cup crystal globe. “There was absolutely some thought that the 24 hours makes a difference to be still pushing and using that energy. I decided to stay because I wanted to compete with my teammates. I couldn’t possibly imagine leaving. There’s been a lot of points in my career where I had to put my individual interests first in order to have the success, accomplish the goals.” She added: “Today it was just important for us to be able to compete together. And they have been supportive of me this entire Games – just unbelievable. They just deserve to know how much I love them and how much I wanted to just try to help and have the potential to win a medal today.” Once a teenage prodigy who became the youngest Olympic slalom champion in history at the Sochi Games, Shiffrin has since blossomed from a specialist into the world’s best all-around skier, branching out into the speed events with success and becoming the only skier, male or female, to win World Cup races in all six disciplines. Her three Olympic medals include gold in slalom in 2014 and in giant slalom in 2018, while her 73 career wins in World Cup races are third-most on the all-time leaderboard, trailing only Swedish great Ingemar Stenmark (86) and longtime US team-mate Lindsey Vonn (82). The US completed the alpine skiing programme in Beijing with only one medal out of a possible 30 in individual events: Ryan Cochran-Siegle’s surprise silver in the super-G. That matched the country’s lowest overall haul at an Olympics since 1998, when Picabo Street’s famous super-G gold in Nagano represented their only medal.There is now a significant risk of people drowning in London as the threat of major flash floods increases in the city because of climate change. According to a report by a London Councils taskforce published this month, the danger is particularly severe because there is no overall plan or authority to tackle the increasing threat of flooding in the city. In its analysis of the citywide disruption that struck last July, when torrential rain swept across London on several occasions, the group says that more than a month’s average rain fell on the city in an hour on several different days. For example 48.5mm of rain fell on Shepherd’s Bush in an hour on 12 July while its average rainfall for that month is 46.8mm. Across London, tube stations were flooded, hospitals closed, and more than 1,000 homes inundated. As deluges become more frequent as global warming takes hold, there is now a real risk that London could see far greater increases in devastation from surface water flooding. The taskforce presented its report earlier to the London Councils, a cross-party group that represents the capital’s 32 boroughs and the City of London. It showed that the worst effects of the flooding were seen in the north and east of the city, adding that it was not clear “that residents in risk areas understand the level of risk that they now face and how to respond”. This point was highlighted by Bob Ward, deputy chair of the London Climate Change Partnership. “There is now a real risk of people drowning, particularly in basement flats if a major flash flood occurred in the middle of the night,” he told the Observer. “The problem is particularly worrying because we have no idea how many people live in basement properties in London.” The report also warned that “London has an increasing area of impermeable surfacing and still essentially relies on a Victorian drainage system that was not designed to cope with the city’s current and predicted future populations.” It highlighted the fact there was no single organisation in charge of tackling surface water flooding in London; there was insufficient funding to manage the risk, and a lack of understanding of the risks posed by surface water flooding. Major improvements in all these areas were urgently needed if the city is to cope with future serious inundations. The danger facing the city is highlighted as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scientists prepare the final draft of a report outlining how nations must adapt to avoid the worst consequences of changes in storm frequencies and weather patterns that will occur in coming years. Last month the government published its third five-yearly assessment of the risks that Britain faces from the changing climate, and painted a future of drastic disruption and costly impacts. It indicated that the climate crisis was likely to wipe at least 1% a year off the UK’s economy by 2045 if global temperatures were allowed to rise by 2C (3.6F). Disruption to food production, and infrastructure were likely to cost more than £1bn a year each, the report warned. In all, at least eight areas of risk were judged likely to cost more than £1bn a year by 2050. Environment groups reacted to the government report by warning that it showed that ministers needed to take more urgent action to defend the country against the effects of climate change. “This report makes clear that even modest increases in global temperature will have profound impacts across every aspect of our lives,” Doug Parr, policy director at Greenpeace UK said. “Adaptation can no longer be an afterthought. Action on climate change of all kinds needs to be right at the heart of government policy and programmes.”Our eyes are used to photographs that know faces. The photographers Eva Lipman and Ken Graves were far more interested in understanding the language of hands. This picture from their book Restraint and Desire is typical of their fascination. The longer we look at it, the more it reveals of the nuanced lexicon of touch, the way palms and fingers describe the emotion of relationships. Do the couple dancing or embracing appear startled by the hands of two others? Are they being subtly pushed together or gently prised apart? Do the splayed male fingers and rucked dress suggest an easy intimacy or an awkward grip? Is the woman with her back to us being comforted or congratulated? Are these hellos or goodbyes? The uncaptioned pictures force us to project our own storyline on to the closeness of strangers, just as we do instinctively a hundred times a day. Lipman and Graves met while taking pictures of a ballroom dance competition in Ohio in 1986. They subsequently married and worked closely together. Graves died in 2016 aged 74. Lipman dedicates the book to him: “I will forever be grateful for his love and generosity, his unfailing optimism, and for sharing with me his strange and unique world view. I miss him every day.” That shared world view is preserved in the 42 pictures in their book, which are all about fleeting moments of connection, people reaching out to one another in different settings – teenagers at a dancehall, soldiers preparing for parade, wrestlers on a mat. We might read shadows of desire and rejection in these pictures, or we might miss them. Lipman describes how she and her husband were drawn to moments that “reflected back to us, like a mirror, the intensities and power dynamics of our shared life together”. • Restraint and Desire is published by TBW Books ($50)In cities such as Kabul, Herat and Bamyan, you feel a profound sense of shame when you see the after-effects of the west’s abandonment of Afghanistan: the long queues for food; the people persecuted and sometimes killed for trying to defend the freedoms they have gained in the past 20 years. Only six months after the fall of Kabul, the American and British media seem mostly to have forgotten about it. Typically, the judgment seems to be that we should never have gone in to help Afghanistan in the first place: as though that solves anything. The catastrophe began before the 2020 US election, when Donald Trump was casting around for anything he could claim as a foreign policy victory, following a series of failures with North Korea, Russia and China. Afghanistan meant nothing to Trump, and he handed it to the Taliban on a plate. There was no obligation on Joe Biden, when he became president, to follow through with this embarrassing deal; but he was desperate to show that he too put American interests before anyone else’s, and he allowed it to stand. After all, when does a US president put a small country’s needs before the chance of an uptick in the domestic opinion polls? The disaster in Afghanistan shows up American and western weaknesses in a way that not even the defeat in Vietnam did. A powerful new collection of essays, Losing Afghanistan, points out again and again that people around the world now see the US as a fickle ally. What, for instance, does it say to China at a time when Xi Jinping is mulling over the invasion of Taiwan? One of the best pieces here comes from a former British diplomat, Nick Fishwick, who served in Afghanistan: he blames the west’s failure on weak leadership, an ignorance of the country, short tours of duty and a desire to compete with one’s predecessors. He’s right. Graham Cundy, who served with the Royal Marines there, speaks with insight about British mistakes in Helmand Province. But this wasn’t so much a failure of the men and women on the ground as of politicians back in Washington. There are valuable contributions here on the reactions of Afghanistan’s near neighbours, Pakistan and India, and on the Russian experience. (Russia comes out of this study reasonably well; it has maintained a steady interest in Afghan affairs ever since its withdrawal from the country in 1989, yet has been careful not to interfere in its politics.) There’s less detail on China’s approach. In Kabul recently, I spoke to the deputy finance minister, Nazir Kabiri, who was a member of the last regime and stayed on to work with the Taliban out of sheer patriotism; they have scarcely anyone who understands economics. Kabiri told me the Taliban would like China to take more of an interest in the country, but the Chinese have refused, preferring countries that offer five or six years of political stability. One of the most valuable sections of Losing Afghanistan deals with the future of liberal interventionism. The 2001 invasion was often regarded as a reasonably good argument in favour of stepping in to rescue a country from disaster. But authorities as varied as Prof Paul Dixon, Prof Stephen Gethins, the writer Mahmud Khalili, Jeremy Purvis of the Liberal Democrats, Masoud Andarabi, interior minister of Afghanistan immediately before the Taliban takeover, and the book’s compiler, the distinguished historian Brian Brivati, make clear how and why August 2021 has changed all that. The era of Blair, Clinton and Bush is definitively over. Victory for the Taliban wasn’t inevitable, but with hindsight there was too much corruption under the old regime, and the Afghan National Army was nowhere near as well trained and confident as the west assumed. The new regime has turned out to be more savvy than the old Taliban leadership of 1996-2001, under the reclusive Mullah Omar. Whereas the old Taliban blew up girls’ schools and murdered their pupils, the new Taliban have so far refused to issue any nationwide guidance about women’s education. Presumably they expect this will form part of a long-term deal with western powers over the country’s frozen financial assets. At present, the Taliban control the cities and the surrounding countryside, but it’s only a matter of time before large-scale resistance gets going. If the Taliban hope to survive, they will have to be more inclusive, and accept a wider range of political and religious opinion. But old habits die hard, and the toll on individual lives will continue to be great. Losing Afghanistan is interleaved with brief but shocking accounts of the way people have suffered since the Taliban took over: “A policewoman faces a dangerous future”; “Losing my culture overnight”; “A mother turns to sex work”. This book provides a really valuable snapshot of the mess that President Biden chose to create, in a country that was entirely dependent on his whims. One of the results of the chaos left by the western allies will, of course, be a renewed torrent of migrants to the outside world. In a moving and beautifully written book, The Naked Don’t Fear the Water, the respected journalist Matthieu Aikins, who writes for the New York Times Magazine and Rolling Stone, tells the story of a young Afghan driver and translator who decides to flee his war-torn country and make the perilous journey to the west. Omar escaped from Afghanistan in 2016, long before the Taliban took power again, but his reasons for leaving had long been present: economic hardship; a lack of freedom of expression that young, open-minded people find stifling; the desire to see and experience another world. Highly readable, empathetic and revealing, Aikins’s book is brutally honest and often deeply moving – a work of great sympathy and understanding. Above all, it explains why so many thousands of Afghans and others risk their lives to follow Omar’s lead, often with tragic consequences. Now, more and more of them will be prepared to take their chances. Every day outside the Iranian consulates in cities such as Herat, thousands queue up in the hope of getting a visa. Few of them actually want to stay in Iran: they hope to use it as a staging point before moving westwards. The catastrophe that President Biden has inflicted on Afghanistan will have consequences in the region and the world for decades to come. And it was all done in a moment of carelessness, with no proper thought or understanding. As one former Afghan politician says: “It was utterly unforgivable. The Americans just didn’t care enough about our country to know what they were doing to us.” John Simpson is the BBC’s world affairs editor • Losing Afghanistan: The Fall of Kabul and the End of Western Intervention is published by Biteback Publishing (£20); The Naked Don’t Fear the Water is published by Fitzcarraldo Editions (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copies at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyMy Irish mother taught me always to try to see the good in people. But it has to be admitted that the attempt to see the good in Alexander “Boris” Johnson would, in another of her favourite sayings, “try the patience of Job”. It is already a commonplace in this country and around the civilised world that our prime minister is a charlatan on an industrial scale. John Major knew what he was about when declaring, as a prime minister himself, that Johnson should not even be allowed to fight a parliamentary seat. The late Lord Carrington resigned as foreign secretary on principle over the fiasco that led to the Falklands war in 1982 – the war generally thought to have saved Margaret Thatcher’s skin after she’d achieved the dubious distinction of being the most unpopular prime minister since the second world war. Many years later, Carrington found himself listening to some young-fogey Tories discussing the case for making Johnson prime minister. There was a pause. “Anyway,” said the good Lord, “he won’t do.” There are some Johnson loyalists who say he should do the decent thing and resign as honourably as he can in the circumstances. But most witnesses to the sorry spectacle of his premiership think he couldn’t spot a decent thing even if it were a favoured horse running in the 3.30 at Newmarket. I am reminded of Dostoevsky’s short story A Bad Business. Things go badly wrong when the general, whose driver has disappeared, turns down a lift from a colleague and heads off into the night, with unfortunate repercussions. It has been a Bad Business since Johnson, who – notwithstanding his irresponsible reporting of fantasy stories about Brussels – was in no doubt that it would be crazy for the UK to leave the EU, but decided to put self-interest above country in leading the mendacious Leave campaign. But “here we are”, as Harold Macmillan once said, “and the question is: where do we go from here?” Macmillan was prime minister when the British economy was lagging behind what was then the European Economic Community. We tried forming a rival group – the European Free Trade Area (EFTA), seven nations as opposed to the EEC Six. The joke was that Europe was “at sixes and sevens”. It soon became apparent that we needed to link up with the EEC. We applied twice, were turned down by President de Gaulle, and finally joined in 1973. Now I have an awful feeling of deja vu. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer and his shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves talk about “making Brexit work”. I can only hope that this is tactical stuff intended to appease “red wall” voters, who were really protesting at the social consequences of several decades of industrial decline – and, let’s face it, the well-meant but disastrous Labour leadership of Jeremy Corbyn. It looks as though Labour’s defeated Remainers envisage a return to the 1950s and early 1960s, to begin the process of “rebuilding a relationship with the EU” – a process whose logical outcome would be rejoining in decades to come. But why wait? Why should Labour attach itself to the chimerical goal of “making Brexit work?” For the truth that dare not speak its name is that Brexit doesn’t work, and never will. The experiment has been tried – and has failed. All this stuff about the “opportunities of Brexit?” There are none. Johnson may have packed his sordid cabinet with Brexiters and time-servers, but the all-party public accounts committee is beyond the reach of his soiled hands. As its chair, Dame Meg Hillier, was reported as saying in the Financial Time: the only detectable impact of Brexit is “increased costs, paperwork and border delays”. There was a classic moment on television last week when a lorry driver held up in one of those dreadful queues on the Dover road was asked: “Is it going to get any better?” His reply was to the point: “Not unless we go back into the EU.” Now, I read that it suits Labour, while protesting against him all the way to the electoral bank, to see Johnson remain in office. But, to paraphrase Carrington above: this won’t do. The man has besmirched the office, and the good name of the country. One of the Brexit secretaries who failed “to make Brexit work” – because it can’t – is my old friend David Davis. He was right to echo Cromwell and say to Johnson: “In the name of God, go!” Even if Johnson were to be succeeded by another Brexiter, there are no morally cogent grounds for acquiescing in his continuance in office. I cannot resist concluding with yet another quotation from the Roman poet Juvenal: “Hoc volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.” (“I want this done, so I order it done: let my wish replace rational judgment.”) This epitomises our present prime minister’s mentality. A nation suffers.As some US companies begin asking people to return to the office and governors lift mask mandates, talk has emerged of life after the Covid-19 pandemic in America. But infectious disease experts aren’t quite ready to declare that it’s safe for individuals, rather than governments and health officials, to determine whether precautions such as masking indoors are necessary. “I think it’s probably reasonable not to get too cocky at this point,” said Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “I welcome the decline in cases that we are seeing in the US and a number of other countries, and I think you can both celebrate the sunshine while also keeping an umbrella close by for the possibility that rain could occur.” The numbers of Covid cases and hospitalizations in the United States have decreased by 67% and 38% over the last two weeks, according to data from the New York Times. Amid that decline, Democratic governors in Massachusetts, Illinois, New York, Rhode Island, California, Connecticut, Delaware, New Jersey and Oregon have recently lifted at least some parts of the masking mandates. California governor Gavin Newsom on Thursday announced a plan based on the idea that we are entering an endemic stage, meaning the virus is no longer a significant threat in some areas, rather than a pandemic, meaning a global outbreak. That new approach includes a focus on countering misinformation and disinformation and mass testing to spot new variants and surges, according to the Associated Press. US companies, most notably, Microsoft, have also announced plans to reopen their facilities and asked employees to return. And Amazon, where many people already worked in person, announced that it would not require fully vaccinated employees to wear masks, according to the Wall Street Journal. “While the world has changed, our dedication to the safety and wellbeing of our employees has remained constant,” Microsoft said in a blogpost about the reopening. “As we navigate this new phase of work, we’ll continue to take a data-driven approach to decision making that follows the guidance of public health authorities.” But Justin Lessler, an epidemiology professor at the University of North Carolina, says that while the numbers of Covid cases, deaths and hospitalizations have recently plummeted, the fact that the Omicron spike was so much higher than previous waves has misled people into thinking that they no longer need to wear masks or avoid mass gatherings. The US daily average of cases and hospitalizations on 16 February were about 124,000 and 81,000, according to the Times. Before removing precautions, Lessler said he would like to see Covid levels like late June 2021 – before the Delta wave – when the daily averages of new cases and hospitalizations were about 12,000 and 16,000. Modeling shows the US could achieve that around late March, he said. “In most of the country, cases, deaths and hospitalizations are still extremely high, and I certainly hope that’s not the new normal, and I don’t believe it’s the new normal,” Lessler said. “I worry that the perception that we are already there is going to lead people to act in ways that is going to draw this out longer than it needs to be drawn out.” William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, also thinks that we cannot yet treat the virus as though it is endemic. “Some governors think we are almost there are already – they are dropping mask mandates – and my response is: good luck to you,” said Schaffner. “My fingers are crossed on your behalf.” Almost the entire country remains at what the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines as high transmission of the virus, meaning a seven-day daily average of more than 100 new Covid cases per 100,000 residents. Anna Bershteyn, assistant professor in the department of population health at New York University, thinks more companies will ask employees to return once their surrounding county drops at least to a level of “substantial transmission,” meaning less than 100 new cases per 100,000 residents. Companies will also consider the vaccination levels of their workforce and the severity of a new variant, among other factors, Bershteyn said. She recommends employers use a framework of “always measures,” such as increasing clean air exchanges in indoor spaces; and ensuring that workers are fully vaccinated and stay home when sick; “sometimes measures,” when case numbers are higher, such as mandating masks and proof of vaccination to be on the premises; and “rarely measures,” such as temporarily closing a business. Also, “people can reduce their risk in the long term for Covid-19 by improving general health, so taking the opportunity when transmission is low to catch up on any health care that has been missed … staying on top of weight, exercise and diet; and recovering economic losses and educational losses; and really importantly, restoring some of the social connections and those activities that are really important to a person’s wellbeing,” said Bershteyn. Nuzzo, the Johns Hopkins epidemiologist, also thinks that the country needs to end its binary thinking on precautions, “that we either care about the virus and are trying to do something about it – or we’re not,” she said. “The option not to care is not an option, but how we try to address the virus can and should change with the data,” she said. “That may include shifting from mandatory measures to recommended measures … It may mean that we put masks at the front of the entrance to the coffee shop for people to take if they so choose, but we don’t have the poor barista have to yell at somebody and call the police if somebody is not wearing a mask.” Nuzzo and other epidemiologists also do not take it as a given that a new variant won’t emerge that overcomes the population’s immunity against the virus. “It’s not like you are going down on a rollercoaster and are just going to keep on cruising. We could see the cases go up again, and I think we have to be mentally and socially prepared that if we are experiencing another surge, we may have to dust off some measures that we got to take a break from,” she said. Dr Celine Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University, also thinks the pandemic will be shaped by individuals’ risk tolerance and how well we protect demographics such as low-income populations and residents of long-term care facilities. That means, for example, ensuring that everyone at a nursing home is vaccinated and boosted. “Instead of having top-down recommendations for everyone, we are entering a phase soon where what we need to be doing is arming people with the information and tools to protect themselves and their loved ones,” she said. “And as opposed to blanket recommendations for the whole population, we need to really focus our public health efforts on the most vulnerable.”As the new Lord of the Rings series gears up for its September launch on Amazon, the company finds itself navigating treacherous, if familiar, waters and has already triggered a fierce debate over race by introducing characters of color into JRR Tolkien’s fantasy world. The tech giant has spent a dragon’s dungeon of gold on adapting the beloved story famous for its cultish fans, some of whom are deeply enmeshed in the rightwing culture war industry. Yet it is fully aware its final product has to reach a broad and modern audience to justify its eye-popping expenditure. Co-produced by New Line Cinema, The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power isn’t part of Peter Jackson’s phenomenally successful Lord of the Rings and Hobbit movies, but it is intended to capitalize on their success: a streaming series set in the world of Tolkien’s high-fantasy novels, with characters and battles drawn from the interior history and mythology laid forth in the books’ extensive appendices. Jackson himself is not involved but the sets and costumes would be right at home in his movies. The new series will feature the Saint Maud star Morfydd Clark as a younger version of Cate Blanchett’s Elvish queen Galadriel, Benjamin Walker as heroic Elven-King Gil-Galad and Maxim Baldry as human king-to-be Isildur among many others. It cost $465m to make the first season, making it the most expensive television show in history. Over its projected five seasons, that budget will almost certainly exceed $1bn. It is the crown jewel in Amazon’s increasing investment in licensing and producing movies and TV series, which went up from $11bn to $13bn last year according to the company’s annual report. In general, licensing old TV shows and movies will only get more expensive. So it’s in Amazon’s interest to make new shows and movies to attract subscribers and earn itself a little breathing room when it comes time to renegotiate the price of Parks &amp; Recreation reruns. The Lord of the Rings appendices are more of a “show bible” – the kind of notes you’d give to teleplay writers – than a narrative of their own. So producers have woven their own stories of romance and palace intrigue into the book’s timelines, fairy stories and genealogical footnotes. That has allowed them to cast people of color as some of the series’ elves and dwarves, pleasing some of the books’ fans and angering others. Recently, Vanity Fair ran a spread of promotional photos for the show, including images of Sophia Nomvete as Dwarven princess Disa and Ismael Cruz Córdova as Elvish warrior Arondir. On YouTube, the trailer for The Rings of Power has 67,000 comments as of this writing, and thousands of them are the same quote from Tolkien about the corrupting and uncreative nature of evil. “Evil cannot create anything new, it can only spoil and destroy what good forces have invented and created,” it reads in multiple languages. Others were more blunt. “Imagine spending millions of dollars to promote your woke social justice warrior garbage of a film. Way to tarnish a good franchise,” read one. “Amazon decided to destroy Tolkien’s work. Because why do a good job when you can just be corrupt and force your political beliefs,” stated another. Non-fans rolled their eyes. South Park retroactively changed its sole Black kid character’s name from Token to Tolkien, the kind of backhanded acknowledgment of its own mistakes that are a staple of the irreverent cartoon’s sense of humor. It’s tempting to dismiss the complaining as the usual internet nerd rage. Similar disputes played out when actors of color started taking new major roles in Star Wars products. But the conflict is also about the rise of two kinds of media empire, not just one: there is Amazon, the crown jewel in the vast business empire of Jeff Bezos, the richest man in the world, and there is YouTube, a place for every dork who likes to complain about pop culture and whose darker corners are a frequent haunt of racism and bigotry. One group is populated by people who can afford to buy the rights to The Lord of the Rings, and the other is populated by people for whom The Lord of the Rings is the second-best thing to the Bible, but for both, an incredible amount of money and influence is at stake. And Amazon is probably wary that its grand project could be vulnerable to attacks by aggrieved online superfans. YouTubers complaining about “fan mistreatment” have hundreds of thousands, sometimes millions of subscribers. Inevitably, these fans are devoted to movies, TV shows and comics from their childhoods and many are constantly on the watch for a new version that might expand the role of women, add characters of color, or include characters who aren’t straight. When they’re riled up, they can coordinate broad campaigns of harassment and even threats of violence across social media and skew perception of public opinion. It’s the sort of thing that often meets with the approval of the broader rightwing media, which will sometimes fan the flames of a useful controversy. Talented social media trolls have gone on to jobs on cable television. In human terms, being the target of rightwing hate campaigns can be draining and depressing. in business terms, it can really mess with a marketing budget, and that kind of power is attractive to permanently aggrieved pop culture devotees. The extremity of protest over the “unrealistic” presence of a Black dwarf princess feels silly, considering the stories themselves are about wizards and magic rings and the occasional dragon. But audiences, says Ebony Thomas, author of The Dark Fantastic and an associate professor at the University of Michigan, are not wrong when they say that Black characters seem like they just don’t belong in the notoriously white fantasy genre. “The history of fantasy is racialized,” she says. “People are used to seeing fantasies and fairytales as all-white, particularly in faux-medieval or magical-medieval settings,” Thomas explains. “We’re taking them out of the dream space. We’re taking them out of how they imagined it could be, and so it feels off to them. So that’s why they’re saying, you know, ‘Who are these people? This is not what Tolkien intended! It’s not accurate!’” Of course, if you’re willing to go back to the poems and legends that inspired Tolkien, you will definitely find characters who are not white. The Norse Prose Edda, compiled in 1220, includes the svartálfar, Black elves who live in Svartálfarheim; Tolkien was a devotee of Old Norse prose and verse and even translated some of the verse into English. But, despite that, it is a fraught time to be adapting anything with even a hint of Norseness to it. American fascist organizations use Norse iconography publicly in lieu of more easily recognized swastikas and Confederate flags. American “European heritage” groups are obsessed with Norse gods and runes. These groups are often violent, and when they rally behind a symbol, the people they target tend to turn away from it. Some devotees are refusing to cede that ground, arguing that such symbols – and fantasy more broadly – should be for everyone. “White Supremacists don’t own Norse Mythology, even if some of them think they do, any more than they own the Bible, or the US Constitution, even though they might think they do,” wrote fantasist Neil Gaiman on Twitter. Gaiman is qualified to deliver that rebuke: he’s written his own Norse mythology and a novel incorporating it (and other traditions) into American myth-making, American Gods. In fact, despite its array of wizards, magic objects, warring races and deep wells of mythology, The Lord of the Rings is a decidedly non-threatening tale: fundamentally a comforting story of middle-class heroes of multiple races who triumph over enormous odds to save their way of life by working together against a common foe. This is poor soil for exterminationism – more of a saccharine conservatism, complicated by Tolkien’s own experiences in the first world war. “I don’t think these books are ‘fascist’,” wrote the great British fantasist Michael Moorcock in 1978, “but they certainly don’t exactly argue with the 18th-century enlightened Toryism with which the English comfort themselves so frequently in these upsetting times.” Moorcock thought Tolkien owed a lot to AA Milne; he called the Rings books “Epic Pooh”. American conservatives, too, especially evangelical Christians who venerate Tolkien and CS Lewis, love Tolkien’s preoccupation with the simple life and disdain for anything urban or industrial. So is it fundamentally disrespectful to do what Amazon has done by making a modern adaptation of such a traditionalist work with a non-traditional cast? Thomas, who loves Tolkien, doesn’t think so, and she points out that the notoriously restrictive Tolkien estate doesn’t think so, either. In this case, Tolkien’s official interpreters are far less concerned with uniform pigmentation among the cast than they are with making sure the new show doesn’t touch the potentially lucrative events of The Silmarillion, a posthumous novel the estate would surely like to see sold to a big movie studio for gobs of cash. The question, Thomas says, is not merely of accuracy, but of authenticity, and given that race is an arbitrary construct anyway, it’s not somehow less authentic to cast Black actors than it is to cast white ones. “My ancestors have been here, speaking English, for 10 generations,” she says. “It’s not the case that some strange people who are not from Anglo-American culture are suddenly demanding representation. We’ve been here for centuries. We have been existing.”It is 15 years since the Equality and Human Rights Commission, the independent body charged with protecting and promoting equality and human rights for everyone in Britain, came into being. We regulate and enforce human rights and equality laws and advance rights through carefully considered recommendations for reform. While we have made significant progress over the past 15 years, there will always be more to do. We have many and varied stakeholders – knowledgeable and effective advocates in encouraging and challenging us to address the equality and human rights issues about which they care deeply. Our relationships with civic organisations, campaigners and those they represent are vitally important in helping to inform our thinking and our priorities. But with our vast remit and so many people and groups advocating on so many issues, it is inevitable that we can’t please all of them all of the time. My position and integrity as the EHRC’s chair have come in for particular criticism by some stakeholders, who perceive that the commission has undergone a shift in its approach. I can’t speak for how the previous chair ran things, but I can say that what matters to me, to the board and our new chief executive is that we are determined to uphold our independence, impartiality, evidence-based decision-making and to resist undue influence from any quarter. This has put us at odds with some of our stakeholders recently, but this isn’t new. The EHRC has often been criticised over the years and it is not a comfortable place to be in – for our commissioners, for our committed staff or for those stakeholders who disagree with us. But it is an unavoidable part of our role in regulating a legal framework that recognises nine protected characteristics, frequently with competing rights and needs. We have a statutory duty to consider equality and human rights for everyone and that includes how the rights of one person, or group, might be affected by the rights of another. We do not allow our decisions and actions to be swayed by the loudest voices in any particular debate. We are accountable to parliament and held to exacting standards in fulfilling our mandate. The legal basis for our governance, including the process for the appointment of the chair and commissioners, is enshrined in our founding legislation and is unchanged since the EHRC was established. It applied to my appointment as it did for those of my predecessors under previous Labour, coalition and Conservative governments. The latest pressure arises from the polarised debates about the rights of transgender people, who face hate crime and barriers to changing their legal gender, such as excessively long waiting times for gender identity clinics. This is wrong and we have been lobbying government to do something about it. We have also been upholding the rights of transgender people at work, in recent legal interventions with employers. Where we have modified our position on self-ID for trans people or the Gender Recognition Act, we have done so because new evidence about the tension between trans and women’s rights is emerging. Only last week, there have been seemingly contradictory legal judgments on the meaning of “sex” in law. Other cases are in the pipeline. Recently, public responses to our strategic plan have shown a huge increase in concern about these competing rights. Last month, I wrote to the Scottish government to advise that further consideration is needed to some specific aspects of the proposals, to take account of issues raised in relation to data collection, single-sex service provision and new case law. I said absolutely nothing to suggest any wavering of our commitment to trans rights. We have also been accused of standing in the way of a ban on “conversion therapy”. Not true. Conversion therapy is harmful and the EHRC supports it ending for both sexual orientation and being transgender. We have advised the UK government that a lack of legal definitions of terms such as “being trans” risks ambiguity about what will be caught by the ban and what will not. We recommended that parliament conducts comprehensive scrutiny of the legislation to ensure not only that harmful practices are prevented but also that transgender people can receive the advice and support they need. Debate about contested issues is necessary and I admire all who stand up for rights and causes, fight discrimination and seek equality and justice. They help our country to shape a fairer future. And so do we. So I ask those – and it is a minority – who seek to undermine the EHRC: what do they hope to achieve and who do they think will protect and advance equality and human rights in our country if they have their wish? • Baroness Falkner is the chair of the Equality and Human Rights CommissionHolding a gold microphone and wearing a seafoam-green pantsuit, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez energized the San Antonio crowd with her vision for flipping the state of Texas to Democratic control. “It will happen,” Ocasio-Cortez said at a rally earlier this month. “The only question is when, Texas.” As the crowd cheered, she added: “The work that you put in today, the work that you put in tomorrow, the work that you put in on Monday – when you go one more door when you’re tired, when you make one more call when you feel exhausted, you’re bringing that day one day sooner.” The progressives in the audience roared in response, hanging on to her every word. Four years after bursting on to the national political stage with a shocking primary victory over a long-serving House Democrat, Ocasio-Cortez is using her substantial political influence to promote progressive candidates and policies. Ocasio-Cortez’s first campaign in 2018 was largely dismissed as a pipe dream, but the leftwing New York congresswoman is now impossible to ignore. Just this month, the New Yorker interviewed Ocasio-Cortez about the fight for voting rights and her role as a progressive icon, while the editors of New York magazine are releasing a book documenting her rapid rise in Democratic politics. As she makes headlines, Ocasio-Cortez has continued to use her massive social media following and her significant campaign war chest to advance her leftist policy agenda. With Democrats bracing for a potentially disastrous midterm season, the congresswoman’s actions on the campaign trail and on Capitol Hill make it clear that she will continue to be a dominant force for the progressive movement. There seems to be no question now: AOC is here to stay. On the trail Ocasio-Cortez travelled to Texas this month to campaign for two of the progressive candidates she has endorsed this election cycle, Jessica Cisneros and Greg Casar. Since her first victory in 2018, Ocasio-Cortez has used her celebrity status to help other progressives attract voters and raise money, which she has a unique talent for. During the 2020 cycle, her campaign committee raised more than $20m. “Having her there on stage with you, it just is an amazing experience,” said James Thompson, a former congressional candidate who held a 2018 rally with Ocasio-Cortez in Wichita, Kansas. “The immediate impact on my campaign was fundraising. We raised a substantial amount of money off of the rally that we had here. It really energized the people.” An endorsement from Ocasio-Cortez has the ability to immediately elevate a progressive candidate’s campaign, and the congresswoman does not limit herself to open-seat races. In the four years since she won her own primary against the then congressman Joe Crowley, Ocasio-Cortez has endorsed a number of candidates who are challenging sitting lawmakers. Cisneros, for example, is attempting to defeat Henry Cuellar, a Democrat who has served in the House since 2005. “AOC endorses more primary challengers to incumbents than pretty much anyone who is a current incumbent in Congress,” said Waleed Shahid, a spokesperson for Justice Democrats, which backed Ocasio-Cortez’s first campaign. “I think a lot of that has to do with the fact that she was the primary challenger to an incumbent, so she knows personally how difficult it is to get support for something that requires that level of courage.” But Ocasio-Cortez’s willingness to openly oppose Democratic incumbents has rankled some of her House colleagues who have been on the receiving end of her criticism. “This election is taking place in the 28th congressional District of Texas – not New York City,” Cuellar’s campaign said in a statement ahead of Ocasio-Cortez’s rallies in San Antonio and Austin. “The voters will decide this election, not far-left celebrities who stand for defunding the police, open borders, eliminating oil &amp; gas jobs, and raising taxes on hard working Texans. Members should take care of their own district before taking failed ideas to South Texas.” Ocasio-Cortez’s rallies in Texas also displayed her singular ability to enrage her Republican critics, who swiftly denounced her suggestion that the traditionally conservative state would inevitably move to the left. “If AOC thinks for a moment that Texans will fall for her whacked-out, woke, socialist idiocy, she doesn’t know Texas,” said Dan Patrick, the state’s lieutenant governor. But to Ocasio-Cortez’s many admirers, her frequent clashes with Democrats and Republicans alike have set an example for a new kind of politics. “She’s been an inspiration, I think, to a lot of people,” Thompson said. “Now, I think that scares the hell out of the Democratic party though, too, because we’re bucking the establishment and saying, ‘Look, we want you to represent the people, not just party interest.’” In the halls of Congress Ocasio-Cortez’s willingness to clash with members of her party extends beyond the campaign trail to her work in Congress. Earlier this month, she pursued the bold strategy of trying to force a vote on a bill to ban members of Congress from trading stocks. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, had voiced opposition to the proposed ban, and Ocasio-Cortez’s tactics seemed aimed at forcing the hand of Democratic leadership. (Pelosi has since struck a more open-minded tone about the ban on members’ stock-trading.) Ocasio-Cortez has also been unafraid to criticize some of her centrist colleagues who have attacked progressive policy proposals. On Friday, after Axios published a report suggesting moderate Democrats blamed the party’s falling polling numbers on progressives and their support for the “defund the police” movement, Ocasio-Cortez hit back over Twitter. She argued the real reason behind Democrats’ bleak prospects in the midterm elections was the party’s failure to pass the Build Back Better Act, the $1.75tn spending package at the heart of Joe Biden’s economic agenda. Ocasio-Cortez accused her centrist colleagues of tanking the legislation by allowing the bipartisan infrastructure bill to pass on its own, leaving Democrats with nothing to campaign on. “They don’t know how to accept responsibility so are lazily blaming the same folks they always do,” Ocasio-Cortez said. Rahna Epting, the executive director of the progressive group MoveOn, similarly dismissed claims that Ocasio-Cortez and her allies are dragging down Democrats’ electoral prospects as “utter nonsense”. “Members of Congress of the progressive flank have raised expectations on Democrats broadly to deliver and prioritize people over profits. There is nothing wrong with that,” Epting said. “What Democrats need to do is to stop the infighting.” Epting, whose group was one of the only progressive organizations to endorse Ocasio-Cortez during her 2018 primary battle, praised the congresswoman for using her platform to advocate for important issues including student debt relief and the climate crisis. “AOC’s superpower is to expose and shed light on corruption and injustices that have been longstanding,” Epting said. “I think she has been one of the most electrifying members of Congress, probably in the history of the United States. And she’s a true champion for people.” But Ocasio-Cortez will be the first to admit that her hopes of enacting meaningful progressive policies have suffered setbacks in recent months. Build Back Better remains stalled in the Senate because of Democrat Joe Manchin’s opposition, and the party has failed to enact national voting rights legislation. Instead of bemoaning congressional inaction, though, Ocasio-Cortez has urged patience. “We have a culture of immediate gratification where if you do something and it doesn’t pay off right away, we think it’s pointless,” she told the New Yorker. “There is no movement, there is no effort, there is no unionizing, there is no fight for the vote, there is no resistance to draconian abortion laws, if people think that the future is baked in and nothing is possible and that we’re doomed.” Thompson has seen the long-term impact of Ocasio-Cortez’s work for himself. He lost his 2018 race, but since then, the politics of Wichita have shifted. Democrats now make up a majority of the Wichita city council, when they previously only held one of seven seats. “Even though I didn’t win, her coming really energized our local Democrats in our community,” Thompson said. “It made us realize that look, we’re not alone. And we can do something when we come together.”Facebook is under renewed scrutiny this weekend, accused of continuing to allow activists to incite ethnic massacres in Ethiopia’s escalating war. Analysis by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (TBIJ) and the Observer found Facebook is still letting users post content inciting violence through hate and misinformation. This is despite being aware it helps directly fuel tensions, prompting claims of inaction and indifference against the social media giant. The investigation tracked down relatives who have linked Facebook posts to the killings of loved ones. One senior member of Ethiopia’s media accused the firm of “standing by and watching the country fall apart”. The accusations arrive amid intensifying focus on Facebook’s content moderation decisions, with it previously being accused of playing a role in the ethnic persecution of the Rohingya in Myanmar. On Wednesday, Meta’s Mark Zuckerberg revealed that former UK deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, would be president of global affairs, a move designed to help the rebranded company repair its reputation following the testimony of whistleblower Frances Haugen, who said it was “literally fanning ethnic violence” in Ethiopia. It also comes as Facebook considers launching an independent inquiry into its work in Ethiopia after its oversight board urged it to investigate how the platform had been used to spread hate speech. TBIJ and Observer investigators also interviewed a number of fact-checkers, civil society organisations and human rights activists in the country. They described Facebook’s support as far less than it should be. Others said they felt requests for assistance had been ignored and meetings failed to materialise. These failures, they said, helped to fuel a conflict in which thousands have died and millions been displaced since fighting broke out between government forces and armed opposition groups from the Tigray region in November 2020. Both sides have been accused of atrocities. Rehobot Ayalew, of the Ethiopian factchecking initiative HaqCheck, said: “Most of the people have low media literacy, so Facebook is considered to be credible. We come across [Facebook] images that are horrifying and hateful content. You’re not getting the support from the platform itself, that is allowing this kind of content. They can do more [but] they’re not doing anything.” Meta rejected the claims, saying it had “invested in safety and security measures” to tackle hate and inflammatory language along with “aggressive steps to stop the spread of misinformation” in Ethiopia. Among the cases where families believe Facebook’s continued promotion of hate makes it responsible for killings include Gebremichael Teweldmedhin, a Tigrayan jeweller abducted three months ago in Gonder, a city in the Amhara region. A relative, who said Teweldmedhin was not political, claimed online hate campaigns and calls for violence – particularly on Facebook – played a key role in his suspected killing and many others. “The worst thing that contributed to their killing are the so-called activists who have been spreading hate on social media,” he said, requesting anonymity. Some posts, he claimed, would name individuals or even post photos helping create an atmosphere “inciting attacks, killings and displacements”. He added that the family have been told that Teweldmedhin – who disappeared after trying to stop a mob looting a nephew’s workshop – had been killed and buried in a mass grave. Teweldmedhin’s family cited one Facebook user in particular: Solomon Bogale, an online activist with more than 86,000 Facebook followers. Although listed on Facebook as residing in London, Bogale’s social media indicates he has been in Ethiopia since August 2021, with posts of him carrying an assault rifle often accompanied by statements praising the Fano, an Amharan nationalist vigilante group. One of Teweldmedhin’s family members believed Bogale’s “inciteful posts” had resulted in many attacks on Tigrayans in Gonder. In the weeks before Teweldmedhin’s killing, Bogale called for people to “cleanse” the Amhara territories of the “junta”, a term used by government supporters to refer to Tigrayan forces and Tigrayans more generally. The post continued: “We need to cleanse the region of the junta lineage present prior to the war!!” According to TBIJ, the post could be found on Facebook almost four months later, although Meta said it had since “removed any content which violated our policies”. When contacted over Facebook, Bogale denied that any Tigrayans were killed in Gonder in early November, saying all Tigrayans in the city were safe. Bogale added that he would delete the posts cited by TBIJ. Less than a month after Teweldmedhin’s disappearance Hadush Gebrekirstos, a 45-year-old who lived in Addis Ababa, was arbitrarily detained by police who heard him speaking Tigrinya. His body was found two days later, 26 November, close to the police station. A relative said Gebrekirstos had no political affiliation, but believes that disinformation posted on Facebook played a key role in causing the killing. “People do not have the ability to verify what was posted on Facebook. Like calling people to kill Tigrinya speaking residents,” they said. Compounding the concern is that, according to disclosures provided to the US Congress by Haugen, Meta has known about the risks of such problems for years. In January 2019 an internal report into “On-FB Badness” – a measure of harmful content on the platform – rated the situation in Ethiopia as “severe”, its second-highest category. Almost a year later Ethiopia had risen to the top of Facebook’s list of countries where it needed to take action. A presentation dated 10 December 2020 evaluated the risk of societal violence in Ethiopia as “dire” – Meta’s highest threat warning and the only country to receive that ranking. More than a year on, it is alleged the firm has frequently ignored requests for support from fact-checkers based in the country. Some civil society organisations say they have not met with the company in 18 months. Multiple sources told the Bureau that Facebook only appointed its first senior policy executive from Ethiopia to work on East Africa in September, a claim contested by Facebook who said it had an “experienced public policy team” dedicated to the region for three years. Meta does run a third-party fact-checking programme, providing partners with access to internal tools and payment for fact checks. Yet it has not partnered with a single organisation based in Ethiopia to tackle the misinformation surrounding the country’s conflict. Abel Wabella, founder of HaqCheck, said Meta had failed to support his organisation despite first approaching executives more than a year ago. The other major independent fact-checking organisation based in Ethiopia, Ethiopia Check, is also not part of Facebook’s partner programme. Instead, Facebook works with two fact-checking organisations on content from Ethiopia – PesaCheck, which runs a small team in Nairobi, and Agence France-Presse (AFP) – but TBIJ said that both appeared to be based outside the country. However Facebook challenged the claim, stating that “PesaCheck and AFP have teams based in Ethiopia for fact-checking.” Although misinformation flagged by PesaCheck and AFP has often been labelled as false or removed by Facebook, content debunked by HaqCheck has largely remained unaltered and free to spread. This has included false declarations of military victories on both sides, false allegations of attacks on civilians and false claims of captured infiltrators. “As far as I know, support for fact checkers in Ethiopia by Facebook is almost non-existent,” said the senior person working in Ethiopian media, requesting anonymity. “Facebook doesn’t pay the attention Ethiopia needs at this crucial moment, and that’s contributing to the ongoing crisis by inflaming hatred and spreading hate speech.” A number of civil society groups have similar complaints of feeling ignored and sidelined. Facebook organised a meeting with several groups in June 2020, to discuss how the platform could best regulate content before scheduled elections. As of November, two of the organisations involved said they had heard nothing about any subsequent meetings. Haben Fecadu, a human rights activist who has worked in Ethiopia, said: “There’s really no excuse. I’ve doubted they have invested enough in their Africa content moderation.” Wabella added: “The problem is not specific to Tigray. Ethiopian citizens from every corner across ethnic groups are severely affected by hateful content circulating online.” Mercy Ndegwa, Meta’s public policy director for East &amp; Horn of Africa, said: “For more than two years, we’ve invested in safety and security measures in Ethiopia, adding more staff with local expertise and building our capacity to catch hateful and inflammatory content in the most widely spoken languages, including Amharic, Oromo, Somali and Tigrinya. “As the situation has escalated, we’ve put additional measures in place and are continuing to monitor activity on our platform, identify issues as they emerge, and quickly remove content that breaks our rules.” The company added that it worked with 80 fact-checking partners in more than 60 languages to review content on Facebook, including Pesa Check and AFP. Additional reporting by Kat Hall and Zecharias ZelalemEconomic change is speeding up. Technology means that industries are shrinking and growing faster than ever. The young change jobs incessantly while firms fire at will, ending the “job for life” enjoyed by previous generations. Everyone moves around the country for work these days, vacating poorer parts of Britain and hollowing out communities. All of these statements are almost universally accepted as truths about 21st-century Britain. They guide what policymakers see as the important questions to be asked and the right answers to give. However, all of them are wrong, in many cases wildly so. In most senses, change has been flat or is actually slowing down. A safe option for anyone needing to sell an economics book for the past decade is to put a robot on the cover and warn that machines are taking our jobs and whole sectors are set to be wiped out – from taxi drivers to lawyers. History shows us that big structural changes do happen. There were 7.7m manufacturing jobs in 1970 and there are only 2.5m today. The share of jobs in professional services, education and health has doubled over the same period. However, this kind of economic change, where the workforce shifts from one industry to another, has been slowing since the 1980s. In the 2010s, it was running at just one-third of the pace seen 30 years earlier because Britain’s de-industrialisation is broadly complete. More recent trends, such as the decline of retail jobs and growth in the care sector, are minor in comparison and industrial change is actually at its lowest rate for a century. Economy-wide trends can hide what happens to individuals, but there too the evidence points in the opposite direction to popular narratives. A job-hopping epidemic is something managers moan about rather than a thing that actually happens. In 1993, the average time that workers had been in their post was 60 months. Almost three decades later, it’s still 60 months. Nostalgia is a dangerous guide to just about anything – there never was a job for life. The UK has a flexible labour market, where it’s easy for workers to move or firms to hire and fire. But that doesn’t mean lots of moving or firing is going on. The rates at which people change jobs is actually down by a full quarter this century with only 2.4% of us moving during the three months prior to the pandemic. The fall is particularly large for those workers held to be most likely to move: the young. We have seen a growth in less secure work, from zero-hours contracts to self-employment, but firms are much less likely to fire these days. In the late 1990s, 0.8% of workers would lose their jobs each quarter; immediately pre-pandemic that had halved. Modern business has nothing in common with The Apprentice. More young adults in university means more moving away from home for education. However, when it comes to young people moving around the country for work, that is now less common, down a third from the late 1990s to the late 2010s. More broadly, odd ideas about exactly who moves around the country are widespread. Take discussions of the so-called red wall seats that the Conservatives won at the last general election. You’d think from how people talk about the likes of Bolton and Ashfield that these constituencies have seen a youth exodus but their defining feature is that far fewer young people leave them than depart other, richer, Conservative seats – and for that matter, far fewer people are moving in. This huge gap between rhetoric and reality on economic change matters. It focuses our attention on the wrong problems and drives us to the wrong answers, taking our politics down rabbit holes that do nothing to help us build a better Britain. Worries about too much change distract us from the real disaster of the past decade: our pay and productivity levels have not changed nearly enough. Before the financial crisis, productivity grew at roughly 2% a year. Since then, it has averaged only 0.4%, resulting in our wages having only just recovered to their pre-financial crisis level when Covid turned up. Those making fewer job moves, particular younger workers, have missed out on significant pay rises: individuals who moved job typically enjoy five times the pay rise of workers staying put. The young aren’t too footloose and fancy free - they’re dangerously stuck in the mud. Far from all change is good, of course. The decline in job losses means fewer people now see the downgrades and falls in pay that often follow. Instead of panicking about jobs being destroyed, we should focus on the fact that different groups face very different risks: lower-paid workers are six times more likely than managers to lose work. They are the ones under threat from the Cameron-era decision to give workers protection from unfair dismissal only after two years in post. Recognition that workers are now less likely to move for a new job has important lessons for us that are obscured by misplaced panic about everyone moving around the country. This is happening for a mixture of good (there are now far fewer places where people have to leave if they want to find work), bad (housing costs rise faster in higher wage areas and put better paid jobs out of reach for many) and important reasons, such as wanting to remain near family, that policy must reinforce, tackle and understand respectively. Finally, understanding that our recent past has not involved significant economic change should warn us that we may not be well prepared if that rate of change speeds up. Pent-up desire for change during the pandemic has pushed job moves temporarily to record highs, while the lasting consequences of the home-working surge remain to be seen. The aftermath of Covid-19 and the rate at which our population is ageing could combine with Brexit and the net-zero transition to reshape our economy over the decade ahead. If they do, it’ll be a shock to Britain’s workers, companies and the state. Our benefits system without its furlough bolt-on does little to insure us against change, while corporate Britain has a weak record on investing when new opportunities and challenges emerge. Watching Apollo 11’s 1969 triumph in taking humans to the moon was a formative experience for my dad. Whenever he’s told technological change has accelerated, he notes that it’s taken us another 50 years for Amazon to get William Shatner into space. He has a point, which is as true for economic change here on Earth as it is for travel to the stars. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgWell, that’s where we might leave it for today, but before I go let’s have a look back at the big headlines of the day. Canadian asset manager Brookfield and Australian billionaire Michael Cannon-Brookes have lodged a bid to take over AGL Energy, Australia’s largest electricity generator. WA now has two Covid positive people in hospital, recording 229 new cases today. The state also recorded two Covid-19 cases in the remote Indigenous community of Jameson, around 1000kms east of Kalgoorlie. Protesters have marched through Melbourne’s CBD to Parliament House in solidarity with the people of Ukraine. Prime minister Scott Morrison accused China of “an act of intimidation” after an Australian defence aircraft was illuminated with a laser emanating from a Chinese navy ship. Labor leader Anthony Albanese has backed the government’s criticism of the Chinese government over the laser incident, with Senator Penny Wong calling for a “strong bipartisan condemnation to Beijing” Victoria recorded nine more deaths, 4,867 new Covid-19 cases. NSW recorded 21 Covid deaths and 5,582 new infections. See you all bright and early tomorrow! Here is a little blog treat for those who have made it this far. Now a word from the man of the hour, Mike Cannon-Brookes. Canadian asset manager Brookfield and Australian billionaire Michael Cannon-Brookes have lodged a bid to take over AGL Energy, Australia’s largest electricity generator. The unsolicited bid was lodged by Brookfield and Cannon-Brookes Grok Ventures on Saturday, according to a well-placed source who requested anonymity. AGL’s board was expected to meet later on Sunday. The offer is understood to value AGL only marginally above the company’s closing share price on Friday of $7.16. Including AGL’s debt, the bid is in the range of $8bn, the source said. The first tourists are on their way to Australia in nearly two years, but tourism operators say it could be more than a year before they truly return to business as usual. Speaking at Melbourne airport ahead of the international border reopening on Monday, Morrison said flights would begin to ramp up in the coming weeks. “They can come and we start building once again our very important tourism economy right across the country, from our biggest cities, where I am today, to our far north, Queensland, regional locations and all around the country and the Top End, where I was yesterday, up in Darwin, in central Australia, in Alice Springs,” he said. “We are going from Covid cautious to Covid confident when it comes to travel.” While many in the tourism industry say they are hopeful and relieved to see the border opening, they don’t necessarily share the prime minister’s Covid confidence. You can read the rest of the article (which I wrote before jumping on the blog) below: The Sydney Morning Herald and Australian Financial Times are reporting that Canadian fund manager Brookfield and Australian billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes are making a bid to take over AGL, one of Australia’s major energy providers. If successful, they would attempt to set stronger emission reduction targets which would result in the closure of all AGL’s remaining coal-fired powerplants well ahead of schedule. A man has been charged with murder after allegedly sawing off another man’s leg in a far north Queensland park, AAP reports. A 66-year-old man died soon after he was discovered by passers-by at Innisfail’s Fitzgerald Park early on Saturday morning. Police believe he succumbed to his wounds after his leg was amputated by a 36-year-old man using a circular saw owned by the 66-year-old. “Police will allege these two people were known to each other, the extent of that relationship is still forming part of our investigations,” Detective Acting Inspector Gary Hunter told reporters. Police also believe there was an [alleged] arrangement between the two people for the amputation of the leg... We can say this was not an unprovoked attack. Police allege the men drove together to the park before 4am on Saturday and sat under a tree. They said about 20 minutes later the 36-year-old allegedly cut off the older man’s leg below the knee using what is believed to be a battery-powered saw, helped him return to the car and then departed on foot. The older man was discovered near the car at about 4.30am by two passers-by but died before emergency services arrived. The 36-year-old man was located by police around noon at an Innisfail residence and was charged with one count of murder. He will appear at an Innisfail court on Monday. Det Insp Hunter could not offer any more details on the nature of the alleged “arrangement”. The specific reasons and the arrangement are subject to inquiries by detectives. He said a police liaison officer was assisting the victim’s devastated family. During my 34 years as a police officer I’ve never experienced a situation as we are presented with here today. Police are appealing for information or anyone with dash cam or CCTV footage. Here’s an interesting look at the Covid death rate in Australia. New South Wales will relax testing requirements for school students, despite more than 12,000 young people in the state testing positive in the second week of term. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said surveillance testing of schoolchildren will move to an on-demand basis from Monday week. Parents will receive eight rapid antigen tests per student to be distributed in two drops. The packs are there for families and staff to use at their discretion for their own peace of mind, for example, when a student is feeling unwell with a sore throat or cough, or if family members are sick. You can read the full report below: That wraps up my time on the blog today. I’m going to once again hand over to the wonderful Matilda Boseley, who will bring you the headlines into the evening. Thanks so much for keeping me company! Home affairs minister Peter Dutton and Labor frontbencher Michelle Rowland were on Sky News this morning, speaking about the likely invasion of Ukraine. Dutton said that while he was hoping for an “11th hour miracle”, he thinks “that’s the action that Putin is intent on”. He said that the alliance between China and Russia is “deeply concerning”. That’s the world in which we live, and we need to respond accordingly and that will include sanctions, and it will include a coordinating act of implementing those sanctions. And obviously we will work closely with our allies because Russia does need to understand, as does China, that there is a price to pay for those acts of aggression. Rowland also said she was concerned about the growing situation in Ukraine, adding that “... one just prays for the people of Ukraine who are going to be collateral damage of this”. She said that Labor would be seeking a briefing from defence on reports that a Chinese warship fired a military-grade laser at an Australian RAAF P-8 Poseidon aircraft. Unfortunately, it comes at a time when China’s presence and its actions are continuing to cause concern right across the region and globally as well. This brings the total number of active cases in SA to 13,189. There are 190 people in hospital with the virus across the state, including 13 people in the ICU. Four people require a ventilator. Of those in hospital, 102 are fully vaccinated, 32 are partially vaccinated or unvaccinated, and 56 have an unknown vaccination status. The chair of parliament’s joint committee on intelligence and security, the Liberal senator James Paterson, has rebuked the defence minister, Peter Dutton, and other parliamentarians for referencing classified information during last week’s hyper-partisan brawling over national security. Paterson told the ABC on Sunday he was not “being critical” of either Dutton or the Labor senator Kimberley Kitching, who both referred to classified intelligence during last week’s confrontations in the House of Representatives and Senate estimates. Read the full article of what was said this morning: For those who like the graphical version of WA’s Covid case numbers: A woman in her 70s from Tennant Creek has tragically died. She had underlying health conditions and died at the Tennant Creek Hospital. NT Health reports that there are currently 127 patients in hospital, with 16 patients requiring oxygen. Two patients are in ICU. There were 546 new Covid-19 cases reported today, bringing the state’s total to around 6,308. Independent candidate Kylea Tink has launched her campaign against Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman for the seat of North Sydney in the upcoming federal election, pledging to restore “integrity, accountability and transparency” to politics. AAP reports that independent Kylea Tink has promised voters action on climate change, support for parents, the release of refugees in indefinite detention and a federal corruption watchdog if elected. Tink addressed hundreds of supporters gathered at a Longueville bowling club wearing coral coloured T-shirts emblazoned with the message: “Let’s change the climate in Canberra”. “You want urgent action on climate led by facts and not politics,” she said to applause. “I will push for more ambitious binding carbon reduction targets for Australia.” Tink said she had received support – including upwards of $680,000 in campaign donations – from the same community who were closing the margin between an independent and Liberal member in the nearby state by-election for the seat of Willoughby. A chunk of her donations, she estimates around 30%, were from the Climate 200 non-profit, non-partisan group led by clean energy analyst and investor Simon Holmes à Court. Zimmerman has held the seat since 2015 after his predecessor, Joe Hockey, retired from parliament. Tink has a background in corporate communications and worked as chief executive officer of breast cancer charity the McGrath Foundation and then cancer charity Camp Quality. Of the 229 new cases, 222 are locally acquired and seven are travel-related. This brings the total number of active cases across the state to 1,044. The cases include 11 self-reported positive RATs. There are two people in hospital with the virus, and no patients in the ICU. Protesters have marched through Melbourne’s CBD to Parliament House in solidarity with the people of Ukraine. Labor MP Bill Shorten and Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, reportedly both spoke at the rally. With that, I shall pass you back over to the wonderful Justine Landis-Hanley. Labor is backing the government hard when it comes to condemning China’s action after a laser was pointed at a Royal Australian Air Force aircraft last week. Leader of the opposition in the Senate, Penny Wong, has called it a “reckless act, which potentially endangered Australian lives,” stating that China was not a “responsible actor” and Labor would support a “strong bipartisan condemnation to Beijing”. This comes after a fortnight of the defence minister and prime minister accusing Labor of somehow being in cahoots with the Chinese Communist party, despite there being no evidence to support this claim. Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, has declared a laser incident involving a Royal Australian Air Force aircraft last week is an “act of intimidation” by China. Australia’s defence department reported a laser emanating from a People’s Liberation Army Navy vessel illuminated a P-8A Poseidon surveillance aircraft last Thursday when the Chinese ship was sailing east through the Arafura sea. On Sunday, the prime minister characterised the episode as “a reckless and irresponsible act that should not have occurred”. Thursday’s incident in waters to the north of Australia followed days of domestic political contention about national security. You can read the full report below: Good day all! Matilda Boseley here for the next little while. Just sharing this tweet because, who in Scott Morrison’s media team let him – a man about to go up for re-election – get photographed looking forlorn in front of a “departures” sign? You are just giving the internet trolls things to work with! I’m handing over the blog to the amazing Matilda Boseley! In what could be an interesting sign of what is to come in Australia, the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, is set to announce the end of the legal duty to self-isolate after testing positive for Covid-19 next week. Downing Street said Johnson will lay out his intentions to repeal all pandemic regulations that restrict public freedoms in England as part of his “living with Covid” plan on Monday. Read the full story abou the UK’s expected announcement here: WA Health is working with Ngaanyatjarra Health Service on the management of two Covid-19 cases in Jameson – a remote Aboriginal community around 1000km east of Kalgoorlie. In a statement, WA Health said: While both cases are currently well and isolating, the community has been placed into lockdown as a protective measure. Contact tracers have identified five close contacts linked to the cases. They have undergone testing and are isolating. A coordinated response is being provided by the Department of Health, WA Country Health Service, Ngaanyatjarra Health Service (NG Health), WA Police and Department of Communities. There are currently around 50 people in community – they are working with health authorities, WA Police and Department of Communities to stay safe. Queensland authorities provided the state’s Covid-19 update at a press conference this morning, but QLD Health just posted the graphic with the full list of figures. Our friends at AAP have more information about Labor’s $200m road infrastructure package for the Northern Territory that Albanese announced this morning. AAP reports that federal Labor is promising a $200m roads package for the NT should it win the May election. Labor, under its Northern Territory strategic roads package, aims to bring economic and social opportunities to remote and regional communities. Road upgrades will be focused on all-weather access, ensuring that remote communities have more reliable year-round connections to the services and opportunities they need. Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said on Sunday: Remote Australia is dependent on good, safe roads for accessing essential services, getting to work, or welcoming tourists. He added: Sadly, remote roads still have a death toll 11 times higher than those in major cities. These investments will give remote communities the connections they deserve, allowing more people to get around with greater safety. Albanese said this funding will be included in Labor’s first budget, ensuring work can get underway as soon as possible. There are currently nine people in hospital across the state with Covid-19. Of these, six are being treated specifically for the virus, while the other three are in hospital receiving treatment for an unrelated medical condition. There are two people in the ICU with Covid-19. Anyway, the reason why Albanese was speaking from the NT was because to announce a Labor election promise: a $200m NT strategic roads package. Albanese was also asked about the evolving situation in Ukraine, and whether Australia should be sending military equipment to Ukraine, as other nations like the Netherlands are doing. On this, Albanese is vague. Well, my understanding is that there are no requests at this stage. What we should be doing is making Australia’s position very clear that we respect Ukrainian sovereignty, we expect Russia to back off. There is no place for the intimidation and threats that we have seen from Russia against a sovereign government which should be respected. The government of Ukraine. And that was something that I indicated to the Federation of Ukrainian Organisations when I met with them in Melbourne nine days ago. Albanese said he doesn’t think Australia is overreacting to the threat of China, saying that “I believe our response has been appropriate, considered and measured”. Australia has been subject to sanctions by China. They weren’t initiated by Australia, they were initiated by China and they should be removed. Albanese is asked whether he agrees with the statement that Australia is overreacting to threat of China. Albanese says “I agree with my statements. I agree with my statements about me not to respond to every former leader of every party ...” Reporter: Just on the matter of China, you talked about being not happy with the process on Hong Kong but you also said China has changed. Is that a bit of an acknowledgment that Australia can’t do anything really to change China’s behaviour? Albanese: China has changed its ideology under Xi [Jinping’s] and its engagement in the national forums. What Australia needs to do, though, is to continue to stand up for Australian values and that’s something that we have done. It’s important in order to do that, that there not be false distinctions raised which undermine Australia’s unity which doesn’t serve the national interest or our purpose. It’s very clear that that’s the case so when China put forward through Channel Nine newspapers, I think, its list of changes it wanted to see, that was rejected by all sides of politics. And we continue to have a common position about the South China Sea, about the treatment of Uyghurs, about Hong Kong, about Taiwan, about engagement in the region. Albanese is also asked whether he agrees with former Labor leader Paul Keating’s view that China is not a threat. I have a different position from Paul Keating on China. I have said that on a range of occasions. I speak for the Australian Labor Party ... I take advice from my caucus and we’ll continue to work through the issues. Paul Keating is a great Australian, but on this, we have a difference between Labor’s position and Paul Keating’s position and I have said that before. Albanese is asked: how would you fix our relationship with China or do you think it’s beyond repair? Albanese: One of the things we have to recognise is the Biden administration says that the need to recognise that there’s competition without catastrophe, needs to be the objective. That is something that we would work with the Biden administration on if we were successful just as the current government will. Albanese says he condemns the Chinese warship shining a laser at an Australian surveillance plane. I condemn, I’m sure the Australian government should be making the strongest possible statement about what is a reckless act. Albanese is asked to describe Xi Jinping’s China and whether he think this is a threat? Albanese: Xi Jinping’s China has changed substantially since 2013. The Coalition government welcomed Xi Jinping to Parliament House and at the time there was an effusive praise for him given by the government of the time. The truth is, though, that China has changed its position... China is engaged is more aggressive activity of which we have seen this latest report has been just an example. China has changed its position with regard to Hong Kong. They tore up effectively the agreements that were put in place there. China is more engaged in the region. It’s changed its posture and Australia has needed to respond to that. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is speaking from Darwin. There are 35 people in hospital, including one in the ICU. One person is on a ventilator. Sixteen road safety projects across South Australia are to receive a $52.69m state and federal funding boost, AAP reports. The upgrades will be fast-tracked to help reduce trauma and save lives, with a focus on rural and regional infrastructure. They will include treatments along the Eyre Highway between Ceduna and Head of Bight, upgrades to sections of the Stuart Highway from North of Coober Pedy and works on the Barrier Highway from Burra to Cockburn. The upgrades will be jointly funded under the Road Safety Program, with the federal government contributing $42.15m and SA providing $10.54m. The safety barriers, surface treatments, audio tactile line marking on edge and centre lines, shoulder sealing, lane widening and pavement treatments are all aimed at reducing crashes, particularly run-off-road crashes. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce says the projects will create 200 jobs and new opportunities for businesses and suppliers, delivering an important boost to South Australia’s economic recovery. Federal assistant minister for Road Safety Scott Buchholz says the new projects are expected to be delivered later this year. The Queensland state government has announced reforms for e-scooter regulations to make them safer for riders and pedestrians. Minister for transport Mark Bailey said the reforms include dropping the maximum speed on footpaths to 12km an hour, to ensure that they are moving around pedestrians at a more predictable and reasonable speed. Users will also be allowed to ride on bicycle freeways and protected separated bike paths. The government is also looking to work with local councils to create better parking options, so scooters aren’t left on footpaths. Dr Gerrard says strong vaccination rates has prevented higher hospitalisation figures and severe illness. Omicron is not the reason why we are not seeing large numbers of people in hospital ... and intensive care. It’s because of vaccination. Queensland health officer Dr John Gerrard reported that, tragically, two people have passed away with Covid-19, one in their 70s and one in their 80s. Neither of them were vaccinated. Dr Gerrard said that case numbers are falling. There are now 365 people in public hospitals, down from 391 yesterday. The number of patients in private hospital has also dropped to 21, from 23 yesterday. There are 1,381 cases in school-aged children between five and 17, down from 1,507. This brings the total number of active cases in Queensland to 34,081. Paterson did criticise a speech Marles gave, during which Paterson said he “proposed there should be closer cooperation between Australia and ... the ones who are aiming lasers at Australia’s air force right now”. Speers: He said in that speech that Australia should have defence cooperation? Paterson: I should we be cooperating with a strategic adversary that is trying to coerce and intimidate Australia. Speers pointed out that a few months after Marles’ speech, the government launched Operation Pandaroo, for which Australian Army members travelled to China to take part in the annual bilateral adventure training. Speers also quotes Marles speech: “We must seek to build it and not just in economic terms but also through exploring political cooperation and even defence cooperation.” “He is not saying up the tempo,” Speers pointed out. But Paterson disagreed: If all he was saying was we should just continue what we have been doing, then why say it at all? Why isn’t it posted on his website? The only place you can read it is on my website, not his. Don’t you think that’s strange? He is embarrassed about that speech and doesn’t want to talk about it. Speers countered: Should the PM post the speech he gave to the Christian Congress? Paterson: That’s a matter for the PM. There is one other moment from senator James Paterson’s interview on ABC Insider’s this morning that I didn’t have the chance to blog about in full at the time. There was back and forth about Labor deputy leader Richard Marles. Speers asked whether Paterson agreed with the prime minister calling Marles a “Manchurian candidate”. The phrase “Manchurian candidate” refers to a politician being used as a puppet by an enemy power. Paterson said “of course he is not a Manchurian candidate” and pointed to the fact that the prime minister withdrew that comment. I note that when Anthony Albanese made the same comment towards the prime minister he didn’t withdraw it, so the Labor party’s stance on this is confected. For context, Albanese said that if the government was looking for a “Manchurian candidate” in parliament they should look at the prime minister. Paterson said he was trying to suggest that “it is OK in a democracy to have a disagreement with a former public servant, even an eminent one like Dennis Richardson.” He added that he had a call with Richardson on Friday, who told him that “in 2011 when he took leave from Dfat as secretary, it wasn’t to negotiate with Huawei, it was to make an initial pitch to Huawei on behalf of the Canberra Raiders for the lucrative sponsorship.” Paterson had told Sky News Richardson had gone on leave to “negotiate” the sponsorship agreement. Asked whether he had gotten that wrong, Paterson said “I think it was a subtle difference to negotiate a pitch.” Paterson declined to apologise to Richardson, but said that “Dennis and I agreed we should catch up for a beer and I look forward to that”. I want to go back to something else that Speers asked Paterson about. Speers raised comments that Paterson made about former head of defence and former Asio boss Dennis Richardson. Richardson said the government has been manufacturing differences when it comes to China. He said this will only help China. Speers pointed to comments that Paterson had raised concerning Richardson’s own record on Huawei, and asked what Paterson had tried to suggest. For context, Paterson argued in the interview on Thursday that Richardson, the former head of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, had publicly advocated in 2018 that the Chinese telco Huawei should be involved in the Australian 5G rollout. The Liberal senator told Sky News the government’s decision to exclude Huawei from the 5G rollout was “one of the best decisions our government has made – and I stand by it even if Dennis Richardson disagrees”. Finally, Speers asked Paterson about comments he made to the Guardian after he took his role as chair of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security. The comments in question were: It is very powerful for us to stand shoulder to shoulder across the political spectrum and send a very strong message to the world that we won’t be separated on these issues of national interest. Speers asked Paterson: “What has changed? The looming election?” On my watch in the last 12 months on the PJCS we’ve handed down 17 bipartisan reports on issues as critical as dark web, critical infrastructure and many of those has required painstaking hours of negotiation with the Labor counterparts. Anthony Albanese [has been] trying to paint the small target, trying to sneak into government and in a liberal democracy we are entitled to analyse their record and making claims in office. If they are not comfortable with meeting the high bar, they can justify that to the Australian people. The back-and-forth continued over Labor’s record on national security. Paterson also pointed to Labor’s anger over the Morrison government’s fallout with France during Aukus, and their defence spending in government. Labor party says they support Aukus. That’s very welcome, I’m glad that they do that, but at the same time they’ve spent much more energy and effort being aggrieved on behalf of the French government being upset about cancellation of a contract than they have on the defence capability we need to acquire to defend our country. Anthony Albanese said we were gas lighting, Penny Wong accused of us of vandalism. When this government, they cut defence spending to 1.56% of GDP, the lowest level since 1938. Ripped money out of the AFT. Subjected to an efficiency dividend of 4% and it got so bad that the former head of the PJCS Anthony Byrne had to stand up in parliament and denounce his own government for it. That is their record. Speers: Again talking about events of 10 years ago and fair enough, defence spending as a percentage of GDP did fall and we could go through the government’s record of submarines, the helicopters that they’ve had to scrap and so on. What now tells us that Labor would do anything differently on national security? Paterson: David, we need to take the whole record into account. We can’t just cut it off and not look at it before then... Speers points out that that example is from five years ago, and “there is plenty of track record from both sides when it comes to changing orders on China. What evidence is there now that AnthonyAlbanese is weak on China? Paterson cites more examples: [When] the list released from the Chinese embassy in which they said we would have to compromise on freedom of the press, freedom of the parliament, Anthony Albanese said it was the Morrison government’s fault that we couldn’t get a Chinese counterpart to pick up the phone and it reflected poorly on us. He knew when he said that, that the only way to get them on the phone was to sacrifice on core issue of democracy. Would he silence the press? Would he silence the parliament? Would he silence independent think tanks? Speers said it was a bit of a reach to suggest that Albanese was saying Australia should give in to China’s demands. Paterson argues that, a few years ago, Paul Keating said that the heads of intelligence agencies were nutters and they should be sacked if Labor came to office. After Paul Keating made that disgraceful attack on our serving intelligence chiefs, Anthony Albanese said that Paul Keating was always worth listening to and has wise counsel. But Speers points out that Albanese has disagreed with Keating’s views of China repeatedly. Paterson: I don’t think we should build up someone who has clearly insane views. Speers asked Paterson about what evidence there is for the government’s claim that Anthony Albanese is weak on China. Paterson: Lots of examples, not just him as leader but the entire Labor party. I hesitate to use this example because senator Keneally is one of the members of the PJC who I work very well with, but the Chinese government accused Australia of racism and in the Bennelong byelection that year, senator Keneally said that she heard voters say that Australia was Chinaphobic and that we were scaremongering, so she was elevating the false claims against Australia. Labor ultimately voted for that legislation, but it is a good example of how they seek partisan advantage on so-called bipartisan issues. Speers asks Paterson about the fact that defence minister Peter Dutton publicly referred to classified intelligence that he had seen while making the case that China wants Labor to win the election. As chair of the parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and Security, a principle question first: do you believe it is appropriate or not to use classified information for political gain? Paterson: I think there have been a range of references to classified material in the parliament and in the media from a range of sources and we should be very mindful of the warning he makes and I understand why he has that anxiety as Asio director general. Paterson did try to point out that “... Peter Dutton didn’t refer to any classified information, didn’t divulge any classified information, just indicated there was classified information.” But when asked whether he thought Dutton’s comments had been appropriate, Paterson said “I think we all need to be careful as heeding the Asio director general.” Liberal senator James Paterson is speaking on ABC Insiders. NSW Health appears to have made an error in its first Covid update this morning, and has issued a subsequent tweet with different numbers. There are 358 people in hospital with Covid-19, 51 of whom are in the ICU. Twelve people require a ventilator. Morrison says China will have to explain their actions as “... to why a military vessel, a naval vessel, in Australia’s exclusive economic zone would undertake such an act, such a dangerous act, in relation to an Australian surveillance aircraft legitimately ... doing their job...” And that act of intimidation is not just a message that I suppose they are trying to send to Australia, a message we will respond to, but a sign of the sort of threats and intimidation that can occur to any country in our region, and that’s why we need to band together. Morrison was asked about reports yesterday that an Australian defence aircraft detected a laser emanating from a Chinese ship. Well of course this is very concerning. It’s no surprise we have Chinese vessels moving through the sea. I am very concerned about the actions of using the lasers on an Australian surveillance aircraft. I can see it no other way than an act of intimidation, one that it unprovoked, unwarranted. And Australia will never accept such acts of intimidation... I have no doubt that if it had been an Australian vessel, British vessel, American vessel, French vessel, Japanese vessel, or German for that matter, that was going through similar waters in the South China Sea, and it was done to a Chinese surveillance aircraft, then people could guess what the reaction to that would have been. It was a dangerous act ... I thought it was a reckless and irresponsible act. Morrison is asked about what support Australia will give to Ukraine should Russia invade. Morrison said it’s so important that the free countries to the world give Ukraine support. He said Australia will work with partners and our actions will be announced in partnership with them. But he said: I’m not about to telecast to those who want to get involved in violence against another country. I think that’s the responsible thing to do ... the precise nature of what Australia’s actions will be. Morrison did say that Australia will “follow through with sanctions [of Russia] in partnership with our allies”. The world will be moving together to seek to counteract what would be a terrible act of violence... Morrison says that Australia will see international flights increase, particularly at airports like Melbourne airport. He points to the $40m Tourism Australia campaign. Morrison also welcomes WA’s announcement that its domestic borders will open next month. I welcome the fact that Western Australia is safely reopening, just as I welcome the fact that Australia is safely reopening and we move into this next phase of the Covid pandemic. One of the first things we did was shut the borders, starting first of all with China. That was incredibly important and it helped us achieve in this country what few others could around the world. We had one of the lowest rates of death of Covid in the world. We had one of the strongest advanced economies coming through this pandemic anywhere in the world. We have one of the highest rates of vaccination anywhere in the world. We’ve got the treatments, we got the vaccinations, and we are here at managing this pandemic better than almost any other country in the world. And that’s why we can take this step. That’s why the wait is over, Australia, because you’ve done the hard yards. You’ve done the work, you’ve pushed through. Morrison: It has been tough, but Australia is pushing through. We are very excited that, from tomorrow, those international flights for visitors are able to return again. They can come and we start building once again our very important tourism economy right across the country, from our biggest cities, where I am today, to our far-north Queensland, regional locations, and all around the country, and the top end, where I was yesterday, up in Darwin, in central Australia, in Alice Springs. Tourists are coming back. That means those jobs become more certain going forward. Prime minister Scott Morrison is at Melbourne airport talking about international borders reopening to tourists tomorrow. Apparently prime minister Scott Morrison is set to speak very soon. As always, I’ll bring you the updates as I have them! Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here, ready to bring you the news today Sunday 20 February, 2022. Let’s dive straight in: The New South Wales government is expected to announce that school students will no longer be provided with twice-weekly rapid antigen tests as of next week. Parents will instead be given eight test kits per child going forward to use at their discretion, ABC is reporting. School and Early Childhood staff will also receive these testing packs. Meanwhile, US president Joe Biden believes Russia’s Vladimir Putin has made a decision to invade Ukraine and will do so within weeks or days. The US defence secretary Lloyd Austin also said yesterday that Russia is “poised to strike” Ukraine. Prime minister Scott Morrison has said Australia won’t send troops to Ukraine in the event of an invasion by Russia but will provide “practical” assistance to allies.Deaths linked to prescription anti-anxiety drugs such as Valium are at the highest level for a decade, driven partly by the increasing popularity of illegal stimulants such as cocaine. Analysis of government data reveals that benzodiazepines – sedatives used for treating anxiety and insomnia – were mentioned on the death certificates of 476 people in England and Wales last year, a 55% increase in 10 years. Experts from social care organisation Turning Point believe that drug dealers are increasingly offering “street Valium” to counteract the effects of stimulants such as mephedrone (Mcat) and cocaine. Cocaine’s popularity continues to grow in the UK, with the latest data indicating unprecedented availability and a street purity that is higher than ever. Analysis of NHS and government statistics by Turning Point found that deaths linked to diazepam – first marketed as Valium – rose the highest among all benzodiazepine-type drugs in the last decade, from 186 to 304, an increase of 63%. Known as “benzos”, the psychoactive substances help calm brain activity and are used to treat fits, along with other conditions, but are highly addictive, although no comprehensive figures are available to estimate the numbers of people addicted. Turning Point, which supports people with substance misuse issues, said urgent action was required to prevent further tragedies and improve support for those dependent on the drug. David Bremner, the charity’s medical director, said: “The increase in deaths across the country is a concerning trend – each one is a tragedy.” Experts believe that cuts in funding for substance misuse support services and increased pressure on primary care are among other explanations for the rise in deaths. “Cutbacks to addiction support services and increased pressures on GPs are among factors that are likely to blame for this rise,” said Bremner. He added: “Sustained investment in treatment services is key if the government is to address this public health crisis.” The data shows that every region in England – apart from the south-west and east – has seen a rise in deaths among people prescribed or using benzodiazepines. The highest figure overall was 78 deaths in 2020 for both the north-east and north-west, compared to 53 and 49 respectively in 2010. This is despite the fact prescriptions for benzodiazepines in England have fallen overall from 11.3m in 2010 to 8.6m in 2020 following warnings about the high risk of dependency. The Home Office was contacted for comment.Senior Tory MPs called on Sunday for Boris Johnson to drop plans to privatise Channel 4, arguing that such a move would damage the “levelling up” agenda, and run contrary to the founding vision of Margaret Thatcher. In a strongly worded letter to the prime minister, the MPs – who include the former culture secretary Karen Bradley and ex-cabinet minister Damian Green, as well as the chair of the foreign affairs select committee Tom Tugendhat – insist that a case for privatisation has not been made and that ministers should “leave it alone”. The signatories, who also include the former minister Stephen Hammond and two MPs from “red wall” seats – Simon Fell (Barrow and Furness) and Andy Carter (Warrington South) – write that Channel 4 is “self-sufficient and successful, making no drain on the public purse”, and plans for a change of ownership are unnecessary. They add: “Margaret Thatcher created Channel 4 as a publicly owned, non-profit public sector broadcaster that would act as an incubator for independent, risk-taking, innovative private sector companies. She had a vision to level up the broadcasting landscape and she succeeded spectacularly well. We should maintain her legacy, not put it at risk.” Their intervention comes as Johnson seeks out what he believes will be big and eye-catching “red meat” policy announcements while he seeks to head off a leadership challenge following the “partygate” scandal, which has enraged many of his MPs and Tory members. In January, with a reformist agenda in mind, the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, confirmed that the BBC licence fee would be frozen at £159 until April 2024, meaning cuts to the corporation’s budgets. Dorries said she could “not justify extra pressure on the wallets of hardworking households”. Last year, under her predecessor, Oliver Dowden, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) also announced a review of Channel 4’s structure. The channel has been under government ownership since its 1982 launch during Thatcher’s first term. But ministers now argue that disruption from streaming giants has altered the broadcasting landscape to the point where Channel 4 might benefit from private ownership. The broadcaster is also seen by some Conservatives as prone to political bias, which defenders of Channel 4 believe is driving the reform plans. In their letter to the prime minister, the MPs argue that rather than being a problem, Channel 4 is an impressive success story, one that is achieving what Thatcher had intended by helping deliver on levelling up and by encouraging entrepreneurship. They write: “It [Channel 4] is self-sufficient and successful, making no drain on the public purse. It also plays a vital role in the broadcasting ecosystem, not least in commissioning programmes from more independent production companies, and more small independent production companies, than any other public service broadcaster. Channel 4’s support for regional SMEs is unique. The channel’s support for these companies through its commissioning targets already goes far further than is required, and further than any other public service broadcaster. “It is in many ways an engine of small production company growth outside the M25, giving a platform to regional businesses, which we should be nurturing and growing. Regional voices have long struggled to break into the broadcasting landscape; Channel 4’s current ownership structure ensures more will be heard. In doing this, it plays a crucial role in supporting British businesses in one of the UK’s most internationally successful and iconic industries. To put it simply: Channel 4 isn’t broke, and doesn’t need fixing.” Since it was founded, Channel 4 has been editorially independent while being owned by the state. It receives its funding from advertising and has a remit to commission distinctive programming and deliver to diverse and under-served audiences across the UK. Unlike other broadcasters, Channel 4 is also required to reinvest its profits in new shows, funnelling cash to the independent production companies that make all its programmes. The MPs suggest that ministers are considering reform without having identified a public interest for doing so.“The government does rightly recognise the unique contribution Channel 4 makes to our broadcasting and cultural sector,” they say. “It has suggested that it may place certain conditions on the sale of Channel 4: on commissioning a certain amount of its programming from independents, on a commitment to levelling up through regional commissioning and retaining its new Leeds headquarters, and on demonstrating innovation and distinctive character in its programming. This is all well and good, but all of it relates to things which Channel 4 already does and which its commercial and PSB competitors do not do, or do not do to the same extent. An easier solution exists: leave it alone.” Channel 4 has to meet what is called a nations and regions quota, requiring it to commission at least 35% of its first-run content, in terms of both hours and spend, outside the M25. ITV has the same quota, but unlike ITV, Channel 4 has made a voluntary contribution to increase this to 50% by 2023, which it is on course to meet: up to £250m additional investment in the nations and regions compared with what is legally required. A DCMS spokesperson said: “We value Channel 4’s contribution to levelling up and are clear its public service broadcasting remit and our commitment to independent regional productions would continue following any potential sale. “There is a wealth of evidence on the challenges for linear TV broadcasters, and it is right we consider a change in ownership to support Channel 4’s long-term sustainability. This could allow more and quicker investment in creative content and platforms to support the wider creative industries.”Opening the Gotham hotel press conference for Monsieur Verdoux in 1947, Charlie Chaplin (1889-1977) told journalists to “proceed with the butchery”. I’d read that comment before, but in this expansive documentary the original audiotape is dramatised in the verbatim theatre style of Clio Barnard’s The Arbor, enabling us to see and hear it – sort of. As with their wonderful previous work Notes on Blindness (2016), co-directors James Spinney and Peter Middleton make adventurous use of lip-synced recreations, bringing old audio recordings to new cinematic life as they wrestle with the contradictory spectre of one of cinema’s true pioneers. It’s a technique that proves particularly powerful when applied to the tape-recorded recollections of Effie Wisdom, a childhood friend of Chaplin’s who was interviewed by Kevin Brownlow in the early 80s, and who is here embodied on screen by Anne Rosenfeld. There’s something genuinely uncanny about the result, as if the film were conjuring ghosts to retell their stories – a feeling brought full circle thanks to a late-life meeting between the pair (“I said: ‘Well, Charlie, we’re all getting on, darling, aren’t we?’”). Affecting too is a wide-ranging interview Chaplin gave for Life magazine in 1966 – recorded for the page but here leaping from the screen. From childhood poverty to adult stardom, obscurity to fame and then infamy, Chaplin’s story was always the stuff of legend. Yet unlike Richard Attenborough’s stodgy 1992 biographical drama, Chaplin, this documentary provides a gripping, clear-eyed overview of his life and works. When comparisons are made between real life and fiction (the attic room of Chaplin’s boyhood is juxtaposed with scenes from The Kid), such connections seem organic rather than contrived. An investigation of the phenomenon of Chaplin impersonators says as much about the “global village” aspect of moving pictures as it does about Chaplin’s own fame, with this magical new medium allowing the formerly theatre-bound Karno clown to appear in many locations at the same time. Admittedly, Chaplin aficionados will find little that is new, and may be frustrated by the concertina-ing of his early work at Keystone, Essanay and Mutual. Things change in the United Artists era, particularly during an extended discussion of a scene from City Lights. Here, the complex process of constructing an apparently simple gag is vividly brought to life, with Pearl Mackie’s low-key narration astutely highlighting the irony of a silent film pivoting upon a car-door slam. Chaplin’s co-star in City Lights was Virginia Cherrill, and their onscreen chemistry prompted speculation about real-life romance. Cherrill later commented that, at the age of 20, she was much too old for Chaplin, an observation that leads this documentary into well-rehearsed but still shocking accounts of his several marriages to (and affairs with) very young women. Much is made of how these women were silenced by Chaplin (his autobiography never even names the second of three teenage brides, Lita Grey) and exploited by his enemies (Hedda Hopper and the FBI both leapt on Joan Barry’s paternity suit), becoming little more than footnotes in the life of a troublesome “genius”. By a strange twist of fate, the one woman with whom Chaplin had a lengthy, stable relationship – his fourth wife, the actor Oona O’Neill – apparently left almost no recordings of her voice, leading her daughter to note forlornly that “my mother’s voice doesn’t exist”. Marriages and divorces not only made headlines but also fuelled the anti-communist witch-hunts that drove the creator of the anti-fascist masterpiece The Great Dictator out of America. While Being the Ricardos is shaping up as leading Oscar contender, the red-scare tribulations recounted here are altogether more horrifying. “Who is the real Charlie Chaplin?” asks the documentary, and the answer is: “Who knows?” Like the Little Tramp alter ego he constructed from absurdly contradictory castoffs (Ford Sterling’s size 14 shoes, Fatty Arbuckle’s giant trousers, Chester Conklin’s tight coat, Mack Swain’s cut-down moustache), he was the long and the short and the tall, all at once. In the words of writer Max Eastman: “Enjoy any Charlie Chaplin you have the good luck to encounter, but don’t try to link them up… There are too many of them.”Serial is one of the most downloaded podcasts in the world. Its first season, a true-crime whodunnit that became an instant hit had me hooked on its release eight years ago. So I was excited to tune into its new offering with the New York Times, The Trojan Horse Affair, an eight-part series that promises to tell the real story of the anonymous letter sent to Birmingham city council in 2013, that alleged a plot to take over and run local state schools according to strict Islamist principles. But this latest series skewers the art of narrative journalism Serial is widely considered to have pioneered. Long-form podcasts have more blockbuster potential than straight-up reporting, but are laced with danger: the temptation to cherry-pick facts in service of a gripping story. The Trojan Horse Affair presents a one-sided account that minimises child protection concerns, misogyny and homophobia in order to exonerate the podcast’s hero, a man called Tahir Alam. In doing so, it breaches the standards the public have the right to expect of journalists, with cruel consequences for those it uses and abuses along the way. What happened in Birmingham in 2014 is a story of two parts. Part one involves the anonymous letter that was quickly established as a hoax, and how it got caught up in an intra-Whitehall fight between the then-education and home secretaries, Michael Gove and Theresa May. Gove held it up as evidence that violent extremism was blossoming unchecked by the Home Office; May claimed the issues later uncovered were a product of Gove’s academy reforms, which removed schools from the oversight of local councils and put them in the hands of privately run trusts. Part two is the story of what was subsequently uncovered by several Ofsted reports, an Education Funding Agency review, two separate inquiries by the Department for Education and Birmingham council, and multiple court judgments. There was no organised plot. But according to these bodies, a small cluster of Birmingham schools, including three run by an academy trust chaired by Alam, suffered from a range of issues: poor governance, including a lack of child protection safeguards; people in leadership positions who espoused or failed to challenge extremist views; cultures in which homophobia and misogyny, including from teachers, were allowed to flourish and young people were encouraged to become intolerant of diversity. At one school, pupils were taught creationism as science and, in one sex education lesson, that a woman cannot refuse her husband sex. Teachers made homophobic comments on a shared Whatsapp group; one referred to gay people as “animals” and “satanic”. At the same school, speakers with extremist views were invited to address assemblies. Alam, the most prominent of the small group of socially conservative men identified as being at the heart of the affair, has fought back, alleging the various bodies that made these findings were driven by Islamophobia. He is right that the way some in government and the media seemed to obsess about finding violent extremism where there was none was deeply unsavoury. The letter was indeed used as justification to drive controversial reforms in counter-terrorism policy. But his claim that multiple agencies and individuals exaggerated their findings for nefarious reasons has been dismissed as conspiracy thinking by the courts. (Alam told me, “not a single actual child protection or safeguarding issue has been cited in any of the reports ”.) That has not stopped Serial’s presenter duo running with a similar story. One half of it, a Muslim journalist from Birmingham called Hamza Syed is explicit about his mission from the beginning: he wants to prove his suspicion that a female Muslim headteacher wrote the Trojan letter for her own parochial reasons, because he thinks it would show “everything that comes after doesn’t matter”. The podcasters resolutely fail in this, but that doesn’t stop them accusing her of playing “racist judo” by faking resignation letters from Muslim members of her staff, a claim dismissed as false by an employment tribunal judge. They doorstep her at work to try to get her to talk, even though by that point she has seen a letter from Syed declaring he thinks she is lying. Syed and his American co-presenter Brian Reed also try to discredit the findings about what went on in the schools Alam was responsible for, including the misogyny and homophobia they tellingly lump into a “grab bag of Islam-adjacent allegations”. Reed secured an interview with two whistleblowers independently assessed as “credible” and “fair”. They understood it would be a general conversation about their experiences. Instead, Reed and Syed subjected them to a seven-hour interrogation on their testimony that they have described in a complaint to the New York Times as “torture”, leaving them feeling “beaten into submission, held hostage in our own home”. Even though Reed and Syed later concede the accuracy of the female whistleblowers’ account – that pupils were taught that wives cannot refuse their husbands sex – the journalists use three sources to try to undermine other aspects of the women’s testimony. But they fail to reveal pertinent information about the sources which raises serious questions about their credibility. And the whistleblowers are named in the podcast, even though they had understood they would be contributing anonymously. Next, Reed and Syed head to the offices of Humanists UK, which acted as liaison for these whistleblowers. They question Richy Thompson, a director, on how Humanists UK verified the whistleblower accounts before publishing them on its website. Thompson had no forewarning of the forensic questions about events that happened years ago, and was hazy on detail in the interview, but the Observer has seen correspondence in which he made clear to the presenters before the podcast aired that the Humanists independently corroborated the whistleblower accounts with other sources before publication. Yet the presenters allege they published the claims without checking them. The impression listeners are left with is that both the whistleblowers and the Humanists were motivated by Islamophobia, and so we should ignore what they have to say. Never mind the fact that the several inquiries into Trojan Horse draw on a multitude of other whistleblowers, including Muslim women. (The Humanists have also exposed the teaching of creationism in orthodox Jewish schools and issues with sex education in Catholic schools .) This grossly understates the risks children were exposed to, with real consequences. One teacher implicated in the sex education lesson was later convicted for sexually abusing a 14-year-old girl he referred to as his “wife”. Powerful men and institutions are adept at throwing around accusations of racism or anti-faith bigotry to undermine the credibility of people speaking up about child protection: see the treatment of those who tried to flag child sexual abuse in the Catholic church, or the Rotherham inquiry’s finding that nervousness about cultural sensitivities impeded the exposure of child sexual abuse by predominantly Asian grooming gangs. The kindest interpretation here is that Syed and Reed are reporting a story about child protection without knowing the first thing about it. How else to make sense of their indignation that the government wheeled out no child witnesses in the relevant teacher disciplinary hearings? Another thing Syed and Reed appear to have little understanding of is the personal costs involved in whistleblowing. A DfE official who visited one of the schools said she had never seen so many distressed, frightened and crying members of staff. A female Muslim whistleblower told me about the abuse and intimidation she has faced as a result of speaking out. Shaista Gohir, chair of the Birmingham-based Muslim Women’s Network UK, was approached by Muslim females from these schools and articulated their concerns at the time. It led to people threatening to harm her children. The silencing of Asian women trying to call out the sexism of certain Asian men is a common theme that comes up when I write about these issues. “The issue is not just how Muslims are treated by other people, but how Muslim women and girls are being treated by men in their own community,” Gohir told me. “Being accused of stoking up Islamophobia is the price I pay for raising concerns about child safeguarding and misogyny.” The idea that conservative men like Tahir Alam represent British Islam is plain wrong: surveys show the majority of British Muslims reject the ultra-conservative form of Islam that was found to be influencing these non-faith state schools. Conflating the defence of Alam with the defence of Islam does no one any favours. Syed’s apparent determination to make the facts fit his precooked narrative is paired with Reed’s meditations on race, which seem to use Syed’s experience of racism to excuse his questionable approach to journalism: the soft bigotry of low expectations. The New York Times/Serial told the Observer that it had considered complaints received from the whistleblowers and Richy Thompson and had concluded the podcast fairly and accurately represented the contents of their interviews and that Hamza and Syed have produced “the most comprehensive account to date of a matter of huge national importance and debate”. Ultimately, one false narrative – that there was a problem of violent extremism in these schools – is never improved by another: that beyond Islamophobia there was nothing much to see here at all. As journalists, our work has real-world consequences beyond the entertainment value of a gripping story. By all accounts, these communities have been healing and the schools recovering, but the people I spoke to fear this podcast series will reopen old wounds and sow new divisions. The New York Times owes them an apology.Mary Barker’s life as she knew it came to an end when fraudsters stole £70,000 from her pension pot. On her retirement, she thought she had invested the money in a bond from a well-known financial firm. However, criminals had cloned its website and paperwork and duped her into transferring half of her savings to a private bank account. Her bank refused to refund her, claiming she had been negligent. The scam has left her in financial straits but far worse has been the emotional impact. She told Guardian Money: “I get so depressed at times, I don’t know how I can carry on. I’m dreading the future.” Online fraud has almost doubled during the coronavirus pandemic, with more than £750m lost to scammers during the first half of 2021. According to a report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services, it can have “permanent and life-changing consequences” for those affected. Yet, it concludes: “Fraud continues to be treated as a low-priority crime, a victimless crime, or a crime that doesn’t cause the harm recognised in other types of crime.” The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, was criticised earlier this month for appearing to dismiss the impact of soaring financial fraud. Defending Boris Johnson’s exclusion of scams when claiming falling crime rates, he spoke of “crime that people experience in their day-to-day lives … in terms of burglary, in terms of physical injury, has gone down”. It provoked an angry response from victims whose lives have been wrecked. Clara Bennett, a 33-year-old NHS worker who was scammed out of her £20,000 wedding savings, says the public’s perception that victims are gullible, greedy or elderly conceals the changing nature of scams. “It allows banks to evade accountability and refund only those they perceive as not to blame,” she says. “The implication is some people are more deserving of justice than others. “I am a savvy professional and I didn’t think it would happen to me but scammers posing as my bank’s fraud department used social engineering to get me into a place of total panic. “Although things appear to be improving with regard to victim blaming in sexual abuse, it seems scams remain unchallenged and justified by the financial sector.” Fraud now makes up 42% of all crime and only one in 700 fraud cases resulted in a conviction in 2019. The effect on victims can be greater than physical theft, according to the consumer group Which?, which estimates that the hit to wellbeing last year equated to £9.3bn. The figure is based on a study of the social impacts of frauds reported through an official crime survey. Unlike burglary victims, however, many of those who have lost life-changing sums feel they are being held culpable. The sophisticated technology and psychological tactics used make it increasingly hard to distinguish a scam from a legitimate financial service. But the frequent insistence of banks that victims were negligent, and the fact that only 4% of complaints to Action Fraud are then passed on to enforcement agencies, suggest victims are being blamed. Bennett’s bank refused to refund her, claiming she should have taken more care to check the callers were genuine. It is an accusation, she says, that has had as great an effect on her as the financial loss. “It is hard to distance myself from what I think other people might think about me, and how the responses from the banks have made me feel,” she says. “My wedding can only go ahead thanks to the generosity of my family but the scam has caused me to question whether I deserve a wedding party, or whether I should just cancel the whole thing, as a sort of ‘punishment’ for what has happened.” Edward Schwarz, 95, considers himself an experienced investor but he was caught out by fraudsters impersonating Goldman Sachs. They stole £85,000 of his pension fund in a sophisticated sting. His bank has refused to refund him because he did not check the Financial Conduct Authority’s list of cloned firms before transferring the money. “I no longer like to leave the house,” he says. “I already struggle to walk after an accident last year and the stress has made it so much worse. I could not get out of bed for some weeks afterwards.” According to Wayne Stevens, the national fraud lead at the charity Victim Support, these stories are typical. “We have supported people who have been forced to sell treasured possessions or, in extreme cases, into bankruptcy or homelessness,” he says. “Victims can struggle with their mental health, sometimes becoming too afraid to leave home or go online.” A Treasury committee report this month urged the government to increase police funding to tackle a fraud “epidemic” and to force banks to reimburse victims. Currently, they can choose to sign up to a voluntary refund scheme. The government says it was bringing forward investment of £400m over the next three years to tackle a “fraud epidemic”. Barker was eventually refunded 12 months after the scam when the Financial Ombudsman Service overruled her bank’s refusal, but the shock of the ordeal still overwhelms her. “If anyone I know found out what had happened, I would die of shame,” she says. “Regardless of the outcome, I am scarred for life.” • All names have been changed.The pandemic has acted like a vast searchlight, sweeping across society, illuminating unpleasant truths that were lurking in the darkness. The potential for online misinformation to unleash a wave of cultish fanaticism, like the current anti-vax movement, long predated the pandemic. The glib libertarian tendency within sections of the Conservative party, a sentiment so often out of step with the public mood in its strident opposition to measures deployed to fight the virus, was similarly hidden in plain sight. However, the truth most bluntly uncovered by the pandemic is the scale and the depth of inequality in 21st-century Britain. Ours is among the most unequal societies in Europe and among the many axes along which inequality runs is that of race. In the blaze of the pandemic’s searchlight, ethnic inequalities in healthcare and health outcomes have been more widely publicised than ever before. Once it became clear that people from minority groups were at greater risk of contracting and dying from Covid, a broader debate about ethnic health inequality quickly followed. Today, two years after the first lockdown, the shocking statistic that black women in England are four times more likely to die in pregnancy or childbirth than white women is now well known within the black community. Other disturbing statistics about black people’s experiences of mental health services have also been brought to broader public attention. In response, during the dark, lockdown days of 2020, the NHS established the Race and Health Observatory, an independent body tasked with researching ethnic health inequalities. The Observatory’s newly published report, built on research by the University of Manchester, in conjunction with the universities of Sheffield and Sussex, states a stark truth in the starkest terms: “Ethnic inequalities in health outcomes are evident at every stage throughout the life course, from birth to death.” It is normally the case that at publication the authors of a report stress what is new about their findings. They emphasise how their work will change the debate or challenge earlier data. The authors of this report go out of their way to stress the opposite. As they state, little of the information they have carefully collected and collated is new, much of it being drawn from the 178 earlier studies that they identify or cite. The problem is not a lack of reports; it is, as they note, “that existing evidence hasn’t led to significant change”. Among the factors that they conclude have negatively affected “the health of ethnic minority people” is “discriminatory treatment from healthcare staff”. As a result of such experiences, some from minority communities have delayed “seeking help for health problems due to fear of racist treatment”. Another reality that has become better understood over recent years is that racism is personally damaging. Discrimination hurts, it is corrosive, it wears people down and, unsurprisingly, those who have experienced it seek to avoid further exposure. They choose not to place themselves in harm’s way even if, as this report shows, that is to the detriment of their health. Talking about the NHS critically is difficult because the NHS is special, a unique and uniquely loved institution. It is held in such esteem that its failings seem to matter more than those of other institutions and the urge to praise the service can at times overwhelm the need for clear-eyed analysis. For that reason, the notion that, like other national institutions, the NHS has a problem with various forms of racism – “structural, institutional and interpersonal”, as the report categorises them – is for some difficult to accept. The demographic who will have the least difficulty coming to terms with this are people of colour who work in the NHS. In 2021, I made a documentary about the history of the service, for which we interviewed doctors and nurses who had built their NHS careers from the late 1940s. Many spoke in detail about their experiences of the racism and discrimination within the service, a subject that is also tackled within the Observatory’s report. The pandemic has further complicated the picture. For most of us, Covid has been among the most profound experiences of our lives. As the NHS became an epidemiological front line, our national affection for the service was heightened. The millions of children who in 2020 stood by their parents, as we banged pots and pans and cheered for the 1.3 million people who work in the NHS, will remember that experience for the rest of their lives. They will remember it in the same way that today’s octogenarians remember air-raid sirens and rationing. Perhaps never in its history has the NHS been more publicly praised and at the same time never have its frailties, and the health inequalities that stem from them, been better understood. Our deep respect for the NHS should not blind us for the fact that it is in need of reform. Yet to even place “NHS” and “reform” in the same sentence feels transgressive. For decades, those whose ideological mission is to carve up and privatise the service have deployed the idea of reform as political camouflage for that politically toxic project. But it must surely be possible to devise needed reforms that are very different from those that linger in the minds of the small staters and disaster-capitalists. The NHS is special but its failings are not unique. It needs reform in the same way that the Met police and the wider criminal justice system need reform. Both sectors – healthcare and policing and criminal justice – have manifestly failed minority communities and in both cases there is no shortage of data detailing the nature and consequences of those failings. The question now is whether a government that largely ignored the previous reports on which the Race and Health Observatory’s work is built will be willing to contemplate anything like the level of change shown to be necessary. Our love for the NHS cannot be unconditional. It can only truly be a national health service if it treats all the communities that make up the nation equally. • David Olusoga is a historian and broadcasterWe all have our own annual milestones that coax us out of horticultural hibernation, kicking off a flurry of plans for the year to come. For me, it’s taking down the Chinese New Year decorations at the start of February. Partly because it is, of course, a spring festival all about new beginnings, and partly because – like Christmas – it is so bound up in nostalgia, which I think is an intrinsic part of how we all garden. This week, I’ve been thinking about the laughter-filled warm evenings spent in my grandparents’ colourful garden back in Borneo. At this time of year we always used to gather together to watch the celebratory fireworks exploding in the dark sky as my huge, extended family amassed around dozens of plastic tables for dinner. It also got me thinking of all the amazing tropical-effect garden plants that can be started out from seed about now – even in these less warm and idyllic climes. In the UK there is the frequent preconception that exotic-style gardening is both incredibly high maintenance and prohibitively expensive. When you consider the eye-watering price of tree ferns and some of the hardier palms, this is pretty understandable conclusion. But that doesn’t mean there are no beautiful tropical species out there that are very affordable and easy to grow from seed. I’m talking about bananas. At the top of any such list has to come the Japanese fibre banana, Musa basjoo. The plant has huge, apple-green, paddle-like leaves, and is capable of creating 6ft monsters of jungly foliage in just a few months. One of the more northerly species of banana, it will thrive even in some surprisingly cold temperatures. Being root hardy (if given a good mulch) it will survive in temperatures down to as low as -15C. It won’t give you edible fruit, but it is an absolute show-stopper for its architectural looks. Soak the hard, black seeds for 24 hours in a glass of water to spark them into growth before sowing them in a propagator of seed compost on a warm windowsill, any time from March onwards. Despite their hardiness, I would still definitely plant them in a sheltered spot to prevent their sail-like foliage from being shredded by the wind. An urban courtyard or near a high boundary wall is ideal. Aside from costing a fraction of the price of buying ready-grown small plants, bananas grown from seed also give you the opportunity to try out all sorts of more niche varieties that may turn out to be similarly hardy. The classics are Musa sikkimensis from the highlands of India, with its gorgeous wine-coloured undersides and tiger stripes over the upper surface; and if you have a very sheltered spot in one of the mildest areas of the country, such as Cornwall or central London, Musa balbisiana is sometimes recommended. I currently have some Ensete glaucum, or snow banana, on the go as a bit of a gamble, and am very curious to try out Musa ‘Helen’s Hybrid’, which some claim is the hardiest edible species. I am so excited to see what they do in the year to come. Here’s to new horticultural beginnings. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekLobbyists representing fossil fuel giants are quietly helping run parliamentary groups on energy and climate policy without the need to formally declare their involvement. The trade associations, which are funded by oil and gas producers including Shell, BP and ExxonMobil, provide administrative and public relations support to groups of MPs. Their roles are not included in official parliamentary transparency logs because of rules that say only benefits in kind above £1,500 a year must be recorded – a threshold the trade bodies say they do not meet. In one case, the UK Petroleum Industry Association (UKPIA) – an alliance of eight of the world’s biggest oil companies – is playing a key role in the running of the All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on downstream energy and fuels. The association’s involvement is not listed as a benefit, and the names of the firms it represents do not appear in official parliamentary records. But it has helped arrange and chair meetings for the APPG and is listed as the public inquiry point, meaning people getting in touch about parliamentary business may first encounter an oil-industry PR representative. The association’s members have also had access to MPs. In a meeting of the APPG in June – which the trade body jointly chaired – MPs were given keynote presentations by two of its members, the oil giants BP and Phillips 66. The UKPIA said the APPG was “set up in accordance with relevant guidance” to consider the role the sector could “play in meeting government net zero goals” and that its “limited activities” meant the value of its services did not meet the £1,500 threshold. Another trade body, Oil &amp; Gas UK, recently rebranded as Offshore Energies UK, is listed as the inquiry point for the British offshore oil and gas industry APPG. The association – which states that its primary goal is to ensure the North Sea “remains an attractive place to do business” – coordinates meetings, distributes invites and prepares minutes for the APPG but says the total value of its services is less than £100. Its link to the group has given it access to the heart of Westminster. In 2020 a reception for the APPG was held on the House of Commons Terrace Pavilion “on behalf of” Oil &amp; Gas UK, according to hospitality logs. A spokesman said: “Offshore Energies UK acts as the secretariat for the APPG but recent costs have been minimal. The cost in the last reporting year, for February 2021, fell below £100.” Some MPs in the groups are among the most vocal advocates for policies that benefit oil and gas producers, including calling for greater investment in the sector and opposing the recently proposed windfall tax, which would see the industry pay about £3bn extra in corporation tax. While there is no suggestion of impropriety, the findings have raised concerns about the possibility of APPGs being used to influence policymakers. Professor Elizabeth David-Barrett, director of the Centre for the Study of Corruption at the University of Sussex, said the undeclared arrangements could allow external groups to “distort policy without the public knowing”. She said it was problematic that industry representatives were contact points. “You might think you’re writing to the APPG … but actually the person has a particular advocacy agenda,” she added. Others said it was surprising that the minimum threshold for declaring services had not been met. In many cases, where outside organisations handle the administration of an APPG, this is registered as a benefit and appears in the official register of APPGs. The entry for the APPG on autism, for example, listed secretariat services provided by the National Autistic Society, a charity, as being worth up to £18,000 per year, while Macmillan, the secretariat for the APPG on cancer, said the annual value of its service equated to a £25,000-£27,000 benefit in kind. But for the energy-related APPGs identified in the Observer analysis, no benefits are listed. The office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards said groups can appoint “whoever they wish” as their public inquiry point and that only benefits worth more than £1,500 must be included on the register. Groups receiving more than £12,500 in benefits over the year must complete an income and expenditure statement listing all benefits above £100. The APPG on downstream energy and fuels says its total benefits do not meet this threshold, so has not completed a statement. The British offshore oil and gas Industry APPG has completed a statement, but says Oil &amp; Gas UK’s services amount to less than £100, so do not need to be included. Dylan Tanner, executive director of InfluenceMap, a thinktank tracking lobbying by polluting industries, said the value of the administrative services being provided was “tiny compared to what’s at stake”. “The focus shouldn’t be on the money,” he said. The findings follow a series of revelations about lobbying by the fossil fuel industry. In October, the Guardian revealed that the Conservative party and its MPs had registered £1.3m in legally declared gifts and donations from climate sceptics and fossil fuel interests since the 2019 election. They also add fuel to concerns about APPGs, which can provide a valuable forum for charities, campaign groups and companies to contribute to discussions, but are seen by some as a backdoor route to policymakers that can be easily exploited. Companies often make direct payments or donate gifts to the groups to help with their running. Rose Whiffen, research officer at Transparency International UK, said a danger could arise when APPGs became “too closely aligned with private interests”. “Without reform, they will remain a backdoor for undue influence in Westminster,” she said.My friend had a birthday party. It was raucous and fantastic, stretching from the afternoon through to the night, two or more locations apparently, three types of cake, a very nice giant couscous salad, karaoke. I haven’t been to a party in years, which meant I entered feeling thrilled but semi-high with awkward anticipation – I couldn’t quite remember how to stand, or the appropriate greetings, and I was very aware of the thickness of my mascara. The room was filled with people I hadn’t seen since before the events, and they came with their new hairstyles, new children, new homes, new bodies, new griefs. I’d thought a lot about parties since being locked down, remembering them variously as orgiastic performances of joy and nightmarish scenes with terrible teeth in their terrible jaws. This was neither, by the time I left anyway, mid-evening dripping in children, but it was invigorating still, and I remembered the truths of parties, how part of their thrill is in allowing no more than a centimetre of conversation at a time, the meetings so brief, a hard shot of social life to be thrown back and followed with lemon. It was on our way home that I caught the thought that had been sneaking up on me all afternoon. Talking to friends again had reminded me how, over the pandemic, ghost sightings had soared. The news was reported around Halloween, so I chose to ignore it of course, leaving it for the fairweather ghost story enthusiasts. People like me, bred on horror, able to recall the names of every poltergeist victim from here to Hull, do not require a nice little fright to make the Haribo harvested from neighbours taste sweeter. In the New York Times a paranormal researcher called John EL Tenney said he used to receive between two and five reports of a haunted house a month, but when the pandemic began it was not unusual for him to get five to 10 a week. “It does seem to have something to do with our heightened state of anxiety, our hyper-vigilance,” he said. Going to that party was like seeing 50 ghosts, all at once, but also like the moment when you realise you have become one. Perhaps you’re sick, now, of revelations about the pandemic and how we have changed. I often think I am, and then another one smacks me around the cheeks and forces me to reconsider the shape of us. Remeeting old friends again after everybody has endured two years of this peculiar discomfort, we come face to face with time. Our memories of who these people are seem suddenly unreliable – those people have gone. As have the years we lost, the dinners, divorces, weddings, funerals, the chance to see their children’s awkward phase, the chance to see their greys come in. These were the people we drunkenly formed ourselves with, on New Year’s Eves at 6am and on the uncarpeted floors of flats off Brick Lane, and now they were middle-aged, which meant we were, too. The reason people saw ghosts over lockdown was (according to Kurt Gray, an associate professor at the University of North Carolina) that at moments of “great unease” there is an increased drive to find meaning. Plus there’s the complication that disease itself shares psychological parallels with a “malevolent spirit”, stalking its victims. But I am seeing ghosts now that lockdown is over, on bridges, where I am suddenly breathless at the sight of the river, and the hundreds of times I’d passed over it and the hundreds of people I’d passed over it with. At work, where an empty office echoes with expired conversations, and at parties where we stand back to back with the people we were, and the people we failed to become. They’re memories that float outside themselves. We were in a community hall, a buffet at one end and stage at the other, and in between the two was the party with its bored dogs and drinking men and children feral on Coke, then, as it got dark, my friend started singing. I had the oddest feeling. As if we had always been here. As if all houses were haunted houses, as if something froze in us during those lockdown years, as if time was unstable. Mostly, I felt grateful. To be there. It took a pandemic for me to truly appreciate the strength of thread that connects us to our pasts, and the joy of standing in a room while those little histories dance clumsily around you. Mr Tenney is certain most of the ghost reports he receives are “completely explainable”. “When the sun comes up and the house starts to warm up, [people are] usually at work – they’re not used to hearing the bricks pop and the wood expand,” he said. “It’s not that the house wasn’t making those sounds. They just never had the time to notice it.” Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanAfter four and a half years of waiting, Leanne* and her three children recently found out that they can move from the two-bedroom council flat they have outgrown into a house. It’s welcome news, but there is a problem, she says: “There are no curtains, no carpet, no nothing: I don’t know where to start.” Leanne, who works part-time as a dinner lady and claims universal credit, is not alone in her struggle to afford basic household items. There are no official figures for the number of people living in furniture poverty, but research done before the pandemic by the charity Turn2us suggested 4.8 million were without at least one essential household appliance such as a cooker or a fridge, and the problem is getting worse. “Somewhere for them all to sleep is the main priority,” Leanne says. Her teenage twins share a room and the bottom bunk is broken, leaving her son sleeping on a mattress. She sleeps in the boxroom with her two-year-old, who is still in a cot. There is other furniture to buy, too, and carpets. The twins share a wardrobe and when they are in separate rooms they will need one each. Leanne’s chest of drawers is currently in the living room with the TV on it, but in the new house she will be able to have her clothes in her room. “So I’ll need to get a TV stand or brackets,” she says. “We’re over the moon that we’ve got a house. But on the other hand, we’re wondering how we’re going to furnish it when we can’t even afford a new bed for the flat.” Previously unpublished figures from Turn2us’s most recent survey, of 6,000 people in August last year, show that 8% were living without a washing machine – the equivalent of 4.5 million people nationwide. Meanwhile, 7% were living without a freezer, and similar numbers reported having no oven or fridge. Not having these basic items has all kinds of knock-on effects for people’s lives: homes are uncomfortable and cold, families are unable to prepare decent meals, and they have to pay a premium to do their laundry. While secondhand items are available, they often break quickly and are difficult to collect if, like Leanne, you don’t have a car. Local councils have typically been a source of help through Local Welfare Assistance (LWA) schemes. These offer crisis grants to people in immediate need and are typically used for fuel, food and essential white goods and furniture. However, the campaign group End Furniture Poverty has found that more than 13 million people in England live in areas with no scheme, at a time when the cost of living crisis is hitting those on low incomes. It says that over the past 10 years, the cost of furniture, furnishings and carpets has risen by 32% while household appliances are up 17%, and that Brexit is driving many of those prices even higher. Claire Donovan, head of policy, research and campaigns for End Furniture Poverty, says: “The value of benefits has gone down, wages have gone down and there are these rising costs. It was hard to begin with, and it’s becoming insurmountable now.” She adds: “With the increase to fuel bills and national insurance contributions, along with rising inflation, the need for support is urgent.” Freedom of information requests made by the group found that in July 2021, one in five local authorities in England did not offer an LWA scheme, up from one in seven the previous year. The number of applications increased by 91% in 2020-21, and the number accepted went up by 157%, but the average payout went down by £29 to £146. About a third of funds were used for furniture and appliances. The group found one in four schemes was only available as a last resort, with applicants needing to have attempted all other options first, including universal credit advances, credit unions and charities. Several local authorities said people would need to have approached friends and family for support before making an application. The group called on the government to commit to spending £485m a year on funding for three years and improve its guidance, giving a single name to the schemes and setting criteria for grants. “This will give local authorities the time and certainty to expand on existing schemes, or open new ones where those have closed,” Donovan says. Thomas Cave, policy and public affairs manager at Turn2us, says: “At a time where millions of people are facing a cost-of-living crisis, we know something like a broken washing machine, or refrigerator, can be the start of a spiral into debt and eventually extreme poverty.” He adds: “Household appliances are not luxuries – they are essentials; and without the intervention of effective LWA schemes, more people will continue to fall through the cracks of the welfare safety net.” Shaun Davies, chair of the Local Government Association’s Resources Board, says councils are doing all they can to support residents who may be struggling financially. “We agree with this report that councils need adequate, long-term government investment for a more sustainable local welfare support system, which they can use flexibly to plan ahead and help households better manage the expected impact of these increasing financial pressures,” he says. * Not her real name At Bulky Bob’s, where sofas find second homes Collette Williams is a director at the FRC Group – a social enterprise which runs the End Furniture Poverty campaign and several other initiatives, including Bulky Bob’s Furniture World shops in Liverpool and Oldham. The organisation won a council tender to collect bulky household waste, and it repurposes unwanted furniture. “Either they’re broken, too old, or not wanted,” says Williams. “We get a lot of items daily and take them to the sorting centres and go through them.” Once in good order, they are put in the shops. Anyone can buy something, but the group has relationships with local agencies who can refer those in need of help. “We provide a voucher and they can come in and choose what they want,” she says. “We don’t want people to think they can only choose the stuff no one else wants. We want them to have the best experience they can … staff ask what they like, what colours they prefer.” Vouchers have no financial limit, and staff make sure people get everything they need, delivered. “They leave with massive relief because the home that’s empty now is going to have the things they need soon; they also walk out with their head held high.” Case study: A tired 12-year-old who needs more sleep Tara’s* 12-year-old son is currently sleeping on an Ikea mattress while she tries to find funds to buy him the bed that he needs. He had been living with his dad until moving back in with her and one of her older daughters, over Christmas. “A friend has lent us a mattress – it’s from one of those Ikea trundle beds that their child has,” says Tara. It’s better than nothing, she says, but he isn’t able to get a good night’s sleep. “He comes home from school and he’s shattered. I struggle to get him up in the morning and to eat his breakfast as he’s too knackered.” It’s not just a bed that he lacks – there’s no carpet in the room. “It’s just bare wooden floors upstairs, and brown tiles downstairs.” * Not her real nameThe number of specialist teachers of the deaf in England is at its lowest for a decade, leading to warnings that the decline is leaving hearing-impaired children “fighting for their futures”. The number has fallen by 16.5% since 2011, a report by the Consortium for Research into Deaf Education shows. The report found there are 887 fully qualified teachers of the deaf, compared with 1,062 in 2011. The National Deaf Children’s Society (NDCS) fears the decline will worsen the achievement gap between deaf and hearing children. Deaf children already fall behind at every stage of school, the charity said, including a whole grade at GCSE. More than half of teachers (53%) are over 50, according to the report, prompting concerns that staffing levels may further drop in the next 10 to 15 years without intervention. Nina Greaves, 44, a social worker in Lincoln, said support from their teacher of the deaf was a lifeline when her six-year-old son, Marshall, was identified as deaf as a newborn. “Straightaway, she just normalised everything,” she said. “I didn’t know anything about deafness before.” The support began when Marshall was a baby, with the teacher visiting monthly to give advice about the acoustics in the family’s home, lip-reading and other techniques. Now he is at school, his current teacher of the deaf visits him there, checking his hearing aids and giving teachers training. With the right support, deaf children can achieve everything other children can, the NDCS said. Almost 80% of deaf children attend mainstream schools without specialist provision. Marshall is now in Year 2, and a “testament to the support” the family has received. “He’s not struggling at all at school: he’s very good with his speech, he’s an avid reader,” Greaves said. Mike Hobday, director of policy and campaigns at the NDCS, said: “Teachers of the deaf play an absolutely crucial role, but year after year they’ve been cut just to balance the books. As a result, deaf children are left fighting for their futures and falling behind at every stage of school. We need urgent action to fix this issue, but there’s no guarantee that more funding for schools will be enough to provide exactly what deaf pupils need.” The NDCS is calling for a £1.3m bursary to replace the teachers of the deaf who have been lost and “make sure every deaf child gets the right support”. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “All children and young people, including those who are deaf or have a hearing impairment, should receive the support they need to succeed in their education. That’s why there is a legal requirement for teachers to hold relevant mandatory qualifications when teaching classes of pupils who have a sensory impairment.”Fit for a prince. “By royal appointment” has traditionally been a recommendation of provenance, quality and trustworthiness. A royal handle today serves as a warning of potential ignominy. As Oscar Wilde didn’t quite write, for one prince to be embroiled in scandal may be regarded as a misfortune, two looks like a pattern. Buckingham Palace must be fervently hoping that no one has anything on Prince Edward. Prince Andrew is paying a large sum to a woman he claims never to have met rather than face interrogation about her accusations of sexual assault before a jury in New York. Prince Charles denies knowing anything about cash for honours, but says he will help the police with their inquiries into whether a Saudi billionaire’s payments to royal charities bought the donor a gong. At times like these, when questions swirl around the conduct of two of the Queen’s sons, it would be usual for the monarch to seek succour from her prime minister. But Boris Johnson is not the go-to person for advice on how to avoid disgrace. Some members of Her Majesty’s government are even taking secret pleasure in the travails of the crown. It would suit Downing Street if the bad odours around the House of Windsor distracted public attention from the great stink generated by Number 10. Britain is not unfamiliar with scandals of political and royal varieties, but this combination goes to the apex of the state in a way without precedent. We have the prime minister and the heir to the throne involved in investigations by the Metropolitan police, itself so poisoned with scandal that Dame Cressida Dick has been forced to quit as commissioner of the Met. This is happening at a time when the reputations of many other estates of the realm are severely corroded. Rarely a month, or a week, passes without one institution or another being put in the dock for incompetence, misconduct, cronyism or corruption. Faith in MPs has not recovered from the expenses outrages that were exposed in 2009 and it was not long ago that parliament was rocked by inquiries and resignations over sexual harassment and bullying. The House of Lords is tainted every time the bloated ranks of unelected peers are further swollen by the introduction of more party donors and muckers of the prime minister, a sleazy game that did not start with Mr Johnson, but one that he has played with characteristic brazenness. The bankers have never restored the trust they lost when their avaricious recklessness led to the financial crash. This year’s bumper bonus season will do nothing to endear them to those feeling the squeeze on living standards. The deaths caused by the Grenfell Tower inferno, and the legacy of misery inflicted on the tens of thousands of people trapped in unsafe and unsellable flats, have made pariahs of the construction industry. The reputation of the army has been diminished by defeats on the battlefields of Afghanistan and Iraq along with bullying and sexual assault cases. The established church has expressed its “shame” over its failures to deal with sexual predators in dog collars. The pandemic has not seen the civil service purr like a Rolls Royce, but backfire like an old banger. The prime minister’s principal private secretary sent the invites to the notorious “bring your own booze party” in the garden of Number 10 and the hapless cabinet secretary had to recuse himself from leading an inquiry into lockdown-busting in Downing Street when it was revealed that his own office had hosted a quiz. Journalists cannot be holier than thou, because the media has also debased itself. The tabloid press was disgraced by phone-hacking. The BBC has often been on the rack, most recently over the Martin Bashir business. Not just one or two of our once-venerated institutions are in trouble. The credibility and moral authority of the entire structure of public life is shuddering. These multiple crises in multiple institutions have features in common. One overarching theme is a paucity of high-calibre personnel. Where are the leaders with the quality and strength of character to infuse the organisations they head with decent values? The Johnson government was guaranteed to be engulfed in opprobrium from the moment that Tory MPs decided to give the premiership to an amoral man. The Queen commands huge public respect, but she is notoriously reluctant to confront issues within her family. It took a long time and intense pressure before Prince Andrew was stripped of his military titles and royal patronages. Three of the past four Met commissioners have been forced to quit. I struggle to decide whether leading London’s constabulary is too much for any one person or if the police are incapable of producing anyone with the smarts and grip to drive reform. Other shared characteristics of dysfunctional institutions are hostility to legitimate criticism, an unwillingness to acknowledge mistakes and a resistance to being held accountable. All these were factors in the Post Office scandal. Hundreds of postmasters were wrongly accused of theft, fraud and embezzlement based on faulty evidence from a computer system known to be unreliable. Ruination was brought down on the reputations, livelihoods and families of wholly innocent people. Some were imprisoned, many were heavily fined, a lot were made bankrupt. The largest miscarriage of justice in recent British history, it is absolutely despicable. Yet none of the Post Office’s leadership at the time has been held to account. Nor has anyone from Fujitsu, the company to blame for the faulty software. Nor have any of the civil servants or politicians with supervisory responsibilities. More than 20 years since the first false prosecutions, a public inquiry is finally underway, but it is too late for many of the victims, at least four of whom are believed to have taken their own lives. The political scientist David Runciman identified another pathology of sickly institutions when he wrote that degeneration is often sourced in “a growing sense of impunity among small networks of elites. As British society has become more unequal it has created pockets of privilege whose inhabitants are tempted to think that the normal rules don’t apply to them.” He wrote that eight years ago and it rings even truer today. The princes were cocooned in plush pockets of privilege from the moment they were born. The prime minister has made a career of behaving as if normal rules don’t apply to him. It is dangerous when institutions are populated with entitled characters who believe they are superior to other citizens. Unchecked, this will inevitably lead to reprehensible conduct. The abuse of power reached a murderous level in the case of Wayne Couzens, the Met officer who abducted and killed Sarah Everard. The fall of Dame Cressida was in part impelled by the publication of a searing report by the Independent Office for Police Conduct into misogyny, racism and other bigotries within the force. It revealed messages between officers in which one bragged about hitting his girlfriend, another told a female colleague he would “happily rape you”, jokes were made about killing black children and abuse was directed at Muslims and disabled people. In other walks of life, behaviour so disgusting would be career-ruining. Yet nine of the officers investigated kept their jobs and two were promoted. From bad coppers to the delinquent at Number 10, from the lords of finance to the construction barons, from princes to dodgy parliamentarians, a culture of impunity is often at the root of institutional putrefaction. Left untreated, rot spreads. When wrongdoing by reprobate politicians goes unpunished, rogue police officers are emboldened to think that they can also get away with anything. Once upon a time, Britons would have been astonished and appalled to find scandal simultaneously bespoiling their royal family, prime minister and largest police force. We are less shockable now. There’s a good reason, which is that there is much less naive reverence for institutions than there was in the past. There’s also a bad reason for our diminished capacity to be scandalised by scandal. We have become wearily accustomed to seeing the public trust betrayed. Where once jaws would have dropped, grotesque misconduct in public life often provokes no more than a fleeting furore or a resigned shrug. That makes us part of the problem, too. When we expect to be let down, we settle for further decay. The British won’t get better service from their institutions until they start demanding it and so insistently that they can’t be ignored. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverWhat would the City of Light be without one of its Enlightenment luminaries? For 18 months concerned Parisians have missed a statue of philosopher and historian Voltaire, which disappeared from its plinth in August 2020 during a wave of statue-toppling around the world. Rumours spread that Voltaire – real name François-Marie Arouet – was a victim of “cancel culture”, removed by politically correct City Hall officials because, while he wrote denouncing slavery, he owed part of his fortune to colonial-era trade and has been accused of racism and antisemitism. Rightwing commentators were outraged. Had the Paris authorities followed the example of the city’s Nazi occupiers, under whose regime the original bronze of Voltaire was removed in 1941 and melted down? Jean-Pierre Lecoq, mayor of Paris’s 6th arrondissement, said at the time: “I demand the return of Voltaire to the Square Honoré-Champion.” Now deputy Paris mayor Karen Taïeb, has said the statue will be back on a pedestal “some time this year”, adding that it was found to be in need of restoration, having been vandalised and damaged not only by the paint but by the elements. “It has now undergone a little cosmetic surgery in that we have redone the nose, which was almost eroded away,” Taïeb said. However, Voltaire will not return to his plinth close to the Seine’s left bank just behind the prestigious Académie des Beaux-Arts. Instead, the statue, by sculptor Léon-Ernest Drivier, will be placed under arches in the university medical school, half a mile away. “Taïeb said: “We thought about installing it on the Quai Voltaire, but the conservation people said no because it’s very polluted there.” “The experts say that if we leave it outside it will be damaged further; even the rain could lead to its deterioration.” She added that in the new site the statue would be protected from the elements but still visible to the public: “I can understand people being worried about the statue because it was removed at a time of a lot of news about statues. I don’t know if the motivations of those who damaged the statue were political, but our only motivation is conservation. The City of Light will continue to have its man of Enlightenment.” Neither the culture ministry nor Lecoq responded to questions. In 1878 a bronze statue of Voltaire was commissioned to mark the 100th anniversary of his death, and placed on Quai Malaquais. It was melted down during the second world war. The Drivier version was placed in Square Honoré Champion in 1962. Prof Matthew Fraser of the American University of Paris, whose forthcoming book Monumental Fury: The History of Iconoclasm and the Future of Our Past examines statue toppling, said: “It’s sad to see Voltaire moved … the statue was placed there for a reason: Voltaire died nearby on what is now Quai Voltaire. Also, it was only a few dozen yards from the original bronze statue that was demolished and melted down by the Nazis, who despised Voltaire for his Enlightenment ideals.” French president Emmanuel Macron has said France will not be toppling any historical statues. “The Republic won’t erase any name from its history,” he said in June 2020. “We should look at all of our history together with lucidity.”The critics are unanimous: the British Museum’s new exhibition, The World of Stonehenge, is a triumph. As archaeologists, it’s wonderful for us to see the show achieve such plaudits. But the fact that the exhibition is once again sponsored by the oil and gas supermajor BP brings inevitable disquiet. Hundreds of our colleagues in archaeology, museums and the heritage sector have recently signed a letter asking the museum to end its relationship with BP. The signatories include senior curators and academics from across the UK and beyond. This is a decisive moment for the British Museum: its agreement with BP is due for renewal this year and its future hangs in the balance. BP has maintained a strategy of sponsoring cultural institutions for decades, as part of its heavy investment in public relations. It’s keen to convince the public – and our policymakers – that it can be trusted to manage the transition to net zero itself. But BP’s programme for “net zero by 2050” relies on massive use of unproved carbon capture technologies and implausible offsetting. The company is continuing to look for new sources of oil and gas, which the International Energy Agency has said cannot be exploited if net zero is to be achieved. BP’s plans also ignore its 20% stake in the Russian oil company Rosneft, which is launching a $134bn project to drill in the Arctic. BP’s activities jeopardise efforts to keep global heating within the 1.5C limit of the Paris climate agreement and avoid yet worse droughts, wildfires and sea level rise. We don’t know exactly how much money BP provides to the British Museum, although it’s almost certainly less than 1% of the museum’s income. With 2021 profits of £9.5bn, this is small change for BP. But at a time of continuing underinvestment by the government, it’s an amount that matters to the British Museum. Through this relationship, BP associates its name with values of civilisation, curatorial care and scientific knowledge about the human past and present, even as it embraces policies and strategies that arguably conflict with all these ideals. But this is no relationship of equals. The British Museum has no power to influence BP’s decision-making or speak out against it. On the contrary, as a result of this arrangement, its senior personnel are often required to publicly defend BP’s track record. We’ve been here before, with debates during the 1980s and 1990s around tobacco and arms company sponsorship. Other potential sponsors exist. And we shouldn’t forget that BP benefits from UK tax breaks worth billions of pounds and has not paid corporation tax on its activities in the North Sea for the past three years, while receiving tax relief of almost £400m, money that could have been spent on supporting renewables or, for that matter, on museums and culture. Last year, with George Osborne’s appointment as the museum’s chair of trustees, these issues took a worrying new turn. In addition to his role as chair, Osborne is a partner at the boutique advisory firm Robey Warshaw, which counts BP among its major clients. If he does not clearly recuse himself from any future decisions on the relationship with BP, it is hard to see how a potential conflict of interest can be avoided. Recent investigations into decision-making processes at the British Museum by the campaign group Culture Unstained are worrying for all of us who care about the museum. They find that the chairman’s advisory group exists outside the regular governance structures of the museum, yet has high-level influence. We don’t know who its members are and its meetings are not minuted, but we do know that it enables ongoing contact between very senior corporate representatives, the chair and the director of the museum, Hartwig Fischer. The British Museum is embarking on an ambitious and very expensive renovation plan. There is much at stake here. Any further deal with BP risks undermining the museum’s reputation for years to come. The generation now in its youth takes a dim view of the fossil fuel industry and those who enable it. BP undoubtedly has cash to spare – but it comes with a price. The museum’s trustees have a legal duty to protect its reputation. We believe this includes a duty to ensure that any decision on sponsorship renewal is subject to oversight and due diligence, including an independent review of BP’s business practices and suitability as a patron. According to investigations by the group Art Not Oil, when the BP deal was renewed in 2016, it was the director of the museum who made the decision. It now seems imperative for the trustees to take a more active role. They will no doubt be considering why it is that most other major cultural institutions in the UK, including the RSC, Tate and the National Theatre, have renounced fossil fuel sponsorship. They will also be aware that this issue is not going away. On the contrary, highly creative protests against BP’s presence in the museum will continue and public opinion is increasingly in favour of taking strong action on climate change. The open letter signed by our colleagues suggests that professional opinion in the heritage sector has moved firmly in the same direction. Our understanding of humanity’s past matters for our future. The remains of our shared past, and how they are used, matter deeply for that future too. By continuing to accept fossil fuel sponsorship, the British Museum has become an outlier when it should be a leader within its sector. Its trustees now have a vital window of opportunity in which to defend the museum’s future and its reputation. • Natasha Reynolds is a palaeolithic archaeologist and an honorary researcher at the University of Bordeaux and David Wengrow is a British archaeologist and professor of comparative archaeology at University College LondonAfter a fistful of excellent Americana albums written in the fertile loam of New Orleans, Hurray for the Riff Raff’s Alynda Segarra has been evolving hard. The Navigator (2017) metabolised their Puerto Rican New York background for an album that slotted into that city’s lineage of lean, leather-jacketed songcraft. Life on Earth – Segarra’s eighth – finds them back in New Orleans, having brought some New York home. It confirms that no matter what’s going on underneath Segarra’s expressive, elastic voice, be it the startling 80s production of Pierced Arrows or the slinky electronics of Jupiter’s Dance, this is an artist with a kneejerk feel for classicism. A brace of great tunes make the case: Rhododendron nods at Jonathan Richman’s Roadrunner, somehow making wildflowers sound gloriously disreputable. Saga, meanwhile, is a traumatised ballad that channels David Bowie, but with acoustic guitars and horns. Very different, but just as hard-hitting, is Precious Cargo, a breezy rap that recounts the journeys of brave people fetching up at the US border, to be met with violence. “It’s been a terrible news week,” Segarra sings at one point. Life on Earth musters defences: the example of the natural world and the hopeful swagger of humans are just two.It started as a token of love, then went viral, and now it’s making people angry. If you noticed that “token”, “viral” and “angry” are all five-letter words, then the chances are you’re a devotee of Wordle, the online word puzzle that has become an internet craze. For those who have just returned from walking across the Sahel, Wordle is a game in which you have to guess, or work out, a five-letter word. Each day there is a new word. You can have six attempts, and each correct letter selected is awarded a yellow square. If it’s also in the correct place, it’s a green square. All other letters get a grey square. Even if you don’t play the game, it’s hard to avoid its cultural imprint, as participants have taken to posting their results on social media – ubiquitous grids of grey, yellow and green squares, signifying a player’s line score. Brooklyn-based Welsh software engineer Josh Wardle – the puzzle is a play on his name – developed the game to entertain his partner during lockdown. Since he put it online back in October, it has drawn millions of users. Last month Wardle sold the puzzle to the New York Times for a sum said to be “in the low seven figures”. But all is not joy and happiness in the world of Wordle. Although the NYT, which mostly operates behind a paywall, has said the game will “initially remain free”, there is an expectation that advertisements or promotions may soon be added. For British players there has also been the issue of cultural imperialism, otherwise known as American spelling. There was a collective loss of a sense of humour recently when “humor” was the solution, just as Brits had earlier felt disfavoured when “favor” appeared. Then it emerged that the newspaper was removing words from the approved dictionary – you have to enter a recognised word on each line – that were deemed offensive, including “slave”, “lynch” and “wench”. The move was seen by some as a cryptically puritanical form of virtue signalling. After the NYT committed to cull “obscure” words, there were also fears voiced that it would make the game easier, followed shortly afterwards by the anxious concern that it would be made more difficult. Last week opinion swung towards the latter scenario when the new owners did not baulk (or “balk”, to use the spelling favoured by many purists) at using “caulk”, a five-letter word that inspired many players to utter four-letter words. Some took to social media to denounce the noun – it’s a kind of waterproof sealant – as something that only Bob the Builder would know. According to clinical psychologist Dr Patapia Tzotzoli, the appeal of Wordle is that it conforms to the theory of self-determination. “The theory suggests we can become self-determined when our three innate psychological needs – autonomy, competence and connection – are met,” she says. “Wordle enables autonomy because we choose to take a few minutes out of our day to play it. It offers competence because we can solve a puzzle and fare better than others. And in terms of connection, it fosters a sense of belonging to a wider community. It hits all the right notes to activate our motivation to keep going back.” But the more popular it becomes, the more complaints it provokes. The agitated talk of caulk followed immediately after the doubling-up crisis of the previous day. One of the appeals of Wordle is that everyone tackles the same word, at least within the English-speaking world – there are now versions in more than 90 languages. Players know that when they are struggling to get “knoll” or “siege” it’s a specific struggle shared with millions of others. This is the “connection”. But last week there was a sudden disconnect. Instead of a single answer, there were two: aroma and agora, depending on whether or not you were using the old or new URL. The NYT decided to drop agora because it was too arcane (excuse me, caulk?) and replace it with aroma, but some unrefreshed browsers got the original choice instead. Cue outrage of the kind more normally associated with gross infractions of the moral code, like flashing the Queen or swearing at David Attenborough. The judgment doing the rounds on Twitter was “scandal”. And many players felt that the one-word-a-day contract had been irrevocably broken. Things came to a head last week with a deceptively simple word: shake. That was exactly what many users were left doing with their heads. To complete the puzzle in four guesses seems to be the par score for Wordle. Doing it in three is a jolt of satisfaction, in two is smugly pleasurable, and in one is pure luck. But failing to do it within the allotted six is a wretched study in self-recrimination. That was the result for large numbers of players when they were lured into writing “shame”, “shape”, “shave”, “shade”, “shale” or “share”, but not “shake”. Disillusioned – or perhaps simply defeated – players began to announce that they were off to Quordle, a more taxing version of the game which involves completing four grids simultaneously. For the time being, however, the discontents are unlikely to dent the phenomenon that is Wordle. The question is whether, as we return to a more outgoing way of life, a game that was born under social restrictions will continue to flourish. “It’s in the nature of things to be impermanent,” says Tzotzoli, “and that’s true for people’s desires. We join a trend and then we move on to something else that is new and more exciting.” No doubt that’s the case, but just at this moment it’s difficult to imagine anything more exciting than five squares turning green – the most satisfying five-letter word of all.In another age Christina Patterson’s Outside the Sky Is Blue would have been marketed as a misery memoir. It’s true that it’s the record of a life that has contained an uncommon amount of misery. But this book is a bracing, heart-lifting read, a narrative that consistently, courageously rises above the horrors it recounts. Patterson is a superb writer – part of the redemptive message of this memoir is that beautiful prose can make almost anything bearable – but she’s also clearly a pretty wonderful human being. On page after page, she’s hit with the kind of sucker punches that would floor most of us, and yet she comes back sparkling with humour, with love, with hope. Outside the Sky Is Blue is a lesson in generosity, in accommodation, but most of all it’s a lesson in resilience. Patterson’s story begins with the birth of her sister Caroline in Thailand. Her mother is Swedish, her father British and he has what promises to be a splendid diplomatic career ahead of him. Caroline is followed by Tom, and then Christina. By the time Christina is born, though, there are already signs that Caroline is troubled. Christina realises early on that her “skinny, sensitive, beautiful sister” is mentally ill, although the true extent of Caroline’s schizophrenia only becomes apparent when she is a teenager. Their father gives up his dreams of roving the world and settles down – grudgingly, we feel – to a job in the Treasury. Patterson reconstructs her childhood with a beautiful, sun-drenched nostalgia, summoning up holidays with her family in Sweden and a happy if shy existence in Guildford, drawing always on the rich store of her mother’s diaries and files. “My mother wanted to mark every moment of her life. She took photos of almost every meeting with a relative or friend.” The trips to Sweden are a particular highlight: a delight at the time but also a rich store of happiness that the older Patterson is able to draw on in later, more challenging years. It’s not only that the holidays are glorious, it’s also that she is able to read within this strange landscape with its barns and islands and lingonberries the contradictions and disjunctures within her own personality. She is her mother’s daughter, you feel, even if she strives always for the approval of her father, who “rarely joins the cast of his family, but when he does, he has the air of a captain inspecting his troops”. The love the young Christina feels for her father is a complex, beautiful thing, the way she teases out his character a wonderfully subtle act of narrative control. One of the conceits in the book is the juxtaposition of Christina’s everyday problems – with boys, with her adolescent faith, with jobs – and the increasingly horrifying position of her sister, who is gaining weight and losing consciousness on a host of medications. The strain on the family is clear, and Christina’s increasing religious fundamentalism is merely one sign of the toll that Caroline’s illness is taking on them all. Patterson lifts the desperate sadness of these passages with tender humour, poking fun at her own po-faced forays into evangelism and recording her sister’s obsessive love of the Romanovs. Caroline’s trip to Russia with her parents will have you punching the air for her, even as you recognise that there is tragedy ahead. Patterson is brilliant on both physical and mental pain, and particularly on the linkages between the two. In one of the darkest passages in the book (and in her life), she is diagnosed with polyarthralgia, which, as she puts it, “really just means an awful lot of pain”. The pain is excruciating and without apparent cause, although the reader intuits that it is the physical manifestation of a deep unhappiness within. She goes to Sweden to join her parents on holiday and revisits the place where she was once so happy. “Back in the garden, staring out at the forest and listening to the grasshoppers, I wondered how someone who had so many friends, and such a loving family, could feel so alone.” Little does she know how much more tragedy there is to come; indeed it seems that what brings her out of her slump is the collapse of everything around her, the sense of a ship going down with Patterson the only survivor. Everyone Christina loves dies, and dies too young. She is covered in acne, contracts lupus, is poleaxed by her debilitating and unexplained pain. She is adored by her colleagues at the Poetry Society and the Independent, but the men in her life treat her terribly. Just when there’s a break in the clouds and you think things might be working out for her, she’s diagnosed with an aggressive form of breast cancer. And yet, despite it all, she survives, and more than that, she thrives. The final, joyful chapter looks forcefully ahead, ending with a wonderful passage of hope in the face of despair, a passage that feels like it is written just in case the reader feels any last shred of pity for her. She is on the verge of 60, and she is happy. “My cup runneth over,” she says. “I mean it. My cup runneth over. When the time comes, someone will have to wrest it [life] out of my hands.” • Outside the Sky Is Blue by Christina Patterson is published by Tinder Press (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe youngest of the 18 dancers who make up Nederlands Dans Theater 2 is 20, the oldest is 26 – and every single one of them is utterly astonishing. Watching them move is just a pleasure, their fluid technique, elegant limbs and disciplined shapes fitting themselves to whatever choreography is thrown at them. Quite a lot is thrown at them in this triple bill, which makes you marvel at their adaptability as well. They begin the night flexing and shuddering in sharp staccato in the choreography of Marco Goecke’s The Big Crying, a knotty piece written in response to the death of his father. It casts its dancers in fierce, shadowy groups as they twitch and surge in constricted, contracted gestures that seem to mimic scenes from life, if only you could crack the code. I suspect your reaction depends on how much you like Tori Amos, who provides the melancholy score, alongside a soundscape of roaring trains and the dancers’ screams. It’s very intense but it ends on a note of resolution, as bare-chested Emmitt Cawley sinks to the floor, stretching his body out of its tight-wound state and begins to dance to REM’s Losing My Religion, sung like a dirge. I am a sucker for all this sort of thing, and found myself both riveted and moved. It was nevertheless a relief to move on to the next piece, aptly called Simple Things and choreographed by the granddaddy of Netherlands dance, Hans Van Manen, now 89 and still a master of clear, clever dance-making. This piece is a 20-minute quartet that seems to be about nothing yet is full of something. Set to a mixture of accordion, modern piano and Haydn, and elegantly designed by Keso Dekker, it begins with two men – marvellous Cawley and the equally wondrous Auguste Palayer – dancing side by side with fluent joy, their arms and hands flicking in relaxed time to the music. Two women – Cassandra Martin and Kenedy Kallas, both lovely – enter and dance with them in turn, changing the mood, sweeping their legs across the stage in languorous turns or jumping like satyrs, feet tucked up high. The steps are elegant and classy; the entire piece, with its little hints of story, has an attractive openness and responds perfectly to its score. Johan Inger’s Impasse, which closes the evening, has a darker purpose but equal facility, expressing a deep idea incoherent dance form. It takes three innocent youngsters – Annika Verplancke, Austin Meiteen and Cawley – and sets them jumping across the expanse of their lives, holding hands, stretching their limbs with a sense of possibility. Through a door at the back of Inger’s own set, lit by Tom Visser, the world crowds in in the shape of an enticing group of dancers, at first in black and then like a wild cabaret. Sophisticated and sassy, this society demands the youngsters give up their freedom to conform, losing the space they have marked as their own. The choreography is a thrilling mixture of swagger and challenge. The dancers, as they do all night, hold the stage with utter and transfixing confidence. NDT2 tour the UK and Ireland until 7 MayIt was one of the most audacious heists in Irish history when a 17-strong armed gang posing as police held up the night mail train at Sallins, County Kildare, snatching the equivalent in today’s money of £1m in cash. The IRA would later twice claim responsibility for the 1976 robbery but the lives of the three men wrongly convicted and sentenced to between nine and 12 years for a crime they did not commit were ruined. Now one of those men, former journalist Osgur Breatnach, is threatening to go to the United Nations over allegations of confessions extracted through torture in one of Ireland’s worst miscarriages of justice. In a Dublin hotel, Breatnach tells of the toll the scandal has taken on his mental health, career and family. “I can’t find closure. I have tried,” he says. He leans in to give a blow-by-blow account of what he says happened in the station when he was first arrested by the Garda Síochána. “If you played blind man’s bluff as a child and you are spinning round and you don’t know a connection with what is around you, except my eyes were open. I was being hit all the time, being pushed against the lockers. I tried to get into a corner to defend myself and I couldn’t, so I thought ‘I’ll say I was there’ so the beatings stopped. “They gave me a pen but I was holding it like this,” he says, demonstrating how shaky his hand was. “I couldn’t hold the pen, so they threw me aside … and started all over again. “I was dizzy, had a roaring headache, sore all over, disoriented, terrified. Part of my mind is saying ‘they are going to kill me’. “By the time I was charged in the district court I had been detained eight times consecutively in a period of eight days, had been to two jails, two courts and hospital. It was just an avalanche.” Breatnach’s conviction was quashed in 1980 and he was awarded compensation after a civil action. But there has never been an inquiry into how confessions of guilt were extracted by gardaí or used as the sole basis of convictions by the courts. Breatnach has retained KRW Law, a high-profile Belfast legal firm at the forefront of challenges to the British state over killings during the Troubles. As part of a two-pronged campaign to get to the truth, KRW is threatening to report the Irish government to the UN Committee Against Torture (Uncat), a move that would be embarrassing for Ireland given it is a signatory to Uncat protocol. KRW is also working with the Irish Council for Civil Liberties on a potential petition to the Irish government. The prosecution put forward claims that Breatnach’s injuries were “self inflicted”, even though he had only been in the company of gardaí before signing his “confession”. The ICCL said there had been a “failure by successive Irish governments to examine” what happened and has called for an inquiry investigating breaches of the European convention on human rights. In its summary of Breatnach’s case, KRW cites comments by a respected, now deceased, judge, Mr Justice Adrian Hardiman, in 2007 that 20 years previously Ireland had been “gripped by the fate of the Birmingham Six, the Guildford Four and the Maguire Seven” – a reference to notorious miscarriages of justice in relation to IRA bombings in the UK – but were not looking into similar injustices at home. “The fact is that, during the same time as these miscarriages of justice were unfolding, so too in Ireland was the Sallins mail train robbery case, which led to massive settlements and grave damage to the reputation of our policing and criminal justice systems. “But we have never, as a country or community, internalised the lessons of that event.” Litigation consultant Christopher Stanley of KRW branded the failure hypocritical. “For a western democracy to ignore such an allegation and fail to investigate it is an indictment of that democracy which would demand a similar investigation into similar practices in so-called rogue or failing states. That is hypocrisy. “The historic nature of the allegation, especially when it exposes a systemic practice of abuse, is not important. The fact that it was allowed to occur and no consequences ensued – such as the prosecution of the offenders – is what demands to be exposed even if those now in authority protest that it was a long time ago and we have moved on. “In the Sallins case we want those responsible – those surviving gardaí officers – compelled as witnesses. We will seek testimony from law officers and we will seek disclosure of all material held by the state. Those who suffered have a right to truth which to date has been denied to them.” A spokesperson for Irish minister for justice Helen McEntee said she was aware that incidents such as Sallins “cast a shadow over the trust” in the criminal justice and policing system. However, they said it was important to note “that these investigations happened several decades ago and the safeguards available then to those who were the subjects of investigation were very different to those in place now”, and “a new system of appeal based on miscarriage of justice” had been introduced as a result of the Criminal Justice Act 1984. “The available safeguards were further strengthened in the years that followed. Since 2015, An Garda Síochána has had a code of conduct. This is signed by all members and forms the core of their commitments in respect of behaviour and standards. The [Garda] commissioner is completely committed to upholding the highest standards in our policing service,” the spokesperson added.A businessman involved in arranging donations for Prince Charles’s charitable ventures has confirmed how a 30-minute meeting at Clarence House helped secure an honorary CBE for a Saudi billionaire, which is now at the centre of a police investigation. Michael Wynne-Parker, who acted as a middleman for donations for the Prince’s Foundation, attended a meeting in September 2014 with Royal aide Michael Fawcett. A key topic of the meeting was the ambition of securing an honour for the Saudi billionaire and charity donor Mahfouz Marei Mubarak bin Mahfouz. Wynne-Parker, 76, said he entered Clarence House, the official residence of Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall, by a rear entrance and was ushered into a small office for a meeting attended by Fawcett, then chief executive of the Prince’s Foundation. William Bortrick, a society fixer who was helping Mahfouz, and an official at Dumfries House, a historic country house in Scotland which is one of Prince Charles’s key projects, were also at the meeting. The agenda was forging the links between Mahfouz and Dumfries House, part of the Prince’s Foundation, according to notes of the meeting revealed last year by the Sunday Times. It was also a logistics meeting on how best to secure an honour for Mahfouz, who was a major donor for Dumfries House. Within six months, a nomination was submitted to the Foreign Office for the honorary award for a foreign national. In November 2016, Mahfouz was given the honour in a private investiture at Buckingham Palace. “It was amazing,” said Wynne-Parker. “I was shocked when I suddenly saw the reality later. They acted very quickly, as always is usual with Fawcett. I wasn’t surprised in one sense because of what seemed like Fawcett’s magical powers.” Clarence House has said Charles had no knowledge of allegations of offers of honours on the condition or basis that donations were made to his charitable projects. In August 2017, Fawcett wrote to an aide of Mahfouz offering to try to help him secure a knighthood and British citizenship, in addition to the award he had already received. The letter said the assistance was being offered “in light of the ongoing and most recent generosity of His Excellency”. The meeting at Clarence House, the subsequent arrangements around the awarding of the CBE and the offer to try to secure a knighthood are likely to form key parts of the investigation announced by the Metropolitan Police last week into alleged offences under the Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act 1925. Wynne-Parker said there was a long tradition of charitable donors receiving honours. He said he was not aware and had no knowledge of Mahfouz being offered an honour on the condition of giving donations. He said: “There was nothing inherently wrong with what happened. If people have got spare cash and they want to give it to a charity and they get a gong, there’s nothing wrong with it.” Christopher Sallon QC, a barrister at Doughty Street Chambers, said an offence would be committed under the Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act 1925 where there was a formal agreement or an understanding between the parties that an honour would be provided in exchange for a donation. The maximum sentence under the act is two years’ imprisonment and/or a £500 fine. He said there was a high evidential bar for a successful prosecution. He said: “There must be an agreement or understanding between the parties or at least an attempt by one party to obtain a reward in exchange for an honour or an offer by another part to give such an award.” Norman Baker, the former Liberal Democrat MP, whose complaint in September last year triggered the police inquiry, said he considered there was a prima facie case to be investigated based on the August 2017 letter which was first revealed by the Mail on Sunday. He said: “The whole honours system now needs to be tightened up.” Fawcett resigned last year as chief executive of the Prince’s Foundation. An independent investigation commissioned by the charity found evidence that co-ordination took place between Fawcett and others regarding honours nominations. It said there was no evidence trustees were aware of these communications. The Prince’s Foundation said last week it was inappropriate to comment on an ongoing investigation, but it was reported that a source close to Prince Charles said he would be happy to help with the police investigation if asked.Louis Theroux’s Forbidden America: Extreme and Online (BBC Two) | iPlayer Severance Apple TV+ The Promise (BBC Four) | iPlayer Gemma Collins: Self-Harm and Me Channel 4 | All 4 Should the openly bigoted be given the mainstream platform they crave? That was the ethical stink bomb permeating the opener of BBC Two’s three-part documentary series Louis Theroux’s Forbidden America, the first part of which dealt with the internet-based US far right (the other episodes will focus on rap and pornography). It raised the question: does this really need to be shown? For sure, the people Theroux meets bask in the negative attention: at times, the parade of needy chancers make reality TV hopefuls look positively Amish. There’s Nick Fuentes, who runs an America First convention, who thinks that white people are bullied, and women shouldn’t vote. And livestreamer Baked Alaska, whose followers spit prejudice in disguised voices. Another streamer, Beardson Beardly, turns up wearing a Louis Theroux T-shirt, his eyes gleaming at his own meta-audacity. Challenged about an alleged Nazi salute, Beardson erupts, and later trashes Theroux on his show, yelling feebly: “You’re a piece of shit and I don’t like you!” Oh Beardson, don’t leave us this way. A big tell is the misogyny: one of the few women featured explains to Theroux how she was threatened with anal rape. Elsewhere, the documentary crystallises how savvy this relatively new breed consider themselves to be. In a bubbling online swamp of agitators, “incels”, gamers and “irony bros”, it’s a new level of evolved bigotry: the same racism, sexism and homophobia, but delivered with a snicker, a wink, a Get Out Of Hate-Speech Jail Free card. They film Theroux filming them. They talk about “majority white” but coyly deny white nationalism. Solemn avowals are made about “not supporting slavery”, as if it’s a valid option they’ve graciously declined. The result is a glimpse of the dark underbelly of Online Bigot USA, except of course it’s also happening everywhere else. Theroux drops the faux-naive act he started his career with, emerging as a stronger, more direct documentarian. Far from sanitising unsavoury mindsets, he holds them up to scrutiny, albeit, his rightwing subjects would claim, with a big pair of “pretentious liberal journalist!” tongs. Should such programmes be made? I’d say so: not looking at something doesn’t make it go away. The new nine-part Apple TV+ offering Severance, set in a near-dystopian future, co-created and co-written by Dan Erickson (The Good Fight; Blue Bloods) and co-directed by Ben Stiller, seems to ask: how much should work own us? Adam Scott plays Mark, a corporate suit at mysterious data outfit Lumen Industries, a white corridored warren that instils instant Black Mirror-style unease. Mark and his co-workers, including John Turturro and Zach Cherry, have willingly submitted to a controversial implant that divides memories of work and home, meaning they (when they’re “Innies” at the office) remember nothing of home, and (as “Outies”) remember nothing of work when they’re at home. The outside world seems bleak (Mark is widowed), while the Lumen bosses, including Patricia Arquette and Tramell Tillman, are menacingly clinical. As a new Innie, played by Britt Lower, rebels (“Am I livestock?”), a former co-worker warns Mark about Lumen. Watching the first two available episodes, I pondered: is Severance an existential cogitation on work-life balance, with a side note on separation of self? I also thought, jeez, guys, I’m not immortal, get on with it. Severance proceeds at the kind of pace at which you might need to stick a hot fork in your thigh to stay alert. In a remarkable cast (Christopher Walken shows up later), Turturro is underemployed, while Arquette gives a performance so dry it leaves dandruff. Nor is it funny, unless mechanically blank passes for black humour. Still, I appreciate the imaginative reach, the attempt at something different. Peeking ahead a few episodes, twists and shocks seem to be – finally – deigning to arrive. Over on BBC Four, the television gods give us another reason to commit to subtitles with French six-part thriller The Promise. Created by Gaëlle Bellan and former Spiral showrunner Anne Landois, directed by Laure de Butler, it’s an elegantly macabre tale about children going missing over two time zones and has been a big hit in France. Detective Pierre Castaing (Olivier Marchal) is obsessively convinced that the seedy Serge Fouquet (Guy Lecluyse) is the culprit in a missing-girl case. Twenty years later, Castaing’s daughter, Sarah (Sofia Essaïdi), now also a detective, returns to investigate another child’s disappearance. Could Fouquet be responsible, and why does Sarah’s onetime love (Robinson Stévenin) keep falling under suspicion? Set in the densely forested Landes region, The Promise takes full metaphorical advantage of the elements, starting with the wild storm ripping though trees and sky as the first small girl disappears. From there, the plot spins out like a sticky cobweb, keeping you speculating until (almost) the end. Heading a sterling cast, Essaïdi is sometimes still, other times as volatile as her character’s father. The Promise becomes not just about the crimes, but also about how deep into the thickets of loyalty you can wander before you realise you have to give up, turn back and follow the breadcrumbs back to reality. Gemma Collins (AKA “GC”) is a sparky reality diva, formerly of The Only Way Is Essex. In Channel 4 documentary Gemma Collins: Self-Harm and Me, made in conjunction with the mental health charity Mind, she reveals a different side of herself. She started cutting herself at 13, and continued self-harming for 20 years. Her parents discovered her covered in blood, as did her now-fiance. Now Collins wants to have children, and she’s afraid the impulse will return. Talking to those around her, and visiting the self-harm charity Harmless, Collins seems determined to shed light on this issue, which, according to NHS figures cited in the documentary, affects one in 15 people in their lifetime, and one in six 16- to 24-year-olds. The programme could have committed to a deeper, more analytical dive, but Collins is commendably reflective, saying that even after she stopped cutting, she self-harmed in other ways, such as weight and relationships. And social media? At one point she reads out brutal online reactions to her self-harming (“I heard she cut her arm and gravy came out”). “It don’t bother me,” she snaps, but just for a second, her eyes flash with something sadder than anger. What else I’m watching Try Harder! (BBC Four) In this absorbing Storyville documentary from Debbie Lum, which originally premiered atlast year’s Sundance film festival, San Francisco students navigate the savage Ivy League college application process, where it’s almost impossible to get a place. The Tinder Swindler (Netflix) A suave diamond tycoon is revealed as a devious con artist in this intense feature-length true crime documentary in which his alleged victims join forces to bring him down. (It’s now reported that the real-life swindler intends to parlay his infamy into a Hollywood career.) The Professionals (BritBox) The first two series of the fabled late-70s/early-80s crime series are up. Bodie and Doyle are the British Starsky and Hutch, but better: sharper styling, more ’tude, tendency to fight villains in crackly faux-leather jackets. Starring Martin Shaw and Lewis Collins (RIP).Regardless of what unfolds in the coming days and weeks, the fact that Vladimir Putin is once again menacing and stalking the world stage requires those of us committed to peace to act. In the UK, that means getting our own house in order. Let there be no doubt: when it comes to tackling Russian aggression, the Labour party supports the UK government and our allies. Those who equivocate between the actions of Russia and Nato are misguided or worse. The unified approach of recent weeks has surprised the Kremlin precisely because it is so used to encountering division. Those divisions have contributed to decades of failure in dealing with Russia. The Putin playbook is well known. He favours chaos over order, the fog of war over clear strategy. He takes a nihilistic, zero-sum approach to foreign policy. Illicit money and influence are used as a judo move that turns the openness and freedom of western democracies into weaknesses. Over almost 12 years of Tory government, the tendrils of the Kremlin have been allowed to wrap around the UK, turning London into the “money-laundering capital of the world”. A cottage industry has been created that directly and indirectly does the bidding of those linked to Putin. Last week, it was revealed that £1.5bn of UK property had been snapped up by Russians accused of corruption or linked to the Kremlin. They are not here for the weather: they see us as a soft touch, somewhere they can hide cash with few questions asked. The prime minister’s recent tough talk couldn’t even be described as closing the stable door after the horse has bolted: it’s more like musing on what a good idea having a door would be. In 2018, the Commons foreign affairs committee said that “reacting in an ad hoc way to the Kremlin’s behaviour has led to a disjointed approach” and that “the assets… support Putin’s campaign to subvert the international rules-based system”. Priti Patel was on that committee. It should not have taken nearly four years, the massing of more than 100,000 Russian soldiers and the threat of war for the Tories to act. While they have refused to take action, the Labour party has laid out a serious plan for weeding out corruption. It involves greater transparency over company ownership via reform of Companies House, strengthening resources and powers of law enforcement on money laundering, updating counter-espionage laws and creating a register of parliamentarians and peers on the boards of foreign companies. By backing it, the government could begin to undo Putin’s grip and restore Britain’s reputation. This seems like common sense. So why is it not happening? Perhaps the answer can be found in the Tory party’s accounts. By taking nearly £2m in donations since Boris Johnson took power in 2019, they have become just as hooked on Russian-linked money as any of the worm-tongued servicers of oligarchical wealth. It is welcome that the Tories are finally waking up to the dangers of Russian money. But it’s not long since the prime minister was selling himself off as a tennis partner in exchange for donations and David Cameron was giving credulous speeches in Moscow. The Conservative party and its MPs and associations should hand back all the money they took. It is the only way to show that their days of turning a blind eye to kleptocratic loot are over. • Sir Keir Starmer is leader of the Labour partyWe’ve been reading a book called There’s A House Inside My Mummy each night before bedtime, a winsome tumble through the fact that people sometimes exist inside other people you know. I don’t mind this book’s approach because it is adorable, and a useful way of explaining the inexplicable miracle of human reproduction through metaphor. It’s useful for me to learn as I have a habit of being altogether too literal. ‘You can’t fit a baby in there,’ he says, patting his mum’s belly, ‘it’s too small, you would be sore!’ ‘It is, a bit,’ we tell him, which is something the book doesn’t really go into, but we feel it’s worth being honest about, particularly in light of all the new noises his mum is making as she makes her way around the house. A lot of parenting involves explaining things in ways so simple that their strangeness is made new to yourself. I know this because, every night, I have to explain the importance of dental hygiene to a three-year-old, too. Teeth, I try to get across, are just external bones which erupt from the flesh of your mouth, one by one, like parasitic wasps. You didn’t ask for them, but now they’re here, and you must scrub and polish these bones every day or they will rot, fall out of your head and you might starve to death. This usually gets him scrubbing quite avidly, and more than once has caused him to state that he most definitely does not want his teeth to fall out. Welllllll, I say – at the risk of changing the terms and conditions quite unreasonably – in about 18 months, they’ll start randomly tumbling from your gums so they can be replaced with your adult teeth. This is good, though. This means you’re a big boy, for these teeth will be massive, my darling, the same size as Mummy and Daddy’s, even though your head being not even half the size as ours by the time the cycle has come through. Despite this lack of cranial real estate, you’ll get an extra 12 teeth on top of the 20 that will be replaced, because your body just has them knocking around. And I do mean knocking around, dear boy, since these 32 comically oversized adult’s teeth are already in your head, in all stages of development, lurking in every recess of your skull to emerge from a mouth you might presume to be prohibitively small to afford this process. If I were to x-ray your face, sweet child, we would see a clear snapshot of the full grisly complement of gnashers, crowding out every inch of your head like some sort of abominable HR Giger lithograph. Just like Mummy has a baby inside her tummy, you have an adult inside you, and it will begin bursting into life via a gory profusion of discarded enamel, just over a year from now. ‘Daddy,’ he says, as I tuck him in, feeling much the wiser about babies, teeth and the joys of life, ‘can you leave the light on, please?’ Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsThe “creeping tendrils of the Kremlin” have been allowed to wrap themselves around the UK and turn London into a global money laundering capital, Keir Starmer has said, as he accused successive Conservative governments of failing to act on the threat. In an excoriating attack on the government’s stance on Russian influence within Britain, the Labour leader said that the UK needed to get “our own house in order” as it unites with the west to confront Vladimir Putin. The warning comes as new figures obtained by the Observer show nearly 30,000 properties in England and Wales including mansions owned by the Russian elite are registered to companies and individuals based in the British Virgin Islands (BVI). Most of the owners are unknown after delays in a government pledge to end secret offshore ownership of property. Writing in the Observer, Starmer says greater transparency, more powerful counter-espionage measures and new anti-corruption laws are required to combat money laundering in the UK. He said that Putin deployed illicit money and influence “as a judo move that turns the openness and freedom of western democracies into weaknesses”. “Over almost 12 years of Tory government, the creeping tendrils of the Kremlin have been allowed to wrap themselves around the UK,” he writes. “A cottage industry has been created that directly and indirectly does the bidding of those linked to Putin.” He said a new report by the anti-corruption organisation Transparency International had revealed how £1.5bn of UK property has been snapped up by Russians accused of corruption or linked to the Kremlin. “They are not buying here for the weather: they see us as a soft touch, where they can hide cash with few questions asked,” he writes. New figures in a separate analysis obtained by the Observer show the BVI is a main low-tax offshore jurisdiction for companies and individuals owning property in the UK. The analysis by the Centre for Public Data, a UK non-profit organisation, of the most recent property data reveals 21,496 property titles in England and Wales are registered to companies in the BVI and another 7,898 are registered to individuals. The BVI does not disclose company owners and many of the individuals who are property title holders are nominees acting for offshore trusts. Experts have established that a number of these properties, including some of the country’s most expensive homes, are linked to Russian billionaires. Anna Powell-Smith, the director of the Centre for Public Data, said: “These figures show the extraordinary role the British Virgin Islands plays in the UK property market. “It is over five years since the government promised to clean up the UK property market by publishing the true owners behind secretive offshore companies. The legislation is ready, but progress has stalled.” The BVI has committed to introducing a public register of company ownership by next year, but the exact details are yet to be confirmed after officials said some individuals should still be entitled to privacy. It was reported by the publication EUobserver this month that the BVI is expected to be added this week by the EU to a “grey list” of tax havens. Ministers are under mounting pressure amid claims that lax anti-corruption measures have allowed suspected illicit funds into Britain. The Observer reported last month that the government was being urged to suspend its tier 1 investor visa scheme, the “golden visa”, over concerns that the super-rich from Russia and other countries had been fast-tracked for UK residency without proper checks. The home secretary, Priti Patel, announced last week the scheme was being scrapped with immediate effect as part of a “renewed crackdown on illicit finance and fraud”. The tier 1 investor visa programme allowed people with at least £2m in investment funds and a UK bank account to apply for residency rights. The speed of their application for indefinite leave to remain was dictated by how much money they had to invest. In the year to September 2021, 798 investor visas were issued, 82 of them to Russians. David Davis, the former cabinet minister, said: “I think we have at least 700 Russian multimillionaires in the country. We have been too slack.” Of the golden visas, he added: “It seems to me that the natural next step is to review all the ones that have been given already with a view to ensuring that the source of the wealth that has allowed them to come here is acceptable to the United Kingdom.” Ministers say they will implement a package of measures to help combat financial crime. A government spokesperson said: “The government will establish a new beneficial ownership register of overseas entities that own UK property, in order to combat money laundering and achieve greater transparency in the UK property market.”Standing in the hospital room where she gave birth to her first child, Rosemonde Bertin looked around in despair. The roof had collapsed, trees grew through the floor and a rusting, enamelled bedpan lay half concealed by ferns. “I had my baby here,” Bertin said. “He was born in 1972.” That was shortly before everyone on Salomon atoll was forcibly deported by the British to Mauritius and Seychelles. Beside the hospital stood St Bridget’s chapel. Creepers and roots penetrated the walls; decaying coconuts littered the floor. Two coloured glass panes remained in one window but the roof had disappeared. Orange and black, coconut crabs lurked in crevices. “My church is abandoned,” wailed Bertin, 67. “I was baptised here. I made my first communion here. All the families came to church every Sunday.” On a previous occasion, escorted by British officials on a “heritage” visit, she had not been able to explore her former community. This time she had returned on a Mauritian-chartered cruise ship. “Now I feel I can show you around,” she said. A torrential downpour, frequent in the afternoons once the equatorial sun heats the seas around the Chagos Islands, required 10 minutes’ shelter under the trees Down a sodden track through overgrown coconut palms, Bertin led the way to the island’s cemetery. Predatory frigate birds drifted overhead. Graves were covered in moss with few legible inscriptions. Rusting iron rails surrounded a few tombs. The temporary return of exiled Chagossians, however, was not the only narrative being played out during the five-day visit this week. Mauritian officials planted their national flag on Salomon, Peros Banhos atoll and even a sandbank that emerged on a low spring tide at Blenheim reef on the northernmost edge of the archipelago. The national anthem was sung and a statement broadcast by the prime minister, Pravind Jugnauth, celebrating Mauritian sovereignty. A metal plaque, recording that the islands are inalienably part of Mauritius, was cemented into place. As the Bleu De Nîmes, hired by Mauritius for its first formal expedition to the archipelago, sailed away, Britain’s control over what it terms British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) appeared significantly weakened. The formal challenge to UK sovereignty was initially met by Whitehall evasion: the presence of a foreign survey vessel in territorial waters explained as cooperation with a “scientific survey”. But the distrust lurking behind diplomatic niceties was evident in the presence of a British fisheries protection vessel, Grampian Frontier, which shadowed the Bleu De Nîmes, keeping a constant distance. In the face of Mauritian allegations of “crimes against humanity”, the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) eventually reasserted UK sovereignty and pointed to grants made to Chagossian exiles. It also denied interfering with the cruise ship’s wifi, which mysteriously failed. But the legal balance shifted decisively in favour of Mauritian arguments for sovereignty after decisions at the international court of justice, the UN general assembly and the international tribunal of the law of the sea (Itlos) in 2019 and last year. The UK was found to have unlawfully separated the Chagos Islands from Mauritius before it granted independence in 1968. This week’s visit was the logical consequence of Mauritius seeking to enforce that internationally ratified authority. The government in Port Louis is now contemplating further legal action to enforce the Itlos ruling. The Mauritian ambassador to the United Nations, Jagdish Koonjul, led the expedition. It had accomplished four objectives, he said. “We completed the survey on Blenheim reef [for a forthcoming ITLOS hearing]. We brought Chagossians back to the islands where they were born. “We were able to exercise our sovereignty, raising the flag of Mauritius as we were travelling through the northernmost part of our territory. And we have [explained] to the world [through the media] all the lies and deceits hidden for so long by certain powers.” The UK justifies its refusal to hand back the territory to Mauritius by pointing out that the initial ICJ judgment, on which other decisions relied, was advisory not binding. Back in Salomon and Peros Banhos, wandering through derelict homes, it is difficult to understand why the UK should have abandoned such strategic settlements. The Chagossians’ ancestors may have been transported as enslaved people from Africa by the first, French, colonial overseers, but their freed descendants had established thriving communities that survived by trading coconut oil. Neighbouring Maldives now hosts a lucrative tourist industry. The Americans, who rent a strategic military base from the UK on another island, Diego Garcia, supported the mass deportations in the early 1970s. The main rationale for evacuation, however, was the consequence of a 1960 UN resolution on the right of self-determination: the UK realised it could only establish a new colony, the British Indian Ocean Territory, if no one lived there. Ever since, the plight of the exiled Chagossians has been the emotional battleground over which legitimacy of ownership has been fought. They UK, by forcibly deporting them, denying them UK citizenship, preventing them from returning, and insulting them in FCO memorandums (where they were dismissed as “Men Fridays”), has repeatedly forfeited international sympathy. The media battle this week to persuade the world that Britain is the retreating colonial power and Mauritius is claiming its rightful inheritance is the latest round in a long international campaign. The incongruity of Chagossian exiles returning on a large cruise ship, replete with Jacuzzis and a deck-top bar, may have diluted the Mauritian message of colonial expropriation (and it certainly provoked criticism from the Chagossian diaspora in Crawley, Sussex.) But a vessel that size, carrying tenders for surveying a large reef, was required. It had originally been intended to accommodate the Mauritian prime minister. Four hundred miles out from the Seychelles – cutting through the deep sea’s heavy swell in an area regularly swept by cyclones – the need for a robust, ocean-going ship was easy to appreciate.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.One in five nearly-new cars are now selling at more than their brand-new equivalents, as disruption to supply chains continues to push used cars to record values. The closure of forecourts because of Covid and an ongoing shortage of semiconductors are the main forces behind a major mismatch of supply and demand, which has been worsening over the last few months. The average price of a used car on Auto Trader’s marketplace has increased 29% over the last year, according to its latest figures. Average prices are up more than £4,200 in just six months. The bizarre spectacle of nearly-new cars selling for more than their brand-new price has been fuelled by buyers having to join long waiting lists for new cars, prompting them to head to the secondhand market. Nearly-new cars are those up to a year old. Among those selling above their brand-new price are models of the Smart Forfour, the Toyota RAV4 and the Volkswagen Tiguan. It comes with the entire used-car market seeing record prices. Of the 10 models that saw the least price growth since the start of last February, only the bottom three models actually saw a drop in price on Auto Trader’s site. The average price for a car on its site is more than £20,000 and has increased for 93 consecutive weeks. Ian Plummer, Auto Trader’s commercial director, said that there was little prospect of a swift “bubble-bursting moment” that would see second-hand prices return to lower levels. “In terms of new cars, we estimate that probably about a million and a half cars fewer were sold in the two years of 2020 and 2021,” he said. “I think the market will still be half a million or so shorter than it would ordinarily be this year. On top of that, more generally, there is a huge appetite for car ownership. “Supply and demand are simultaneously swinging quite dramatically away from each other. I’m sure this will narrow over time, but it doesn’t feel like there’s going to be radical changes in either metric very quickly.” The number of used cars exceeding the price of their brand-new versions is not limited to the UK. Manufacturers, including Ford, Volkswagen and Toyota, have all recently said that they are still struggling to deal with the impact of the semiconductor shortage hitting production targets.Talking to Dr Becky Kennedy today requires flexibility – the kind of flexibility that many of us parents have had to hone pretty well during the pandemic. My five-year-old daughter is off from school with her first bout of Covid, which means I have to take Kennedy’s Zoom call from the bedroom. Kennedy’s own seven-year-old daughter is also at home with a fever and sore throat; luckily her husband has stepped in to help oversee childcare, so she’s got an hour to speak. The slapdash situation feels apt: Kennedy, a clinical psychologist from New York who specialises in parenting, experienced a rapid rise to prominence during the pandemic when young parents suddenly found themselves at home with their children and in desperate need for a hand to guide them through it. Kennedy had never even posted on Instagram when Covid-19 first emerged, but on 28 March 2020, two days after lockdown measures came into force in the UK, she wrote a message to her 200 followers that changed her life. It read: “Most young kids will remember how their family home felt during the coronavirus panic more than anything specific about the virus. Our kids are watching us and learning about how to respond to stress and uncertainty. Let’s wire our kids for resilience, not panic. How? Scroll for some tips.” The post went viral. Dr Becky (as she is known online) and her company Good Inside now has 1m followers, a hit podcast, a series of paid-for workshops covering everything from potty training to anxious kids, and a legion of devoted followers located everywhere from Jordan to Guatemala via Australia and the UK. This year she has a book out and big plans for a membership platform that she hopes can become, as she puts it, a “Peloton for parents” – a community hub packed with educational tools. Kennedy talks about what she does as becoming a “movement”, an empathic, relationship-centric approach to parenting that is attracting a whole new generation of mums and dads to the cause. It’s not for nothing that Time magazine called her the “Millennial parent whisperer”. “Yeah, I’ve got that tattooed on my arm,” she says laughing from her Manhattan office. “No, no, I definitely do not!” In fact, Kennedy is not big on any kind of labels. Her focus on parenting arose from when she worked on long-term therapy with adults and realised some people were being needlessly diagnosed with disorders for patterns they had wired into their bodies during childhood as they learned to adapt to their family system. Kennedy wondered if we could intervene earlier, so that children could build resilience and learn to adapt not just to their own family system but in the future as adults, too – “Rather than having to unwire and rewire themselves back again in adulthood,” she says. Five months after she’d had her first of three children (a boy, now 10; she also has a boy, aged four), Kennedy opened her private practice aimed at doing just that. During our hour-long chat it is clear why Kennedy is so popular: she’s friendly, funny and speaks with clarity, summing up complex theoretical ideas in relatable terms. She believes in focusing on the parent rather than the child – transforming them into “sturdy leaders” who experience their own growth and healing along the way. The parent is invited to examine how they respond to their child’s tantrums and deep feelings – do they deny them (“Oh, don’t be silly!”), distract them (“Oh, look, a bus!”) or feel guilty? Or do they validate them and discuss them openly and respectfully (“I can see you’re feeling really sad – let’s talk about why.”) Kids aren’t afraid of feelings, she says, but of feeling alone in those feelings. She likes parents to put themselves in the position of their children and imagine how they might feel. She talks about a time she played a short game with her own daughter where the child got to set the rules. Her daughter asked her to change into clothes she didn’t like shortly before Kennedy had to leave the house for work and she realised it made her bristle with resentment – if she felt like that, then why wouldn’t a child? As a child growing up in Westchester County, New York, Kennedy was a perfectionist who thrived on being the good girl, the people pleaser, the high achiever. This pressure to be good is what she believes contributed to a “brief but intense” experience with anorexia as a teenager. She found therapy rewarding and the experience had the added benefit of suggesting a career path: “Understanding people’s stories, unlocking things… Therapy can change the course of people’s lives. I know because it did with mine.” At first, Kennedy studied and applied the behavioural method of parenting favoured by previous generations – changing behaviour using naughty steps and reward charts felt logical and it seemed to get quick results. But she remembers sitting in her office with a set of parents, telling them how to implement a time-out, and thinking: “This feels wrong, I wouldn’t do this with my own kids.” She became suspicious of the whole approach. “The way I think about behaviour now is that it’s the tip of the iceberg,” she says. “It’s important because you need to see the tip to understand what’s underneath. But if I cut off the tip I don’t think anybody would say you’re suddenly safer on your ship – in fact, the waters would now be more dangerous.” A later session, with parents of a 14-year-old boy who was rebelling after years of being sticker-charted into behaving well, confirmed her change of heart. “He basically said: ‘I don’t fucking care about your stickers and you can’t physically move me and put me in a time-out any more. You don’t understand me, you don’t try to understand me, you’ve been more interested in shaping my behaviour than helping me grow up as a human being and now we have nothing.’ I could actually cry thinking about it, but that case showed me that it’s also truly never too late to change.” Kennedy’s Instagram has a wealth of snappy information on it. A typical post might say: “Three Things To Say When Your Child Is Hesitant” or “Common Parenting Myth: If I Take Care Of Myself Rather Than Spend Time With My Children, I’m Selfish.” There are multiple to-camera clips to watch, digestible in a minute or so. In terms of translating deep ideas into social media nuggets for time-starved parents to consume in spare moments, Kennedy seems to have aced the market. But is it possible to come away with meaningful change from such short snippets? Parental advice for previous generations involved consuming huge tomes, such as Dr Benjamin Spock’s 1946 book The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care (527 pages) or 1983’s The Baby Book (783 pages). But then that relied on people actually reading them. I found the accessibility of Kennedy’s advice a great starting place to consider her ideas – and she frequently directs you to her podcasts and workshops if you wish to investigate further. Dr Becky also offers advice that is targeted at the unique problems millennial parents face, reframing some of the stereotypes we’ve become used to hearing in the media: that they’re snowflakes, suffer from a sense of entitlement and are glued to their devices. “Younger parents experience a lot of guilt,” she says, which is not only a problem for building sturdy leaders, but also misplaced: a 2016 study by the University of California, Irvine, found that both mums and dads spend significantly more time with their children than their 1960s counterparts: mums moved up from 54 average daily minutes on child care activities in 1965 to 104 minutes in 2012; dads moved up to 59 minutes from a whopping 16 minutes in the 60s. Kennedy also points to the pressures of social media, which invites comparisons to unrealistic scenes of perfect parenting and offers continuous opportunities for external validation from likes and comments. “It’s so easy to define yourself by the information others give you, rather than from what’s going on inside you,” she says. “And if you apply that to parenting then your child becomes the latest barometer of whether or not you’re a good person. So if they have a meltdown in the playground, you must be a horrible parent because they’re not giving you an Instagram perfect video. Whereas I want parents to think, yes my child is tantrumming, but I feel confident about my intervention.” This notion of internal and external validation applies to children, too, and Kennedy warns against something some of us softer parents might find counterintuitive: over-praising. “We think, great, that will build them up. But if that’s true, the opposite is true too when they hear something less nice.” Instead of saying, “You were amazing at soccer today,” she suggests asking questions (“Who crossed the ball to you when you scored?”) or focusing on how the experience made the child feel (“I could see how happy scoring made you.”) Partly, this comes from her own upbringing: Kennedy has a close relationship with her parents, but wonders if maybe they could have framed their praise in different ways. “I needed more permission to struggle. To not be so good,” she says. Analysing our own upbringings and identifying things that worked or didn’t work is an important part of Kennedy’s approach. I tell her about a vivid memory I have from childhood, of overhearing a conversation about Ronald Reagan “pressing the button” and descending into uncontrollable tears when my parents explained what nuclear war was. My devastation was met with a mixture of bemusement and panicked attempts to reassure me, neither of which, I now realise, were validating the extreme feelings I was having. I ask Kennedy how I might go about telling my own children about the difficult things of our era, such as climate change. “What you’re talking about is how we talk to our kids about hard truths,” she says. There are no set rules. “It’s not like at two you say this and at five you say this. It’s more… Where is my kid now in terms of talking about uncomfortable truths?” She points to the example of a family who might steer their children away from a rough sleeper to avoid talking about homelessness. Or how another parent might argue with their partner, but then say to their child afterwards, “You heard us argue and that probably felt scary, here’s what was going on.” The second child is likely to be more emotionally prepared to talk about bigger things such as climate change because they have built up skills to deal with hard truths. “So there’s not a sex talk, a racism talk, a climate talk… You start them off, tell them you will check in and they can talk about these important topics. This also sets the stage for how you get your teenager to talk to you rather than hide things. Because that doesn’t just happen in adolescence.” A few days later I speak to Carolyn Ismach, 36, a speech and language pathologist from New Jersey with two children: a girl aged five and a son who is three. She had been following a variety of “positive parenting” sites, but found their lack of concrete examples frustrating. Kennedy’s material seemed different: while emphasising a positive approach, it also contained specific steps that Ismach could take out into the real world. “Within a week, I’d pretty much abandoned the other accounts and relied solely on Dr Becky,” she says. Ismach has called on Kennedy’s sleep workshop and her podcasts for advice (“I can’t tell you how many times I’ve listened to the callers and thought, ‘Wow, I could have called in with that exact question, I’m not alone here.’”). And she credits Kennedy’s “Back to School” workshop with helping her daughter adapt to a new school environment after months away. “She walked into her first day back with zero hesitation and, even better, I felt fully confident in myself as a parent.” These stories aren’t uncommon. Yet Kennedy has faced criticism, too, namely that what she’s selling is the unattainable notion that it’s possible to “win” at parenting. To some degree, she says, she can understand where that comes from. “It’s one more way to feel not enough, right? I didn’t listen to the whole podcast, or do the latest workshop. But I think two things can be true: I am doing enough and there is more I could learn.” Still, she thinks her aims have been misrepresented: “I don’t say you can ‘win’ at parenting, in terms of controlling your kids’ behaviour or having picture-perfect moments. If a win exists, then it’s parents having more clarity and internal confidence even in the hard moments.” Regardless of criticisms, it’s hard to disagree that a sea change is happening regarding how parents build relationships with their children. The Observer’s agony aunt Philippa Perry is the author of 2019’s The Book You Wish Your Parents Had Read (And Your Children Will Be Glad That You Did), which shares similar ideas to Kennedy’s about establishing a respectful bond between adults and children, and emerged from a similar place. “I wrote my book after decades of seeing patients whose parents were perfectly nice, yet believed it was in their child’s best interests to deny rather than validate their child’s unhappy feelings,” she says. “Parents who did not realise you cannot scold a child out of being sensitive and thought they were doing the best thing when they attempted this.” She adds: “If you can’t create a safe, harmonious home environment where differences of opinion and cultures can be worked through safely, then you might need to self-examine a bit.” If such ideas are set to mark a permanent shift in how we parent, then Kennedy is seizing it. Later this year sees the release of her book Good Inside: A Guide to Becoming the Parent You Want to Be. And for her membership scheme she has devised a platform to provide a library of information to a community of like-minded mums and (hopefully) dads, too – her Instagram followers are currently 94% female. She has also just finished training her first cohort of therapists in the Dr Becky method and they will populate the community, too, offering advice and support. But if her fame continues to grow will it put pressure on her own parenting style? She laughs: “I get asked a lot, so are your kids perfect? No! That would be the opposite of my approach. And also, for anyone who needs to hear this – I yell at my kids sometimes, I find myself saying, ‘OK just do this and you can have an M&amp;M,’ I get distracted by my phone when I’m supposed to be playing with them. If knowing that helps knock me off some kind of pedestal then that’s a win for everyone. Because at the end of the day we’re all human and parenting is hard – and that’s true for me, too!” Visit goodinside.com for Dr Becky’s podcast, workshops, and to sign up for her Good Insider newsletterFlorida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, is backing a controversial proposal to strip $200m in education funding from Democratic counties that defied his executive order last year banning mask mandates in schools. DeSantis, who is widely seen as a leading heir to Donald Trump in the Republican party, plans to send the money instead to mostly Republican counties that supported him. The plan, which some analysts believe is almost certainly unconstitutional, was part of a budget bill that passed the Republican-dominated Florida house on Wednesday. It was immediately attacked by teachers unions, school districts and education advocates, who say the penalties will strip further resources from classrooms in a state already in the bottom four of per-student spending nationally. “This is retaliation by legislators and the governor,” said Jabari Hosey, president of the advocacy group Families for Safe Schools and a parent of school-age children in Brevard county. “We are down over 150 teachers in Brevard right now. We need more social workers, there’s a performance gap because of Covid that is still present in our community. We need more funds, more opportunities, more instructors. “To retaliate and to attack the public school system they are supposed to be promoting is very sad. Frankly, it’s embarrassing.” Under the proposal by the Republican state congressman Randy Fine, school districts in the 12 Florida counties that implemented mask mandates last summer in defiance of DeSantis’s executive order will forfeit amounts based on their size. Brevard, where Hosey’s children attend school, and which Fine represents, would forgo $4.5m. Two-thirds of the money would come from south Florida, which votes overwhelmingly Democratic in local, state and national elections. Miami-Dade, the nation’s fourth largest district with 357,000 students, would lose $72m; Broward, the sixth largest with 270,000 students, would forfeit about $32m; and Palm Beach, the 10th largest with 193,000 would give up $28m. Of the others, Alachua, Duval, Hillsborough, Indian River, Leon, Orange, Sarasota and Volusia counties, all but three backed Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election in Florida, which was won by Donald Trump. “Following the law is not optional. These school districts broke the law, and they were broken for nothing,” a visibly angry Fine told fellow legislators on Wednesday. He insisted during a turbulent session of the Florida house appropriations committee last week that the state would cut the salaries of administrators earning more than $100,000 and not “reduce funding for any direct educational service or resource that impacts the education of kindergarten through grade 12 students”. He conceded, however, that the policy was intentionally punitive to counties who refused to fall in line with the governor. “It is intended to reward the 55 school districts, the overwhelming majority of which followed our state law and respected the rights of parents over the past year,” he said. Initially, DeSantis, a fierce critic of mask and vaccine mandates, declared himself against the proposal. “My view would be let’s not do that,” he said in an appearance in Jacksonville on Friday, telling reporters he instead preferred to let parents sue school districts individually if they felt children were harmed by “forced masking”. By Tuesday, however, the governor backtracked, supporting Fine’s initiative and parents’ rights to file lawsuits. “They should get compensated for academic, social and emotional problems caused by these policies,” he said in a tweet. Having passed the Florida house, the $105bn budget that includes the redistribution of education funds must now be reconciled in the state senate, which also has a Republican majority. If DeSantis eventually signs it into law, it is likely to face legal challenges. Hosey’s group points out that every Florida county with mandates dropped them as soon as the original executive order became law in November, following a lengthy legal back and forth with districts who insisted they followed advice on masking from the Biden administration and federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Additionally, they say, the fines target the salaries of school district administrators who only implemented the mask policies, not the school board members who set them. John J Sullivan, director of legislative affairs for Broward county public schools, told the Guardian in a statement that students would be directly affected by the withholding of funds. “We are disappointed in the governor’s reversal. We hope the senate will not agree to penalize administrators who have worked tirelessly to meet the unprecedented challenges caused by the pandemic, always focused on the health and safety of students and teachers,” he said. “This penalty would have a negative impact on the services the district is able to provide to our students.” Administrators in Miami-Dade and Palm Beach counties have issued similar statements, and educators’ unions have condemned the plan. “We have 165 vacancies and a lot of it has to do with the salaries we can offer to teachers. So that money would mean a lot to our school district and it’s a shame that someone would do that. It’s totally punitive and politically motivated,” Wendy Doromal, president of the Orange county classroom teachers association told WMFE radio.I don’t normally take much interest in planning applications, appeals and disputes, but one that is local to me piqued my curiosity as it involves a burning issue, literally. This is the application by the waste management company Veolia to build an incinerator not too far from Jane Austen’s house at Chawton. Given that it is in an area of breathtaking countryside and despite objections from Alan Titchmarsh, CPRE Hampshire, the South Downs National Park Authority and Historic England, among others, the authorities appear to be giving it the go-ahead. What particularly caught my eye was the following: “But despite this overwhelming opposition, the report states the proposal will ‘allow residual waste, which cannot be reused or recycled, to be managed at the most reasonable level of the waste hierarchy, diverting it from landfill’.” Excuse me - the waste hierarchy? I would dearly love to hear an explanation from Veolia or Hampshire county council as to what this means exactly, otherwise I think that the application should be thrown out on the grounds that it contains elements that are an offence against the English language. Now, how do you normally buy your clothes? I imagine physically or online. Oh please, do get up to speed. Read the following breathless press release: “Designer fashion has been merged even further with the metaverse with the world’s first ever Metaverse Fashion Week, which began yesterday. Being accessible to all, fundamentally sustainable and catering easily to the constant churn of new trends is something which the physical world is unable to do: the metaverse is the future.” I wrote last week about the metaverse and the dangers that can befall you while wearing VR headsets or staring at the computer screen. This now adds to the confusion. Do you own the clothes? Do they actually exist? It’s all very confusing. I think I’ll go back to the altogether simpler world of planning applications. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistFather and daughter chef duo James and Georgia Sommerin are so in sync that they can communicate with one another using only eye contact. So impressive is their serenity while working in the open kitchen of their family-run restaurant in Penarth, Wales – appropriately named Home – that people get “mesmerised” watching them, said James Sommerin, 43. He describes his daughter, 23, as “my right hand”. “We don’t necessarily have to talk to each other,” he said. “It’s literally a look. She knows that I’ve got her back 110% and vice versa.” Last week, less than six months after opening, the restaurant celebrated a landmark moment when it was awarded its first Michelin star. It was one of three British establishments awarded a first star to be run entirely by family members – not an easy feat in an industry known for its workload and stress levels. Two other restaurants in London – Evelyn’s Table, run by three brothers, and Sollip, run by a husband and wife – were recognised for the first time by this year’s guide. And at a time of turmoil for the industry, all represent rare success stories, having opened since the start of the pandemic. “The pandemic made people realise what was important to them and encouraged them to follow their dreams – and, for many, that was to spend more time with the ones they care about most,” a Michelin spokesperson said, adding that family-run kitchens are often “calmer, quieter places, where everyone works in harmony”. Home, the guide notes, is “staffed almost exclusively by family members”. Their small team of six includes James’s wife, Louise, who leads the front-of-house team, which also includes their daughter Angharad (they also have an 11-year-old daughter, Elin) and Louise’s twin sister Cath. Their “surprise” menu is seasonal and uses locally sourced produce. While this is not Sommerin’s first Michelin star – he previously had one at his former restaurant in Penarth, which was forced to close due to the pandemic, and at the Crown at Whitebrook, where he was head chef – this one feels different. “It’s more special than it ever was before,” he said. “Just purely because it’s us as a unit, there are no other investors, no business partners, no nothing. We are running it solely and it’s such a huge achievement.” It was a worrying time to open a business, in the teeth of the pandemic – at the height of which the family prepared meals for NHS staff – and having gone through “excruciating pain” with the closure of James’s previous business. But they decided to take things slowly with Home, which seats 24. So far it has been a huge success. He couldn’t have done it without Georgia, he said, adding that the star is as much hers as it his. Describing her as one of his best friends, he said “we work exceptionally well together”. They draw inspiration from Spanish father-and-daughter partnership Juan Mari and Elena Arzak, whom they met when they ate at their renowned three-starred restaurant in San Sebastián. “Is she a daddy’s girl? I don’t know. I treat her like a mate to an extent. She’s my daughter, I’m there to protect her, but also I’m there to nurture her as well.” Georgia, who is the restaurant’s sous chef, has earned recognition in her own right. In 2020, aged just 20, she became the youngest competitor on the BBC’s Great British Menu. Now, to be awarded a Michelin star at such a young age, she says, is “like winning an Oscar”: “To be on the map as one of those top-end fine dining restaurants in the UK is amazing.” She first started cooking with her father when she was 13, making Welsh cakes on Saturdays at the Crown. After leaving school at 16, she briefly tried college but decided she would prefer to work with him. “The rest is history really. I never looked back to do anything else.” Her parents live in Penarth, while she now lives in nearby Barry. She loves all areas of cooking but has a soft spot for pastry. “Me and my dad, we split each section equally, so I do a bit of cooking, of sauce and garnish, and then he does a bit and we share the job.” Next, she is hoping for two stars. “It’s just keep doing what we’re doing and pushing forwards.” In London, brothers Luke, Theo and Nathaniel Selby not only won a Michelin star for their work at Evelyn’s Table at the Blue Posts in Chinatown but also got a special award for best young chefs. The brothers, who have been serving food that combines French and Japanese techniques at the 12-seat restaurant since October 2020, have been working in kitchens together for over a decade. Head chef Luke, 31, said they were “all super happy and very emotional”, and he plans to take Theo, 29, and Nathaniel, 27, to celebrate on Sunday – first by visiting Raymond Blanc at Le Manoir aux Quat’Saisons in Oxford, where they all used to work, and then with lunch at Alain Roux’s Waterside Inn in Bray. “We close the restaurant on Sunday and Monday so we’re looking forward to being able to celebrate properly together then as a family.” He said the brothers have an “amazing dynamic” and that he couldn’t have done it without them, adding: “We have an amazing synergy in the kitchen. Not only that they’re my brothers, but we’ve also worked together for a very long time.” Their passion for fresh produce started at a young age, when they went foraging with their mother, who is from the Philippines, around Steyning, West Sussex, where they grew up. “She was foraging with us, picking blackberries, fishing, so we had an appreciation of nature, ingredients and produce and where it came from a very early age,” he said. At 18, he left home to train at Le Manoir. Three years later, Theo came, followed by Nathaniel the following year. “That’s where we really started working together. I was the sous chef and they were both commis chefs, so it was an interesting dynamic being their boss and their brother as well.” Now, while Luke is officially in charge, he says they are equals in the kitchen and all create their own dishes. They plan to continue refining and improving their work, and in the long term would like to start their own self-financed venture together. Despite the pandemic, he said the industry had “bounced back” and that they had been overwhelmed with support. “It’s an incredible time. The future’s bright and it’s an amazing industry to be part of.” Three miles away from Evelyn’s Table, husband and wife Woongchul Park, 37, and Bomee Ki, 34, had planned to open their first restaurant, Sollip, in March 2020 after moving to London from South Korea, but due to lockdowns were delayed until August. The opening was, Park said, “the biggest challenge of my life”. Having sold everything in Korea, they moved with their children, aged seven and five, and then had to face the pandemic. When they found out Sollip had been awarded a Michelin star last week, Park was elated but lost for words. Their restaurant, near London Bridge, combines European and French styles with Korean techniques and ingredients, and was described by Michelin as “polished and poised”. He would like to use it to introduce more people to Korean food and culture. “If you go to New York or other global cities, there are so many good Korean restaurants and lots of Korean people and Korean chefs. But here in London there aren’t many.” The couple met in 2010 at Le Cordon Bleu London, where they both trained, but did not become a couple until 2012, getting married the following year. Park puts their success down to Ki’s perfectionism and their ability to share ideas. While he said his standards were high, hers were even higher: “I believe in her 100% as a pastry chef and so there’s nothing really to argue about in the kitchen.”Did you know the UK government had a Flickr account? A fast-moving succession of unexplained photographs create an impression that things involving Tory politicians are happening, at a very high level, and at some speed, but offer no explanation of what they mean. It is perfect – the taxpayer-funded, vanity-engineered photo-diary of a group of globe-trotting lightweights, hopelessly out of their depth, the subject of international ridicule and domestic contempt, making the sort of shapes and faces they imagine appear significant. Arrive in conference room holding document. Wear face mask at railway station. Gesture towards thing. Don helmet near scaffolding. Laugh with peasant. Concerned expression. Hi-vis jacket. Hat. I’m filing this column 36 hours early. I have been able to snap up a holiday abandoned last week by a politician keen to be seen as taking Ukraine seriously, in a PR move already known as the Reverse Raab. (Indeed, it is rumoured that some politicians who weren’t actually on holiday quickly arranged one so they could be seen to return from it.) By the time you read these words they will be five days old and anything could have happened. Madness. Madness. War. In the past two weeks our horse-heating apology-doormat education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has argued about his leader’s obvious dishonesty with some small schoolchildren who found out about it on Newsround; the police are suddenly Dickless; and, in an act of heroic hypocrisy, the tonally inconsistent comedian Jimmy Carr was condemned as “deeply disturbing” for his Holocaust material by the prime minister, Boris Piccaninny-Watermelon Muslim-Letterbox Tank-Topped-Bumboys Romanian-Vampires Cocaine-Event Spiritual-Worth Gay-Marriage-Three-Men-and-a-Dog Jimmy-Savile Wallpaper Johnson, who is presumably an expert in the area of monetised, attention-grabbing offence. Newspaper columnist satirists’ attempts to make jokes about current events are like trying to nail eels to a curtain. The curtain is ruined and the eels die. As I begin this column it’s Sunday 13 February and last time I looked at UK government Flickr it was mid-afternoon and Liz Truss was standing with her mouth open in front of a tapestry of some lakes while Sergei Lavrov scratched his head, like an itchy chimp, and who can blame him? Now it’s 6am on Monday and defence secretary Ben Wallace is making a gesture of judgmental evaluation towards a fur-covered microphone, as if accusing someone at the British embassy in Moscow of attempting to mock him by providing it. Was this where he diplomatically brought up appeasing Hitler, in a place that lost 27 million people in the second world war? The irony is, if Wallace was able to get round the table with Putin he would find they have much common ground – a homophobic opposition to gay rights, a fondness for the dark art of the groundless political smear, and early onset baldness – but the UK government Flickr account has instead given the impression that Wallace is talking tough with some furry audio equipment. I scroll back five days to the famous Liz Truss fur hat fiasco. There’s the foreign secretary framed by a wooden doorway, against a backdrop of serious Soviet architecture, looking like a bit-player in the sort of 80s espionage drama where Alexei Sayle would steal the show as a KGB pastry chef; the notorious Red Square fur hat sequence portrays Truss as a contemplative loner cutting her be-hatted swathe through the diplomatic landscape, trailed only, presumably, by her photographer, her makeup person, her stylist, her milliner, some Peta protesters, and one of those men who hold those big circles of silver foil. A day earlier, we see Michael Gove, on a “Levelling Up Visit to Birkenhead and Liverpool”, the latter city one Margaret Thatcher’s government notoriously wanted to put into “managed decline”. There’s a thin blue line between levelling up a red wall seat and simply levelling it. As Gove passes a hair salon, the awkward obscuring of an aide’s grey bonce behind his raised fist makes it look as if the secretary of state for levelling up is addressing a small furry rodent, asleep in his hand. “Nosey Nip gives me all my policy advice. He lives in a tin in my anorak.” On 3 February, transport secretary Grant Shapps and Michael Portillo, the Cuprinol Wood Goblin, are on a bench at Marylebone station laughing uproariously at an immediately discredited railway policy announcement. In all four shots a delighted Portillo models a bright purple blazer, but Shapps’s stylist has given him a bright red blazer for two shots, and a black one for the others. Or perhaps black blazer Shapps is the real Shapps, while red blazer Shapps is Michael Green, Corinne Stockheath or Sebastian Fox, the pseudonymous identities under which Shapps shepherded dodgy get-rich-quick schemes. At Hammersmith academy, on 6 January, stallion-snuggler Zahawi makes menacing claw-like gestures towards a year 7 Newsround viewer soon to become his chief ideological opponent. And on Monday, former culture secretary Sajid Javid visits Willows care home, and calls two elderly Michael Bublé ticket holders, who paid five times over the odds, “chattering middle-class champagne socialists who have no interest in helping the common working man earn a decent living by acting as a middleman”. Lacking context and looking cynically stage-managed, the UK government’s Flickr photographs can be made to tell almost any story, surely a gift to those endlessly creative members of the public who manufacture the satirical memes that delight us daily. Michael Gove is alone on a windswept pier; Steve Barclay stands in front of a projected slide headed “Arp Spoofing”; Liz Truss jogs at speed over Brooklyn Bridge, but cannot outrun the judgment of history. UK government Flickr has given you the tools, internet mischief makers. Now do your work. On the other hand, why bother? The Tories’ Flickr account’s vainglorious follies herald the arrival of Britain’s first self-ridiculing government. Rescheduled national 2022 dates of Stewart’s 2020 tour, Snowflake Tornado, are on sale now; the autumn 2022 London dates of his new tour, Basic Lee, are also on sale; “You can prove anything with facts” shirts are available hereIf Ken McElroy gets his way, a very unusual feature will soon be added to the wild Caithness landscape at the northern edge of mainland Britain. He plans to re-create a 50ft-high iron age “skyscraper”, known as a broch, one of the most intriguing and mysterious types of building ever constructed in the British Isles. The elaborately built, drystone structures stood several storeys high and were erected only in Scotland, with hundreds being constructed between 600BC and AD100. The identities of the people who built them remain a mystery. Nor is it understood what purpose lay behind the building of these huge windowless structures, which would have loomed over the local landscape and been visible for miles. Some historians have suggested they were built as refuges for local people seeking shelter from Roman slave ships. However, this idea is controversial and is rejected by other researchers, who argue that they were erected by people who wanted to show off their power and status. Only one relatively intact broch remains in existence today, on the tiny island of Mousa, now uninhabited, in Shetland. McElroy – a director of the Caithness Broch Project – plans to create a completely new version, using traditional techniques, including construction methods such as drystone walling. “Brochs are pinnacles of prehistoric architecture,” he argues. “They were several storeys high but were built without cement, and that is a remarkable achievement on its own. While the rest of Britain was living in low-level roundhouses and the like, these iron-age skyscrapers were being built all around Scotland. “It is also important to note that Caithness has a higher concentration of broch sites than any other area in Scotland – and that makes the region the best place to tell the distinctive story behind these remarkable buildings.” Most brochs have imposing walls that were often three metres thick, and which were double lined with spiral staircases running between their inner and outer lining. They would probably also have had wooden roofs, a central door and other features. “They were incredibly sophisticated structures for their time,” adds McElroy, a self-confessed “broch-bragger” who has been promoting the cause of these strange structures for years. He highlights three key motives for building Scotland’s first new broch in 2,000 years. “We are still in the dark about the reasons for constructing brochs. However, in learning how to build one, we should get a better idea about why they were constructed,” he says. In addition, it is hoped that the construction project will help preserve local skills – in drystone wall building, for example – while it should also create a tourist attraction for Caithness. “The region faces a real problem in terms of the population decline that is predicted for the coming decade. This could reach 20%, and that would have a pretty grim impact. “We need to provide reasons for people to come here, and the broch project should play a key role in boosting tourism and employment,” he adds. McElroy – who co-founded the Caithness Broch Project with fellow archaeologist Iain Maclean – likened the broch scheme to the construction of Guédelon Castle, which is currently taking place near Treigny, France, with the aim of recreating a 13th-century castle using period techniques, dress and materials. “Like Guédelon, the Caithness broch would be a focus of interest while it was being built and also a place to visit once it had been completed.” The first brochs were constructed more than 2,500 years ago at the end of the bronze age and the beginning of the iron age in Britain. “The climate began to get a bit cooler around 900BC and the struggle for resources would have got harder,” says McElroy. “Tribes and bands of people began teaming up, leading to the formation of kingdoms as the iron age went on. “I think brochs reflect these changes in which expanding groups wanted to show off their power, and they did that through constructing these highly sophisticated buildings. They were status symbols.” The Caithness Broch Project began operations several years ago and is now closing in on a construction site that McElroy and his colleagues hope to buy before the end of the year. It is estimated that it will then take at least three or four more years to build the broch with money coming from the Heritage Lottery Fund, crowdfunding and other sources to enable the building of the £1m-£3m structure. The project certainly offers an intriguing vision of the future at the very northern tip of the British mainland. Other efforts being made in the area to provide skilled jobs for the region include the Sutherland spaceport, which is now under construction on the A’ Mhòine peninsula. It hopes to begin launching satellites next year. The juxtaposition of recreating ancient buildings while putting probes into space in these neighbouring remote counties suggests an intriguingly rich mix of attractions for the region. “Rockets and brochs. It just sounds like a lovely combination,” says McElroy. “Who would not be attracted by that?”Mothers are being unnecessarily separated from their newborns in some hospitals due to overly-stringent Covid-19 rules, leading birth charities have warned. They say inconsistent policies by some trusts mean parents have been made to isolate away from their babies for longer than national guidance stipulates – either after having Covid or as a contact of a positive case. The charity Birthrights wrote to one trust in support of a woman whose baby was receiving care on the neonatal unit at London’s University College Hospital. Kate Ellis-Martin was told she couldn’t see her baby for 10 days because her husband had tested positive for Covid-19 upon their arrival for a planned Caesarean section on 31 January. Ellis-Martin said: “I had been double-vaccinated and tested negative but I was still told I couldn’t go to the unit to hold my baby. After the birth I held him for about 20 seconds and then he was taken straight to the unit because he was having problems breathing. “My mum could visit the unit and there was a webcam set up so I could see him from my room but after a couple of days I began to get very distressed.” It was only after being transferred to another hospital, four days after the birth that Ellis-Martin was able to hug her baby for the first time. She says: “We are bonding well but 10 days of separation would have had a really negative impact.” Maria Booker, programmes director at Birthrights, said: “At times we are seeing a focus on infection control at the expense of human rights and psychological safety and our concern is, two years into the pandemic, when are we going to learn that lesson?” After the charity wrote to the trust saying its guidance did not appear to follow the latest national guidance for mothers testing negative, the trust said it would update its policy. Ellis-Martin said she was delighted and relieved at the news. “I’m not surprised it has changed as it was outdated and wrong. I did feel for the midwives because they didn’t write the policy and had a lot of stress to deal with because of it. I wouldn’t want other mums to go through the same thing.” Another woman who wanted to remain anonymous said she was left traumatised after being separated from her baby born at the same hospital in early January. She was admitted in December with pregnancy complications and later caught Covid-19 on the antenatal ward. The woman, who had been triple vaccinated and tested negative before the birth of her baby on day eight of her isolation period said: “After the birth my baby was taken away before I could hold her which was really distressing.” The baby, born prematurely was taken to the neonatal unit and quickly improved. But the mother was prevented from seeing her because trust policy stated the isolation period for inpatients with Covid-19 was 14 days. “I missed the first three days of her life. I don’t understand why there couldn’t have been an opportunity to hold her sooner. We were both negative. “This has been one of the most traumatic experiences of my life. In the end I discharged myself before feeling physically ready so I could visit my baby as an outpatient because the isolation for outpatients was only 10 days.” She said when she eventually went to meet her baby she wasn’t allowed to hold her and was left in shock. During her second visit to the unit she said she “cried hysterically” until staff allowed her contact. “There were staff who were working really hard in difficult circumstances and I understand the hospital needs policies to keep everyone safe. But I felt there was an enormous lack of compassion in the application of their Covid policies which are hugely draconian.” Her frustrations were compounded by the apparent contradiction with guidance for staff who were able to come to work after seven days if they had tested negative. The British Association of Perinatal Medicine strongly supports the view that parents are partners in their baby’s care, not visitors, and recommends the same rules should apply to them as staff working on neonatal units. The charity Bliss said it had been alerted to issues around isolation guidance at other trusts. The chief executive, Carline Lee-Davey, told the Observer: “In recent months we have heard of a number of cases where hospitals have told Covid-positive mothers to isolate for longer than current guidance sets out, with examples of inconsistent rules applied and unclear communication to parents. “Where a baby is admitted to neonatal care, the first priority must be to facilitate as early contact as possible between a baby and their parents, given how important this is to the baby’s health and the family’s bonding and attachment. It is vital rules are communicated clearly to parents, and are in line with latest guidance.” A UCLH trust spokesperson said: “We are very sorry for the distress caused to our two mums at the birth of their babies. This should have been a joyful time of human contact and closeness and our isolation rules did not make this possible. “We know safety needs to be balanced with compassion and we believe our staff have always done their best in very difficult circumstances. We recognise, however, that as an organisation, we have not always got the balance right. “We have now updated our isolation policy for maternity patients in line with national guidelines and we have invited the mums to meet with us so we can understand if any further lessons can be learned.”I have got used to thinking that new theatre arrives in an explosion of form. Yet – obvious but true – sometimes fresh subject matter alone is the vital thing. Straightforward in structure, occasionally too explicit but dynamic in its argumentative twists, Two Billion Beats sets up an urgent thrum. Sonali Bhattacharyya’s two-hander constantly surprises as it spins from bullying to sibling rivalry and the difficulty of not fibbing when speaking up. A clever schoolgirl with a Hindu background challenges her mother, who reveres Gandhi, with her own preference for BR Ambedkar, spokesman for “untouchables”. Her enthusiasm for the ideals of the most politically radical of the Pankhursts, Sylvia, brings her into confrontation with a teacher inclined to think this prize pupil will go further if she concentrates on studying people with brown faces. When her sister exaggerates a Muslim boy’s bullying, she takes his side. Nimmo Ismail’s absorbing production sets Anoushka Chadha and Safiyya Ingar on a concrete stage, alone apart from a hamster, of whose presence the audience is warned. Moving towards self-determination, they are slangy and fervent and sharp. Their school uniforms hang off them like the unsuitable assumptions they are trying to shuck. They are better than babes: they are unclassifiable. Sian Carter’s first play also unfolds without structural flourishes, but it has at its centre an intricate knot: the concealments of the open-hearted. Three generations of a British Caribbean family are living together. The grandparents are of Windrush vintage; their granddaughter dreams of making her own flight. Sorrow, guilt and social anxiety have turned the death of a son and the illness of a bipolar daughter into unmentioned subjects. Running With Lions turns on the patient warmth – but also the sheer accident – that eventually unlocks their secrecy. Michael Buffong’s production for Talawa, the black touring company of which he is artistic director, leaps over the stiltedness of some over-declamatory dialogue. The family dance together – over-optimistically to Let the Good Times Roll – and bump each other knowingly hip to hip. Ruby Barker – of Bridgerton – has a steady radiance and Wil Johnson beguiles with sinuous mischief. Soutra Gilmour’s design suggests precariousness, high hopes and long voyages: rupture and reconciliation take place on a shifting platform under a dazzling, starry sky. Florian Zeller’s plays have altered the landscape of British theatre. Apparently bourgeois domestic dramas can crack open the stage with distress. A man with dementia is surrounded by scenery that keeps being dismantled. A woman quietly peels mushrooms while bereavement conjures illusions. The mushroom moment was part of Jonathan Kent’s superb production of The Height of the Storm in 2018. Now Kent directs the world premiere of The Forest, in a version by Zeller’s long-time English translator Christopher Hampton. Anna Fleischle’s design is sinister and sleek: glossy parquet; a portrait whose subject unaccountably changes; a mass of stiff bouquets that begin to look like floral tributes. The stage, divided horizontally and vertically, echoes the fractures of the plot, in which unnamed characters – “Man 1”, “The Wife” – step unexplained into each other’s roles, and dream merges with action. The thriller element – did an adulterer hire a contract killer? Is a blood-boltered figure a ghost? What is that Big Dead Beast on a bed? – grips, but too many of the play’s mysteries look like ways of diverting attention from a thinly conventional plot and sketchy characterisation. You may never know where you are, but there’s not much mystery about who you can trust. Toby Stephens has a flair for suggesting the inauthentic, and uses it to the hilt. Gina McKee’s talent runs in the opposite direction: she is not given much to do, but emits honour from every pore. There is a rigid, possibly satirical performance from Silas Carson and a gleamingly macabre turn by Finbar Lynch. Intriguing rather than resonant. Eugène Ionesco’s work plays peek-a-boo with its audiences, waggishly semaphoring its lack of significance. The Chairs (1952) is like Beckett’s Endgame without the pungency. An elderly couple daily repeat the same routine to an invisible audience – a growing number of empty chairs. They await a speaker who will say nothing. They jump to their deaths. Yet what on the page is skinny and over-insistent can on stage be haunting and frisky. Twenty-five years ago, Richard Briers and Geraldine McEwan were beautifully comic in a tumbling Complicité production. Now, Omar Elerian impressively stages his own translation. The design by Cécile Trémolières and Naomi Kuyck-Cohen is the perfect tease: four sets of frowsty velvet curtains looped in front of each other; pretence revealing further pretence. Kathryn Hunter, skittering in an orange wig (with dark roots) and scarlet stockings, looks like a marionette – Ionesco was transfixed by puppets – while her extraordinary voice, unearthly yet inward, swoops from piping to guttural. Marcello Magni – Hunter’s husband on and offstage – is casually nimble, deftly snatching chairs from the air and ensuring that his placing of a cup in its saucer is disconcertingly not synchronised with the clinking sound effect. Together they swing an imaginary child and walk from opposite sides of the stage, each carrying half of an unseen window. In a surprise coda, Toby Sedgwick arrives as the expected non-speaking speaker – and blasts Ionesco’s airiness with a brilliantly delivered naturalistic oration. The most vivacious, surprising part of the evening was not written by the Romanian-French dramatist. Still, subverting subversion: what could be more apt for elusive Ionesco? Star ratings (out of five) Two Billion Beats ★★★★ Running With Lions ★★★ The Forest ★★★ The Chairs ★★★ • Two Billion Beats is at the Orange Tree, Richmond, Surrey until 5 March • Running With Lions is at the Lyric Hammersmith, London until 12 March • The Forest is at Hampstead theatre, London until 12 March • The Chairs is at the Almeida, London until 5 MarchWhen is a classical music composition not actually classical? This is the conundrum now at the heart of a heated row over the shortlisted songs for the Grammys, the annual awards that will be handed out in a few weeks’ time to recognise outstanding contributions to music. A number of musicians have collectively expressed their outrage that nominations for the “classical music” awards include recordings they consider anything but classical. Letters of complaint have been sent to the organisers, the Recording Academy, arguing that the tracks in question – by two separate artists, Jon Batiste and Curtis Stewart – have been “mis-categorised”. Their objections have absolutely nothing to do with quality, but genre, say the musicians. They believe that “mistaken categorisation” jeopardises the credibility of the music industry’s highest honours. Though not disputing the brilliance of the Oscar-winning Batiste, they believe that his track, Batiste: Movement 11’, should not have been nominated for best contemporary classical composition. While they similarly admire the multi-Grammy nominated Stewart, they believe his album, Of Power, should not have been nominated for best classical instrumental solo. Composer Marc Neikrug, a former Grammy nominee, told the Observer that Batiste is a pop musician and that nominating his recording for a classical music award is baffling. “How much sense do you think it makes to a serious novelist when Bob Dylan gets a Nobel prize for literature?”, he said. “It’s not that what Bob Dylan does isn’t magnificent in what it is. But it’s not Nobel literature.” In a letter to the academy he wrote: “As a serious, dedicated composer of what has always been considered ‘classical’ music, I am dismayed. I have spent 60 years studying and labouring at this precise craft. It is unfathomable that an organisation which is supposed to have some inherent knowledge of music would choose to re-categorise an entire segment of our inherited culture.” The Recording Academy represents “all music professionals”, from performers to engineers, all of whom are eligible to vote for the awards. It stages the 64th Grammy awards show on 3 April, recognising the achievements of recordings released in the year until September 2021. Professor Apostolos Paraskevas of Berklee College of Music, Boston, is equally perturbed by the inclusion of Batiste and Stewart. “I’m not going to say that classical music is better than jazz. I love both genres,” he said. “Both of those musicians deserve the recognition for their work. But we cannot compare apples and oranges.” He added: “If you look at the nominees for the best contemporary classical composition, you see amazing musicians who write operas and symphonies. Batiste’s piece is two minutes long, someone playing sequences in the jazz style. If this person gets an award, this is a big slap on our face. It’s a message to everyone that we should give up and just do this.” He, too, has sent a letter to the academy, telling it: “I am a voting member of the Recording Academy and I have seen minor inconsistencies over the years in the results, but nothing in comparison to what is happening this year.” He added: “This jeopardises the credibility of the Grammy awards.” Asgerdur Sigurdardottir, a classical producer and the head of Tonar Music Management, which specialises in classical guitarists, also questioned whether the music of Batiste and Stewart belongs in classical music categories. “My argument is: why should I personally be able to even vote in the gospel category or reggae? I have no expertise in that field, but yet I am able to vote. This also means that people that have no classical expertise are able to vote in the classical fields.” Stewart, who studied at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York, has performed as a classical soloist at the Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall, and held chamber music residencies at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. He said that he does not need to justify his music’s inclusion in the classical music category but hopes that it “can connect a divide that has hurt and ostracised classical music from a world of listeners for decades”. He added: “My work attempts to draw question marks to categories. I think of myself as a classical musician.” On his classical music blog Slipped Disc, Norman Lebrecht, a British music journalist and author who specialises in issues concerning classical music, wrote that he had received numerous complaints that this year’s Grammys were muddying the classical award sections with non-classical entries. His report sparked a flurry of Facebook comments, with one supporter telling Stewart: “Your musicianship is of the highest calibre however they want to categorise it.” Batiste studied at the world-renowned Juilliard School in New York City. In 2018, he received a Grammy nomination for best American roots performance. In 2021, he won the Oscar for best original score for the Disney/Pixar film Soul, shared with fellow composers Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross. Batiste’s record company and the Recording Academy were approached, but declined to comment.For three decades after the second world war, US scientists and doctors carried out a research programme of striking ambition – and breathtaking moral negligence. They deliberately infected more than 1,000 people, including at least 100 children, with hepatitis, an illness that can trigger chronic liver disease and cancer. Very few of those subjected to this experimentation had much idea of what was being inflicted upon them. Many were poor and uneducated and came from prisons, asylums and orphanages. A disproportionate number were black. “I know of no series of problematic infectious disease studies that involved a wider array of devalued and stigmatised groups,” Sydney Halpern tells us in this chilling, unsparing account of a mass experiment that violated the rights and health of America’s underprivileged from 1942 to 1972. Subjects included prison inmates, draft objectors who were already derided as “yellowbellies” and adults and minors with intellectual impairments. “The use of such a broad range of marginalised groups is astounding,” adds Halpern, a US sociologist and bioethicist. The fact that this mass violation of human rights continued for so long is perhaps the most extraordinary aspect of this story. How could these decades-long trials have been permitted in a society that believed itself to be untainted by crimes that had typified its Nazi opponents? Halpern is at pains to find rational answers to such questions, but in the end struggles to find coherence in the motives of the scientists involved or to discover any doubts they may have had about the ethics of their behaviour. The nation had allowed the creation of a military-biomedical elite that decided the need to control disease and defend the nation justified actions that clearly led to the early deaths of innocent people. Worse, they were largely supported by a supine, deferential press. Hepatitis is a disease characterised by inflammation of the liver, jaundice, fever and exhaustion and is caused, we now know, by three different virus variants: A, B and C. In some cases, those infected can develop cirrhosis and liver cancer in later life. In 1942, a major outbreak occurred among US soldiers. This was traced to a contaminated batch of yellow fever vaccine whose serum had been derived from hepatitis carriers. Scientists decided to take advantage of these sullied samples and used them to infect men, women and, later on, children in a bid to understand more about hepatitis. These studies were expanded over the decades, with researchers persuading their recruits to directly ingest samples of tainted material. These included milkshakes made from infected human excrement mixed into chocolate milk in a bid to conceal its true contents. “What scientists did was create a pool of hepatitis carriers at risk for slowly simmering, life-threatening liver diseases,” writes Halpern. Just how many died as a direct result of the US hepatitis programme is unclear, so clandestine were its operations. Undoubtedly, there would have been fatalities. Not all these dangers were known when the hepatitis programme began, Halpern acknowledges. Yet even when they did become evident, no one bothered to try to trace those who had developed liver disease or pinpoint those who had died because of scientists’ actions. In the end, the programme was brought down by 1960s activism. Campaigns against the Vietnam war and for minority rights heightened sensitivity to the actions of the authorities and young doctors began to question the programme with increasing vigour. “I moved easily from civil rights to patients’ rights,” one young doctor told Halpern. The programme ended, effectively, in 1972. Halpern’s story is chilling, told with clarity and commendable brevity and, most importantly, is of crucial relevance today. The emergence of Covid-19 galvanised calls for the creation of experiments in which volunteers would be infected with SARS-CoV-2 to help understand how the disease spreads and behaves. Some of these studies continue. But as she warns, the long-term consequences of infection are unknown and are not likely to be fully understood for years. “It is therefore vitally important to understand human experiments with dangerous viruses during a previous emergency.” America’s hepatitis programme has a lot to tell us from that perspective. • Dangerous Medicine by Sydney Halpern is published by Yale University Press (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applySome years everything happens at once. In 1998, the photographer Ewen Spencer started taking shots of nightclubs for the Shoreditch-based style magazine Sleazenation around the same time that he became a father. For the next three years, Spencer would spend each weekend racing between clubs with his Mamiya 6 rangefinder camera and then get back home to Brighton to look after his son, Kuba, on Monday morning. Two decades later, during the first pandemic lockdown, Kuba was helping his dad rescue a digital archive from a deteriorating hard drive when he became fascinated by the club pictures. “His eyes upon it made me realise the significance of it,” says Spencer. “He said to me, ‘When were you doing this?’ and I said, ‘While you were sleeping.’” This became the title of the digital folder and, now, a handsome book. In magazines such as Mixmag and Ministry, club photography was primarily an advertisement for club culture, bright and glamorous, but Spencer came at it from a different angle. He had recently graduated from Brighton School of Art, where his lecturers included the documentary photographers Mark Power and Paul Reas. He was also inspired by Wolfgang Tillmans, who began his career photographing Berlin nightlife. “I saw someone who was capturing his experience in 360,” Spencer says. “It was a new approach to a documentarian’s body of work: very personal, very subjective. This was a world that I understood: music and style coming together in a little room somewhere. I just applied my passion and love for that school of photography to my other passion and love, which was the northern soul scene.” Spencer, who had fallen in love with northern soul as a teenager in Newcastle, took those photographs to Sleazenation’s photographic director, Steve Lazarides, and became a regular contributor. Lazarides’s preference for black-and-white photography enhances the anthropological tenor of Spencer’s pictures. “It was less about clubbing per se and more about being young and British and what that meant,” he says. “We’ve always been very good at enjoying ourselves.” Avoiding the glossy superclubs that dominated late 90s nightlife, Spencer sought out niche events in small venues, where he was invariably the only photographer in the place. Being a participant as well as an observer helped him to win the confidence of his subjects. “I’m photographing something I understand,” he says. “I wasn’t creeping around in a trenchcoat and hat; I was part of it.” Spencer’s personal passion for the nascent UK garage scene led to a book, short films and a collaboration with Mike Skinner of the Streets, but he covered everything, weaving between distinct subcultures: hip-hop, funk, trance, rock. “Nu-metal was unbearable to listen to but I liked them as a group of kids,” he says. With only 12 exposures on each roll of film, Spencer had to choose wisely. “You don’t want to waste a moment. I would look for characters who resonated and work around those people. Sometimes I can’t put my finger on it. I’m just drawn.” His subjects aren’t podium peacocks, craving attention, but people lost in music or conversation. Some of them aren’t even dancing. One of his favourite shots captures a couple kissing beside an extremely glamour-free bank of plug sockets at Sonic Mook Experiment in Shoreditch, east London. “We’ve all been there, haven’t we? And if we haven’t, then we should have been. I love that embrace. It’s awkward but it’s real.” In her preface to While You Were Sleeping, the photographer and film director Elaine Constantine (a fellow northern soul aficionado) mourns “a spirit of a freedom we have forgotten… a moment in time that has irretrievably passed”. Spencer doesn’t wholly agree – when he visits a club now, people are still having a whale of a time. But he says that something has changed – and it’s not just the demise of smoking on dancefloors. Smartphones have made clubbers, like everyone else, accustomed to taking photographs and being photographed. When it is expected that a great night should be documented and shared online rather than confined to a moment and a memory, a degree of self-conscious performance enters the equation. “Everyone’s more visually literate now because everyone’s got a camera in their pocket all the time,” Spencer says. “Some people go out with almost the sole intention of photographing themselves and being seen. The thing I was doing for Sleazenation 22 years ago, people are doing on their social media accounts now.” Spencer’s pictures represent a less inhibited era. Even the extroverts – a man spinning on one arm at Deep Funk, a kid seizing the open mic at WKD, a shirtless dancer at Queer Nation – seem unaware of the camera, forging their own physical relationship with the music. This era is far less mythologised than the renegade heyday of acid-house clubs and open-air raves a decade earlier but through Spencer’s curious lens, these look like glory days. • While You Were Sleeping 1998-2000 by Ewen Spencer is published by Damiani (£40). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhen he was a teenager, Joe Woodhouse bred and showed whippets. His dogs won the junior category at Crufts and other big shows. On the way home to their farm in Cambridge, he and his mum would stop at pubs for some food. Woodhouse has been a vegetarian since he was 10 and, this being the 1990s, Woodhouse’s best hope was that the pub would serve mushroom stroganoff with wild rice. Woodhouse, a 35-year-old former chef who is now a food photographer and stylist, revisits that dish in his vivid, inspiring new cookbook, Your Daily Veg. “It’s so nostalgic, but still a bloody great meal,” he writes. Woodhouse’s take on mushroom stroganoff, though, shows how far vegetarian cooking has come in the intervening decades. His version is lighter, more sophisticated, less gloopy. “Sort of reminiscent of the flavour,” says Woodhouse, over the phone, “but there’s a bit of chard in there and the old one would definitely have had a lot more cream.” Your Daily Veg is one of those cookbooks that you can tell will go into heavy rotation in your kitchen. Each chapter is given over to a different, common vegetable and how you can turn it into a satisfying, straightforward meal. “Get nice stuff, don’t do too much to it and make a nice dish – that’s the ethos,” Woodhouse says, with a chuckle. “My food is very healthy, but it’s also realistic and it’s not about shutting anything down: no fat, no cheese, no fun kind of thing.” When Woodhouse first became a vegetarian, his parents wondered if it might be a phase but 25 years on, he thinks he’s only scratched the surface of what you can do with vegetables. Your Daily Veg was a lockdown endeavour, and he proved the perfect one-man band for the project: he created the recipes (in his 20s, he was a chef at the Towpath cafe in east London) and then shot them in his kitchen. Woodhouse’s partner, the food writer Olia Hercules, was also working on a book, and they have a two-year-old son, so there was little lounging around. “When Wilfred was quite young I used to do little cooking demos with him,” recalls Woodhouse. “He’d be strapped to me and I’d talk him through it as if it was a cookery show.” The task of recipe testing in lockdown mainly fell to locals in Forest Gate, east London. “Our neighbours are pretty happy they are our neighbours,” says Woodhouse. “We would put up a picture on the street WhatsApp and say: ‘First come, first served!’ And it would go in this kind of bidding war. But to be fair we get loads of food back. One of our neighbours brings us amazing Bengali curries. And there’s cakes from across the road because they have a bakery. So it’s quite a nice back and forth.” The feedback Woodhouse had on his doorstep drop-offs was overwhelmingly positive, but what he really enjoys is when his food surprises people. “Sometimes people think, ‘It’s just vegetables,’ but they start eating it and it’s almost like they’ve forgotten they’re having a vegetarian meal,” he says. “I like it when the first reaction of someone is slightly unexpected: ‘Oh, this tastes really good!’” Mushroom and chard stroganoff (pictured above) This dish reminds me of my childhood. I used to travel around a lot, dog-showing with my mother. It was a wonderful time, the weekends spent camping and barbecuing with pit-stop pub visits on the long journeys home. As a vegetarian, 20-odd years ago, I often found the pub mainstay was the mushroom stroganoff, if I was lucky, dusted with paprika and served alongside white rice flecked with wild rice. It’s so nostalgic, but still a bloody great meal. I’ve added chard to round it out a bit, but spinach works just as well. Feel free to add some wild rice to keep true to the 1990s. Serves 4 neutral oil 4 tbsp (such as groundnut or sunflower) mixed mushrooms 750g (button, chestnut and portobello), whole, halved, quartered or sliced, depending on size onions 2, finely sliced garlic 5 cloves, finely sliced paprika 1 tsp (preferably sweet) cayenne ¼ tsp, or chilli powder white wine or cider 200ml rainbow chard 300g, leaves separated from stalks, stalks finely sliced, leaves roughly chopped stock 200ml creme fraiche 200ml lemon juice 3 tbsp, or more to taste parsley 15g, finely chopped, or chervil (or both) sea salt and black pepper boiled rice to serve Heat half the oil in a deep pan large enough to accommodate everything. Fry the mushrooms over a medium heat for 5-7 minutes, turning once or twice, until a good golden brown colour. If they begin to stick, add a splash of water to keep everything moving. Once the mushrooms are coloured well, scoop out and reserve. Add the remaining oil followed by the onions and a good pinch of salt and cook for 12-15 minutes until translucent and soft. Follow with the garlic and give them a stir. Add the mushrooms back in, along with the paprika and cayenne or chilli powder. Stir to combine well in the pan. Add the wine or cider and allow the alcohol to bubble off for 30 seconds. Add the chard stalks along with the stock and cook for 5 minutes. Then add the creme fraiche and allow to bubble away for 2 minutes until slightly thickened. Add the chard leaves and simmer for 3 minutes. Remove from the heat and add the lemon juice with the chopped herbs. Check the seasoning and add more salt if needed. A good grind of black pepper is welcome. Serve spooned on top of rice. Beans in sherried tomato sauce This is a fresh beans on toast, but the beans are livened up with sherry and the toast is oven-baked crisp bread. The crisp breads can be made ahead and stored in a sealed container. They go well with anything. Try breaking them to form croutons or use as scoops for dips. The beans take well to being topped with herbs or cheese, or eaten with just some bread and good-quality oil over the top. Serves 6 neutral oil 2 tbsp (such as groundnut or sunflower) onions 2, roughly diced carrots 3, roughly diced garlic 5 cloves, roughly chopped plum tomatoes 2 × 400g tins, or 8 fresh tomatoes, roughly diced dried white beans 200g, soaked and cooked (cannellini, haricot and coco are good here), or 500g tinned best-quality sherry vinegar 3 tbsp, or to taste extra-virgin olive oil for drizzling sea salt and black pepper For the crisp breads olive oil 6 tbsp large baguette or slender loaf 1, finely sliced Preheat the oven to 160C fan/gas mark 4. For the crisp breads, drizzle some of the olive oil on several large, flat baking trays, or work in batches. Lay the bread slices, evenly spaced, in a single layer on the trays. Gently rub the slices with the rest of the oil and flip them over to lightly coat each side with oil (too much and they tend to be a bit greasy when cooked). Bake in the oven for 25 minutes until golden and crisp, turning halfway through. Some will inevitably cook faster and some slower. If working in batches, pull out the done ones and replace with freshly oiled slices, essentially having a production line on the go, while you are making the beans. Meanwhile, heat the neutral oil in a pan over a medium heat and sweat the onions, carrots and garlic with a pinch of salt for about 15 minutes until soft. Add the tomatoes, roughly breaking them up with a spatula. Half-fill each tin with water and add to the pan. Cook for 25 minutes until reduced but not too dry, topping up water as needed. Blend the contents of the pan in a blender until smooth, then return to the pan. Add the cooked beans, then gently cook together for a further 30 minutes or longer, adding water if needed: the consistency should be loose but still amalgamated. Season with salt and pepper, then add the sherry vinegar to taste: you want the sharp, sweet twang of the vinegar to be a solid backbone of the sauce. Serve drizzled with extra-virgin olive oil, the crisp breads cracked over the top. Spanish tortilla goes well with the beans. Also great with whole roasted portobello mushrooms on top. Creamed corn, soft-boiled egg and garlic chilli crisp This garlic chilli crisp can and should go on everything and anything. Here, the sweet, creamy corn and potatoes act as a wonderful platform for the fiery, floral oil. The crisp can be used to dress noodles, fried eggs or steamed vegetables such as broccoli or greens, or stirred into egg-fried rice or crunchy veg salads. It’s worth having on hand to bring simple ingredients together into more of a meal. It will keep well in the refrigerator, sealed in a jar, for four weeks or so. Serves 4 as a light meal with a salad or as a starter frozen sweetcorn 350g, or kernels from 4 ears unsalted butter 50g onion 1, finely diced potato 1 large (about 300g), such as king edward, maris piper, desiree or estima, cut into roughly 1cm cubes full-fat milk 200ml eggs 4 sea salt For the garlic chilli crisp neutral oil 250ml onions 1 large or 2 medium, finely diced garlic 1 head, cloves peeled and evenly sliced chilli flakes 3 tbsp Sichuan peppercorns 2 tbsp, crushed star anise 5 sea salt flakes 1 tbsp honey 1 tsp To make the garlic chilli crisp, add the oil, onion and garlic to a medium-sized saucepan and simmer for 20-30 minutes until golden but not too dark. You want to slowly drive the moisture from the onion and garlic; if you cook it too quickly they will burn. Just before the end, when the mix has slowed its bubbling and the garlic is nice and golden, add the chilli flakes, Sichuan peppercorns and star anise. Give a good turn around and remove from the heat. Mix in the salt and honey. Set aside until ready to use. Set aside 100g of sweetcorn. Pulse the remaining kernels in a food processor five or six times until broken but not pureed. A hand blender is also fine, or roughly chop them with a knife. Add the butter to a medium saucepan over a medium heat. Follow with the onion when the butter begins to foam. Stir around the pan for 10-12 minutes until translucent. Add the potato and cook for a further 10 minutes, stirring so nothing sticks. If the mixture gets a little dry, add a splash of water to keep things moving. Add the pulsed corn and milk. Cook over a medium heat for 1 minute, then reduce to a low heat, stirring often, for about 3 minutes until the mixture slightly thickens. Add the reserved kernels and cook for a further 2 minutes. Remove from the heat and keep warm. Season with salt to your taste. Place the eggs in a medium-sized saucepan filled with cold water and cover with the lid. Heat over a medium heat until gently simmering. Remove from the heat and leave to sit in the water for 2 minutes. Drain the eggs and return to the pan. Shake it to break the shells, then fill with cold water, empty and refill with cold water. Let sit for a while until the eggs are cool enough to handle. Remove the shells and halve each egg. Add the corn to a plate and top with 2 egg halves. Spoon over as much garlic chilli crisp as you like. Savoy cabbage gratin The beautiful golden crust on top with crispy cabbage edges hides a creamy, cheesy, mustard-spiked sauce below. The cabbage goes wonderfully with the chestnuts and makes this a great wintertime dish. The richness is kept in check by the acidity from the mustard and this, combined with the wine, makes for a rather alpine-style eating experience. It is important with this recipe to use good-quality wine as it shines through in the finished dish; a dry or oxidative white wine is best. Serves 4 savoy cabbage 1 (about 800g), trimmed of any tough leaves and the dry base, cut through the stem into 8 wedges olive oil 2 tbsp unsalted butter 50g onions 4 (about 600g), roughly diced garlic 4 cloves, roughly chopped good-quality white wine or sherry 100ml creme fraiche 200g dijon mustard 1 tbsp vegetarian cheese 100g, grated (non-vegetarians can try gruyère or comté) cooked chestnuts 200g, roughly broken up sea salt and black pepper Preheat the oven to 160C fan/gas mark 4. Place the cabbage wedges on a roasting tray, drizzle with the oil and season with salt. Roast in the oven for about 45 minutes until tender and the edges are beginning to colour. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a medium saucepan with a lid over a medium heat. Add the onion, garlic and salt. Cook, covered, for 15-20 minutes until soft but without colour, checking occasionally and giving everything a good stir. Add the wine or sherry and allow to bubble off, stirring, for 2 minutes. Put the mixture in a blender and add the creme fraiche, mustard and half the cheese. Blend until smooth, check the seasoning and adjust accordingly. Spoon some of this sauce on to a suitable dish for the gratin. Add the cabbage wedges, cut-side down, in one layer. Scatter over the chestnut pieces. Coat everything well with the rest of the sauce. Finish with the remaining cheese. Bake in the oven for 30-40 minutes until the sauce is bubbling and slightly thickened. Heat the grill to a high heat. Grill for a final 5-10 minutes to get the top lovely and golden. Crack over black pepper and serve with a salad, to drag around in the gratin juices. Potato and cheddar pie with apple sauce This pie is a thing of beauty. Layering the cheese means you get molten pockets, which gives a strong taste set against the platform of the potatoes and onions. Do use a strong cheddar if you can. And eat it warm; you want it cooled just enough to taste everything but still warm enough that things are still in motion. The apple sauce is a lovely fruity foil. I use whatever variety I have to hand, but go for sharp-flavoured cooking apples if you want something to really cut through the cheese. A good braeburn or russet is also most welcome. Go for cider over water to add a further dimension. Serves 4 generously For the pastry self-raising flour 300g, plus extra for dusting unsalted butter 180g, very cold, cut into small pieces cider vinegar 1½ tbsp, or white wine vinegar ice-cold water 2-3 tbsp egg 1, beaten with 1 tbsp milk sea salt For the filling unsalted butter 25g bay leaf 1 fresh onions 2, finely sliced potatoes 600g, finely sliced dijon mustard 1 heaped tbsp vegetarian mature cheddar 200g, coarsely grated For the sauce apples 3 medium, cored and diced cider 50ml, or water For the pastry, pulse the flour, butter and a pinch of salt in a food processor until the mix resembles coarse breadcrumbs. Add the vinegar and water. Pulse a couple of times, tip the mix out onto a clean work surface and knead gently to combine. Place the dough in a bowl, cover and chill for 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 160C fan/gas mark 4. Place a baking tray in the oven to heat through. Grease a round 24cm or 20-30cm square pie dish. For the filling, heat the butter and bay leaf in a pan over a medium heat, add the onions and cook for 10-12 minutes until well softened. Add about 125ml water, and continue to cook until it has evaporated. Add the potatoes and cook for 1-2 minutes, turning them around to coat well with the onions. Remove from the heat, discard the bay leaf and stir in the mustard. Roll out two-thirds of the pastry to about 5mm thick and line the base of the pie dish, leaving some overhanging. Roll out the rest of the pastry to form the lid, a little larger than the pie dish. Over the base, lay out a third of the potatoes as flat as possible. Follow with a third of the cheese. Repeat twice. Brush the edges of the pastry with a little of the egg wash and lay the pastry lid on top. Press the two pieces together to seal. Trim the edge to neaten if necessary. Brush with more egg wash and pierce the lid a few times. Place the pie on the heated baking tray and bake in the oven for 40-50 minutes until golden. Meanwhile, in a lidded pan, cook the apples with the water or cider over medium heat for a couple of minutes until the apples are collapsing. Purée with a stick blender until as smooth you like. Remove the pie from the oven and allow to stand for 20-30 minutes. Try to avoid cutting it too soon. Serve with a mustardy salad. Sweet potato and ginger stew with quinoa I was introduced to this dish by my friend, wonderful chef Paola Carosella. It has such vibrancy to it. Paola originally made it as a soup, but I lean towards a more stew-like consistency. If you prefer a soupier version, add more water accordingly. The longer this sits, the deeper the flavours will develop – so happily make it ahead of time. Serves 6 onions 2, sliced lyonnaise (cut across the onion from root to top, rather than across the grain; this results in the onions keeping their shape when cooked, rather than breaking down) oil 3tbsp garlic 6 cloves, peeled fresh root ginger 50g, peeled star anise 2 cinnamon stick 1 tomatoes 8, roughly diced, or 2 × 400g tins chopped tomatoes sweet potatoes 4 (about 600g), cut into 2.5cm chunks quinoa 150g, any colour sea salt To serve mozzarella or stringy cheese (optional) yoghurt (if not using cheese) red chilli 1, sliced fresh coriander leaves picked limes 6, cut into quarters Sauté the onions with the oil and a decent couple of pinches of salt in a heavy-based saucepan over medium heat for 15 minutes until translucent. Add a splash of water if they go too dry. Crush the garlic under the heel of your knife and throw it into the pan as is. Grate the ginger directly into the pan using a fine or medium grater (or finely chop and add to the pan). Add the spices. Sauté for a further 2 minutes until the onions have fully softened. Add the tomatoes along with water from half-filling the tins and rinsing them out, then cook for 10 minutes. Add the sweet potato chunks and gently simmer for 20–30 minutes or until they are tender when poked with a knife. Keep topping up the water if needed. Check the seasoning when they are done. Cook the quinoa in salted boiling water for 15 minutes. Usually I cook and drain quinoa ahead of time, refreshing it in cold water to stop the cooking process. When the stew is ready, stir in the cooked quinoa to warm through. Add a touch of water, if necessary. In suitable bowls, add the diced mozzarella or stringy cheese, if using, then spoon over the sweet potato stew. Sprinkle on chilli slices and coriander leaves – fresh and punchy is the idea here, so don’t hold back on the garnish. Serve with lime wedges for squeezing over. Your Daily Veg by Joe Woodhouse is published by Octopus, £22. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy from guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyStacey Gregg’s debut feature starts promisingly. Set in her native Northern Ireland, it stars Andrea Riseborough as a bereaved mother who bonds with the daughter of her new neighbours. Moody weather, an unsteady electronic score and cute-but-creepy young Megan (Niamh Dornan) suggest we’re heading into horror territory. The increasingly desperate Laura (Riseborough) is bewitched by the 10-year-old, who reminds her of her own late child. Gregg crafts a spooky atmosphere charged with the supernatural. Riseborough’s intensity helps sell the idea of a possible otherworldly presence, but the script is less committed, faltering with a lacklustre ending.Uda looks like a much thicker vanilla pod but instead of micro-seeds inside the pod, there are pebble-like things. They are the length of my finger, usually; it depends where they’re harvested from. The ones that my grandma brings back from Nigeria in her suitcase are usually twice the size of my finger but the ones I get from the store are quite small. The taste of uda is very hard to describe – there’s nothing like it. It’s almost woody, then there’s a tiny bit of bitterness, but not overpowering. It’s kind of warm, like nutmeg or cinnamon. The key distinction is its musky smell. Traditionally, I use it in suya and pepper soup, which is a kind of broth with goat meat and offal like tripe, or sometimes a fish broth. The whole point of the dish is that it’s really, really spicy, and then you have the woody taste from uda. It’s also amazing in place of vanilla; I make suya ice-cream. When you mix the uda pods with any form of dairy, it really seeps into it, so the taste is strong. You have to be careful how long you leave the uda in the custard for – if it’s too long it will taste more bitter. I use it in a scotch bonnet jam for my supper clubs. Obviously the scotch bonnet is really spicy but the uda gives a musky, calming scent. It takes dishes to a whole new level. It’s not a shy spice. Lopè Ariyo is a cookery writer and the author of Hibiscus (HarperCollins, £22)What’s the story with the modern television sex scene? Are there too many of them? Or not enough? Are they overtly pornographic and shocking, or becoming so numerous they verge on monotonous? What about the actors who perform sex scenes: in the era of the post-#MeToo intimacy coordinator – this golden age of on-set respect and sensitivity – is TV sex feeling good for everyone? TV sex is nothing new (the still-legendary I, Claudius aired in 1976), but increasingly the small screen is all panting, writhing bacchanalia. The leads in the BBC One show Cheaters barely complete their meet-cute before they are rutting in randy abandon. Elsewhere, just in recent memory, there have been sex scenes galore (couples, group sex, masturbation) in prestige programming. Euphoria. Normal People. Sex Education. It’s a Sin. Girls. Fleabag. The Great. I Hate Suzie. Industry … and a fair few lousy shows too. Meanwhile, streaming giant Netflix continues to live up to its “Sexflix” and “Netflix and chill” (youthful code for hook-up) reputation with series such as the spoofing uber-sexuality of The Woman in the House Across the Street From the Girl in the Window and the global hit Bridgerton, a period drama featuring a show-stopping performance of cunnilingus. But much as this is about a changing, more open and sexually charged world – and one affected by a pandemic – it is also about an evolving film and television landscape. The post-#MeToo era ushered in guidelines, moving towards a new protective climate where actors would no longer be at the mercy of capricious – and worse – producers and directors. Enter, the intimacy coordinators, with tools of their trade including nudity riders, modesty patches, nipple pasties and vajogas (a yoga mat used as a genital barrier when two bodies are grinding against each other). They work alongside directors to turn difficult scenes into a form of choreography. The intimacy coordinator also serves as an artist advocate, representing a crucial shift in the on-set power dynamic; the message being: just as with real-world sex, consent is all. Great, problem solved – right? Except that maybe there remain issues that are a little too complicated and deep-rooted to allow complacency to set in. What about gratuitous, boring, unnecessary sex scenes – those that exist purely to prop up a lame plot? What about the fact that generally younger, less established actors perform the most explicit sex scenes? For a while, reality shows such as Love Island featured pixelated “sex scenes” of contestants. Some of them were fine about it, but what about those who were not? While this was going on, all across the arts, working class people were finding it increasingly difficult to break in. One factor that cannot be ignored is the crossover of screen sex with the rise in consumption of online porn, particularly among young people. There have been many studies about the impact of porn on young brains. One such effect could be the expectation of something close to hardcore imagery from ordinary television. An instance of “porn-creep”, where not only has the porn glut normalised porn, it has also normalised the idea of explicit sex on mainstream television. Is that fair on actors who did not sign up to be quasi adult entertainment stars? Certainly, entitlement is out there, as is ugliness within the industry. Ruth Wilson is reported to have left The Affair after suffering extreme disrespect, including coercion to perform scenes she was not comfortable with. When Emilia Clarke spoke about dreading nudity in Game of Thrones, there was a public pushback, basically amounting to: you were paid, stop whingeing. As I thought at the time, it was almost as if Clarke was perceived as a buzzkill, splintering some fantasy of her unbridled joy at getting her kit off in front of millions. There was no acknowledgment that some actors – whatever their sex – are laid-back about doing sex scenes, while others, Keira Knightley among them, at times are not. This is part of the problem: the dearth of nuanced debate. Some of us remember Mary Whitehouse and her campaign against onscreen sex and are in no big hurry to join her. That said, you cannot speak even mildly critically about onscreen sex without setting off the prude klaxon. Personally, I find a lot of TV sex risibly gratuitous, and feel directors should be more creative. I still accept that the answer is not to replace the sex scene with clunking expositional dialogue along the lines of, “We’ve just had sex and how marvellous and life-affirming it was.” Sexual content can be meaningful. The funny, cartoonish stunt sex as seen in Sex Education can dispel fear and anxiety. I May Destroy You spoke powerfully about consent. In the This Is England series, actor Johnny Harris demonstrated how rape is not a sex scene, or a porn scene – it is purely about violence. In Girls, Lena Dunham’s nudity promoted body positivity. LGBTQ+ sex in shows such as It’s a Sin and the lesbian drama Tipping the Velvet can be groundbreaking and inclusive. All successful sex scenes perform specific functions in terms of plot development and characterisation. Normal People is an example of sex scenes building an emotional dimension, not because it is “posh TV”, but because it is beautifully crafted. One poignant aspect was how nice Connell was to Marianne during sex, sharply contrasting with the rise in real-life porn tropes of domination, violence and choking: a dark world where young women pretend to enjoy strangulation because it is “hot”. In this way, Normal People gave younger viewers valuable information about what sex can be – and what sex does not have to be. Another underrehearsed aspect of this debate concerns power and who has it? Recently, Sydney Sweeney, a big rising talent, spoke of turning down a nude Euphoria scene: with the cooperation of her director, she felt able to use her power. In therecent Disney+ series Pam &amp; Tommy, Lily James, playing Pamela Anderson (brilliant, by the way), was furnished with assorted prosthetics, including a fake breastplate. She still had to enact graphic scenes but not (really) with her own body: she was, in effect, her own prosthesis-clad body double. Other actors ask for dimmed lighting, certain angles, or strategically arranged sheets. In the Sex and the City follow-up And Just Like That the character of Miranda has a riotous sex scene with her non-binary lover, Che. It is OTT, unintentionally hilarious: the fuss Miranda makes, you would think no one had touched her clitoris before. Tellingly, the scene is staged fully clothed, as befits an actor of Cynthia Nixon’s age and stature. All of which is great, but it does not magically erase the reality for other television TV actors. Those who continue to feel degraded and nerve-racked about sex scenes, but who, even in the enlightened post-#MeToo climate, find it difficult to refuse graphic material. Actors who are starting out. Who need the work. Who need the first break. Who want to appear to be a team player. Who ostensibly have “choice” but – hmm – not really. This is something to remember as we stand before the churning ethical tsunami that is 21st-century TV sex culture. If you have noticed a lot more sex, you are not imagining it, or a prude – it is happening, and while at times it is brilliant and valid, at other times, it is boring, unnecessary and potentially harmful. Moreover, let us remember that television is an artform with a remit wholly separate from pornography. No viewer is ever “entitled” to nudity or simulated sex. Furthermore, sadly, it may be naive to think that all actors consider themselves fully protected, or that intimacy coordinators will always be welcome on set or listened to. Such measures may be an industry figleaf for issues that are of continuing concern. TV sex is not always great for everyone.A trio of bison has gathered around a fourth animal’s carcass, and Jimmy Doyle is worried. “I really hope we’re not on the brink of some disease outbreak,” said Doyle, who manages the Wolakota Buffalo Range here in a remote corner of south-western South Dakota in one of the country’s poorest counties. The living bison sidle away as Doyle inspects the carcass, which is little more than skin and bones after coyotes have scavenged it. “If you don’t catch them immediately after they’ve died, it’s pretty hard to say what happened,” he said. So far, at least, the Wolakota herd has avoided outbreaks as it pursues its aim of becoming the largest Indigenous American-owned bison herd. In the two years since the Rosebud Sioux tribe started collecting the animals on the 28,000-acre range in the South Dakota hills, the herd has swelled to 750 bison. The tribe plans to reach its goal of 1,200 within the year. “I thought we had an aggressive timeline on it, but the thing’s gotten a lot of support,” said Clay Colombe, CEO of the Rosebud tribe’s economic development agency. “It’s been a snowball in a good way.” With their eyes on solving food shortages and financial shortfalls, restoring ecosystems and bringing back an important cultural component, dozens of indigenous tribes have been growing bison herds. Tribes manage at least 55 herds across 19 states, said Troy Heinert, executive director of the InterTribal Buffalo Council. The pandemic, which has hit tribes particularly hard, added to the urgency of bison restoration, said Heinert, who is also the minority leader in the South Dakota state senate. The first animal harvested by Wolakota helped feed homeless residents of the Rosebud Sioux reservation. “It did highlight the fact that many of our areas on tribal lands do have some kind of food insecurity,” he said. “When trucks stopped coming in, it was rural and reservation communities that got hit hardest. Our people don’t have the ability to travel long distances to find new food sources.” Although the words are used interchangeably, bison and buffalo are different animals. Bison – named the US’s national mammal in 2016 – are found in North America and Europe, while buffalo are native to Asia and Africa. “I used to be a stickler for calling them bison, but I’ve heard them called buffalo a lot around here,” said Doyle, who is also a wildlife biologist. “I feel like it rolls off the tongue more easily, and it’s just fun to say.” Millions of bison once roamed the US, but they were hunted nearly to extinction in the 19th century, partly to suppress Indigenous Americans as they were forced on to reservations. In many areas, bison were replaced by cattle, which overgrazed the western US and killed off native vegetation. Indigenous American leaders are hoping Congress will help tribes bring back the bison. The Indian Buffalo Management Act, modeled after a bill that provided federal help to fishing tribes, was passed by the House in December and is awaiting Senate approval. “For Indian tribes, the restoration of buffalo to tribal lands signifies much more than simply conservation of the national mammal,” said Ervin Carlson, president of the InterTribal Buffalo Council, at a House hearing last year. “Tribes enter buffalo restoration efforts to counteract the near extinction of buffalo that was analogous to the tragic history of American Indians in this country.” Not all the tribes that would benefit from the federal funds are in places where buffalo previously roamed. The Alutiiq tribe on Alaska’s Kodiak Island has been raising bison since 2017 to combat food insecurity. The tribe has nearly 90 animals – including three bulls from Yellowstone national park that were sent part of the way via a specially outfitted FedEx plane – and expects to reach at least 150 this year, said herd manager Melissa Berns. “People are excited to be able to harvest right in our own back yard,” she said. “It’s clean meat and we know exactly where it came from.” While food security is most often cited as the reason for the recent interest in bison, tribes also hope that returning bison to the land will restore ecological balance. At Wolakota, for instance, bison have been eating the yucca plants that became plentiful after native grasses disappeared, tearing them up by the roots and allowing grasses to return. The grass regeneration increases carbon capture. The bison also is tightly connected to the culture of Great Plains tribes such as the Sioux. The animals provided food, tools and shelter for indigenous people, and some tribes consider them to be family. “It’s a powerful feeling bringing our relatives home,” said TJ Heinert, Troy’s 27-year-old son who lives on the Wolakota range with his family and helps manage it. On a recent winter morning he was dressed in camouflage as he prepared to hunt coyotes as part of a tribal benefit for his mother, who is recovering from cancer surgery. “If our buffalo nation is healthy, we’re healthy,” he said. It takes a lot of work to keep that buffalo nation healthy. Doyle and TJ spend hours each day crawling over dirt roads that test the suspension on their trucks. “It’s bumpy out here,” Doyle said as he navigated his truck through rolling hills dotted with running coyotes. “It will really rattle your kidneys if you spend a full day bumping around.” Much of the past two years has included replacing 40 miles of fences to keep neighboring cattle ranchers happy. Another 40 miles will be replaced or added this year. In the winter, employees must constantly chop up frozen watering holes with axes to keep the animals hydrated. About once a year the bison need to be vaccinated against an array of diseases and the females checked for pregnancy. As with grass-fed cattle, the bison are herded from one pasture to another to prevent overgrazing. On a recent day, nearly all the animals were confined to a 2,000-acre pasture, except for a few “ornery” bulls that Doyle said had been reluctant to move with the rest of the herd and were left behind. “We’re trying to strike a balance of letting the buffalo express their natural behaviors, making sure they have plenty of room to roam,” Doyle said as he drove toward a group of about two dozen bison, “and being able to manage where they’re grazing so we can make sure we’re still improving the range health and habitat quality for other wildlife.” With millions of dollars donated to the project in the past two years, the Wolakota herd has grown quickly. That growth has been aided by donated animals from at least nine sources, most of them federal wildlife refuges and national parks. Doyle expected to bring in 60 additional bison from Montana in the coming days. “I think the rapid growth of this project is a sign of how much support there is for projects like this,” said Dennis Jorgensen, who coordinates the World Wildlife Federation’s bison initiative and has helped Wolakota get off the ground. “I really think there’s an energy among the American people to return bison to the native people.”Residents of a California county are mounting an aggressive campaign to oust officials who have supported Covid safety measures and vaccines, the latest example of a growing extremism in local politics fueled by the pandemic. A group in Nevada county, a rural expanse of about 100,000 people in the Sierra Nevada, is seeking to recall five county supervisors, saying that contact tracing efforts and the promotion of lockdowns and vaccines violate “religious freedoms and individual liberty”. The effort comes on the heels of a successful recall campaign further north in Shasta county, where voters ousted Leonard Moty, a Republican supervisor and retired police chief. The Shasta county election, which followed nearly two years of threats and increasing hostility toward the longtime supervisor and his moderate colleagues, gave control of the board of supervisors to a group supported by local militia members. Both campaigns shared extreme rhetoric and in some cases aggression driven by discontent over Covid restrictions and rooted in a deep distrust of institutions. This antagonism has only accelerated during the pandemic, even in largely Democratic states like California. Experts warn angst over Covid rules, inflamed by social media, has become a gateway to extremism. Shasta county activists pitched their recall as a fight for “freedom” while the Nevada county recall campaign has accused supervisors of “promoting corruption” and enabling “crimes against humanity”. Nevada county officials have said the recall attempt is a “desperate effort” by a vocal minority who are pushing false and misleading information. “I did not enable ‘crimes against humanity’, I sought to protect citizens’ health in the face of a deadly virus,” Supervisor Dan Miller said in response to the filing. Experts say extreme language is becoming increasingly common in local politics and public meetings, even those that have historically been staid and orderly affairs. “We’ve seen an increase in threats against public officials and an increase in the climate of conflict,” said Brian Levin, the director of the Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism at California State University, San Bernardino. “Whether it’s supervisors or school board officials, we are now seeing an in-your-face brazenness with regard to personal interactions, but it’s also spread culturally.” In northern California, small groups with extreme beliefs have tapped into existing discontent over Covid restrictions, attracting residents who have long felt unheard or ignored by state officials, Levin said. “This kind of activity in northern California is a symptom and manifestation of how widespread and dispersed extremism can be and why it has particularly gained traction in rural areas,” Levin said. The last few years have been volatile, the Nevada county supervisor Sue Hoek said, with officials and staff subjected to personal threats amid growing anger over the pandemic. “We didn’t make Covid, but it’s our job to try to keep all of our community safe,” she said. Calvin Clark, a proponent of the recall, says the effort is a grassroots movement in which about 200 residents are involved. “This is simply the citizens asking for accountability from their elected representatives,” he said. The recall campaign in Nevada county has only just officially kicked off – organizers have 120 days to gather enough signatures to get the measure on the ballot – but the effort has already created tension. The county’s registrar of voters recently closed its office after maskless proponents of the recall “stormed” the office and pushed a worker, officials said. In December, the board of supervisors called for a recess amid a rowdy meeting in which recall supporters demanded the officials be removed from their posts. Clark said officials had falsely painted the recall as extremist, and that he and others were simply trying to have their grievances addressed. Invoking a talking point of the far right, he compared government Covid policies to living in Nazi Germany. “As they said in Germany, ‘Just get on the train.’ We’re not doing that. We’re not going to Auschwitz,” he told the Guardian. “It’s not about vaccines,” he said. “It’s about the liberty to choose how you’re going to live and if you’re going to give your rights to five elected representatives.” The Nevada county supervisors have had to call for recesses several times during the pandemic in order to de-escalate tense meetings, Hoek said. “It is one of our rights to speak up and have freedom of speech. I just wish sometimes we could do that a little more civilly,” she said. “I think we’re doing everything we can to keep things from escalating and let them be heard.” Disruptions and threats have been seen in public meetings across the country amid strife over pandemic health rules. A county commission in Oregon moved to virtual meetings last month due to anti-mask protesters. In Virginia, a parent was arrested after threatening to bring guns if officials didn’t make masks optional. “Distrust in government has permeated the most local levels,” Colin Clarke, a terrorism expert, told the Guardian earlier this month. “I’m familiar with the indicators of extremism and radicalization. I see them in places I never expected to see them. If you had told me as a terrorism expert I’d be talking about school boards, I’d have said you’re crazy.” Discord in rural politics has also been driven in part by pent-up anger from residents who feel they’re not getting a fair shake from the government, said Lisa Pruitt, an expert on rural law at University of California, Davis. That anger has trickled down from state leaders to local officials who people believe aren’t doing enough. The divisive state of American politics has only created more tension. “I can’t help but believe that had we not been in such a fractured political moment, the pandemic might not have become so political and people might not have responded in such emotionally charged ways,” Pruitt said. But that phenomenon can be seen across the US, she added. “I can’t see anything about this that seems unique to Nevada county,” Pruitt said. “We’re seeing uncivil behavior at public meetings and in public places. We’re seeing these really heated political clashes.” Regardless of the outcome, the use of extreme rhetoric in politics is cause for concern, Levin said. “People [might] dismiss it as hypercharged rhetoric,” he said. “Calling someone a traitor, talking about crimes against humanity, is part of the way individuals turn the spotlight away from their use of violence-glorifying rhetoric. People labeling their political opponents as traitors and criminals – we’ve seen what the results are in lesser republics than ours.” Despite the division in Nevada county, Hoek said she was proud of what officials had achieved amid the pandemic, from new housing to broadband projects, and is hopeful for the area’s future. “There are some challenges. Sometimes I go home and shake my head. But you know what, it doesn’t deter me from doing my job,” she said. “It’s worth it.” This article was amended on 21 February 2022. An earlier version stated that Brian Levin was at California State University, Long Beach. He is at California State University, San Bernardino.Britain has frustrated its EU allies and weakened the west’s financial threat to the Kremlin by failing to close a loophole that will ensure London real estate remains a safe haven for Russian money, according to diplomatic sources in Brussels. New legislation, described as the “toughest ever” by the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, gives the UK government powers to freeze the assets of individuals linked to the Russian state in the event of an invasion of Ukraine but fails to “capture” property owned via anonymous offshore structures. The irritation in EU capitals at the perceived hole in the UK’s sanctions threat has only been exacerbated by Boris Johnson’s repeated calls in recent days for European governments to “wean” themselves off dependency on Russian gas. “Parading around preaching at your allies is all very well if you have sorted your own house out,” said one diplomatic source. “But they haven’t. You only need to look at the number of empty properties in Kensington and Chelsea to know that.” Truss had claimed that legislation laid in parliament on 10 February left the oligarchs with “nowhere to hide” as the UK is able to sanction entities and businesses of economic and strategic significance to the Russian government, as well as their owners, directors and trustees. But EU capitals are concerned by the failure of the government to ensure that the identity of those who own real estate is at hand in the event of sanctions being necessary. According to the NGO Transparency International, more than 85,000 properties in the UK are owned anonymously by entities registered abroad. The legal loophole in Europe’s punitive package has been the subject of discussions in recent days among diplomats coordinating Europe’s response to Russian aggression. It is understood these concerns have been conveyed to London. A Foreign Office spokesman declined to comment. On Sunday, Boris Johnson, speaking to the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, conceded that the City of London had a problem with Russian money but claimed that the government would be able to expose the true ownership of property through a register of beneficial ownership. Johnson told the BBC: “We are making sure that we open up the Russian doll of property ownership, of company ownership, in London and see who’s behind everything. And we’ve got to do it and we’ve got to hit very hard.” But such a database is yet to be established despite promises made by the government since 2016. Plans for an economic crime bill had been included in the 2019 Queen’s speech but the legislation is yet to materialise. Johnson conceded that the sanctions package “may not be enough on its own”, adding “it will be very damaging and very difficult” but “it may not be enough to deter an irrational actor”. The west has sought to show a united front on the sanctions that would be imposed on Russia if Vladimir Putin does wage war in Ukraine, with warnings from the US, the EU and the UK of “severe costs and massive consequences”. On Sunday, the European council president, Charles Michel, told the Munich security conference: “One thing is certain: if there is further military aggression, we will react with massive sanctions.” The UK has for a long time been a favoured hiding place for Russian oligarchs seeking to protect their wealth. Transparency International published a report last week that identified £1.5bn-worth of property owned by Russians accused of corruption or links to the Kremlin. A report by the House of Commons foreign affairs select committee in 2018 concluded: “London’s role in hiding the proceeds of Kremlin-connected corruption risks signalling that the UK is not serious about confronting the full spectrum of President Putin’s offensive measures.”The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has failed to recognize that people with confirmed Covid infections, also known as “natural immunity,” have achieved some level of protection against subsequent infections and severe disease. This has unnecessarily fueled divisiveness, particularly when vaccines are mandated without acknowledgement that prior Covid is an alternate path, albeit with some limitations, for protection of the individual and helping to build the population’s immunity wall. While there has been a body of data supporting a robust immune response to Covid infections, that evidence has recently been substantially bolstered. In the very large trial on the Johnson and Johnson vaccine single shot compared with placebo, among over 2,000 participants with prior infections, as documented by positive antibody status, their protection against moderate or severe disease was 90%. That’s much higher than the vaccine efficacy of 56%, yet the CDC recognizes 2-shot of this vaccine as “fully vaccinated” but ignores these data, and many other proof points, of natural immunity protection. A recent CDC report for Covid in California that included the Delta wave, the cumulative hospitalization rate for the vaccinated was 0.7% among vaccinated and 0.3% unvaccinated with prior infection. Notably, a 10-fold lower risk of subsequent infection was found in the people with natural immunity compared with those vaccinated in the Cleveland Clinic health system’s study of over 52,000 employees. These reports convey a high level of protection of natural immunity, at times comparable to 2-shot vaccines. Multiple studies following people at least 15 months out from Covid infections have shown persistent antibody levels and memory B cells. Reinfections among those with natural immunity throughout the pandemic, until the recent Omicron wave, have been very low, less than 1%. A United Kingdom study of about 9,000 people with prior infections demonstrated higher than 90% protection against subsequent infections, even among those who had Covid more than 18 months previously. If there is good protection from infections, then why is one-shot of a vaccine necessary and sufficient? A new report of nearly 150,000 people with Covid infections in Israel, with about half vaccinated, compared to the others left unvaccinated, there was an 82% lower risk of reinfection for people aged 16 to 64 years, and 60% for age 65 or older. There was no difference for the protection with more than 1-dose of vaccine. The same was found in another study. Both of these were performed during the Delta wave, but now we have data with Omicron, the strain of the virus with the most substantial evasion of our immune system. Substantiating that, In Qatar, while the protection of natural immunity was about 90% for previous Alpha, Beta and Gamma variants, it dropped to 56% for Omicron. In the United Kingdom, the risk of reinfection for people with prior Covid spiked to a level 16-fold what had been seen previously. Yet an Omicron wave study from Cleveland Clinic in about 8,000 people with natural immunity, 1-shot of vaccine markedly reduced the risk of infection and 2 or 3-shots had no incremental protective benefit. That same finding was consistent in the Israel and UK studies: 1-shot did the trick, no added protection from 2 or 3-shots. Indeed, the waning of protection after 1-year in the UK study was averted with one dose of vaccine. Past critique of natural immunity protection is still relevant. These studies have survivor bias—they only include people who survived their infections. We know that the symptoms of Long Covid can be reduced by vaccines, which is an important added feature of the controlled vaccine approach compared with the unpredictable chronic duration sequalae of an infection, which can be disabling, even when they are mild. Although about 90% of people with infections develop antibodies and memory B an T cells, that leaves some without an immune response, which appears to be more of an issue when a person did not have symptoms, or they were very mild. Since we do not assess antibody levels, especially those capable of neutralizing of the virus, and do not measure T cell responses, there is a blind spot in knowing about an individual’s level of protection, be it by infection or vaccination. Which brings us to hybrid immunity. It would be reckless to ever recommend someone get purposely infected with Covid. However, for those who have sustained an infection their immune response was directed to the whole virus whereas our vaccines are specific to the spike-protein. The result of combining the different immune responses is synergy, more than additive, a powerful and durable protection, 25 to 100 times more antibody response and broader against variants of the virus. Note that we do not have the same evidence for the opposite order: vaccination prior to breakthrough infections. It is now clearly overdue for the United States and the CDC to acknowledge natural immunity as a partial path to protection, as has been previously done in several countries. The term “fully vaccinated” needs to be redefined. For people who have received 2 mRNA vaccine shots, without prior infection, a third shot, booster, is needed to protect against symptomatic and severe disease. On the other hand, for people with natural immunity, with proof of a positive PCR test, one-shot is all that is necessary to be considered “fully vaccinated.” By providing immunity certification in this way, the polarization between natural and vaccine-induce immune camps will be bridged, at least to some extent. The evidence has become overwhelming and its adoption as policy will likely help get the low American vaccination rate of 64% , ranked worse than 60 countries in the world, to a much higher level, further building the immunity wall for the whole population. It’s also about sticking to the science when a large and ever-increasing body of data can no longer be ignored. One can fully understand why vaccine mandates would be repudiated when there was evidence of protection conferred by infection. Now, as the virus evolved, we are at a time when natural immunity alone is not sufficient, but with a single shot it’s as good as three. Eric Topol is the founder and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, professor of molecular medicine, and executive vice-president of Scripps Research“All ideas are good,” according to the great theatre teacher Jacques Lecoq. “The question is: will they work on stage?” This production is bursting with ideas, but they haven’t reached concrete expression in performance. Director Anthony Lau, designer Georgia Lowe and lighting designer Jack Knowles have taken Helen Edmundson’s celebrated 1992 ensemble-based adaptation of Tolstoy’s 1878 realist novel about families (happy and unhappy) and given it an early-20th-century Soviet theatre makeover. The stage is configured as a circus ring abutting a wall of doors (think Meyerhold; think Eisenstein before he moved on to film). Instead of a set, there are sculptural lighting effects (think Gordon Craig and/or Appia). This style is demanding. It sets the actors in sharp relief and demands incisive and imaginative direction. The eight actors all perform creditably, but the direction is piecemeal. Too many scenes come across as if they are stuck in the early stages of rehearsal, not yet worked through. Edmundson’s structuring of the drama as a dialogue between Anna and the landowning, would-be family man Levin is poorly handled, made to feel slow and clumsy. Celebrations and dances are particularly raggedy (a movement director is credited, but it’s hard to believe they were employed). Adelle Leoncé’s Anna, in figure-hugging black satin dress, is the attention-holding emotional focus of the piece, achieving an impressive climax of despair and desolation in the second half. Nick Fletcher brings a simmering passion to the role of Anna’s wronged husband, Karenin, which is not counterbalanced by Chris Jenks’s Count Vronsky, more bashful schoolboy than dangerously dashing officer. As the “good girl” counterpoint to Anna’s “fallen woman”, Tara Tijani’s Kitty grows touchingly through girlishness to womanhood in her relation with Levin. In what is becoming a pattern at the Crucible, this is a studio-suited piece given a main-house razzmatazz that highlights its weaknesses, not its strengths. Anna Karenina is at the Crucible, Sheffield, until 26 FebruaryWhen Marian Keyes announced she had written a sequel to her 1997 smash hit novel, Rachel’s Holiday, social media went into overdrive. Rachel’s Holiday – which sold more than 1.5m copies and spawned generations of devotees to Keyes’s writing – was a cultural phenomenon, following protagonist Rachel Walsh as she struggled to come to terms with drug and alcohol addiction during a spell in a Dublin rehab clinic, the Cloisters. Again, Rachel picks up the story 20 years later, and Rachel is now an addiction counsellor at the clinic that once saved her. Where Rachel’s Holiday concluded with her estranged boyfriend, Luke Costello, declaring his love for her, here we learn that Rachel and Luke have now been acrimoniously divorced for six years, and have not spoken since. Rachel is dating Quin, “an adrenaline junkie, his particular poison being rock-climbing”, but in spite of his adoration of her, she is reluctant to commit fully. When Luke returns to Ireland for his mother’s funeral and he and Rachel meet up again, the truth about their failed relationship forces her to reposition the prism through which she had perceived the dissolution of their marriage. Keyes, as ever, is dealing with a plethora of emotionally and psychologically knotty issues: as well as the driving narrative of addiction and recovery, Keyes tackles depression, sexual abuse, regret and grief. And yet typically she manages such a lightness of touch, effortlessly segueing from tragedy to comedy. There is chaos and humour in the life of the Walsh family, as when Rachel and her sisters prepare a “surprise” party for her mother’s 80th birthday. Rachel’s ageing mum – a highlight in a novel replete with beautifully well-rounded secondary characters – issues strict instructions: “Make them practise yelling, ‘SURPRISE!’… My sisters, but especially Imelda and Philomena, won’t want to, and some of the cousins are right bitches too, but tell them there’ll be no goody bag for them if they don’t.” Grief also runs through the novel – both Rachel’s own and that of her patients at the Cloisters – and it is here that Keyes’s skill at characterisation really shines: each patient is so vividly depicted that the chapters dealing with their therapy meetings are like exquisite short stories; the mother who’s lost a daughter, the teenager devastated by his alcoholic father, the abandoned son. But ultimately this is Rachel’s story, and as it unfolds, Keyes deftly draws parallels between her recovery and that of her patients, forcing her to reassess the progress she’s made and to confront painful truths about herself and her past. If there’s a core theme in Again, Rachel, it’s that of forgiveness: forgiveness of oneself for human failings. Forgiveness for loved ones who don’t always behave in ways we might wish. Forgiveness for the adversities – seemingly perverse in their cruelty – that life sometimes throws at us. Again, Rachel has all of Keyes’s trademark wit, humour and whip-smart dialogue, but it’s also a novel teeming with compassion and redemption. • Again, Rachel by Marian Keyes is published by Michael Joseph (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAt the heart of Patrick Wang’s cheeky indie comedy, split into a pair of two-hour films, is the Bread Factory, a community arts centre in the fictional Checkford (a proxy for Hudson, New York). The space houses a theatre, a newspaper and a makeshift town hall, as well as a bustling ensemble of lovably eccentric characters. Local leaders Dorothea (Tyne Daly) and Greta (Elisabeth Henry) tussle for funding with May Ray, a flashy but vapid performance artist duo. Part One is a manual for maintaining integrity as standards of art, journalism and personal ethics slip. It could exist comfortably as a standalone film, but it wouldn’t be as much fun without the weirder, more experimental Part Two, which revolves around a production of the Greek play Hecuba and features characters breaking out into surreal bursts of tap dance and song.He was the Russian genius who founded the celebrated Ballets Russes in Paris in the early 20th century and whose revolutionary influence on the world of dance and theatre design is still felt today. But, despite his extraordinary talents, Sergei Diaghilev resorted to underhand and even vicious tactics to ensure that the spotlight remained firmly focused on him, according to new research. Professor Lynn Garafola, an American dance historian, discovered a previously unpublished text in which Bronislava Nijinska, the dancer and one of the most innovative choreographers of the 20th century, wrote of Diaghilev’s attempts to claim credit for the work of fellow artists – even blocking their employment elsewhere. Nijinska, whose brother was the celebrated dancer Vaslav Nijinsky, had joined the Ballets Russes in 1909. She wrote: “[Diaghilev] victimised the ballet artists when they left his company and tried by all means possible to prevent their employment by other companies... he hindered their receiving an entry visa to England.” She added: “Everything had to originate with Diaghilev. He considered himself the creator and the ruler of the Russian Ballet, and all had to submit to him. “To create one’s own and to destroy somebody else’s – this was his principle. But such a principle seemed to me not only dangerous but also unworthy of a great man.” She continued: “Diaghilev was beside himself when the new company of Ida Rubinstein was organised. [He] conceived a hatred for us and vowed to destroy us … This great man regarded as a mortal enemy anyone who … encroached on ‘his’ art: I personally was subjected to cruel reprisal: Diaghilev criticised me maliciously and impeded my work in every way.” Nijinska, who died in 1972 aged 81, had trained at the Imperial Ballet School in St Petersburg and joined the Mariinsky Theatre company in 1908. She danced with the Ballets Russes, like her brother, and choreographed several ballets for the company, including Les Noces, which was described by the writer HG Wells as “the soul itself of the Russian people in sound and vision”. Sir Frederick Ashton regarded her as one of the greatest influences in his career as a choreographer, once saying: “Her achievements have proved to me time and again that, through the medium of classical ballet, any emotion may be expressed. She might be called the architect of dancing, building her work brick by brick into the amazing structures that result in masterpieces like Les Noces.” Garafola, professor emerita of dance at Barnard College, Columbia University, has now written Nijinska’s first biography. Titled La Nijinska: Choreographer of the Modern, it will be published by Oxford University Press in February in the US and in June in the UK. She said that, when Nijinska tried to set up her own company in Britain in 1925, Diaghilev indirectly informed the Home Office that her dancers did not have the correct visas. Five of those dancers had to leave within 48 hours under the Aliens Order of 1920, according to research in an unpublished MA thesis to which Garafola had access. She spoke of being the first to draw on Nijinska’s writings, including “very rich” diaries, letters and notes, among newly available documents held in the Library of Congress in Washington. She said: “There’s quite a bit about Diaghilev. She was always trying to please him but she also felt that he wanted to claim everything as his own. She had already been choreographing for a number of years in Russia, but he didn’t want her talking to the press. He wanted to present her new work as though this were Diaghilev’s. There were times when he hurt her professionally. When she decided to leave the company, he went out of his way to ruin her first independent effort. She had a small company in England. She had a number of young men she’d trained. They were now part of the Diaghilev company. They were on vacation and were to appear in her company. But he pulled strings in order to alert the Home Office and make sure that they didn’t have the correct visas.” But she was clearly conflicted over Diaghilev. In a draft note to an unnamed correspondent, following his death in 1929, she wrote: “[He] knew me entirely and idolised me in art – and he created me (without intending to – because I was a woman, after all).” Garafola said: “Her diaries… allow one to track from the inside her obsession with creativity, her self-doubts, her triumphs, and her most intimate thoughts about love and, especially, her obsession with the opera singer [Feodor] Chaliapin.” It was unrequited love. Chaliapin made it clear that he had no interest in any romantic involvement although she never doubted – at least in these diaries – that she owed the inspiration for her creative achievement to Chaliapin. Garafola added: “Once she began working for the Ida Rubinstein company in 1928, her craving for Chaliapin’s physical presence intensified. As opening night approaches, all she can think about is Chaliapin and whether he will be in the audience. He isn’t. He misses all of the season’s performances, denying her the pleasure of hearing how much he admires her art. “She sees him day and night in her dreams. They are ‘full of caresses’, she writes, and she wakes up happy. It doesn’t really matter, she adds, if this ‘happiness’ is real or not: ‘I was with you’.”Boris Johnson has repeatedly refused to say whether he would resign if fined by the police for breaking Covid laws at a series of alleged Downing Street parties. After handing back a questionnaire to the Metropolitan police, which is expected to defend his presence at some of the dozen events under investigation, the prime minister dodged a series of questions about the issue. Asked if he would quit if Scotland Yard issued him with a fixed penalty notice worth at least £100, Johnson told the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme: “I can’t comment about a process that is under way.” He said he would have “something meaningful to say about this” when the Met investigation ended, but insisted that any answers now “would be interpreted as a point of commentary about the process”. Johnson added he hoped people “won’t have long” but said: “There’s not a jot I can say until it’s done.” Previously, the prime minister has commented on specific events – including a “bring your own booze” garden party to which more than 100 Downing Street staff were invited. The gathering was held on 20 May 2020, when only two people from different households could meet outdoors socially distanced. Last month, Johnson denied any wrongdoing and claimed “technically” no rules were broken and that he thought it was a “work event”. However, he apologised for the “rage” people who had made “extraordinary sacrifices” during the pandemic felt because they felt “the rules were not being properly followed by the people who make the rules”. Asked by the BBC if he understood why people found his defence of the event implausible, Johnson said: “There is literally not a bean I can tell you about that.” About a dozen Conservative MPs have gone public with their concerns about Johnson’s conduct and the way in which he ran No 10 during the pandemic. However, more have expressed concerns in private about his leadership, and others are waiting for the Met inquiry to conclude and the publication of the full Sue Gray report before putting in a letter calling for Johnson to quit. Pressed on whether he was burying his head in the sand about the serious concerns his own MPs had about the parties, Johnson said: “I am fortunate to live in a democracy. I am fortunate to be the PM of a free, independent, democratic country where people can take that sort of decision, and where I do face that sort of pressure, that’s a wonderful thing.” Johnson declined to say whether he stood by his promise in the Commons that no Covid laws were broken in Downing Street. And as to whether there was a party in his Downing Street flat during lockdown, he said: “Respectfully, humbly, I can’t say anything more about this until the process is completed.” A staunch ally of Johnson’s, the Foreign Office minister James Cleverly, insisted: “I don’t think what the country needs right now is a vacuum at the centre of government.” But David Lammy, Labour’s shadow justice secretary, responded in a tweet: “I totally agree – this is exactly why Boris Johnson should resign.” The Met has not said how much longer its investigation – known as Operation Hillman – will take. Officers have started receiving back questionnaires sent to those – including Johnson – who it believed attended some of the dozen gatherings being investigated. Ed Davey, leader of the Liberal Democrats, said Johnson was “not fit to be prime minister”, and added: “If he won’t resign, Conservative MPs should do the right thing and sack him.”There’s something odd about Rishi Sunak. The chancellor has rarely been out of the news since he took over at the Treasury from Sajid Javid two years ago and his approval rating with the public is high. His reputation as a safe pair of hands means he could be the next prime minister – yet we know little about what he believes. To the extent that while a picture of Sunak has emerged through the blizzard of budgets and mini budgets of a technocrat fascinated by Silicon Valley-style capitalism, in truth there have been only hints of an over-arching philosophy. Sunak has the chance to do something about that when he gives the Mais lecture on Thursday, an event at which previous chancellors have taken the opportunity to lay out a credo. Nigel Lawson certainly did in 1984 when he rejected the postwar consensus that macro-economic policy (the big picture stuff such as interest rates, public spending and tax) should be about delivering full employment while control of inflation was the job of micro-economic policy (supply-side measures). In his Mais lecture 15 years later, Gordon Brown cavilled with Lawson’s notion that deregulation was the key to productivity growth but broadly agreed with his predecessor’s view of the role of the two halves of economic policy. Indeed, Brown had handed control of interest rates to the Bank of England in 1997 for this very reason. But the new orthodoxy only lasted for as long as the economy stayed out of serious trouble. In both the global financial crisis and, to an even greater extent during the Covid pandemic, demand management came back into fashion. Under Sunak, big picture macro-economic policy has all been about jobs and growth. The nitty-gritty, supply side stuff has taken a back seat because the past two years have been dominated by crisis management and damage limitation. In the circumstances, Sunak had no choice but to turn the Lawson-Brown orthodoxy on its head. His strategy was costly and unavoidable, and up to a point it has worked. Furloughing workers prevented a repeat of the mass, long-term unemployment that left such deep scars in the 1980s. The upshot has been a much bigger role for the state in the economy, a development that has been good for Sunak politically. It is because he was prepared to run the biggest peacetime budget deficit in history to save jobs that the chancellor is so popular. All of which will make the Mais lecture timely and fascinating. Sunak is supposed to be a small state, low tax Conservative who just happens to be in charge of the economy when taxes as a share of national output are on course to be the highest since Labour’s Hugh Gaitskell was doing the job in the early 1950s. Liz Truss, one of his rivals to succeed Boris Johnson, is making her pitch as a dry Thatcherite and it would be a surprise were Sunak to use Thursday’s event to try to outflank her on the right. Doubtless, there will be the usual talk of how it is important to knock the public finances back into shape yet that would be the message from any chancellor – Labour or Conservative – in the current circumstances. But Sunak will also note the importance of the state in supporting the economy in the past two years, arguing that as things return to normal the respective strengths of government and the market can be harnessed to stimulate innovation and improve Britain’s poor productivity record. The emphasis on productivity makes sense because – as the National Institute for Economic and Social Research (NIESR) thinktank points out – the pandemic has made a poor record over the past decade worse. It notes one of the hidden costs of Covid-19: as a result of missed schooling children from disadvantaged backgrounds have fallen even further behind their more-fortunate peers. The long-term effects will be an under-skilled workforce and lower productivity and a cost per pupil in lost lifetime earnings of up to £22,000. The report has some strong things to say about the deficiencies of economic policy: it is over-centralised and short-termist; industrial policy is too hands-off; investment in early years learning is inadequate and needs to return to the levels under Brown’s government. As a country, the report notes the UK has one of the poorest productivity performances among the OECD’s 38 advanced economies. Britain also stands out for having big productivity differences between and within regions. The gap between the richer and poorer parts of the country has grown wider. “If policymakers return to the same economic structures post-pandemic that failed to resolve the productivity problem pre-pandemic, then the UK is set for another decade of a low-growth, low-productivity and low-wage economy”, NIESR concludes. That all rings true, but the Treasury is always wary of devolving power, partly because it likes to be in control and partly because it thinks a bottom-up approach leads to the waste of public money. Covid loan fraud losses mean Sunak is not immune from that criticism himself. It is the goal of all chancellors and shadow chancellors to make the economy more productive. Before the 2010 election, George Osborne used his Mais lecture to call for an economic model that did away with a reliance on unsustainable and private debt. The wait for this game-changing model goes on, which is why Thursday is the time for the real Rishi Sunak to stand up.When Tom Pooley, 21, became the first person to receive an experimental vaccine against plague as part of a medical trial last summer after tests on mice, he was inspired by the thought that his involvement could help to rid the world of one of the most brutal killers in human history. “They made it quite clear I was the first human to receive it,” says Pooley, a radiotherapy engineering student. “They didn’t dress it up, but they made it clear it was as safe as possible. There are risks, but they are talented people: it’s a big honour to be the first.” The single-shot, based on the Chadox technology developed by the Oxford Vaccine Group and AstraZeneca, took less than five seconds to painlessly administer, he says. That night, he felt a little unwell, but he was fine within three hours; and the small trial continued apace to combat the centuries-old bacteria threat, which killed 171 in Madagascar as recently as 2017. It uses a weakened, genetically altered version of a common-cold virus from chimpanzees. It is just one example of how scientists are increasingly looking at how Covid treatments can help to treat other diseases. Trials are expected to be developed for other similar jabs against dengue, Zika and a whole host of pathogens. Another vaccine study against Ebola is already going to human trials. As Professor Sarah Gilbert, architect of the Oxford Vaccine, has said: “We’ve got the cake and we can put a cherry on top, or we can put some pistachios on top if we want a different vaccine, we just add the last bit and then we’re ready to go.” The Covid pandemic sparked an unprecedented drive to control a lethal disease whose outbreak led to a near global shutdown to contain its spread. Billions in public and private money were pumped into research like never before in such a short space of time. It’s not something the medical world would have chosen, but the developments of the past two years could not have happened without Covid-19 – the pathogen has served as a giant catalyst ushering in different technologies, data and research that offer insights into other diseases. The lessons that have been learned – and the new norms that have solidified – will change medical science forever. The world now sits on the verge of a number of potentially significant breakthroughs, mostly thanks to the growing research into hi-tech vaccines, which could benefit patients with cancer and a whole raft of infectious diseases. Meanwhile, new studies into long Covid could shine a light into blood clotting, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and other conditions associated with the stubborn virus. Obesity and vitamin levels are under the microscope; while digitisation and increased cross-border collaboration could soon reap rewards. “Covid has stimulated the rapid translation of previous knowledge into practice,” says Independent Sage member and UCL professor of virology, Deenan Pillay. “Developing science takes many years and needs an opportunity to be implemented. Covid has provided an easier regulatory environment, with fast-tracked trials, so vaccine developments, for example, have been really quick.” Until Covid it could take a decade or more for a new vaccine or drug to go through all the development and regulatory stages, he adds, but now they have been rolled out within 12 months of first description of the disease. “Our expectations are now for a much more rapid translation and implementation of scientific advances,” says Pillay. “The caveat to this is the continuing need for equity of access to these advances, which is yet to be seen with Covid vaccines and drugs.” Just five years ago, there was widespread hesitation to invest in experimental drugs that use synthetic molecules to guide human cells into making specific proteins that can defend against diseases. No product based on mRNA (which stands for messenger ribonucleic acid, and provides recipes to create proteins) technology had ever been approved, but within two years, the rapid development and success of Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna’s jabs against Covid were a gamechanger. The US big pharma giant Pfizer was already working with German start-up BioNTech, which has significant mRNA expertise, on a flu jab before the emergence of Covid. Then focus shifted to developing a vaccine for the pandemic and the pressing need for a treatment to be created accelerated steps into the next frontier – research into treatments based on RNA, a strand of nucleic acid that transfers the instructions needed to make proteins. “It’s been an unforeseen benefit of the pandemic because RNA and mRNA vaccine technology has been researched for at least 10 years,” says Richard Bucala, the Yale school of medicine chief of rheumatology, allergy and immunology. “It wasn’t until the pandemic that RNA was really heavily invested in,” he adds. “Vaccine development is empiric: it’s very difficult to figure out if it’s going to work. It’s extremely risky. No one really wants to be involved in research and development. You don’t realise it’s a failure until you’re tens of millions into a trial. But the fortuitous success of RNA tech changed all of that.” Relative public acceptance of an unusual hi-tech approach has also been key, and approval by a diverse range of regulatory bodies has given both investors and industry confidence. This could open the floodgates to further approvals if the new jabs impress in trials that are being prepared for humans. Already they have their sights set on another killer disease, malaria, which is estimated to have killed almost half of all people since the Stone Age. It remained a leading cause of global infectious disease death last year: more than 600,000 people, usually young children, died from it. Bucala’s team, in partnership with pharmaceutical company Novartis, succeeded in developing a “self-amplifying” RNA (also known as saRNA) jab for it. The technology stems from a successful RNA malaria vaccine for mice developed at Yale and is in advanced preclinical testing. It could be tested for the first time in humans within two years. “You can potentially protect against a range of tropical diseases using self-amplifying RNA, which targets a parasite-encoded MIF protein that kills memory cells,” he says. “The self-amplification advancement will create the next generation in RNA vaccines, permitting much lower dosing and the generation of critically needed memory T-cell responses. All of this will unfold in the next five to 10 years.” Or even earlier: at the start of February, Moderna began their trial for an HIV vaccine that relies on the same mRNA technology as the Covid jab. If they’re successful, a one-off jab will offer lifetime protection. Now this technology is being studied to see if it could help control largely treatment-resistant conditions, such as rabies, Zika, and cancer of the colon, skin, breast and other parts of the body. Professor David Diemert, an immunologist at George Washington University, says: “The Covid pandemic really demonstrated the success of mRNA vaccines. And so the path from discussing its application for HIV to a Phase I clinical trial happened at an accelerated pace.” Dr Jeffrey Bethony, professor of microbiology, immunology and tropical medicine at George Washington School of Medicine and Health Sciences adds, “This vaccine primes the immune response against HIV by stimulating cells in the lymph node. This procedure is not just unique to Phase I trials; it’s unique for vaccines. It’s very novel.” Moderna alone is developing trials for at least another 30 mRNA-based treatments in six different areas of medicine. Meanwhile, there has been more focus on how to tackle obesity since it has emerged as a leading factor related to Covid – 78% of US patients hospitalised between March and December 2020 were overweight. In June, the first obesity medication approved by the US Food and Drugs Administration since 2014 hit the market. Semaglutide, also known as Wegovy, could be up to twice as effective as previous weight-loss medications after a study of nearly 2,000 patients saw participants lose on average 15% of their body weight. The synthetic version of a hormone that reduces appetite was already used in much lower doses to treat type 2 diabetes, but amid growing evidence that substantial weight loss reduces Covid severity, it was greenlighted by regulators. The availability of a drug that can improve both blood glucose and body weight could have far-reaching effects for public health beyond the context of Covid, especially for people who have remained overweight despite their best efforts. Covid has also shone a light on the potential benefits of vitamin D. In Norway, Finland and Iceland, where there’s an emphasis on maintaining healthy levels of the vitamin, persistently low Covid mortality rates have been observed compared to other northern-hemisphere countries with less of a focus on the sunshine nutrient. Amid the ongoing search to ascertain exactly what makes some people more vulnerable to Covid than others, focus on vitamin D earlier this year led to the publication of a paper in a Lancet journal co-authored by dozens of experts, which suggested deficiencies could be a root issue in the development of many diseases “For participants with vitamin D deficiency, genetic analyses provided strong evidence for an inverse association with all-cause mortality,” it said, calling for wider trials and a fresh look at disease prevention strategies. “There are several potential mechanisms by which vitamin D could be protective for cardiovascular mortality… There are also potential mechanisms implicating vitamin D for cancer.” Digital health has also come to the fore as a result of pandemic responses. “Use of smartphone applications and the public understanding of data and knowledge of disease prevalence are now widespread,” says Pillay. “People are increasingly accustomed to getting clinical advice at distance, through virtual consultations, while other information collected on apps is sent to medical professionals.” Home testing is also a significant advance, as it allows people to effectively self-diagnose and thus be able to limit their exposure to others. This has come alongside rapid clinical evaluation. “Covid has provided a vision for how best to apply science to health problems in the future,” he says. And as more in-depth research into long Covid is starting to emerge, it is throwing more light on other long-term conditions, such as ME/CFS. The crucial link here could be microclotting, an area Resia Pretorius, head of the physiological sciences department at Stellenbosch University, South Africa, has long been exploring, but the need for further understanding has become even more pressing due to Covid. The model under scrutiny proposes that small clots in blood capillaries preventing oxygen from reaching tissues may cause long-Covid symptoms. Pretorius is now leading a study investigating this further, to understand whether microclotting could go some way to unravelling the enigma of long Covid after research in her lab detected significant formations among patients. The preliminary results of her initial research suggested that anti-clotting treatments could help ease long Covid. “There might be a point of no return for many ME/CFS patients – this might also be the case for long Covid, if you don’t treat early in the disease onset,” says Pretorius, “then the body can become overwhelmed by inflammatory molecules that may cause significant damage. We suspect the reasons why people develop long Covid from a viral infection could be similar to why individuals develop ME/CFS.” Pretorius, among many other scientists, has been impressed by the increasing degree of academic and research collaboration – with Covid uniting people from across the globe in a common goal that could endure. “Thank goodness, there’s a lot of like-minded researchers who have joined the endeavours from a variety of big research institutions all over the world,” she says. If there’s one area of optimism, it is this move towards scientific collaboration and the impressive advances that have emerged in such a relatively short space of time. “It’s been such a horrific time for so many people”, agrees David Braun, an oncologist and scientist focusing on cancer immunotherapies at the Yale Cancer Centre in New Haven, whose team is working to transfer the RNA technology to a cancer jab. “I hope that some of the scientific advances made during this period might help us to treat other diseases, so that at least there can be one glimmer of hope that comes out of this tremendously difficult situation.”It was only a matter of time before vermouth became fashionable again. It’s a half-century since its last heyday, an era when big Italian brands, Martini and Cinzano, were an essential element of a certain vision of jet-setting sophistication. That’s plenty of time for the cycle of fashion to complete its 360-degree rotation through naff and kitsch to ironic retro and sincere rediscovery. It’s not just a matter of image. Vermouth’s characteristics suit the times. If a drink that derives so much of its character from an infusion of botanicals can’t find favour now, at the end of the long gin boom, it never will. For someone of my generation, who grew up when vermouth was something found lurking at the back of parental drinks cabinets, there’s a certain amount of cultural baggage to ditch before taking a seat at the bar of one of the stylish new, specialist bars and restaurants that have emerged over the past five years. At Kings Cross’s Vermuteria and the Aperitivo Bar of Soho’s Mele e Pere, vermouth isn’t just a background ingredient in classic cocktails such as the martini, the manhattan and the negroni. It’s served as it would be in Turin or Barcelona: neat, over ice, with a slice of citrus – an aperitivo to be consumed with a bowl of olives. Drinking it this way, it doesn’t take long to realise that vermouth can be every bit as complex as good sherry, port or, indeed, unfortified wine, even though the skills required for making it are a little different. Made from a base of fortified wine, choosing and infusing the range of bitters, citrus peels, herbs and spices that give each vermouth its own distinctive character, calls for something closer to the art of the chef or perfumer. Mauro Vergano, the Piedmontese man behind some of the finest, most uplifting vermouths has perhaps the perfect experience for the job: after training in oenology, he spent 15 years working as a chemist developing flavours and aromas for a pharmaceutical company. Vergano, who began making his infusions as a hobby, is part of a wave of small-batch vermouth producers, many of them producing vermouth as a sideline from wine, others from the spirits and bartending worlds, that has emerged over the past decade in the drink’s traditional heartland in northern Italy and in France, but also in Spain, the US, South Africa and, increasingly, the UK. With their fastidious attention to the quality of both wine and botanicals these crafty newcomers have brought a new, sometimes-quirky, polished dimension to a venerable drink. But for me there’s at least as much pleasure in exploring the library of older brands you find at Mele e Pere. Among them is the original Turin vermouth, Antica Formula Carpano Vermouth. First produced in 1786, the modern-day version still uses the same recipe. Its intensely medicinal bitter-sweetness – a blend of Alpine herbs and spices including saffron – will never go out of style. Six vermouths to try Gonzalez Byass Vermouth La Copa Rojo Spain (from £12.95, thewhiskyexchange.com; cambridgewine.com; farehamwinecellar.com) Spain has been at the forefront of the 21st-century vermouth revival and it has its own long tradition of producing aromatised wines. Many of the best examples in both eras are the work of Jerez’s sherry bodegas, with La Copa by González Byass (of Tío Pepe fame) a sweet, heady, red revival of a 19th-century classic. Dolin Dry Vermouth de Chambery France (£14.95, thewhiskyexchange.com) Vermouth’s origins may be on the Italian side of the Alps, but French versions of the drink had become enormously popular by the mid-19th century. Originally patented in 1820, Dolin’s original white mix of 30 Alpine botanicals remains as fragrant and citrus fresh as ever. AA Badenhorst Caperitif Kaapse Dief South Africa (£20, swig.co.uk) One of the key winemakers to emerge from the creative ferment of South Africa’s Swartland region, Adi Badenhorst has proved no less adept at making this Cape version of vermouth, which includes local fynbos among its 35 infusing ingredients in an intensely tangy-bitter orange-floral style. Belsazar Summer Edition Riesling Vermouth Germany (from £22, waitrosecellar.com; thewhiskyexchange.com). German vermouth maker Belsazar is one of a new breed of producer paying as much attention to the wine as the botanicals. For example, this glorious concoction is based on riesling from top German winemaker Ernst Loosen and includes a little pineapple in the mix, too. Antica Formula Carpano Vermouth Italy, (from £30.95, thewhiskyexchange.com; masterofmalt.com) A faithful reproduction by the Branca Distillery, of Fernet Branca fame, of both the hand-blown bottle and the recipe of the 1786 original Turin vermouth invented by Antonio Benedetto Carpano. Antica Formula is a kind of medicine for hedonists: a swirl of dried red fruit, sweet spice and mouth-tingling bitterness. Chinati Vergano Vermouth Italy (£38, waywardwines.co.uk; gnarlyvines.co.uk) Retired chemist Mauro Vergano’s small-batch production of various aromatised wines includes this intensely aromatic take on classic Piedmontese vermouth, built from a month’s maceration of herbs, wormwood and other botanicals on a base of quality dry white cortese and moscato wine.Victims of a French modelling agent’s alleged sexual abuse have expressed shock and dismay after he was found dead in his cell, in an apparent echo of the prison suicide of his close associate, the disgraced US financier Jeffrey Epstein. Paris police are investigating the death of Jean-Luc Brunel, 75, who had been charged with the rape of minors and was also being held on suspicion of trafficking underage girls for sex, whose body was found in La Santé prison early on Saturday. Sources close to the investigation said Brunel had hanged himself, but this has not been officially confirmed. Epstein was found hanged in his New York jail cell in August 2019 while awaiting trial over the alleged abuse of hundreds of young girls. Brunel’s death means the case against the agent – who was arrested in December 2020 at Charles de Gaulle airport as part of a French probe launched after US sex-trafficking charges were brought against Epstein – is now closed unless other suspects are identified. A frequent companion of Epstein, who travelled often to France and had apartments in Paris, Brunel was accused in US court documents of rape and of procuring young girls for his friend and was considered central to the French investigation. Victims of his alleged trafficking, who were mostly said to have been lured with promises of lucrative modelling contracts, said they were angry that Brunel, like Epstein, would never face trial. Anne-Claire Le Jeune, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, described the news as “quite terrible” for them, adding they felt Brunel had “left behind many secrets”. Le Jeune expressed the women’s “frustration and bitterness over not being able to obtain justice – just as for the victims of Epstein”, adding that it had taken “so much courage for them to be able to speak up, to be heard by the police”. Thysia Huisman, a Dutch former model who has said she was drugged and raped by Brunel as a teenager and was one of many women to identify themselves to French police as victims of the agent’s abuse, said she was shocked by the news of his death. “It makes me angry, because I’ve been fighting for years,” Huisman said. “For me, the end of this was to be in court. And now that whole ending – which would help form closure – is taken away from me. To rebuild yourself, that is an essential step.” One of Epstein’s principal accusers, Virginia Giuffre, who has said the financier once bragged to her that he had slept with more than 1,000 “of Brunel’s girls”, said she was disappointed by the news of the agent’s death. “The suicide of Jean-Luc Brunel, who abused me and countless girls and young women, ends another chapter,” Giuffre tweeted. “I’m disappointed that I wasn’t able to face him in a final trial to hold him accountable, but gratified that I was able to testify in person last year to keep him in prison.” Giuffre recently accepted an undisclosed sum from Prince Andrew with no admission of liability after bringing a civil case against the Queen’s second son, with whom she says she had sex when she was 17 – a minor under US law – after being introduced to him through Epstein. Sigrid McCawley, Giuffre’s lawyer, said the news of Brunel’s death was “devastating”. “For the women who have stood up … it is not how these men died, but how they lived, and the damage they caused to so many. The fight to seek truth and justice goes on,” she said. Brunel’s lawyers said his apparent suicide was “not guided by guilt, but a profound sense of injustice”. Mathias Chichportich, Marianne Abgrall and Christophe Ingrain said his death was “the tragedy of a 75-year-old man crushed by a media-judicial system. He had always maintained his innocence and had intensified his efforts to prove it.” Brunel began his career as a model scout and in 1978 was involved in setting up the prestigious Karin Models agency. He then moved to the US where he co-founded the Miami-based agency MC2. He is credited with discovering a number of supermodels, including Christy Turlington and Milla Jovovich. He had been placed under formal investigation for the alleged rape of two minors and for sexual harassment, and also been questioned on suspicion of sex trafficking of underage girls. He denied all charges.Today in a nutshell: A gold at last for Britain, an historic ice hockey victory for Finland, and yet another win for Norway Next up: The closing ceremony signals a pause before Beijing hosts the Winter Paralympics starting 4 March Eve Muirhead, Vicky Wright, Jen Dodds, and Hailey Duff will be the only members of Team GB to return from Beijing with a gold medal after they triumphed on the last day in a somewhat one-sided women’s curling final, beating Japan 10-3. Team GB ended the Beijing Games with two medals – short of their target of three to seven – after Bruce Mouat’s men won curling silver on Saturday. Curling coach David Murdoch described it as “a perfect performance” from Muirhead and her team. There were, as they say, absolute scenes, as Finland came from behind and defeated the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) 2-1 in the men’s ice hockey final to take an Olympic title for the very first time. They’ve been losing finalists twice (in 2006 and in 1988) and won four bronze medals through the years, but never won gold. The Finns ended up unbeaten throughout the tournament, including that blockbuster three-goal comeback against Sweden to top their group. “This means a lot, first time we made history today, it feels great,” said Finnish forward Markus Granlund. “It was an early game, the fans probably woke up early, it’s a big thing for Finland.” Germany extended their historic sliding dominance at the Beijing Games. Yesterday there was a one-two finish in the women’s bobsleigh with Laura Nolte holding off defending Olympic champion and countrywoman Mariama Jamanka. Then in the final action in the sliding centre, Francseco Friedrich and Johannes Lochner piloted their respective four-man teams to another German one-two. “We hope it goes on,” Friedrich said after the race. “Our goal is to make four more years.” For his part, Lochner said of Friedrich, “There’s always a chance to beat him, but the point is that he has to do a mistake.” Things you might have missed There was almost a symmetry to the Games as one of the very last medals to be won went to the athlete who had won the very first medal just over a fortnight ago – Norway’s Therese Johaug. She won the women’s mass start cross-country 30km. The race was moved earlier due to expected high winds. Norway ended up with 16 golds, a new record for a single country at a single Games. Jessie Diggins of the US came second, and was so cold and exhausted that she had to be assisted away from the finish line. Finland’s Remi Lindholm underlined just how cold and tough the conditions were during the men’s shortened 30km mass start event on Saturday by revealing that his penis froze during the race. He explained that he used a heat pack to try to thaw it once the race was over. “When the body parts started to warm up after the finish, the pain was unbearable,” he added. Ouch. The doping row about the figure skating medals continues, but at least one contentious issue from these Games has gone away. South Korea’s Olympic Committee has said it has dropped plans to have a right old moan up to the Court of Arbitration for Sport about their speed skaters Hwang Dae-heon and Lee June-seo being disqualified from the men’s 1000m semi-finals on 7 February. You might also enjoy reading: Thrills, spills and Olympic figure skating dreams – in pictures ‘Perfect performance’: Team GB finally win first Beijing gold in women’s curling Mikaela Shiffrin’s Olympics end with no medal after mixed team near-miss The briefing’s picture of the day Austria took the honours in the mixed team parallel contest that was rescheduled to the final day. The Austrian team beat Germany in the final, while Mikaela Shiffrin will leave the Beijing Olympics without a medal after the US lost to Norway in the third-place race. How things finished The final emoji table from Beijing looked like this … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 16 🥈 8 🥉 13 total: 37 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 12 🥈 10 🥉 5 total: 27 3 🇨🇳 China 🥇 9 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 15 4 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 8 🥈 10 🥉 7 total: 25 5 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 5 total: 18 6 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 4 total: 17 7 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 7 🥈 7 🥉 4 total: 18 8 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 7 🥈 2 🥉 5 total: 14 9 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 6 🥈 12 🥉 14 total: 32 10 🇫🇷 France 🥇 5 🥈 7 🥉 2 total: 14 Selected others 11 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 4 🥈 8 🥉 14 total: 26 17 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 2 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 3 18 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 19 🇬🇧 Great Britain 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 [The official IOC website notes that the Figure Skating Team and Women Single Skating event results are provisional] Results, sport by sport | Medal table What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Sunday 20 February 8pm Closing ceremony – Beijing will hand over the Olympic flag to Milano-Cortina 2026 and that’s a wrap. Who knows if tonight’s event will include the kind of highly provocative gesture we saw a couple of weeks ago, when the “genocide Games” were opening with China choosing Dinigeer Yilamujiang, an athlete of Uyghur heritage, as one of the people to light the flame. I will be on our live blog for it. And after that … 4 March-13 March 2022 Winter Paralympics – the opening ceremony is on Friday 4 March, and the sport begins the following day. The Winter Paralympics are on a much smaller scale to either the Summer Paralympics or the Winter Olympics, with 78 medals awarded over nine days of events in six different sports. You’ll be able to follow coverage on our website. Paris 2024 – the next Summer Olympics are scheduled from 26 July to 11 August 2024, with the promise the opening ceremony will be held on the Seine rather than in a stadium, and many events will be in the city centre with venues within walking distance of each other. If it is OK with you, we will keep you on this mailing list, and we will be back with coverage in two years time. If that isn’t ok with you, then you can simply hit unsubscribe at the foot of this email. We hope you’ll want to stay. Thank you so much for your messages while I’ve been doing the Beijing Briefing. I’ve thoroughly enjoyed reading them and I look forward to running into you again on the Guardian website soon. Until then, take care and stay safe. The last word To think it was 20 years ago when Rhona Martin made history in Britain by winning that gold medal. We’ve followed in her footsteps and done it. This is a moment I’ve dreamed of as a child. To stand on the podium and get that gold medal around your neck is honestly a moment I’ll never forget. – Eve Muirhead, successful skip of the Great Britain women’s curling team.Is it time for champagne? I think it might be. I always used to get excited by Charbonnel et Walker’s Marc de Champagne truffles, £16/135g, which were part pudding, part chocolate. But London Chocolates’ champagne truffles are a new favourite with smarter, for me, credentials: single-origin Tanzanian cocoa, Taittinger champagne and a bit of cognac, all in Jersey cream, £18/250g. A beautiful, clean snap to the dark chocolate with a sensational centre. Very grown up. Pump Street’s new 44% single-farm Togo Swiss Milk, £6.25/70g, is a gold-star bar, which has become my new favourite from Pump Street (which I think of as my local chocolatiers since we are both in Suffolk). With beans from Togo, the first time Pump Street has used cocoa beans from Africa, and from a small co-operative of 100 smallholders. It’s got that lovely, creamy, treaty milk chocolate taste that we all need in February. Lastly, Palm Chocolate are all date/nut-based, with no refined sugar. Ideal if your new year’s resolutions are going strong, but also if you just sometimes like, as I do, a little box of chocolates that has more wholesome ingredients. I tried both the Restore and Balance boxes, £12 each, with six bonbons a piece (listen: I take my research seriously) and absolutely loved them. It’s super dark chocolate (100% Madagascan) around squidgy dates, with added ingredients, including nuts, tahini, seeds and spices. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBRussian troops sent to Belarus for military exercises will remain in the country indefinitely, Belarus’s defence ministry has said, in a decision that will further fuel concerns Moscow is planning an imminent Ukraine invasion. US television networks CBS and NBC reported on Sunday that US intelligence sources now believe Russian army generals have been given the go-ahead to invade Ukraine. The news came as Russian president Vladimir Putin held a 105-minute phone call with France’s Emmanuel Macron and agreed to continue diplomacy. In Belarus, defence minister, Gen Viktor Khrenin, said Russian soldiers would stay after large-scale joint drills were completed on Sunday. He said the move was necessary because of the “escalation of the situation” in the Donbas, in the east of Ukraine. The Kremlin had promised to remove its forces from Belarus once the 10-day exercise, which began on 10 February, ended. It has deployed what the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said was the largest concentration of soldiers and modern weapons in Belarus since the cold war. They include 30,000 combat troops, elite Spetsnaz units, Su-35 fighter jets and S-400 missile defence systems. Russian forces are stationed close to the Belarus border and within striking distance of Kyiv, 160 miles (260km) away. The US and UK have warned Moscow is planning to attack the Ukrainian capital. “In connection with the increase in military activity near the external borders of the Union State and the escalation of the situation in the Donbas, the Presidents of the Republic of Belarus and the Russian Federation decided to continue the joint inspection of response forces,” the statement by Belarus’s ministry of defence said. As recently as Wednesday, Belarus’s foreign minister, Vladimir Makei, said “not a single” Russian soldier would remain in the country after the massive joint drills – a promise echoed by Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, repeated his claim on Sunday that Russia had no plans to launch a military offensive. “We urge you to ask yourself the question: what is the point of Russia attacking anyone?” Peskov told the state-run Russia-1 TV. Peskov added that Russia had “never attacked anyone throughout its history”. But he warned that “any spark, unplanned incident or minor planned provocation” in the Donbas region might lead to what he called “irreparable consequences”. The troop announcement follows what Ukraine’s government says is a coordinated spike in violence in the east of the country, where Ukrainian soldiers and pro-Russian separatists face off across a 260-mile (421km) frontline. Since Thursday, Ukrainian positions have come under intense bombardment. Ukraine’s joint forces command said that by 6pm local time on Sunday 57 artillery strikes had been launched against 13 Ukrainian-controlled villages and towns. It blamed the “provocative shelling” on Russia’s armed forces. Two Ukrainian soldiers have been killed since Saturday and five wounded, it added. Separatists from the Luhansk People’s Republic (LPR) have claimed they are under Ukrainian attack. On Sunday, they said two civilians had been killed near the village of Pionerskoye. “Unfortunately, as a result of the aggression of the Kiev militants, two civilians died and five residential buildings were destroyed,” the LPR said. Ukraine’s operational command dismissed the report as “an absolute fake” and said troops had been given orders to refrain from any “active action”. “We realise that the Russians are now looking for any excuse to invade,” it said, adding that it was closing several crossing points with rebel territory because of hostile fire. Russia’s acting emergencies minister, Alexander Chupriyan, said on Sunday evening that more than 53,000 people from Donetsk and Luhansk had crossed into Russia since the territories announced an “evacuation” on Friday, claiming Ukraine was planning to attack – a claim Kyiv denies. The Biden administration and Boris Johnson, among others, have said they believe Russia is behind a series of recent “false flag” events, designed to give Moscow a pretext to invade. They include a car bomb on Friday outside the separatist administration building in Donetsk, an “attack” on a water plant and a “shell” that landed across the border in Russia’s Rostov region. In an interview with CBS news, Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, insisted Russian recognition of the separatist republics, considered a potential part of the scenario for Kremlin intervention, was not on the table. “We are not trying to take any territory of foreign countries. I would like to confirm that Donbas and Luhansk is a part of Ukraine,” said Antonov. The situation in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities remained calm on Sunday. Demonstrators took to the streets of the Black Sea port city of Odessa, waving blue and yellow Ukrainian flags. They shouted slogans including “Glory to Ukraine” and “Putin is a prick”. Meanwhile, the Dutch foreign ministry said it was moving its embassy from Kyiv to the western city of Lviv “due to security reasons”. The US and UK have already moved their missions to Lviv, with other European countries following suit. The French ambassador in Kyiv said on Saturday he was staying put. Austrian Airlines, Swiss and SAS announced the suspension of flights to Ukraine on Sunday, joining Lufthansa and KLM who had previously stopped flying. Other airlines continue to fly into the country for now. The political analyst Artyom Shraibman said the decision to keep Russian troops in Belarus was expected. He described Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, as “completely dependent” on what Putin wants. “Lukashenko is forced to dance to Putin’s tune,” he said. He added: “Lukashenko won’t be happy that he is being used, but he will hope that Belarus might get something in return from Russia. Potentially a new credit or new weapons deal. The Belarusian leader doesn’t have any real allies left. “This shows that Lukashenko is very vulnerable at the moment, he has to play along with Putin’s bigger games.”The British Olympic Association wants a harsher ban imposed on Russia if it can be proved that its sporting system deliberately doped the 15-year-old skater Kamila Valieva. Speaking at the end of the Beijing Games, which ended with a gold medal at last for Britain in the women’s curling, the BOA chief executive, Andy Anson, described Valieva’s treatment as “horrific” and revealed it had lobbied the International Olympic Committee to investigate the skater’s entourage one or two days before the IOC decided to act. Russia was officially banned from the Winter Olympics, although it was allowed to compete under the banner of the Russian Olympic Committee. But Anson indicated that his organisation would back a stiffer punishment if a wider investigation proved Russia wrongdoing. “The Valieva stuff is horrific,” Anson said. “I don’t think we can pretend that it’s anything other than that. The investigation into everyone around her needs to be thorough and go as deep as it possibly can because what happened there was just completely unacceptable.” Valieva’s doping case dominated these Games after her positive test for the banned heart drug Trimetazidine was reported a day after she inspired the Russians to team skating gold. She was then allowed to continue competing by the court of arbitration for sport but, under the most severe pressure, she fell twice in the individual figure skating and finished fourth. To make matters worse, Valieva was then scolded by her coach, Eteri Tutberidze, as she left the ice in tears – something the IOC president, Thomas Bach, condemned the next morning. Anson said: “I have to say I’ve found the IOC very open. We’ve had discussions. We were pushing at the beginning that the entourage needed thoroughly investigating and a day or two that’s what came out. It sounded like they listened.” When asked whether he supported a unilateral ban on Russia, Anson said: “The Sochi doping was clearly systematic and covered the whole team. That deserved to be punished. “We were very frustrated by the Cas ruling that reduced the ban from four to two years. I still can’t understand the logic of reducing that. If the investigation into Valieva found that this was part of a sporting system that was doping this deliberately, of course we’d support a harsher ban.” Anson said he was also open to a review of age limits in the wake of the Valieva case to protect vulnerable children. “This a global story and a pretty awful one,” he said. “The IOC and everyone involved has to act and push this thing as far as they can. It’s not easy. I was on the tennis tour when there was the match-fixing scandal in Poland, and we tried to get to the bottom of that in Russia and the policemen who were leading that decided they would not be around if they carried on that investigation. But we have to push it as far as we can and make sure we get to the bottom of it.” Anson also admitted that, if Britain was going to call other countries out for doping, it also had to be tough on its own athletes who committed anti-doping rule violations. “If we’re going to sit here and criticise the Russians for the Valieva case, we need to be as tough as [we] possibly can be when doping happens in the UK,” he said when asked about GB losing its Tokyo 4x100m relay silver medal after CJ Ujah was found to have banned drugs in his urine. “If it was down to me personally, someone found guilty of a doping offence would never compete for Team GB again. “I’m not sure legally I’d always win that battle but that’s how I feel about it. We want to send out the clearest possible message that it’s unacceptable.” Anson also praised Team Eve Muirhead and Team Bruce Mouat, who won women’s curling gold and men’s curling silver, as Britain finished 19th in the Beijing medal table. “They have really kept us going and happy and positive. The gold medal is just the icing on the cake after a long, long time away from home and it’s been well deserved.”It is a chamber of the mind, a room of one’s own, a hothouse or a prison. It is an attic or an empty shop, a suburban lockup or a concrete cubicle in a disused acid factory that still takes coins for the meter and is a million miles from the white cube factory designed by architects where assistants manufacture blue-chip art for the rich. Yet they are all known, because of who goes there, and what they make, which may be something or a paralysed nothing whatsoever, as artists’ studios. A show with this theme opens at the Whitechapel Gallery next week. And it turns out be a riveting experience, achieved with great wisdom and drama by Iwona Blazwick and her team. A Century of the Artist’s Studio goes in and out of this magical place in such inventive ways. There are spectacular reconstructions of actual studios – Matisse’s bedroom in the south of France, hung with magnificent embroideries; Kurt Schwitters’s Dada studio, all wild wooden stalactites – but the show also moves through global space, crossing five continents from the secret studios of Iran to the tiny kiosk in Manila where the father of Filipino art, Roberto Chabet, made conceptual sculptures. The century flows through the show like an underground river. Egon Schiele sets up his drawing box in the office of a prisoner of war camp in 1916. Ten years later, Brancusi is labouring through the dark night in his Paris attic. Frida Kahlo, torso in plaster, works from her sickbed in the second world war while Picasso sets up studio in the 60s in a majestic French castle. Cindy Sherman makes herself up, character by character, in her Manhattan loft in the late 1970s, the flashbulb wire visibly trailing across the floor. In Johannesburg, William Kentridge doubles up to play two versions of himself on screen, arguing about the value of political art in the digital 21st century. In films, photographs and paintings, the studio edges in at every turn. It is a place of cigarette butts and congealing palettes, the masking tape running out as the daylight fades too fast and the leg of the drawing table needs propping yet again. It is a place where the clock ticks with reproachful violence as no work gets done in Darren Almond’s live feed of his studio. Where the canvases are still worryingly bare, in an exquisite tempera painting by Andrew Grassie (perfect paradox). Or the paintings have all gone, along with the students, in Paul Winstanley’s photographs of deserted art schools, haunted by telltale hints of colours the decorators have tried to cover over with whitewash. The studio is a place of heroics. The heap of paint rags in Lucian Freud’s Holland Park studio, so lovingly depicted in the enormous portrait of his assistant, becomes a sacred relic in Darren Almond’s photographic homage. The rags in Robert Rauschenberg’s studio appear almost erotic in their sprawled abandon, photography by his friend Cy Twombly. And there are hints of Twombly’s own paintings of high summer in the luminous dabs blossoming across the walls of Francis Bacon’s studio, where he has wiped the excess of mauve, blue, pink and black from his brush. There is a fascination in seeing his colours isolated like this, and even more in the presentation of photographs found in that studio. It is sometimes said that Bacon couldn’t draw and relied almost entirely on photos. This feels like the ocular proof. The show teems with revelations. A startling 1925 shot of Alexander Rodchenko making photomontages in his Moscow studio looks fantastically advanced, except that he is wearing gaiters. Giacometti’s painting of his studio, so spectral and sketchy, looks so like the photographed reality – diaphanous shadows, walls scribbled with sketches – as to confuse art and life. And a lifesize log cabin – a facsimile of her Nova Scotia home – shows that the Canadian artist Maud Lewis painted everything she loved upon everything she owned: birds, flowers and trees trail right across the walls and windows. So many of the artists in this exhibition never had a separate studio. I am reminded of the great Cuban painter Carmen Herrera, who died last week at the age of 106, still painting dazzling abstractions in a room of her flat. A studio can be a floor, a hall or a kitchen, like the one shared by several artists in Iran, where the bowls of food look just like the bowls of paint. Studios may bring privacy and peace. A beautiful painting by Wilhelmina Barns-Graham shows the perfect easel in the perfect studio, rectilinear, formal, everything in its place – the Platonic ideal. But studios may also be the stage for performing, throwing parties or fighting with art. A terrific painting by Maria Lassnig shows the Austrian artist literally struggling to get into – or is it out of – a newly primed canvas. The studio becomes a place of pilgrimage. There are classic photographs here of Picasso painting for the cameras in Antibes, his masculinity barely concealed by a toga; and Jackson Pollock hard at it outside his Long Island barn for Hans Namuth to memorialise on film. This act of painting – this solo feat, this battling with one’s demons – is gleefully satirised by Paul McCarthy in his violent video Painter, in which McCarthy plays a clownish child lugging giant tubes of paint around his studio-cum-nursery. Painting is not so much heroic as a monstrous display of infantile male tantrums. Women alternate with men, here, to coruscating contrast. The American painter Helen Frankenthaler, photographed by Gordon Parks, sits with poised intelligence upon one of her own canvases, in command of her art. The young African American artist Mequitta Ahuja paints herself hemmed in between easel, mirror, canvases and art history, but breaking free of the past. And the whole show opens with one of Louise Bourgeois’s monumental caged Cells, all working hands multiplied in mirrors: a dynamic studio of the mind. The studio, always a subject in itself, becomes increasingly central with time. Joseph Sudek was reduced to photographing nothing but his bare Prague studio, first under Nazi occupation and later Soviet dictatorship. Gregor Schneider’s German family home has been both studio and source of his terrifying films and installations for three decades (he is said to have once remarked that he might have been a murderer if he hadn’t been an artist). And the Polish artist Mirosław Bałka has made art, piece by piece, from and in the house where he works outside Warsaw, inherited from his father. One of the last works here is a wooden angel beautifully sculpted from their fence and garden gate. Bałka’s forebears made funeral monuments, just to complete the elegiac metaphor. This is Iwona Blazwick’s last show as Whitechapel director – she departs in April – and it is fittingly superb. She changed the whole nature of the gallery, turning it into a multi-part museum with a special welcome for the local community and for artists of all ages. Blazwick has presided over many great exhibitions, but I doubt the rooms have ever been more densely and revealingly used than they are here. Go if you possibly can. This is nothing less than a history of art by other means; a magnificent way of entering the minds of artists through the places where they worked, and what they made there. A Century of the Artist’s Studio: 1920-2020 is at the Whitechapel Gallery, London, from 24 February to 5 JuneIn the 12 years since the gorgeous Teen Dream brought their hazy, heavy dreampop to wider renown, Beach House have refined and tweaked their formula across four albums, reaffirming rather than reinventing. Their first self-produced record (with engineering assistance from Alan Moulder and Dave Fridmann), and the first to benefit from the wild richness of a live string section, Once Twice Melody was released serially. It phases through different moods across its four chapters, with dominant hints of Love-like, dark-tripping folk-rock and a more electronic psychedelia reminiscent of Broadcast. The title track opens with an aloof feel, Victoria Legrand keeping close, mysterious harmony with herself. Runaway brings the duo back to their most seductive by Chapter 2, with pulsing beats and brittle, harpsichord-like keys. Masquerade hits an overtly goth-rock high point in Chapter 3 before the final songs fade out slowly in a warm, golden-hour nostalgia, closing at last with the stately cosmic darkness of Modern Love Stories. It’s testament to the structure and variety of Once Twice Melody that it never lags over 18 tracks, its gradual release paradoxically validating the album format as one still worth surrendering to, totally.There are many individual battles that tell the story of Vladimir Putin’s Russia, but few can have quite the fairytale resonance of Natalya Sindeyeva’s. A dancer as well as a defiant truth-teller, Sindeyeva has lived a life that feels a bit back to front: she first married her handsome prince and then all her struggles began. Sindeyeva’s wedding took place at the Peterhof Palace in St Petersburg in 2006. She was the founder and voice of a celebrated non-stop music radio station and a fixture in style magazines; her new husband, Alexander “Sasha” Vinokurov, was part of the fabulously wealthy post-communist oligarchy, the young multimillionaire head of an investment bank who lived on a great estate outside Moscow. The celebration at the Peterhof involved a performance by dancers from a prominent ballet company, with Sindeyeva taking the lead. When that party ended, it seemed she might float away to any make-believe she chose. What she decided to do was this: she would create an independent television channel that championed what she saw as a new youthful exuberance in Moscow society. The station, Dozhd, or TV Rain, would be drenched in attitude as much as news values and billed as “the optimistic channel”. Sindeyeva, with her fantasy lifestyle and her bright pink Porsche Cayenne, was determined to inject some of her life-loving energy into the restricted landscape of Russian state media. The promotional launch of the new channel featured her dancing barefoot on a rooftop in the rain. Those chapters of her story are the opening scenes of a new documentary about Sindeyeva and TV Rain called F@ck This Job, which was the headline act of last year’s Artdocfest in Moscow. The director of the festival, the veteran film-maker Vitaly Mansky, describes succinctly what happened next: “When Natalya started her journey with the Dozhd TV channel, she was naive enough to believe that it was possible to create independent, light and, let’s say, glamorous television in Russia,” he says. “Instead, this innocent young woman drove her Porsche into a war zone and her glamorous car got very dirty and hit by shrapnel.” The documentary, which opens in UK cinemas this week and will be shown next month on the BBC, has been made by Vera Krichevskaya, who was among Sindeyeva’s first hires as an editor in the TV Rain newsroom. (“Natalya knew nothing about news,” Krichevskaya tells me. “She came from showbusiness.”) The film examines all the ways that Sindeyeva’s irresistible optimism went head to head with the Kremlin’s cynical authority. For a while, TV Rain was tolerated by the censors and included on all the digital broadcasting platforms. Peter Pomerantsev, author of the seminal book about Russian media manipulation, Nothing Is True and Everything Is Possible, recalls that time to me in this way: “There was a moment when it seemed that just maybe the future of Russia would not be determined by these crazy KGB guys. At that moment, TV Rain and Sindeyeva seemed to have the zeitgeist, improvised and hipsterish – they represented that reforming, optimistic tone. Not many voices in Russia ever say ‘We can change things’, but they were very much the hub of that possibility.” Sindeyeva’s hopes for that new Russia rested on Dmitry Medvedev, who was president, in name at least, alongside prime minister Putin from 2008 and in some ways a modernising force who looked to build relationships in the west. After the 2012 presidential election, however, when Medvedev was replaced by Putin, who had forced changes to the constitution to enable himself to return to power, that hope disappeared. With mass protests over rigged elections on the streets of Russian cities, Sindeyeva had a choice to make: which side are you on? TV Rain sent its reporters out to give live-streamed reports of the protests that were being ignored on the national news. Several reporters were arrested and continued coverage on their mobile phones from the back of police vans. That anarchic spirit went on to inform the ways in which TV Rain covered all subsequent opposition demonstrations, as well as events in Chechnya and Ukraine (the title of the documentary, F@ck This Job, comes from a live phrase uttered by a lone frontline reporter when he came under fire from Russian-backed troops during the 2013 democracy riots in Kyiv). The station became, too, a vocal champion of LGBTQ+ rights at a time when laws were introduced making the public expression of same-sex relationships illegal. In predictable response, Putin’s state set about intimidating Sindeyeva and slowly starving TV Rain of its audience. The station was, overnight in 2014, removed from cable networks and digital packages (after the broadcast of a discussion programme, which was deemed “anti-patriotic”, about whether surrender at the siege of Leningrad would have changed the course of the second world war). Its regular audience of 10 million collapsed. In a period when the murders of dozens of investigative journalists were left unsolved, however, the channel continued to resist efforts to silence it and created an online platform with a subscription model. When its headquarters were shut down and no one would offer studio space, it broadcast for a time from Sindeyeva’s apartment. Last week, I spoke to Sindeyeva in that apartment about TV Rain’s long decade and about her continuing efforts to make it a small – and optimistic – voice of truth. By Zoom from Moscow she still wears the smile that illuminated her wedding videos, but the wide-eyed innocence that accompanied it has been replaced by a far wearier edge of experience. She recently turned 50 and the last couple of years have been particularly tough for her. She announced live on her own TV Rain show in February 2020 that she had breast cancer and was taking some time off for treatment and surgery. Since then, her marriage to Sasha, partner in all her adventures, has ended. Meanwhile, the attacks on TV Rain have intensified. In August last year, she and her staff were officially declared a “foreign agent” by the Kremlin. Last month, Putin’s thuggish stooge in Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov, denounced the station’s journalists as “terrorists” who should be “destroyed”. Most recently, the state ordered that all TV Rain’s archived coverage of opposition leader Alexei Navalny’s investigations into high-level corruption must be destroyed. With translation help from a TV Rain editor, Sindeyeva talks me through some of these latest trials. “We definitely are entering a different landscape,” she says. “I guess it really started from the jailing of Navalny last year. Every time we think it cannot get worse, it gets worse. Many journalists have left the country recently, other people, just associates of Navalny’s organisation, have been arrested. Putin is always moving the borders of what is allowed…” When she was classed as a foreign agent, Sindeyeva responded with an open letter stating: “Rain is almost 200 people who, just like me, love their country, cheer for it and want Russia to become better – more humane, safer, fairer, more honest, richer, freer. And I’m sure the approximately 20 million people who watch and read us on different platforms every month want the same thing as we do. You can joke as much as you like about the status of ‘foreign agent’ and call it a ‘seal of excellence’. But, in fact, all this is terrible. It is quite awful when the state divides people into ‘friends’ and ‘strangers’.” The latest round of attacks escalated her sense of personal threat that came after the murder of the opposition leader Boris Nemtsov in 2015. That event, she has recalled elsewhere, “brought the physical feeling of fear. There had been warning signs before – a car following me after one of our stories came out, things like that. But when Nemtsov was killed, it became an existential fear. You start thinking to yourself, ‘Well, how long will they wait before killing someone else?’” In the face of that, I wonder if Sindeyeva has been surprised by her own courage, by her determination to stay in Moscow and keep TV Rain alive… She smiles. “To be honest, that has surprised me. I found out many new things about myself in the past few years. I always believed I was an open-hearted person, with a strong sense of justice. But I didn’t really think that I was brave. I keep on asking myself: why are you not afraid? And my answer to that question is that I have no choice. That gives me a sense of enormous calm. There is no fear. I don’t think I am a hero, though Dozhd does some heroic things.” Krichevskaya’s film portrays this growing resolution beautifully. “I have to be honest,” says Krichevskaya, who is now based in London. “I didn’t consider either Natalya or her husband were serious people to start with. I wasn’t interested in their opinion on politics or stuff in the news. But later, especially after the Leningrad siege scandal, I started understanding that they had changed. They were always driven by justice. Sure, they didn’t always have a clear political agenda. But what was most important for them? To be honest.” Krichevskaya describes the golden couple as products of the “fat years” of wild prosperity among the Russian elite before the global financial crash of 2008. I wonder if their political awakening is rare among the oligarchs who benefited from that great windfall? “In Russia, this couple is completely unique,” she says. “Many oligarchs from different fields, they thought about Sasha as a really stupid guy who has allowed himself to be led by his wife, which is completely unacceptable in Russia.” The film details how, over successive years, that journey cost Natalya and Sasha and their two children almost everything. The had to sell the big estate and the glass-walled mansion as they poured their money into keeping TV Rain alive. It must, I suggest to Sindeyeva, have been a very hard thing to watch that happen again on a screen having lived through it? “Those decisions weren’t so hard,” she says. “Because when we were selling our house, the audience for the channel was growing. We didn’t see it as some sort of a tragedy.” She describes the decision to end their marriage last year as a mutual one, brought about in part by the pressure of running the business. “Both of us were unhappy,” she says of the last act of that fairytale. “But we are still friends. We keep on talking to each other. And perhaps we didn’t totally close that door.” One compensation has been that she still has her family in the newsroom at TV Rain to rely on. Even after her successful cancer treatment she sees no separation between work and home. “If ever somebody leaves Dozhd, they’re still part of my family. I think of them all as ‘raindrops’. We’ve been through a lot and are all part of this bigger thing.” Have there been moments when she thought of giving up? “The main crisis was when the cable operators just switched us off,” she says. “And there was a moment when I wanted to quit everything. That was the day when our landlord in the Red October district, in the very centre of Moscow, said that we were no longer allowed to work there. But that despair lasted, I guess, for 24 hours or so.” Since then, she says, no doubt just as the state intended, the frustrations have been drip-fed, as the station has become more isolated. The dangers then become that “we are tired of each other and we tired of the war that was going for so long”. The latest episode in that war is the film itself. The preview screenings gave something of a taste of the political climate in which it is being released, in which Putin seems determined to silence all opposition in advance of his move to secure power for a further 12 years after the 2024 elections. The Artdocfest was disrupted by a series of threats and protests from violent pro-Kremlin activists and anti-gay protesters, who broke up the screening of films about Chechnya and Ukraine. Mansky was physically assaulted by one thug, but the festival director persisted with the sold-out screening of F@ck This Job. The film gets a wider release in Russia next month, with a series of screenings that will be attended by Sindeyeva and Krichevskaya. I suggest to the director that it seems a particularly significant and precarious moment for that short tour, not least because the presentation of TV Rain’s vibrant newsroom reminds viewers both at home and abroad what an alternative vision of what Russia could look like… “One of my big motivations to make this film for a western audience,” she says, “was to tell you guys that despite what you see on the news, we are not freaks, not all of us. I live in London and my children go to school here. After each recent crisis, it has been easier for me to tell the other school mothers that we’re from Ukraine rather than Russia, just to avoid questions. Some people can’t imagine that we might be normal and live in a free way. The cliche of Russia is so bad.” I ask how the audience responded to the film when it was first shown last year, and Krichevskaya’s voice chokes a bit with emotion. “I got hundreds and hundreds of letters and emails from professionals, from media, saying that it represented all their stories. Afterwards, everyone was crying. People want to cry together about our hopes, why we didn’t achieve what we wanted…” She says that for the first time in her life, she saw Sindeyeva lost for words. When I ask Sindeyeva about that moment on our Zoom call, she falls silent for a moment again as she collects her thoughts. “One thing was,” she says eventually, “that ever since 2014 all the state propaganda is always doing some fake news about Rain or about me. Saying that we are owned by Americans, or Ukrainians, making personal attacks.” Watching herself on film dancing with Sasha, seeing herself having scans for her cancer, reminded her, she suggests, not only of all the lies that had been told but of the sacrifices they had made. “I guess there is a large number of people here who believe the lies,” she said. “But there are also thousands of people who have stayed loyal to us.” And what about her optimism, had that survived the decade? “I’ve always been optimistic and I’m still optimistic,” she says. “For me, this means that there is always some hope, that the good guys will take over eventually. But also there is one more important thing to say about that. Optimism is not dreaming, it also says, ‘Get your ass up from the chair and try to make things happen.’” F@ck This Job (Tango With Putin) is in UK cinemas from 24 February. For details of Q&amp;A cinema screenings with Natalya Sindeyeva and Vera Krichevskaya see fckthisjob.netSergei the meerkat and his rival Gio Compario have put comparison websites at the heart of many people’s buying decisions, but soaring energy price rises and new rules on insurance sales mean challenging times for the businesses they advertise. At a time when consumers are keener than ever to cut bills, the websites have found themselves without any deals to offer on energy because sky-high wholesale prices mean that suppliers are not offering cheap tariffs. The sites earn commission from companies when customers switch to them, thought to be about £30 for some energy contracts and £40-50 for insurance policies. On Thursday, one of the biggest, MoneySupermarket, reported a 25% fall in profits last year, and said that revenues from home services, which include energy switching, were down 34%. The company said it was expecting zero revenue from its energy business in 2022. GoCompare, one of its rivals, said 2021 was a “year like no other” in the energy market. It paused that strand of its comparison service completely in September. “At the moment, there aren’t any competitive deals available for people to compare but we are hopeful that we can offer this service again in the near future and get back to helping our customers save money on their energy bills,” a spokesperson said. In October, USwitch made the unusual decision to advertise to customers that they should “stay put” with their current providers and stop using its energy service until further notice. “It’s something we never thought we’d say,” a statement from the company said at the time. The comparison sites also face the challenge of new rules banning loyalty penalties on home and motor insurance. The regulations, set by the Financial Conduct Authority, came into effect on 1 January, and state that anyone renewing their policy with an existing provider should pay no more than they would as a new customer. Prices for customers who switch regularly have gone up, while those who stay with their providers now pay less. At the time these rules were first announced, shares in Moneysupermarket and GoCompare’s parent company fell, and experts suggested that the incentive to shop around for insurance would reduce once the changes had bedded in. Rising interest rates also mean the disappearance of some of the best deals on loans and mortgages. Danni Hewson, financial analyst at AJ Bell, said the companies needed to evolve to get through the rough patch. “They have enjoyed huge success because they’ve become an essential tool but can that tool do more to help us buy time in our increasingly busy and costly lives?” she asked. One way to do this would be focus the business on areas where consumers are still keen to shop around and where they still stand to save money. “Many people are desperate to get away, but our collective confidence has been knocked by changing restrictions during Covid and many people will be hunting out protection before they even start looking for their holidays,” Hewson said. “Travel is expected to be a big money maker for price comparison sites this year, along with broadband business which has become increasingly important as our homes become more and more connected. “And whilst that business is unlikely to cover all the losses from the energy side it should help cushion the blow.” MoneySupermarket has already laid out plans to recoup its losses – including sending customers prompts when savings could be made on products. “While it’s true that wholesale energy prices mean there are no competitive energy deals for consumers to switch to for now, there are numerous other ways we help consumers save on their household bills,” a spokesperson said. “In recent months, we are seeing much more switching on borrowing and banking products, as well as travel insurance. So the ways consumers can save with us is increasing, and we are investing in our site and systems to make it easier to do so.” It said it would be adding car insurance comparison to MoneySavingExpert, which it owns. It also recently bought the cashback site Quidco, which offers a range of ways to save money on products via the site. It was added to the company in November. USwitch said, too, that there were still products which people could save on. “Mobile and broadband customers who are out of contract will likely be able to find a better deal elsewhere,” a spokesperson said. “A quarter of people are estimated to have let their broadband lapse, meaning that millions of consumers are missing out on the best deals and overpaying.” However, it advised customers to “start the process by haggling directly” with current providers in order to negotiate a better deal before turning to them for a switch. Ultimately though, the energy price challenge facing most comparison sites will come to an end and when it does, experts said the switching market would recover. Giles Thorne, financial analyst at the Jeffries Group, said that the lack of cheap energy tariffs was a “temporary rather than a structural phenomena”. However, he admitted “the timing of a return in revenue is uncertain”. AJ Bell’s Danni Hewson added: “Energy business will have to come back. Consumers and companies alike won’t cope if tariffs stay elevated in the long term.” She said consumers had got used to relying on comparison websites when looking for deals. “Many people feel these sites are essential middlemen, even if they’re making the money from supplying companies with our business,” she said. “We want control and we want choice and just being able to compare one product with another can help us understand what it is we really need and what we are prepared to pay for.”Stravinsky formed the focus of Iván Fischer and the Budapest Festival Orchestra’s Festival Hall visit, a pair of remarkable concerts exploring his output early and late. Both were structured around one of the ballets written for Diaghilev – Petrushka in the first concert, The Rite of Spring the next evening – preceded in each case by a work for soloist and orchestra (the Violin Concerto, the Capriccio for piano and orchestra) and a neoclassical piece from the 1930s or 40s (Jeu de Cartes, the Concerto in D for strings). The Diaghilev ballets were both magnificently done, Petrushka in particular: this was one of the finest performances I’ve heard of it in London for some time. The central narrative, tragic yet ironic, was thrown into sharp relief by the cacophony of the Shrovetide fair, vivid in its whirling detail and verve. Petrushka’s shrieks of desire and despair combined pathos with grotesquerie, nowhere more so than at the close when his ghost confronts the Magician who has created and abused him. The Moor’s music had a heady sensuality, while the Ballerina’s flute and cornet solos were all flirtatious impertinence. The Rite of Spring was comparably powerful, edge-of-your-seat stuff, with great beauty amid the violence (the Mystic Circles of the Young Girls were simply ravishing) gradually accumulating tension as it went, rather than eruptive and seething from the outset. The soloists in the concertante works differed sharply in their approaches. Patricia Kopatchinskaja, for whom theatricality is integral to performance, seemed not so much to play the Violin Concerto as to live it, acting and even dancing to the music, none of which detracted from her dazzling technique and expressive brilliance. Nicolas Namoradze, in the altogether cooler Capriccio, was ideally laconic and debonair, weighty yet exquisite, and exactingly precise in tone and touch. Fischer, who conducts with boundless energy, did wonders with Jeu de Cartes, a comic yet austere work that can be tricky to get right. Larger than usual forces elevated sinewy neoclassicism to mock-baroque loftiness, while the ironic allusions to Rossini and parodic yet affectionate gestures towards the divertissements of imperial Russian ballet bristled with brilliance and wit. The Concerto for strings, effectively a concerto grosso, sounded gracious, svelte and consummately elegant. “This is an outstanding orchestra,” Kopatchinskaja declared before launching into two of Bartók’s Duets for Two Violins, as an encore, with István Kádár, one of the orchestral violinists. She is indeed right, and their playing was sensational throughout.London lawyers who help the global super-rich apply for “golden visas” to enter the UK have called on the government to reconsider its decision to abolish the Tier 1 investor visa scheme, warning that it would be “enormously damaging” to the economy. Kyra Motley, a partner at the law firm Boodle Hatfield, said the UK was jeopardising billions of pounds in overseas investment “because of a popular myth that foreign money is dirty money”. “On a conservative calculation, the investor visa scheme has brought in over £17bn of investment into the UK over the last decade,” she said. “That is a substantial success.” The home secretary, Priti Patel, announced the immediate closure of the scheme last week to stop “corrupt elites who threaten our national security and push dirty money around our cities”. More than 12,000 golden visas have been granted since the scheme was launched in 2008, including more than 2,500 to Russians. The programme allowed people with at least £2m in investment funds and a UK bank account to apply for residency rights, along with their family. The speed with which applicants were allowed to get indefinite leave to remain was hastened by how much money they planned to invest in the UK: £2m took five years, while £10m shortened the wait to just two. Chetal Patel, a partner at law firm Bates Wells, said scrapping the investor visa because of increased tensions over Russia’s threat to Ukraine would be “unfair” to other rich people wishing to come to the UK. “A blanket ban would be cutting off one’s nose to spite their face. “Since the introduction of golden visas in 2008, the UK has benefited from billions of pounds of investment. It would be enormously damaging to the UK economy if this was to be cut off.” After the 2018 Salisbury poisonings of Sergei and Yulia Skripal, a former Russian military officer and his daughter, the government launched a review into the investors awarded visas from 2008-15. The review has yet to be published. The scheme remained open, despite parliament’s joint intelligence and security committee saying in 2020 that it was “welcoming oligarchs with open arms”.Can you be a Buddhist as well as a Christian? Can a non-theist and theist perspective operate together hand in hand? Anna M St Clair Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.With that, I will bid you, and Beijing 2022, farewell. I want to thank Sean Ingle and Bryan Armen Graham who have done such an amazing job of reporting from the ground in Beijing in very difficult circumstances in the “closed loop”. And I want to thank a myriad of colleagues, many of whose names you don’t see – picture editors, sub editors, production staff, interactive developers, technical staff – who make it all possible for us to cover the Games behind the scenes. And I want to thank you for reading it all. It is a real honour to be able to cover sporting events like this, and I’ve had such lovely emails from people over the last couple of weeks, so thank you very much. I love the Olympic ideal, but to me it said everything about this edition that of the two medal ceremonies that took place during the closing ceremony, one featured an athlete who has previously missed an Olympics serving a doping ban, and one featured a country whose national anthem is banned due to systematic doping, who appear to have paid no heed to that and gone on to have an athlete involved in the biggest and most unsettling Olympic doping scandal for years. And the president of the IOC chose to say absolutely nothing in his speech about wanting or needing clean competition for the Olympics to remain credible. All that feels like it has totally overshadowed what has been two weeks of – mostly – fantastic competition and huge sporting achievements. There have been some incredible multi-medal performances from the likes of Johannes Thingnes Bø, Quentin Fillon Maillet, Marte Olsbu Roeiseland, Irene Schouten and Suzanne Schulting, as well as break-out stars like Eileen Gu. Ah well, until Milano Cortina in 2026 I guess. Before that the Paralympics start in Beijing with their opening ceremony on Friday 4 March, and you’ll be able to find coverage on our website. Until then take care and stay safe. Team GB only had one set of gold medallists in the end from Beijing – and here they are in their own words, Eve Muirhead saying they “did it the tough way.” The British Olympic Association wants a harsher ban imposed on Russia if it can be proved that its sporting system deliberately doped the 15-year-old skater Kamila Valieva. Speaking at the end of the Beijing Games, which ended with a gold medal at last for Britain in the women’s curling, the BOA chief executive Andy Anson described Valieva’s treatment as “horrific” and revealed it had lobbied the International Olympic Committee to investigate the skater’s entourage one or two days before the IOC decided to act. Russia was officially banned from the Winter Olympics, although it was allowed to compete under the banner of the Russian Olympic Committee. But Anson indicated that his organisation would back a stiffer punishment if a wider investigation proved Russia wrongdoing. “The Valieva stuff is horrific,” said Anson. “I don’t think we can pretend that it’s anything other than that. The investigation into everyone around her needs to be thorough and go as deep as it possibly can because what happened there was just completely unacceptable.” Here are a few images just coming through of the very end of that closing ceremony. Where after Milano Cortina 2026 I hear you idly wonder? The IOC has gradually moved away from massive bidding processes in favour of having targeted dialogues with potential venues for both the Summer and Winter Games. That is how both Paris and Los Angeles expressing an interest in 2024 led to Paris getting 2024 and Los Angeles getting 2028 for the Summer Games. Brisbane is currently the IOC’s preferred candidate for the Summer Games in 2032. On the Winter Olympics front, for 2030 there are three venues in the running: Vancouver in Canada, Sapporo in Japan, and an intriguing cross-border bid in the Pyrenees based around Barcelona, Andorra and a couple of venues in France. Vancouver is currently considered the front-runner as it is offering a very eco-friendly bid, not least of which because all of the infrastructure they built for hosting the 2010 Games is still just sitting there. The choir finished with a brief solo from one child which reminded me of the miming “scandal” from the 2008 Opening Ceremony. The Olympic rings have been raised into the air, the snowflake has been lowered, the flame has been extinguished. Snowflakes are being projected rising up into the air. Fireworks are going up spelling “One world”. They are signing something along to the tune of Auld Lang Syne. And that is a wrap. Just the four years to wait for the next one then. We’ve had a video montage now of people from all around China, including kids with snowmen, and a dog, and the Games’ cute panda mascot waving goodbye. We are about to see the extinguishing of the Olympic flame, accompanied by a children’s choir. This speech by IOC president Thomas Bach is a diplomatic test given the controversy surrounding the Games. Addressing the athletes he said: “You embraced each other even if your countries are divided by conflict. You overcame these divisions. In this Olympic community we are all equal. We are all equal regardless of what we look like, where we come from, or what we believe in.” He notably did not say “or who we love” there. “You give peace a chance,” he said, echoing a theme he spoke of in the opening ceremony. “May the political leaders around the world be inspired by your example of solidarity and peace.” Of the pandemic he said “it breaks our hearts” that some athletes could not make it because of Covid, reassuring them they will always belong to the Olympic community. “If we are to overcome this pandemic,” he said, using the phrases from the Olympic motto, “we must be fast, we must aim higher, we must be stronger, we must stand together.” He then made an explicit call for equal access to vaccines for everybody around the world. In praise of China, he said the Chinese people “set the stage” in an excellent and safe way. He said this experience was only because of “our gracious hosts, the Chinese people,” and he said “the positive legacy of this Olympic Games is ensured” with improved participation in Winter sports in China. “With a truly exceptional Olympic Winter Games, Beijing 2022, we welcome China as a winter sports country.” He then declared the Games closed. He made no reference – not even obliquely – to any of the controversies that have dogged this Games. It is speeches time, first up the chair of the organising committee, Cai Qi. He starts by wishing gratitude to athletes, coaches, journalists (air-punch!) and volunteers who made it possible, and praises the “unrelenting pursuit of excellence” He says all competitions have been well organised, and thanks to the professionalism and dedication of the media every moment was captured. He obviously didn’t see me doing it at 6am in my PJs from home. He also praised the people who worked on the Covid response, and says everyone has “worked wonders” for the Games. I jinxed it. I much preferred the Paris handover segment. What we’ve got here is a sort of Jean Michel-Jarre-esque techno number with two dancers, and a lot of work on the screens that are underneath their feet. Then a video insert which is brilliantly showing off the scenery and people of Italy, while also featuring a couple of old guys delivering what to my ears seemed a somewhat awkward phonetically-learned message of greeting in Chinese. And now we come to the handover section. I must confess that the Paris bit of Tokyo’s Olympic closing ceremony was easily the best bit that day, so there’s some pressure – from me mostly – on Milano-Cortina 2026 to deliver here. It has started with two kids rolling a giant Earth around the stadium cracking ice underneath them to demonstrate the fragile state of the world. A big part of the Milano-Cortina bid was using existing infrastructure – which is great from an ecological footprint point of view, but does mean it will be one of the most geographically spread Games of all time. The pass-the-parcel of the Olympic flag here goes from the mayor of Beijing Chen Jining to IOC president Thomas Bach, to the mayors of Milan and Cortina d’Ampezzo, who I believe are Giuseppe Sala and Gianpietro Ghedina. And now we get the national anthem of Italy. Truly one of the absolute bangers of national anthems, but inexplicably being done in a breathy John Lewis Xmas advert style here. If it ain’t broke … The Greek flag has been raised and national anthem raised in honour of the Olympic movements debt to the Greeks in founding the concept. That is being followed by the Olympic anthem being sung by children, in a reprise of the same slightly disorganised swaying that we saw in the opening ceremony. The Olympic flag is being lowered to prepare for its formal handover. We’ve had another montage of highlights, and now we are having a sequence of remembrance which is themed around the willow tree, which is a symbol of sorrow and loss in China. 365 ordinary people are carrying willow branches around the arena, which represent remembering lost loved ones 365 days of the year. A pillar of light has then built in the middle of the arena as spring arrives. It is accompanied by a very maudlin piece of music for a small strings ensemble. There has also been a video montage of athletes totally overcome with their emotions during the Games – and a lot of slow motion close-ups of tears. I can’t comment about whether you would be able to film a similar slow motion close-up of tears at my desk yet. A group representing the volunteers are being gifted traditional Chinese lanterns as a thank you. In the meantime, here are your 30km mass start women’s medallists There is a video montage now of volunteers and behind the scenes workers from Beijing 2022, with lots of Covid precautions in evidence. We had a gallery on a similar theme yesterday: The Russian Olympic Committee athletes at these Games have won more medals in total than any previous Soviet Union, Russian, Unified Team or Olympic Athletes of Russia team. The 32 is two more than their previous best. I would wager that at least one of those 32 medals is going somewhere else though, so maybe hold fire on updating your record books. Here are a few more pictures of the athletes in the stadium while the medal ceremony continues with the Norwegian national anthem being played for the sixteenth time in Beijing. The next medal ceremony is for the truncated men’s 30km mass start cross-country. It was a third gold for Alexander Bolshunov representing the Russian Olympic Committee at these Games. As a reminder, due to a worldwide set of sanctions as a punishment for covering up a massive state-sponsored doping programme, we will not be seeing the Russian flag or hearing the Russian national anthem. Instead we get Tchaikovsky‘s Piano Concerto No 1. The initial four year ban was halved by the court of arbitration for sport, and at the time the British Olympic gold medal cyclist Callum Skinner said the ruling meant “the biggest doping scandal in history had gone unpunished”. There’s an interlude now while we have a medal ceremony. It is the medals from the women’s 30km mass start free which was held earlier today and which was won by Norway’s Therese Johaug. It is nice for these athletes to get their award in the stadium in front of all their peers. We’ve gone to a video montage highlights package of clips from the Games. Things I suspect they won’t include: Kamila Valieva’s coach Eteri Tutberidze giving her a hard time after she fell, Remi Lindholm’s frozen penis [see 11.48am], and events due to be held on synthetic snow being postponed because there was suddenly too much real snow. In an otherwise very tightly controlled Games there’s been a little bit of anarchy here as an announcer keeps politely asking the athletes to leave the stage and go to their seats, and the athletes just keep on dancing and partying as Beethoven’s Ode To Joy goes round on a loop. The hosts have easily got the biggest contingent in the stadium. They also had their best ever Winter Olympics medal haul. Simon Gleave, head of sports analysis, Nielsen Gracenote again here, pointing out that they maybe didn’t expect quite the host bounce that other people have: China did not increase its medal total by as much as most of the recent host nations have, winning only 67% more than in the year prior to hosting. However, gold medals improved from one to nine and were 80% higher than China’s previous best of five. The only hosts since 1988 which have improved their highest number of Winter Olympic gold medals by more than China’s 80% are Japan (1998) and Canada (2010) whose best gold totals went up by 400% and 100% respectively. On total medals, China was the first host nation to finish outside the top-10 medal winners since Canada at Calgary 1988. I don’t want to blow my own trumpet, but before I came onto the live blog I was putting the finishing touches to my last daily Beijing briefing of these Game, and it is a jolly good read today, so while the athletes are wandering around the stadium, why not give it a glance? Bruce Mouat of the men’s curling team is carrying the flag for Team GB. He told the BBC earlier what an honour it was, saying: They actually told us as a five, and that was an incredible moment, just having all the boys kind of congratulate me as well. I think that kind of gave me goosebumps. Silver medal and the announcement the flag-bearer in the same day. I’ll take that, yeah. It was a good day. Norway are one of the teams coming into the stadium now and they have absolutely bossed it at these Games. Simon Gleave, head of sports analysis, Nielsen Gracenote had this to say about their performance: Norway finished at the top of the Beijing Winter Olympics medal table, just as they did four years ago at Pyeongchang 2018. The Norwegian team won two fewer medals than their Olympic record total of 39 achieved in 2018 but broke the Olympic gold medal record by winning 16. Norway won medals in nine of the 15 sports at Beijing 2022. Norway extended its lead at the top of the all-time medal table for the Winter Olympics. In Beijing, Norway became the first nation to win 400 Winter Olympic medals when the Norwegian nordic combined team won gold on day 13. The Norwegian team finished the 2022 Winter Games on 408 medals, including 148 gold. Children and other dancers are now pushing around stylised bobsleighs in the shapes of the different animals from the Chinese zodiac, which are glowing bright icy blue, and making virtual ice tracks across the stadium floor. The flags of all the countries who competed are being brought into the stadium now by flag-bearers from each country. There aren’t as many athletes as usual as Covid protocols dictated that they left within 48 hours of competing. We are getting the introduction of the dignitaries now. There will be an intense about of scrutiny on the words that IOC president Thomas Bach will say. It is time for the national anthem of the People’s Republic of China. The closing ceremony is again directed by film director and producer Zhang Yimou, who did the opening and closing ceremonies for the 2008 Summer Games in Beijing, and who also did the opening ceremony which we watched just a couple of weeks ago. I’m reliably informed this is going to be a low-key affair again. It has opened with a routine of children carrying snowflake lanterns, and as a very tired parent who has been covering the Winter Olympics non-stop for days I’m already getting a lip wobble. Hello, Martin Belam here in London. If you were reading the live blog yesterday you’ll know I got a bit emotionally overcome by the figure skating. I expect much the same today. I am genuinely fascinated how Olympics opening and closing ceremonies have become an arts genre in their own right, and often find them very moving. I’m quite torn this time – I think both Gus Kenworthy and Nils van der Poel have been very eloquent about the issues surrounding the IOC granting China the right to host these Games. Kenworthy said “When there’s human rights and the country’s stance on LGBT, those issues should be taken into consideration by the IOC.” Van der Poel said “The Olympic Village was very nice, the Chinese people I met were absolutely amazing. The Olympics is a lot, it’s a fantastic sporting event where you unite the world and nations meet. But so did Hitler before invading Poland, and so did Russia before invading Ukraine. I think it is extremely irresponsible to give it to a country that violates human rights as blatantly as the Chinese regime is doing.” And the saga around the figure skating has really tarnished these Games for me. And yet … and yet … there’s still something incredible about all these athletes coming together to celebrate what they have collectively achieved, and the prospect of a show like no other. I’m handing over to Martin Belam, who will guide you through the Beijing 2022 closing ceremony. Thanks for reading, emailing and tweeting over the past couple of weeks – it’s been emotional, and I guess it can be summed up by two contrasting narratives. The brilliance of the remarkable Eileen Gu: And the sorry story of the lavishly talented Kamila Valieva: Bye for now. A non-Winter Olympics newsflash as the Queen tests positive for Covid-19: Via Reuters this morning – not a headline you see every day: Lindholm suffers frozen penis in mass start race The men’s 50km mass start race at the Beijing Games was shortened to 30km but that did little to help Finland’s Remi Lindholm, who needed a heat pack at the end of the race to thaw out a particularly sensitive body part. Lindholm spent just under an hour and 16 minutes traversing the course in howling, freezing winds, leading to his penis becoming frozen for the second time in a cross-country skiing race following a similar incident in Ruka, Finland last year. “You can guess which body part was a little bit frozen when I finished (the men’s Olympic 50km race) ... it was one of the worst competitions I’ve been in. It was just about battling through,” he said. With organisers worried about frostbite during Saturday’s race, it was delayed by an hour and shortened by 20km. The thin suits and under-layers worn by racers offered little protection. Lindholm explained that he used a heat pack to try to thaw out his appendage once the race was over. “When the body parts started to warm up after the finish, the pain was unbearable,” he said. The Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, has tweeted congratulations to Eve Muirhead and co. for winning curling gold: One of my favourite images of the Games. Mikaela Shiffrin skiing off the course after missing a gate in the slalom in the Alpine Combined event. Shiffrin didn’t win a medal, but she was still brilliant, not least in the way she was willing to discuss and articulate her experience in Beijing. It’s 10 days since Nathan Chen of the USA won figure skating gold. That will feature highly on the video montages we’ll be seeing on the telly over the next hours and days. Bryan Armen Graham witnessed it for the Guardian: “Nathan Chen left no doubt, making good on his long-held promise to finally take hold of figure skating’s ultimate prize. The world’s most dominant skater over the past 47 months roared to the Olympic men’s title on Thursday, winning by more than 22 points over a talent-stacked field of established champions and polished newcomers with a mesmerizing long program that included five quadruple jumps and a pair of triples.” In screengrab form – the medal table top 10: Norway, Germany, China on the podium, in that order. Shaun White’s interview after his final Olympic event, in which he finished fourth, was a tear-jerker. He cracked up while thanking his competitors for their kind words on how he had inspired them to take up snowboarding – and to push the sport further than anyone could have imagined when White first came on the scene. I challenge you to watch White’s interview without a lump in your throat. ‘I’m happy. What a life, what a career, what a legacy to leave behind,” White said. “It’s not about today, it’s about a whole lifetime of this sport. I’ve got to thank the competitors for embracing me this whole way, for the kind words they said to me at the bottom, you know, that I had inspired them, and pushed them to get to this point. Thank you guys, thank you snowboarding. It’s been my life.” What was your best moment of these Olympics? Feel free to let me know on email or tweet @LukeMcLaughlin Let’s have a glance at the medal table. Estonia, Latvia and Poland are the three nations who won a single bronze. Spain and Ukraine both notched a single silver each. Norway are in a league of their own at the top: 16 golds, eight silvers and 13 bronze medals for a total of 37. Germany second (12 golds, 10 silvers, five bronzes = 27), China third (nine golds, four silvers, two bronzes = 15). Great Britain, of course, were nowhere to be seen on the medal table until the final weekend, when the men won curling silver, and the women won gold. Finland’s men’s ice hockey team finally reached the top of the Olympic podium on Sunday by beating the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) 2-1 to claim the final gold medal of the Beijing Winter Games. Ville Pokka and Hannes Bjorninen each had a goal while Harri Sateri was rock solid in net when called upon, facing 17 shots as the inspired Finns capped an unbeaten run to gold by overcoming the defending champions. “This means a lot, first time we made history today, it feels great,” said the Finland forward Markus Granlund. “It was early game, fans probably woke up early, it’s a big thing for Finland.” Finland have made regular appearances on the Olympic podium, returning home with a medal from five of the previous seven Games, but until Sunday had never reached the top step. Twice before the Finns had contested the final, at the 1988 Calgary Games and 2006 Turin Olympics, and come up short. The last medal to be decided in Beijing - the men’s final - was supposed to provide a sporting crescendo to the Games with the world’s best battling for gold. But Beijing was denied that spectacle when the NHL opted out of Olympic participation after a Covid-19 surge through North American locker rooms forced the postponement of more than 100 games. Instead the players going for gold on Sunday were taken mostly from the Russian-based KHL and Finnish elite league teams. “What a way to end it and on this day we’re the best hockey country in the world,” said Finnish forward Harry Pesonen. “There are so many good players, even if North American guys were not here. There were no easy games in this tournament.” “I can’t even describe it, it was an emotional incredible moment,” said Sateri. “I don’t even realise yet it’s such a huge thing, just a huge thing. It’s been a dream since I was a kid. An Olympic gold medal is just unreal.” “Incredible feeling to get a gold medal, thinking that everybody was up (back in Finland),” said Pokka. “I’m sure everyone in Finland is pretty excited even if it’s super early in the morning. But not too early to drink beer in Finland.” (Reuters) Bruce Mouat has vowed to bounce back from the heartbreak of having to settle for a silver medal and emulate Eve Muirhead’s march to the top of an Olympic podium. Mouat was in the crowd at the Ice Cube to watch Muirhead’s women’s team defeat Japan 10-3 to claim Great Britain’s first curling gold medal since Rhona Martin’s triumph in 2002. Muirhead’s success came less than 24 hours after Mouat and teammates Hammy McMillan, Grant Hardie and Bobby Lammie were snuffed out by the Swedish skip Niklas Edin in their own gold medal match. “That gold medal looked very good on them and now it’s down to hard work from the boys so that we can be the ones putting one on in four years’ time,” said Mouat. “The loss yesterday is going to hurt for a while. The guys and I have got the same drive to get back in 2026 and fight hard for that gold medal. We came so close coming into an extra end with Niklas, but we’re going to give it our all. It’s been a dream of ours for a lifetime.” Mouat, who missed out in a bronze medal play-off in the mixed doubles competition with Muirhead’s teammate Jennifer Dodds earlier in the Games, paid tribute to the skip’s remarkable resilience. The way Mouat’s men eased through to the semi-finals was in stark contrast to the struggles of Muirhead’s side, who relied on a stroke of fortune before finally finding their form in the last four. “Eve has been a great ambassador for our sport for so long now,” said Mouat. “With the team that she’s got right now, what a resilient team that is. They’ve had to battle so hard over the last 12 months to get to this point and I’m over the moon for them. I managed to see Jen afterwards and I gave her the biggest hug ever. I can’t stop smiling for them.” (PA Media) And here’s an Australia-focused gallery of that nation’s exploits at the Games: Today’s closing ceremony is scheduled to begin in 90 minutes’ time. This year’s opening ceremony, while a scaled-down affair in comparison with Beijing’s stunning curtain-raiser for the Summer Games in 2008, threw up some beautiful imagery: Germany extended their historic sliding dominance at the Beijing Games with a one-two finish in the women’s bobsleigh to finish ahead of the United States’ Elana Meyers Taylor, who took bronze to become the most decorated Black athlete in Winter Games history in what may be her final race. If you’re in the UK, BBC2 are currently replaying Japan v Great Britain in the women’s curling final. You probably know the result already, but if not, here is Sean Ingle’s report: Thanks Jonathan. Hello everyone. What is my moment of the Games? Japan’s calamity in the women’s speed skating team pursuit springs to mind. Nana Tagaki crashed out on the final bend when the very impressive, incredibly well co-ordinated Japan team were a handful of seconds from glory ... but I only mention it because the overall story ended with happiness for Miho Tagaki (Nana’s sister), with an individual gold medal in the 1,000m. They’d rather have won gold rather than silver in the team pursuit, of course, but it was heartwarming to see Miho Tagaki subsequently get her hands on a gold medal in the individual event. And before I hand over the baton to Luke in London... in these cynical times, with troops marshalling on the Ukraine border, here’s one for the Olympic romantics. It was a remarkable few weeks for the Kiwis, with both gold medalists hailing from the town of Wanaka - population 10,000, with at least 5000 of those being registered bungee jumping practitioners. The Chinese generally don’t go for this type of carry-on. Expect a more sober, low-key affair at this year’s Closing Ceremony, which is due to kick off in just over two hours. In case you missed it earlier, Mikaela Shiffin’s woes were one of the most compelling storylines of these Games. Today was another excruciatingly near miss for the American, but she demonstrated extraordinary grace under duress. From the sprint to the marathon, Jessie Diggins was one of the most versatile athletes of these Games. Eve Muirhead on Britain’s Breakthrough Curling Gold “This is a moment I dreamed of as a young child. Having lost two semi-finals then come through that great battle against Sweden, we knew this was an opportunity we might never get again. “It’s definitely been a rollercoaster journey for the whole team. From not finishing the top six at the world championships, we had to come back and it was hard. “There were times I wanted to throw my shoes in the cupboard and never get them out again. But we all came back and got this new team together and came through the Europeans and the qualifiers. “There have been ups and downs, there have been a couple of positive tests, but here we are, five very healthy girls with gold medals around our necks.” From Mark Staniforth, PA Olympics Correspondent, Beijing Lindsey Jacobellis on claiming the Gold that slipped through her grasp 16 years ago. For many, Eileen Gu was THE star of the 2022 Games. Even when all the medals have been handed out, Nathan Chen is still having a lend. Apologies in advance Hockey Recap The Finns had won four Bronze medals in Olympic Hockey, and two Silvers. They’ve been thereabouts in all the big recent tournaments. They conceded an early goal, but scored in the opening seconds of the third period and then hung on for dear life in an excruciating final few minutes. They were Captained by Valtteri Filppula, the former Detroit Red Wing who won a Stanley Cup in 2008. He and his teammates are about to receive their Gold Medals, the last awarded at these Olympics. Here are your winners, in slightly less euphoric times. There’s some mean looking cats in that lineup. Finland 2 - Russia 1 They’ve done it! Finland’s first ever Olympic Hockey Gold. It was a chaotic final few minutes but the Finns stonewalled and repelled and were worthy winners. All that’s missing here is a decent crowd. The Finns are going bonkers and plenty of tears form the Russian lads. ROC 1-2 Finland, 3rd period Russia’s goalie Ivan Fedotov is keeping his country in this one. The Finns have had 30 shots on goal to the Russians 16, but it’s still anyone’s Gold. ROC 1-2 Finland, 3rd period Russia’s coach Oleg Znarok seems to be in a highly agitated state, pacing around like a nervous groom. We’re nearing the end of the third period. ROC 1-2 Finland, 3rd period Thank you Sir. It was a cynical, scrappy, defensive first half but things have opened up noticeably. The Russians are peppering the goal, to no avail. Less than 30 seconds into the third period, Marko Anttila shoots only a few feet from the blue line. It deflects in off Hannes Bjorninen, and now the ROC will need to find some offense. Anttila, incidentally, is 36 years old and has spent most of his career in Finland. And with that, after all my nights of live-blogging, I’m handing off to Jonathan Horn. Thanks as always for following along through one of the strangest but most exhilarating Olympics of our lifetimes. My favorite moments of the Olympics? Glad you asked. In no particular order: Nathan Chen and Eileen Gu showing off their tremendous talent on the world’s stage. Lindsey Jacobellis claiming the gold that slipped through her grasp (or grab) in 2006. The scintillating men’s curling final, with Niklas Edin and Bruce Mouat trading amazing shots. Jessie Diggins taking two medals at two vastly different differences. Mikaela Shiffrin’s extraordinary grace. Erin Jackson winning gold, followed a few days later by Brittany Bowe, who gave her 500m berth to Jackson, taking bronze. I’ll have to stop there because ... How did Team GB take curling gold and silver in the Olympics? Sean Ingle has the story: We end with another ruck and some face mask-pushing between the two teams. This is not a classic. ROC 1-1 Finland, 2:29 2nd period Hockey is the winter sport that loses the most without a crowd. Discuss. I think Mikaela Shiffrin is practicing what they call “radical acceptance.” ROC 1-1 Finland, 7:00 2nd period Shot. Shot blocked. And again. ROC 1-1 Finland, 10:15 2nd period This is exactly like the USA-Canada women’s games. Finland keeps shooting. ROC defensemen keep blocking them. Half-chance when the guy coming out of the box finds the puck on his own, but the Finnish defense scrambles into shape. ROC 1-1 Finland, 12:29 2nd period Finland is back on the power play. Last time, they generated a ton of shots and kept it in the ROC zone, but they didn’t manage a breakthrough. Ville Pokka takes an opportunistic shot from the boards, and it looks like it takes a slight deflection through traffic and eludes Fedotov at the near post. Pokka plays for Avangard Omsk in Russia and is facing three of his teammates. Because some leagues let their players go to the Olympics. ROC 1-0 Finland, 17:01 2nd period Long ruck (not a scrum, which is different) along the boards. An official keeps yelling at both teams to get the puck moving, like an MMA ref yelling a fighter to defend himself. Do they all speak English? Remember when the US women kept outshooting Canada but couldn’t score? Same story here. Finland has outshot Not Russia 15-7. ROC goalie Ivan Fedotov -- born in Finland, believe it or not -- has stopped all 15 shots. Also believe it or not, he’s 2 meters tall. That’s 6-foot-7, for those still awake in the USA. Hey, look who’s back! That’s right -- Vincent Zhou, who won a ... um ... a medal in the figure skating team event but has not yet received it because no one has received a medal because you know the rest of the story, is back to open the exhibition gala. Eighteen seconds into a power play. A rare sprint-distance double medal, after her bronze in the spring, and Diggins’ face is full of joy, anguish, pain and probably some ice. She goes face-first into the snow, and it’s taking them some time to get her to stand and get away from the finish line. That’s a full set for Diggins, who took that memorable gold in the 2018 team sprint. Sweden’s Ebba Andersson couldn’t hang on to bronze and dropped back to eighth. Finland’s Kerttu Niskanen just managed to get away from Sweden’s Jonna Sundling to round out the podium, with the USA’s Rosie Brennan a couple of seconds back in sixth. Brennan was so close multiple times. Fourth in the sprint. Fifth with Diggins in the team sprint. Now sixth here. Gold in the 10km classical, gold in the skiathlon, gold here. As if Norway needed more medals. Now we wait for Jessie Diggins and a heated battle for bronze. The late, great Warren Zevon (with a surprising co-writer -- journalist Mitch Albom): “There were Swedes at the blue line, Finns at the red. A Russian with a stick heading straight for his head.” Our last event has started ... Finland vs. the ROC in the men’s hockey final. It’s a terrific matchup with Alex Ovechkin seeking that elusive ... wait ... what? OK, so it’s a bunch of non-NHL players. But that’s the way it used to be, and it’s going to be a good one. Also underway: the figure skating exhibition gala. I might put that on my second screen when the cross-country race is finished. Great start for Friedrichs, but he went pretty high up on the first wall. That was his only mistake. He was steady the rest of the way with a lead between 0.37 and 0.40 seconds. He posted the fastest time in the second, third and fourth heats. GOAT? Bobsleigh: All that said, the top two Germans were nigh uncatchable coming into the fourth heat, and Johannes Lochner has come down well ahead of Kripps. Now it’s Francesco Friedrichs bidding for the double-double -- two-man and four-man in 2018 and 2022 (though the 2018 two-man was shared with Kripps). Bobsleigh: Phew! Exhale, Canadians. Kripps was going along nicely, with no noticeable errors, but he lost time in the middle section. 0.02 seconds ahead at one split. 0.01 at the next. But the finish is the one that counts, and he was 0.06 ahead. No sweep for Germany, and unless Rosie Brennan pops up to take bronze while Diggins keeps silver in the 30km cross-country, Canada will finish with more medals than the USA. Bobsleigh: Moment of truth now for Canada’s Justin Kripps. He shared gold in the two-man in 2018. He was second and third in the two-man and four-man on home ice in Whistler in the 2019 world championships. Now he needs to finish fast enough to beat Germany’s Christoph Haber, who just finished the best run of the fourth heat so far. Bobsleigh: Team GB’s Brad Hall will finish sixth, barring disaster for any of the top four. Latvia’s Oskars Kibermanis has crossed the line ahead of him. We have only two events in which the medalists are not known. In men’s ice hockey, we don’t know the order of gold and silver, but we know who’s getting something shiny. Canada currently has 25 medals to the USA’s 24. But if Jessie Diggins hangs on in the women’s 30km cross-country and Justin Kripps doesn’t hang on in the four-man bobsleigh, it’ll be a tie at 25. Through 17.9 km, Diggins is 49 seconds behind Therese Johaug, who’s poised to extend Norway’s record haul of gold medals to 16 and take their total to 37. Diggins is 53.3 seconds ahead of Sweden’s Ebbe Andersson, who’s more than 30 seconds ahead of anyone else. Kripps is third in the bobsleigh after three runs. He’ll be up in about three minutes. Bobsleigh: The USA’s Frank Delduca will move up from 15th to at least a tie for 13th. The top 12 are getting ready to head out next. Cross-country skiing: Norway’s Therese Johaug has put the hammer down. She leads by 16 seconds. Second place -- Jessie Diggins, who’s more than 16 seconds ahead of everyone else. The USA’s Rosie Brennan is in fifth. Still nearly 20km to go. Muirhead, of course, makes the last shot for two, and it’s a 10-3 score. Japan concedes, and GB finally has a gold medal in Beijing. Curling: Japan puts a couple of rocks in the back of the house, hoping to entice some mistakes. And Vicky Wright makes a rare one, missing a takeout to get at least one of those rocks away. It’s still not a great-looking house for Japan. GB has the first- and second-best rock, both ahead of the tee line that bisects the house. Japan needs to eventually get rid of those yellow rocks without jamming them onto these red rocks in the back. Fujisawa’s first rock taps a GB rock on the button. Muirhead knocks that rock away, along with one of the red ones in the back. So that’s three yellow GB rocks clustered from the button forward in a staggered line. There’s one red Japanese rock in the back. Fujisawa tries to take out a bunch of those rocks. She gets two, but GB still has shot rock and a draw for two. Will the lead be six or seven? Curling: The five-rock rule means that a team can’t start removing opponents’ guards from play until five rocks have been thrown. We have now passed the five-rock mark, which means Jennifer Dodds is sending granite out of play. Dodds also played mixed doubles in Beijing, placing fourth. Cross-country skiing: The women’s 30km mass start is underway. The USA’s Jessie Diggins, gold medalist in the team sprint in 2018, is best in the sprints but also solid in longer distances. This year, she has bronze in the individual sprint, fifth in the team sprint, sixth in the skiathlon and eighth in the 10km classic. Through 6.2km of this epic race, she’s firmly entrenched in a lead pack of four skiers led by Norway’s Therese Johaug. Curling: I was expecting Japan to concede even if they scored two, which they did not. Fujisawa’s draw was too heavy, like my final shot today when I was in a tie game in the last end. Sniff. Anyway, we play on ... 8-3 GB after eight ends; GB has hammer Curling: The two teams put a few rocks in play until Muirhead figures it’s time to just avoid giving up a score of four or six or 13 or whatever. (Eight is actually the maximum, and that requires a lot of mistakes.) This game is being won at the vice position. Vicky Wright has been outstanding, even if she just didn’t quite make the double takeout on her second shot here. Chinami Yoshida has made too many mistakes. Her last shot just taps a GB guard in utter futility. Muirhead easily disposes of the only Japanese rock in the house, so at most, Japan will score two here. Fujisawa responds with a wonderful shot, a draw behind all the rocks in play that nestles neatly on the button. Muirhead’s last shot of this end follows the same path. Fujisawa still has shot rock, but she’ll have to go to the other side of the sheet and throw a really accurate shot to score two ... Bobsleigh: Only the top 20 drivers through three heats can compete in the last one, which means we much bid farewell to Jamaica’s Shanwayne Stephens. He was 8.25 seconds behind leader Francesco Friedrichs. The next-to-last driver, Italy’s Mattia Variola, was 5.48 seconds back. But Stephens made it here. Some countries didn’t. Top 20 will go in reverse order, starting in about 15 minutes. Curling: It’s almost over, as Muirhead completes a relatively routine runback -- throwing a yellow rock onto her own yellow rock, sending it flying into Japan’s lone red rock in the house. The red rock goes away, and Muirhead scores FOUR. 8-2 GB after seven ends; Japan has hammer Curling: GB uses its timeout, which is a little surprising this early in the game. But this may be where they can turn a strong lead into a commanding one. Facing two British rocks touching the button, Fujisawa slams one of her own rocks into the mixer. Muirhead comes back with a beautiful double takeout, though she leaves a rock exposed. Fujisawa tries to hit and roll into the center to put pressure on Muirhead. She whiffs ... Huge opportunity for Muirhead ... Yeah, not a surprise. The blue and red courses were so lopsided that, by my count, only three races were won from the red course aside from DNFs or DQs. Two were in the Switzerland-China mismatch. The only other winner? Mikaela Shiffrin. Curling: Game of inches ... Muirhead puts her last rock a few inches too deep, leaving Fujisawa a draw for two. But Fujisawa is just a couple of inches off target and scores only one. It’s a long way back now for Japan. 4-2 GB after six ends; GB has hammer Alpine team event: Nope. Radamus wins but finishes in 24.04. Just rotten luck for the USA. If Moltzan had kept her feet in the semis, they likely would’ve been going for ... well, silver, because there’s no way they would’ve beaten Austria. So that’s officially a full Olympics with no medal for Shiffrin, who’ll have to settle for all the hardware she already has and GOAT status. Alpine team event: Mikaela Shiffrin’s last run in these Olympics starts slowly. And continues slowly. Didn’t miss a gate, but my goodness, she was never even in it. And Thea Louise Stjernesund laid down a much faster time on the blue course than Moltzan did. River Radamus needs something magical here -- not just a win but a blazing time of 23.62 ... Curling: Muirhead plays a nice takeout with her first shot. Fujisawa puts one in the middle of a gaggle of British stones, but Muirhead should have a makeable draw that would force Japan to one. Alpine team event: No mistake for Paula Moltzan this time, and it’s a nice redemptive run, winning by 0.74 seconds. It would probably take an accident for Ford to win, as it did earlier today. Nope, not this time. 1-1. Can Shiffrin steal a win from the red course and set things up for a US bronze? Curling: GB lead Hailey Duff starts things up with a couple of wayward shots, one sliding too deep into the house and one guard that isn’t in line with her first shot. But Vicky Wright picks out a Japanese rock that had been sitting on the button. Curling: Didn’t mean to leave you hanging there. Muirhead managed to squeeze one of her rocks into a tight space to force Fujisawa into a difficult shot. The Japanese skip removes Muirhead’s rock, but in the ensuing shuffle, Muirhead has a rock slightly closer than Fujisawa, and that’s a steal. 4-1 GB after five ends; Japan has hammer Alpine team event: Disaster for the USA! On the faster blue course, Paula Moltzan was well on her way to the win but slipped. In the finish area, River Radamus stands up and puts his head on his hands while Mikaela Shiffrin hangs her head. There’s no way Tommy Ford will win from the red course, is there? No, there’s not. Germany wins 3-1, and the USA will face Norway for bronze. Alpine team event: As predicted, Shiffrin loses on the slower red course. Not sure whether this was random assignment or a blunder on the USA’s part. Or do they just think Moltzan is faster? Radamus answers with a predictably easy win on the blue course. 1-1 in the semis. Curling: Muirhead’s first rock is a picture-perfect draw that sits in front of the rock Japan just threw. Fujisawa responds with a nice draw to the top of the four-foot. Back in a second .... Alpine team event: This is shaping up to be a question of who can get the fastest times on the blue course and win the tiebreaker of fastest combined time by the fastest man and fastest woman. Austria and Norway tied 2-2, but Austria took the tiebreaker. So has the USA made a tactical blunder by putting Shiffrin on the red course, where she’s less likely to win or post a fast enough time to help in a tiebreaker? Curling: GB puts one in the house. Japan goes for the corner guard but then concentrates on peeling guard after guard. A missed takeout attempt by Chinami Yoshida opens things a bit, but Vicky Wright puts her draw too deep. Yoshida puts her next rock between Wright’s and the button, though it bounces a little bit off course. Daniel Taylor writes: “Thanks for the coverage - in Tokyo watching the with my wife on local TV and you’re helping me understand the intricacies of the game! We’ve bet cakes on the outcome so if the ladies win not only do they get gold but I also get cake - a win all around I say! Go team GB!” Now I’m hungry. Alpine team event: Another upset, and it shows how much faster the blue course is. Lena Duerr beats double medalist Wendy Holdener of Switzerland, and seventh-seeded Germany knocks out the second-seeded Swiss, who’ll just have to content themselves rolling around on a giant pile of Alpine medals from these Games. Yes, this affects the USA, which will face Germany in the semis rather than Switzerland. First up: Austria vs Norway. Curling: Remember mixed doubles, when all the shots piled up in the four-foot circle? That’s about how the fourth end went. Eve Muirhead had one easily enough but couldn’t fit her last shot onto a narrow sliver of the button for two. That’s a good force for Japan. 3-1 GB after four ends; Japan has hammer. Alpine team event: UPSET! USA into the semifinal with a win over Italy. And the funny thing -- the only US skier to lose was Mikaela Shiffrin. But that’s deceiving. The blue course is clearly a little faster, and Shiffrin lost her heat by only 0.02 seconds. Paula Moltzan had that blue course and kicked things off with a massive 0.56-second win over giant slalom silver medalist and combined bronze medalist Italy’s Federica Brignone. The big break for the US was in the second heat. Tommy Ford is, by any reckoning, the least accomplished skier on the team, and he’s 13 months removed from a catastrophic crash. But Luca de Aliprandini went off course, and Ford coolly finished for a 2-0 lead. Shiffrin lost a back-and-forth heat on the slower course, but that just left River Radamus to clean up with an easy win. Alpine team event: Can Norway add another medal here? It’s possible. The fourth-seeded team wins the tiebreaker over fifth-seeded France. Austria easily took out Slovenia. Next up: USA-Italy. Bobsleigh: Francesco Friedrichs is in good shape to finish off his double-double -- two-man and four-man in 2018 and 2022. But it’s still close. Fellow German Johannes Lochner, who set the track record in the first run and still holds it, is only 0.20 seconds back heading into the fourth and final run. In position for bronze is Justin Kripps of Canada, who shared the four-man gold with Friedrichs in 2018. He gave back a little bit of time in the third run and will need a solid final trip down the ice to prevent a German sweep, with Christoph Hafer in close pursuit. Not literally. Putting multiple sleds on this track seems like a bad idea. Team GB’s Brad Hall is still in sixth and doesn’t seem likely to move up or down. Curling: The two teams crowd the center line until the two vices (third players to shoot), Chinami Yoshida and Vicky Wright, exchange double takeouts. Yoshida hits remaining GB rock, but it rolls to a spot in which Wright can through yet another double takeout. And so she does, leaving the house empty except for one GB rock. Skip rocks: Takeout, takeout, takeout, takeout with a roll out of the house. That’s a blank. 2-1 GB after three ends; GB has hammer Alpine team event: The round of 16 (actually 15, with a bye for Austria) is complete. Canada is out, losing on the tiebreaker to Slovenia. Fourth-seeded Norway survived a sloppy tie with Poland, winning on tiebreak despite two DNFs. The top eight all advanced. Next up for the USA: third-ranked Italy. Bobsleigh: The Germans are winning. Curling: Catching up on the second end -- GB keeps putting up center guards, and Japan targets them with varying success. Fujisawa then plays a spiffy double takeout, leaving a GB stone on the button but fully exposed while a Japanese stone is farther out, in position to count for two. But Muirhead hits a truly excellent shot, taking out the Japanese rock and rolling to the button. That leaves two GB rocks crowding the center with no Japanese rocks in the house, and all Fujisawa can do is hit one to score a single point with hammer. (One more basic curling point: The goal when you have hammer is usually to score two or more points. If you’re not going to get that, you may try to “blank” an end -- intentionally getting rid of all the remaining stones in the house and in your hand -- to keep the hammer for the next end. If the other team forces you to score one point, that’s called a “force.” What we just saw was a force.) 2-1 GB after two ends; GB has hammer. Alpine team event: His result flew a little under the radar, but the USA’s River Radamus placed fourth in the giant slalom. He takes an early lead and wins his heat when Slovakia’s Andres Zampa misses a gate. Next: Paula Moltzan breezes to victory. 3-0 USA, and they’ve advanced to the quarterfinals. Alpine team event: It’s the USA vs. Slovakia, and the first US skier is none other than Mikaela Shiffrin, who gets a good start and looks as smooth as can be. No missed gates, no problem. 1-0 USA. Curling: Beautiful shot by Japanese vice Chinami Yoshida to bury a red rock behind the multitude of guards out front, but Vicki Wright goes bang-bang up the middle (promotion takeout or raise or runback in curling lingo) to remove it. Satsuki Fujisawa’s first shot drifts a bit too far, and Eve Muirhead puts her shot right on top of that one. That means GB is closer, but because it’s behind the tee line (the line bisecting the house from left to right), Fujisawa can respond in kind. The Japanese skip gives it a try, but it doesn’t quite curl enough and Muirhead has a shot for two. (I’m going to dial back on the definitions from henceforth. I assume everyone has the hang of it by now.) Muirhead makes the shot with ease. 2-0 GB after one end. Curling: GB has the hammer (last shot). Japan opts to put its first rock in the house instead of putting up a guard. GB’s Hailey Duff easily removes that one. Japan plays its own takeout, and GB decides to ignore that one to play the conventional shot for a team with hammer, a corner guard, behind which they deposit rocks that will be difficult to remove. NBC then does its traditional lengthy commercial interruption during the middle of an end, but we have ways of seeing what happened Basically, it’s a constellation of rocks in front of the house, which is kind of bad for GB, especially given the red Japanese rock sitting in the back of the house Curling: Here we go! After taking bronze in 2014 and fourth in 2018, Eve Muirhead is back again representing the birthplace of the game, Scotland, which specializes in inventing sports that torture the rest of the world. She’s also the 2013 world champion. Alpine team event: It’s minus-3 degrees. Fahrenheit. And windy, though not enough to postpone it again -- which is good, because there’s not another day to which it may be postponed. The format: Skiers race head-to-head on parallel courses. Each team has two men and two women. Most wins ... um ... wins. If they’re tied, the combined time of the fastest man and fastest woman determines the winner. The courses are short giant slalom-ish layouts. Medal count check: Looks like Norway won’t match its record medal haul of 39 unless it sweeps the cross-country event and reaches the podium in Alpine. They may just have to settle for the record for gold medals -- 15. Canada (25 medals) is virtually assured of finishing ahead of the USA (24) in total medals, but the USA leads in gold medals 8-4 (pending the figure skating team event). Ready for February Madness? That’s the Alpine team event, which uses a bracket system for head-to-head matchups. It’s a bit shorter than the Big Basketball Tournament in March. As we bid farewell to these most unusual Olympics, please share your favorite and least favorite moments. Or just some offbeat thought. Or some sport you’d like to see added. Email me with your thoughts or tweet @duresport For one last time (for these Olympics), hello from me (Beau Dure) to you (the other billions of people on the planet). We’ll soon have the Alpine team event, which was rescheduled and moved to this date and time. It’ll be Mikaela Shiffrin’s last chance at a medal here, but it’s a slim one. In four-man bobsleigh, Canada’s Justin Kripps is currently interrupting a German sweep, while Team GB’s Brad Hall sits sixth and has an outside chance of getting on the podium. A little later, we’ll have the traditional finales of a cross-country long-distance race and the men’s hockey final. But you’re all here for curling. As you should be, and I’m not just saying that because I spent nine hours in a curling club today. (First two shots were like Niklas Edin. The rest were like Homer Simpson.) Can Eve Muirhead get Team GB its first and surely only gold of these Olympics? Or will Japan’s Satsuki Fujisawa, the bronze medalist in 2018, spring another surprise? Coming up today Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 9.00am Alpine skiing - the team event🥇 9.05am Curling – the women’s gold medal match: Great Britain v Japan 🥇 9.30am and 11.20am Bobsleigh – the final two runs of the four-man competition 🥇 12.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s gold-medal match, Finland v almost defending champions Russian Olympic Committee. In 2018 the competition was won by the ‘Olympic Athletes from Russia’ team, as the Russian Olympic Committee was suspended at that point due to doping violations. 🤔 2.30pm Cross-country skiing– women’s 30km mass free start 🥇 8pm Closing ceremony – Oh, that’s it. Done.As if from nowhere a title race has appeared. Manchester City’s 12-point lead is down to six which means that if Liverpool win their game in hand and if Liverpool win at the Etihad Stadium in April, the two clubs could be level on points. City are still in the better position, particularly given they have not lost a league game at home against Liverpool under Pep Guardiola. But what had started to look like a procession has, quite unexpectedly, regained a sense of intrigue. It is an indication of how dominant City had come to appear that this feels surprising. Liverpool, after all, have won 11 of their past 14 Premier League matches. In any previous era, that would have been obvious title-winning form. Drawing at Tottenham and Chelsea and losing by a single goal at Leicester should not be a wobble from which there is no coming back. That is a wider concern: it is always tempting for English football to congratulate itself because it has not gone the way of many European leagues and become a monopoly, but it is still troubling if winning the title means having to pick up at least 95 points. That is not the sign of a league that is providing healthy competition on a regular basis. That those are the standards is down in part to the genius of Jürgen Klopp and Guardiola, but also to a broken financial structure. More immediately, though, what is striking is that the expectation had been that Liverpool would wobble in January and February as Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané went to the Africa Cup of Nations – not just for the two league games they would miss but because there is always a risk after any tournament of emotional hangover. That the pair faced each other in the final could have heightened that; it took a lot of England’s players until late autumn to begin to find their rhythm again after the European Championship. So far, though, there has been no indication at all that either is suffering any kind of reaction. In that, it helps that the great front three now has backup. Diogo Jota had already given one extra option, but Luis Díaz has settled remarkably quickly. Playing for Klopp looks complicated; it must take players time to learn the pressing schema and assimilate the patterns but, as Klopp has said, Díaz looked a Liverpool player from the moment he first stepped on the pitch for them. The famous front three have scored four goals between them in the past two games without all being on the field together at any point. Jordan Henderson and Thiago Alcântara have also both made significant contributions from the bench in the past week: little wonder Klopp speaks of this squad as the greatest he has had. The danger for those hoping for a proper title race is that this becomes a two-team procession in the way 2018-19 was. Then a run of four draws in six games from the end of January to the beginning of March was enough for Liverpool to cede their advantage to City; Liverpool won their last nine league games of the season but could not get past City as they won their final 14. It was all very impressive, a great demonstration both of ability and nerve, but it was also, for the neutral, rather lacking in drama. A great title race, such as 1971-72 or 2011-12, demands fallibility. City had looked remorseless. The title race had seemed over less because it was inconceivable that Liverpool should embark on a winning run than because it seemed implausible City would drop enough points to let them back in. When a side wins 14 out of 16 games, it feels absurd to identify flaws, but perhaps in retrospect there have been hints that they were not quite so impermeable as they appeared. Leicester, in losing 6-3 to them, showed in the second half that City could still be vulnerable to counterattacks, that those balls played in behind the defensive line that have always been a potential vulnerability could still cause problems. Spurs were ruthless in exploiting that in Saturday’s 3-2 win, largely because City struggled to deal with Harry Kane as he dropped off the front line. He was a danger both with balls played on the turn to runners outside him and with his late runs. The attacking nature of City’s full-backs means the sort of run from Son Heung-min that led to Tottenham’s opening goal is always a potential danger, but where City have been able to neutralise that is in the form of Rodri blocking the space Kane exploited to spring Son. Kane, for all the complaints that he should spend more time in the box, is exceptionally good at that. His relationship with Son is very close, but other sides may look at that, and the way James Maddison played against City, and see an opportunity. Still, perspective is required. City still had the better expected goals (xG) against Tottenham. Not since the defeat against Brighton in the penultimate game of last season, by which point City’s focus had firmly switched to the Champions League, have City had a lower xG than their opponents in a league game. They remain an awesome force. But there is, perhaps, at last, just a glitch in their relentlessness and, if Liverpool maintain their exceptional form, there may yet be some life in this season. At the very least a neutral can hope there is enough doubt that that game on 9 April feels meaningful.The country is “in a different world” from when the Covid pandemic started, Boris Johnson has said, meaning the last remaining restrictions can begin to be lifted from next week. Ahead of an announcement on Monday about the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, the prime minister signalled free mass testing would end imminently and told people to return to the office and “get their confidence back”. “We’ve reached a stage where we think you can shift the balance away from state mandation – away from banning certain courses of action, compelling certain courses of action – in favour of encouraging personal responsibility,” he said on Sunday. Concerns have been raised by some scientists and health experts about the mooted plans to drop the legal requirement for people to self-isolate, scrap the majority of free lateral flow tests and end most contact tracing. Labour has also argued the move is premature, and accused ministers of wanting to “declare victory before the war is over”. But Johnson was bullish about the prospects of returning most freedoms to their pre-Covid frontiers. Speaking to the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, he said “now is the time” to press ahead with reining in public spending and ending restrictions. “I think it’s very important we should remain careful,” Johnson said. “We’re certainly not asking people to throw caution to the winds. Covid remains a dangerous disease, particularly if you haven’t been vaccinated and if you’re vulnerable. “There are still people who haven’t been properly vaccinated, there are still people who haven’t had their booster. Huge numbers have, but there are still people who haven’t, so there is no case for complacency about this.” Johnson said testing would happen “at a much lower level” as it was unsustainable to continue spending £2bn a month on the scheme. He added: “We’re in a different world. I think it is it is important that people should feel confident again and people should feel able to go back to work in the normal way. I do want to see our country really getting back on its feet … Now’s the moment for everybody to get their confidence back.” Johnson did not rule out restrictions being re-imposed. He said: “I don’t want to go back to that kind of non-pharmaceutical intervention. I want to be able to address the problems of the pandemic with a vaccine-led approach … but I’m afraid you’ve got to be humble in the face of nature.” Wes Streeting, Labour’s shadow health secretary, told the same programme that the move “seems very premature” and used the analogy of a football team being one goal ahead and then taking off their best defender in the closing minutes of the game. “I’m not clear that the scientific advice supports this,” he said, adding that he stood with those groups who had raised concerns, such as the NHS Confederation, World Health Organization and British Medical Association, “any day of the week and twice on Sunday”. “At this stage, it’s not the right thing to do,” Streeting added. He accused the government of “glaring inconsistencies” in its approach to relaxing restrictions and trying to distract attention from Scotland Yard’s investigation into a dozen alleged parties in breach of Covid rules, some of which were attended by Johnson. Streeting said it did not make sense for the prime minister to still be advising people to stay at home – even if it was not mandated – without continuing the support payments for low-income workers and free testing. “It does seem to me that the whole decision making process in No 10 at the moment is being driven by the prime minister’s political weakness, not by public health, and that should concern all of us,” he added. Johnson is expected to call a cabinet meeting on Monday at which the plan for lifting Covid rules will be signed off before a likely announcement in the House of Commons.A wave of attacks on “woke” charities by rightwing politicians has “backfired”, generating an outpouring of public support for the targeted charities and helping drive a surge in social justice activism, say campaigners. An annual survey of social campaigning suggests many charities feel increasingly emboldened to speak out on contested issues, including race, immigration and the environment, despite attacks they feel are designed to intimidate them into silence. The findings of the Sheila McKechnie Foundation survey come as charities report huge concern over the “chilling” impact on civil society of a raft of proposed legislation designed to restrict public protest and legal challenge. Campaigners said they have faced an increasingly hostile political environment – 78% said they felt politicians were hostile to civil society campaigning, up from 63% the previous year. A majority said attacks by politicians and the media were a threat to charities’ right to speak out and campaign. However, the survey also found the attacks persuaded many charities to re-examine their mission and refocus on campaigning, and had revealed heartening public support for social activism. A third of charities said they were now “more likely to speak out”. “The high-profile attacks on charities over the past few years seem to have backfired. Many have responded by asking themselves if they are still honouring their core mission by speaking out and concluded that, in fact, campaigning is not just their right but their duty,” said Sue Tibballs, the chief executive of the Sheila McKechnie Foundation. A number of charities, including the National Trust and Barnardo’s, have faced coordinated attacks by backbench Conservative MPs for supposedly “political” or “woke” stances on such as racism and inequality at odds with their core charitable mission, The MPs argued the charities’ role was to provide services, not engage in social issues. The National Trust was called “Marxist” and politically correct for publishing a report highlighting the slave trade links of some of its historical properties, the race equality thinktank Runneymede trust was accused of having a “political agenda,” and the children’s charity Barnardo’s of promoting “ideological dogma”. All three were investigated by the Charity Commission after the backbench “Common Sense” group of Conservative MPs complained they had breached charity laws. In each case they were cleared of wrongdoing. The National Trust subsequently reported record numbers of new members, despite critics’ claims it was losing public support. In another high profile case, the RNLI – the UK’s national lifeboat charity – was accused by Nigel Farage, the former leader of the UK Independence party and Brexit party, of running a “migrant taxi service” for rescuing migrants at risk of drowning in the Channel. It robustly defended its work, and received massive public support and a surge in donations as a result. The failure of those charges had convinced charities they were doing the right thing and the politicians were out of step with public opinion on issues like race equality, one refugee charity leader told the Guardian. “The feeling is, let’s stop caveating ourselves all the time, let’s be bolder,” they said. Halima Begum, the director of the Runnymede Trust, pointed to the wide public support for the England football team’s decision to make the anti-racist gesture of taking the knee. She said: “I feel when we talk about race at the moment we are reflecting public opinion, not attempting to change it.” One survey respondent wrote: “The attacks have made us invest a lot of time in getting our engagement right, we felt like we were on a tightrope and some powerful people were willing us to fall. However, the strategic review that resulted probably made us more focused and stronger,” one respondent wrote. Craig Bennett, the chief executive of The Wildlife Trusts, said: “There has been overreach by interests trying to ‘chill’ charities. It’s been so blatant and so shocking, this assault on civil liberties and campaigning, that people [in charities] are thinking: ‘We have to up the ante.’” The survey found 89% of respondents said they were “very concerned” the police bill going through parliament would “chill” campaigning activity, with 60% saying the same about the judicial review bill. There were 118 respondents to the survey, carried out between October and December last year.Up until the past 18 months, Bad Boy Chiller Crew’s music seemed a secondary consideration. The most interesting thing about the Bradford rap trio was their chaotic, hilarious videos, capturing a head-on collision between Jackass and People Just Do Nothing, their entire existence a loving if hopelessly deracinated tribute to hip-hop culture. A typical BBCC song would tether a speeded-up vocal to a rudimentary bassline house beat and subject it to torture by mediocre rapping. At best it sounded like your little brother’s grubby mates squawking about drugs, clothes, cars and girls over a 20-year-old UK garage CD. At worst, pretty much the same. Perhaps the pandemic focused their minds on quality control, or there’s something comforting about BBCC’s relentlessly optimistic nihilism while the world burns around, but all last year’s singles plus a dozen new drops here add up to an excellent, if exhausting, mixtape. Sensibly, songs confine themselves to three minutes or less, and there’s a wild joy to their commitment to entertainment. Don’t You Worry About Me, BMW, Baby Boy and One Time are particularly irresistible, but if you love any one of these tracks you’ll eventually like them all.The west has inflicted catastrophic damage on Afghanistan and its own reputation by imposing a policy of starvation on the country, according to David Miliband, the former UK foreign secretary and chief executive of the International Rescue Committee. “If we wanted to create a failed state we could not have a more effective policy mix than the one we have at the moment,” he told the Guardian. Miliband has been at the forefront of those lobbying the Biden administration and the World Bank to release cash not only for humanitarian aid but also to start reconstructing the economy. “I simply do not understand the lack of urgency to get this thing moving. It genuinely befuddles me that we should have allowed this to get so much worse so quickly,” he said. He warned the crisis was so deep that the UN’s appeal for $4bn this year, due to be addressed at a pledging conference next month, was likely to rise to $10bn next year. There are reports that the World Bank board may meet in March to release as much as £1bn that it has so far refused to release. On his first visit to London in two years, he said: “What we are doing is not making it worse for the Taliban, it is making it worse for the people. We are not punishing the Taliban. It is ordinary Afghans that are paying the price of peace. It is not just a catastrophe of choice, but a catastrophe of reputation. This is a starvation policy.” Fresh from testifying to the Senate foreign relations committee inquiry on the scale of the crisis, Miliband challenged those who believe that withholding aid would produce a more pluralist Taliban. He said: “There is absolutely no evidence that people who have spent 20 years fighting the Americans and won a war are now going to become susceptible to leverage that they have not been susceptible to for 20 years. The choice is a very brutal one. It is not ‘do you help the Taliban or not?’ It is “do you help the people or not?’. This is a government where already 75 % of its spending came in the form of international aid and has gone overnight.” He said four problems needed to be addressed urgently if the country was to survive the remainder of the winter. “There is no money to pay salaries. Some teachers and hospital workers have not been paid since April. That has to change. “The US sanctions continue to have a chilling effect on commercial activity even though there are carve-outs in US and international sanctions for humanitarian purposes. The carve-out does not touch commercial entities so if you are a private agricultural or food importer who has to touch the government at the border in some way you are scared you are going to get caught up in the sanctions. “Then there is the liquidity crisis, so there is no capital underpinning the banking system so no one can lend or pay for imports. Finally there are no technocrats or expertise in the Central Bank – they have all left. All this can be done without having to get into the issue of recognition of the Taliban. “Together this is causing an economic freeze and in these tragic circumstances you can give more aid until you are blue in the face, and it will not solve the structural problems. I am in the ridiculous position of running an aid agency and I am saying ‘don’t just give out humanitarian aid, you have to underpin the economy’”. He said the Taliban were being given the perfect excuse not to be challenged on the right of women to go to school since the salaries of teachers were not being paid.Phil Foden and the Manchester City player’s family were the subject of an abusive attack on Saturday night at Manchester’s AO Arena which has caused shock at his club, after a video of the incident was circulated on social media. Foden and a woman believed to be his mother, Claire, were shown in the film being hounded in the backstage area of the venue before they and their entourage entered a private box for refuge. The woman emerged a moment later and, after a scuffle, is seen being hit by a man, following which a fight occurred. It is understood that directly before the episode shown in the footage, Foden – who was attending a boxing event headlined by Amir Khan and Kell Brook on Saturday night – had been harassed by a group of people whom he had tried to ignore. A City statement said: “The club is aware of a video which has circulated on social media showing Phil Foden and his family being harassed and abused. We are shocked and appalled [by] the nature of the abuse and ensuing assault on one of Phil’s family members. We will continue to give Phil and his family all the support and assistance they need.” Foden was one of a contingent of City players at Manchester Arena for the Khan-Brook fight who had attended following their earlier 3-2 Premier League defeat by Tottenham. The attack occurred after the bout and is understood to have caused Foden and his family and friends particular distress due to their view that they were completely blameless during the incident. After making his debut as a 17‑year‑old in November 2017, Foden has become a key member of Pep Guardiola’s team, winning three Premier League titles, four League Cups, and an FA Cup. Last season he was voted the Professional Footballers’ Association Young Player of the Year. In a statement given to the Guardian, Greater Manchester Police said: “GMP are aware of a video circulating on social media showing a disturbance at the AO arena last night (19 February 2022). We are conducting some further enquiries into the circumstances surrounding the incident.” It is understood the police have not received any report, and so are acting proactively.Tributes from across Northern Ireland’s political divide have been paid to Christopher Stalford, a Democratic Unionist party member of the Northern Ireland assembly who has died suddenly at the age of 39. The DUP leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, said he had talked at length on Friday night with Stalford, whom he described as a friend and as someone who had been “born to be a public representative”. “He was passionate about Northern Ireland and wanted the best for his constituents. I was never to know how precious that conversation was to be,” said the MP. Stalford, who was seven when his father died aged 26 from a bleed on his brain, was born in Belfast, where he studied at Queen’s University after becoming involved in politics as a teenager. After graduating, he worked for a number of the DUP’s elected representatives and later in the party’s press office and policy unit. In 2005, at the age of 22, he was elected to Belfast city council, the youngest person on the local authority, to represent the city’s Laganbank area. He was elected as the high sheriff of Belfast in 2010 and as deputy lord mayor in 2013. Three years later, he was elected to represent Belfast South in the Northern Ireland assembly, and from January 2020 he served as the principal deputy speaker of the assembly. He is survived by his wife, Laura, and their four children. Referring to their Friday night conversation, Donaldson said that Stalford’s pride in his family had been apparent. He added: “He talked about his eldest child transferring to big school and the discussions that were ongoing in the home.” Sinn Féin’s vice-president, Michelle O’Neill, who was the deputy first minister of Northern Ireland until earlier this month, extended her sympathies, tweeting: “Desperately sad news of the sudden passing of DUP Assembly member Christopher Stalford.” Brandon Lewis, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, also expressed his condolences on social media, adding: “As MLA and Principal Deputy Speaker, Christopher was passionate about crucial issues that affected people across NI and was dedicated to building a better Northern Ireland for everyone.” The Irish taoiseach, Micheál Martin, said he was “deeply saddened” by the death of the DUP politician, adding: “He served the people of South Belfast diligently and with integrity, working tirelessly to improve housing and education.” Stalford was described as “a genuine and funny person” by the leader of the Alliance party, Naomi Long, who said he had been dedicated to public service. “Christopher revelled in the role of principal deputy speaker of the assembly, carrying out his duties in an even-handed and fair manner, no matter the situation,” she added. The leader of the Ulster Unionist party, Doug Beattie, said: “This is absolutely tragic and shocking news which will be felt by every single person who worked at Stormont.” The SDLP postponed its spring conference, which had been due to take place on Sunday, as a mark of respect. Its leader, Colum Eastwood, said: “Christopher and I knew each other for more than 20 years and this news has come as such a shock. I don’t think there was a single political issue that Christopher and I agreed on, but one of my defining memories will be his great ability to disagree well.”Hospitals in England have been told to abandon targets aimed at limiting the number caesarean sections carried out, over fears for the safety of mothers and babies. Maternity units were told in a letter to stop pursuing “normal births”, with the chief midwife describing the targets as potentially “unsafe” and clinically inappropriate. The letter from Jacqueline Dunkley-Bent, NHS England’s chief midwife, and Dr Matthew Jolly, the national clinical director for maternity, instructed “all maternity services to stop using total caesarean section rates as a means of performance management”. It added: “We are concerned by the potential for services to pursue targets that may be clinically inappropriate and unsafe in individual cases.” The changes have been welcomed by medical bodies, who have been calling for the targets to be scrapped for several years. Scrapping the targets was also recommended in July last year by a Commons health and social care committee report, which said it was “deeply concerning” that maternity services had been penalised for having high rates in the past. NHS trusts have for years benchmarked their caesarean section rates against the average. Around one in four babies in the UK is born by C-section, but there is considerable variability between different hospitals. There is concern that the pursuit of normal deliveries may have contributed to some instances of poor maternity care, including at Shrewsbury and Telford hospital NHS trust, where the deaths of dozens of babies are being investigated. The Shrewsbury trust had among the highest normal delivery rates in England, between 2010 and 2018. A report into the scandal will be published next month. The Royal College of Midwives (RCM) formally abandoned its normal birth campaign in 2017. Responding the change of policy, first reported in the Sunday Times, Gill Walton, RCM’s chief executive, said that decisions about clinical care should be made in the best interests of the woman and her baby “not because of an arbitrary target.” “While we welcome the decision by NHS England to remove targets that penalise maternity services for higher caesarean section rates, it’s a shame it’s taken so long,” she said. “Those running local services will be delighted that this target has finally been removed.” Dr Jo Mountfield, consultant obstetrician and vice president at the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said: “We welcome this clarification from NHS England. These targets are not appropriate in individual circumstances. Both vaginal and caesarean births carry certain benefits and risks, which should be discussed with women as they choose how they wish to give birth. “Women giving birth should feel supported and their choices should be respected. The RCOG does not support one method of birth over another.”London fashion week has paid a glamorous tribute to designer Federica Cavenati, known as Kikka, who died in November at the age of 28 after a short and sudden illness. The last collection Cavenati worked on was completed after her death by Marco Capaldo, her partner both in life and their independent fashion label 16Arlington, and presented on the catwalk at an emotional Sunday morning show in Bloomsbury. “This was a celebration of the most beautiful person in my life,” Capaldo said backstage after the show. “I just hope that I did her proud.” The mood was sombre but the clothes were anything but. Cavenati’s name was synonymous with effervescent partywear – maribou feathers, platform disco boots and barely-there dancefloor dresses – and that spirit lived on in snakeskin-printed leather minidresses, cut-out sequin jumpsuits and tissue-thin knit dresses. Many of the feathers used in the collection were from an archive hand-dyed by Cavenati some years ago. The collection was called Tears, referenced further by teardrops embroidered in crystal beading on white silk shirts. But there was a playfulness in the wet-look feather boas and acid-tipped fluffy bucket hats, which Capaldo said felt true to the “lavishly, fabulously generous” Cavenati who “was a luminous person”. Alice Temperley shows ‘wild west’ collection The designer Alice Temperley made radical changes during the pandemic to future-proof her label, moving her headquarters from London to Somerset, shifting to local production where possible, diversifying into homeware and planning an expansion of Somerset, a less expensive ‘younger sister’ line. Temperley brought the first collection designed in her Ilminster studio to a showroom in the capital for London fashion week, but its heart remained in the countryside. “I call this my wild west collection, because it’s my love of Somerset with a bit of cowgirl escapism added in,” said the designer, surrounded by jodhpur-style jeans, ponchos, romantic full skirts and bohemian ruffled prairie dresses. A silver-studded leather jacket, inspired by a vintage belt in Temperley’s own wardrobe, nodded to James Dean, while the rhinestone-dotted collared cocktail dresses referenced Dolly Parton. Velvet trouser suits, which are a signature of the brand – “we can’t make them fast enough!” – are made for autumn in carnation pink and ice blue, with or without fitted waistcoats. A shawl-collar trouser suit in striped British merino wool, made in Somerset, is the first tailoring look from the brand to be fully manufactured in the UK.The police watchdog has ordered a force to re-examine its handling of the case of a black student killed on a railway line after his parents complained their son’s death was not properly investigated because of his race. Romello McCook, a talented and popular 22-year-old, was hit by a train after a night out in Plymouth, where he was about to begin a course in architectural engineering. British Transport Police (BTP) immediately concluded it was an accident but his parents, Lawrence and Vivienne McCook, believe their son may have been the victim of a crime and have discovered a string of flaws in the inquiry. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) has investigated how BTP dealt with the family’s complaint that the case was not taken seriously because of the student’s race and – in a decision seen by the Guardian – concluded the force should look again at how it has handled their grievance. McCook’s parents, from Abingdon, Oxfordshire, welcomed the decision and said they hoped it would lead to a full re-investigation. They are also hoping to learn more of what happened to their son when an inquest takes place in June. Lawrence McCook said: “We felt we have been let down because of our ethnicity. That is very sad. Romello was our only child. We brought him to this country from Jamaica hoping life would be good. He did very well. He was very popular and very happy. But the police did not do very basic things when they investigated.” Vivienne McCook added: “We felt the moment they went down there and saw it was a black person the investigation ended. The case was almost closed from that day. We were hoping the police would help us and they didn’t. We’ve had to become investigators.” McCook was starting a new course in Plymouth in the autumn of 2018 having already spent three years studying in the Devon city. On the night of 29-30 September he went to a club and left in the early hours. His bank card was used in a shop at 6.05am and shortly after 10am he was hit by a train. BTP put it down as an accident, but McCook’s parents could not understand why he was more than two miles from his accommodation and walking in the opposite direction. They were mystified that he did not have his phone with him, though he was “addicted” to it and could not understand how he had got on to the line as there was a high fence. He had been drinking but his family did not believe he was so drunk that he had lost control. Dissatisfied with the police inquiry, they carried out their own investigation and established his phone appeared to have been used after his death, suggesting to them that it may have been stolen. Another police force reviewed the BTP investigation and concluded there were “missed opportunities” to trace McCook’s movements, including securing CCTV footage before it was wiped. The report, seen by the Guardian, said: “What caused Romello to be at this spot, some miles from his address and walking in the opposite direction appears never to have been considered by the initial investigation … the concerns of the McCooks were not heard and evidence that could have potentially answered some of the questions regarding where Romello had been and who he was with were lost.” The IOPC has written to the McCooks acknowledging that “errors” made at the start of the investigation led to them “losing a significant amount of faith in the police process”. It said that none of the reviews had asked the McCook family why they felt ethnicity played a part in how the investigation was carried out and said their concerns about this should be looked at properly. BTP acknowledges that questions remained unanswered but said there was “no evidence or information to indicate any suspicion or third party involvement”. A spokesperson said:“We strongly refute the suggestion that his death wasn’t investigated properly because of the colour of his skin.”Just 20 minutes walk from the ornate Hotel Bayerischer Hof, where world leaders gathered this weekend for the Munich security conference, lies No 12 Arcisstrasse, the shuttered brown ornamental building known as the Führerbau. On a cold grey Sunday morning, the building, now temporarily closed and in disrepair, has a forbidding air. Near the steps at the front is a small plaque with the bare inscription in German, Czech and Slovak: “In this building, on 29 September, 1938, the Munich agreement was signed, which led to the smashing of the Czechoslovak republic.” No mention is made of the signatories, including Adolf Hitler and then British prime minister Neville Chamberlain, who, fearful of a renewed European war, appeased Hitler by agreeing to cede the Sudetenland. Hitler had promised this was his last territorial claim in Europe. The empty building, its interior preserved, stands as a monument to the ability of diplomats to misread their opponent. Back in the conference hall, this history hung heavy. No speech was complete without a reference to the threat of a return to war in the heart of Europe, or to an impending refugee crisis. No one was foolish enough to compare Russia to national socialism, but underlying every discussion was the question of Vladimir Putin’s true intentions and whether the western response is moral and a sufficient deterrent, or instead a betrayal and a repeat of the appeasement of the 30s. In his mercurial address to the conference hall on Saturday, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, did not hold back in what he described as “his own horrible history lessons’’. Referencing the Russian-backed separatist shell that damaged a nursery school on Thursday, he said: “Seeing a shell crater in the schoolyard, children have a question: has the world forgotten its mistakes of the 20th century? “What do appeasement attempts lead to? How did the question ‘Why die for Danzig ?’ [a French anti-war slogan coined in 1939] turn into the need to die for Dunkirk and dozens of other cities in Europe and the world, at the cost of tens of millions of lives?” He then twisted the knife by saying there was no threat of war in Europe – the war was already under way: “How did it happen that there is a war ongoing and people are dying in Europe in the 21st century? Why does it last longer than World War II? How did we get to the biggest security crisis since the cold war?” Zelenskiy had answers that the doting western security establishment might not have applauded so vociferously if they listened harder to his withering attack on their collective failure. He blamed “selfishness, self-confidence, irresponsibility of countries at the global level. As a result, some commit crimes, and others stay indifferent. Indifference that results in complicity. This is your contribution to the security of Europe and the world.” He said: “Ukraine has been Europe’s shield for eight years. For eight years, it has been holding back one of the largest armies in the world.” Yet the door to the EU and Nato had not been opened. The promises to protect Ukraine’s sovereignty enshrined in the Budapest memorandum in 1994 seemed worthless. “The current policy of appeasement,” he said, “has to be turned into one of guarantees of security and peace”. He called for the west to send more arms and to impose preventive sanctions nimmediately. He revealed he had challenged western leaders who said they were 100% sure that an invasion would occur. “What are you waiting for? We don’t need your sanctions after the bombardment will happen and after our country will be fired on, or after we have no borders, or economy.” On Sunday morning, the former president of Estonia, Kersti Kaljulaid, gently picked up Zelenskiy’s challenge, asking Charles Michel, the European Council president, if at the very least the EU should be more proactive. “Are you ready personally to give Ukraine an emergency invitation to fast-forward discussions on accession to the EU? It would give the EU a unique chance at this difficult time to gain some advantage. Right now the EU is very united, but very reactive.” Kaljulaid did not get an answer in the affirmative. Although Michel claimed Putin’s strategy was backfiring by creating unprecedented transatlantic unity – the common dominant public theme at the conference – the source of his circumspection about enlargement partly lay in history. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, reflecting a longstanding scepticism in parts of Germany about Nato enlargement to the east, pointedly told the Munich conference that Ukraine’s membership is not on the foreseeable agenda, and he had told Putin as much. Although Scholz insisted he would not be naive in his diplomacy, and defended the principle of national self-determination, he clearly hopes his statement takes Ukraine closer to effective future neutrality, and that this might assuage Putin. It did not please Zelenskiy, who witheringly dismissed the idea as Munich 2.0. But Putin wants the pledge in writing, and again history plays a role in his thinking. Russian mythology holds that Russia in 1990-91, after the fall of the Berlin Wall, was promised no Nato enlargement to the east. The more subtle truth, meticulously charted by the historian ME Sarotte in her book Not One Inch, judges no such offer was made by George Bush, even if it was discussed by advisers. But Putin has his casus belli, and it may be there will be no compromise, no pledge in writing, no piece of paper, that will lead to peace in our time.It was a historic land handback decision that established Lismore city council as a regional leader in reconciliation with First Nations people. But after a contentious motion by a newly elected councillor to halt the handback of 37 hectares at the southern end of Sleeping Lizard Hill, or North Lismore Plateau, what was seen as a significant step in the healing journey for Aboriginal Australians seems a little less sure-footed. For the Widjabal Wia-bal people, and a community highly active in environmental issues and social justice, the hope is that the attempt to overturn a commitment towards healing the wounds of the past will be the last. At the council’s first meeting of the year, a newly elected councillor, Big Rob, proposed that council take no further action in relation to its decision of July 2021 to hand back the land while it explored financial options and issues. In response more than 20,000 people signed a change.org petition to support the handback and a crowd of 450 people assembled in front of the council chambers on the night. After much debate and numerous calls to order, Big Rob’s motion was defeated 10-1, with the council resolving to hold a workshop with the traditional custodians to determine the best way forward. Jenny Smith, a traditional custodian, told the council the lack of consultation prior to the motion “left a bad taste” in a lot of people’s mouths. The chairman of the Bundjalung Elders Council, uncle Mickey Ryan, said the move to turn back the clock was a strong reminder of the great injustice, dispossession and cultural genocide that is still at large. “Giving the land back to us is part of the healing process,” he said. “Sleeping Lizard Hill is part of the Bundjalung people’s dreaming and a totem for Lismore. “There are spiritual consequences if it isn’t looked after properly. Artefacts have been found all over the mountain and there’s burials up there too.” In fact, the area features six sacred sites as well as significant flora and fauna. “We’re going to keep fighting,” Ryan told Guardian Australia, when asked about any future moves to sandbag the handover. “It’s so important for the mountain to be protected and saved for our future generations.” A longtime and vocal advocate for preservation of culturally and environmentally sensitive sites in the area, he has also been involved in fighting housing development of other sections of Sleeping Lizard Hill with the North Lismore Plateau Protection Group. The former mayor and current councillor, Vanessa Ekins, who championed the original motion in 2021, said the move by Big Rob had devastated the Lismore community. “When the motion was supported last year, we were the first council to do it and there was so much joy,” she said. “Since then, I believe that other councils around Australia have resolved to hand over land. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter “The only conversation we need to have now is what does handback look like and that’s a discussion we will have with the traditional custodians.” Sue Higginson, an environmental law expert and former Greens candidate, said the original handback decision was “spectacular and proactive” and a “profound moment in the Lismore community”. “It is a relatively small parcel of land being handed back, but it is a strong and powerful step in a much bigger process of reconciliation.” Higginson said Big Rob’s motion was clearly divisive and would have been a backward step for the community. “Fortunately, democratic processes prevailed. The community came out to uphold the handback.” She said the council’s original decision had not been made without recognition that some pioneering processes, as well as time, money and consideration, would be required. Ekins confirmed that council staff under her leadership had been asked to prepare a brief for councillors to examine not only how the land would be returned, but possible time frames and the impact on council’s budget. At the time, the federal member for Page and National Party representative, Kevin Hogan, suggested through social media that a council that was in debt was not in a financial position to give away a $5m asset. Ekins said that the 37 hectares was listed on council’s books at value of $500,000. Hogan has been contacted by Guardian Australia for comment. Meanwhile, Big Rob, a qualified lawyer, has called out those who opposed his motion for making it “such a big racial issue”, insisting that it was about “funding and safety”. “I was completely misunderstood,” he said. His website notes that his key policies including strongly advocating against prejudice, discrimination and racism and “facilitating social inclusion for all members of our community”. “The main reason I put forward the motion is that there are issues with that land including a big quarry on that site and a high cliff face which does not have a fence, as well as a mine there and potentially detonators. “We cannot give the land back unless we rehabilitate and regenerate it and clear up all the problems.” Uncle Ryan said that local people had climbed the quarry walls as children and, today, the whole floor of the land had been cleared of anything dangerous. “The Westpac Rescue Helicopter crew even does training in the quarry.” The Guardian was unable to contact the new mayor, Steve Krieg, but he told the council meeting that the issue for him was not about reneging on a promise, but process and getting things right. “We’re going to keep fighting,” said Ryan, of the community’s hopes for the eventual hand over of the site. “We’re Northies, and Northies don’t give up.” Helen Hawkes is a freelance journalist and author based in Kyogle Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityWhen does keeping a low profile transition into being forgotten? How much are supporters willing to endure? Can you promote your way into a good product? After a week in which it felt like several tipping points were reached at once, these appear to be the metaphysical predicaments confronting the A-Leagues and its handlers, the Australian Professional Leagues. On Wednesday, the latest symbolic reminder of said malaise was delivered in Sydney’s west at a stadium devoid of fans, colour or atmosphere for Western Sydney Wanderers’ 2-0 A-League Men win over Melbourne Victory. In previous years, this fixture was a bewitching spectacle which consumed supporters and neutrals alike and drove the 22 men on the field to strive for more. But mid-week, two of the league’s most well-supported clubs could attract only 4,231 fans to attend a contest reports described as an “ordeal”. The Wanderers are bad right now, but not that bad. Only once has the A-Leagues cracked more than 20,000 fans at a game this season and of the teams with actual sample size, only Victory is averaging more than 10,000. Victory games in Melbourne, in fact, make up five of the seven to have lured more than 10,000. Television ratings, even after the behemoth that is the Australian Open has moved on, have been middling to poor. The streaming experience on Paramount+, where most games are shown, is crude to the point where an international viewer watching on YouTube is getting a better experience than someone paying for the service in Australia. Grace periods are a thing but have limits. Of course, to critique in good faith, acknowledgements must be made. Inheriting a league that was fragile even before Covid-19, the APL was dealt possibly the worst hand by the pandemic. Rescheduling has played havoc with the fixture and the national teams, still Australian football’s best ambassadors, have been moribund. The hype train greeting the APL’s arrival possibly gathered unrealistic steam thanks to bombastic statements about handbrakes and the perception that drains in Football Australia and Fox Sports were being jettisoned. Looking at the empty stands of the men’s Big Bash, the A-Leagues are hardly alone in having Covid-driven troubles. But these circumstances, the thin margin for error, make the needless own goals all the more grating. And as “drinks breaks” have continued to be inserted into games shown on Network 10 to allow for advertisements, fan sentiment has begun to bubble over. Football supporters can put up with a lot – they have to in Australia – but having to watch a game be deliberately paused for the benefit of an advertiser is a new one even for them. These breaks in play may be the price required to be on free-to-air TV and exposed to a larger audience, but they come at the cost of what was previously considered sacrosanct to the loyal cohort who stuck with the game. Australian football has a long history of alienating its core supporters in pursuit of a mythical mainstream and injections of capital, and this is seemingly the latest example from a group that promised to be better than that. And despite all the new bells and whistles, the league’s core product – the actual football these breaks are interrupting – feels stagnant. Ignoring the false comparison that is European leagues, the quality of ALM’s play has taken a step back from its heights of the 2011-2015 period. Dour pragmatism and playing not to make a mistake is now the prevailing paradigm. Unfortunately for the APL, any attempts to actively legislate how clubs play would take away from the game’s essence – another intrusion on the sacred pitch – and only alienate further. Better players would help, but there’s been more concrete discussion of foreign signings and marquess than youth leagues and development. These are coming, but when? Meanwhile, in the A-League Women, a day after she scored five goals against Brisbane Roar, Adelaide United’s Fiona Worts was back working her part-time job at a McDonald’s. She still isn’t able to develop as a full-time professional, often finds herself kicking off under the harsh early afternoon sun and only gets to play in a 14-game season. Hey, but at least now, as she serves a McFlurry at the drive-through, she gets to call herself an A-League Women player rather than a W-League one. The Matildas remain the best promotional tool the ALW has but, with professionalism and full home and away uncertain, their harvest is in danger of withering. Ultimately, things should get better. Covid will fade and fans, after watching the AFL and NRL fill stadiums, will return. It is in the APL’s interest to fix this. But hope is not a strategy. Neither is waiting for Covid. And pretending there aren’t issues beyond the pandemic is not helpful.Australia’s largest immigration detention centre is “awash with drugs”, sources inside the Villawood detention centre say, with several detailing an extensive drug-smuggling operation. Photographs from inside the centre show marijuana and “bupe” – buprenorphine, an opioid medication – in numerous compounds across the facility, which currently holds 450 people, in western Sydney. Sources in the centre say the drug trade is widespread and widely known by staff and detainees. The drugs are brought into the centre by a small cohort of guards, multiple sources claimed. Asked whether any staff had been dismissed over drug importation, Serco – the company contracted to provide “support services” inside Villawood – has confirmed one employee was dismissed and reported to police last year following an investigation into “illegal activity”. Multiple sources, across compounds, have independently detailed one smuggling operation. Those detained at Villawood are given a “buy-up” allowance every week which allows them to purchase incidental and personal items such as drinks, snack foods, shampoo and soap. The goods available through the buy-up are bought by Serco, which recently signed a $715m extension to its contract with the Department of Home Affairs to provide support services inside Australia’s onshore immigration detention network. The Serco contract is ultimately paid for by Australian taxpayers. Each detainee’s weekly “buy-up” allowance is 60 points. A 25g packet of loose tobacco costs 26 points, so a detainee can buy two packets a week. These packets are collected and tightly packed in 5kg express post bags, which are also bought through the buy-up scheme, for 21.5 points. “They pack these very tightly, about 50 packets per envelope,” a source said. “As the tobacco is 25 grams, even when adding in the package weight that is still well below the weight limit. I see two-to-three envelopes leaving my compound alone per week, so I would guess the total leaving Villawood would be a minimum of six to eight. That means between 300-400 packets of tobacco per week.” According to the source, outside the detention centre the tobacco is sold, usually below market price, illicitly by drug dealers, or through “chop chop” shops, and the detainees credited for their supply. That credit is used to buy drugs or other contraband, which is then smuggled into Villawood. With visitors prohibited because of Covid restrictions, drugs are being brought into the centre by a small cohort of guards, multiple sources claimed. When visits were cancelled because of the risk of Covid, there were attempts made to fly drugs in via drones, or throw them over the fences, but these were largely intercepted. One person with knowledge of the trade inside Villawood said he believed the vast majority of drugs in the detention centre were brought in by a small cohort of staff members who were paid for transporting contraband in. The centre is “awash with drugs”, a source from a different compound said. Another said they estimated around $10,000 was traded each week. “And considering in [my compound] alone … one dealer has at least $1,500 in bupe in their room right now. I am guessing that my estimates are at the extreme low end.” A further source said the posted tobacco “grey” market represented only a fraction of the drugs market inside Villawood. “People can get whatever they want inside. The Covid restrictions have not slowed the importation of drugs at all.” Another source said: “I find it ironic that the department that is tasked with intercepting illicit drugs from entering Australia can’t stop the same from entering or exiting their own facility.” People held in detention have consistently registered complaints with Serco and the Australian Border Force (ABF) about the drug trade. Others have written to parliamentarians raising their concerns. A spokesperson for the ABF said all visitors and staff in immigration, along with detainee mail, were subject to screening and that the ABF conducted “intelligence-led searches, screening and seizure activities”. “Where drugs are suspected to be present or located, the ABF will refer information to police for action, including investigation. “Where drug infiltration and supply is suspected, the ABF works closely with its law enforcement partners.” The spokesperson did not answer whether any staff had been dismissed or charged over drugs matters. The proposed Migration Amendment (Prohibiting Items in Immigration Detention Facilities) Bill 2020 would make detention centres safer by expanding agents’ search powers and banning prohibited items, the spokesperson said. That bill would also ban mobile phones, used by detainees to speak with their families and legal representatives. An earlier attempt by the government to ban phones in detention was struck down by the federal court. Introducing the bill to parliament, former minister Alan Tudge said: “One of the most critical challenges in managing immigration detention is the continuing incursion, distribution and use of illegal drugs and contraband items, and associated criminal activity.” A spokesperson for Serco said the company was “strongly committed to providing a safe and secure environment for the people in our care, staff and visitors”. The spokesperson said the majority of those held at Villawood detention had been detained after having their visa cancelled under section 501 of the migration act – on character grounds, generally for criminal activity. Government figures state 285 of the 450 people detained at Villawood are “501” detainees. “Detention facilities do not have prison-like infrastructure and the [Migration] Act does not allow a detainee or their accommodation to be searched for the purposes of finding drugs,” the Serco spokesperson said. “We note there is a bill in the parliament that would allow prohibited items to be seized if they are being used for criminal activity or because they are putting at risk the health, safety or security of persons in the immigration detention facility.” The spokesperson said Serco took allegations of illegal activity seriously. “Alleged breaches are investigated … One employee has been dismissed and reported to police in the past year following such an investigation.” The issue of drugs inside Villawood detention centre has been consistently reported, but details have not been previously revealed publicly. In 2019, video obtained by SBS News shows detainees smoking ice, marijuana and bupe, with one explaining on camera that they usually inject bupe and often share needles. In the same year, the ABC revealed that a global fraud and drug trafficking network was being operated from inside Villawood on smuggled phones. New Zealander Robert Peihopa died inside Villawood in 2016, with the coroner later finding his death was caused by both smoking ice and getting into a fight. Autopsy results showed he died from “methamphetamine toxicity” that had complicated “ischaemic heart disease”.Companies are facing increasing consumer and shareholder pressure to ensure the investments they make are ethical. But how do they define what’s ethical? Broadly, ethical investment is on the rise. According to the Responsible Investment Association Australasia (RIAA), about $1tn of the $2.24tn in managed funds is classified as responsible. That’s not just because Australians are becoming more aware of the impact their investments can have, but also because responsible or ethical investment is really starting to pay. Sustainable, environmentally friendly and socially conscious businesses are often making essential contributions to our future. Through superannuation, banking and shares, people are actively putting their funds into such ventures. Unfortunately, there’s no uniform indication of what constitutes “ethical”. There’s also no regulation to clarify what ethical investing is as a basic standard. So you need to navigate the marketing. Ethical screening is generally conducted by fund managers and financial advisers. So, for example, in the case of an ethical superannuation fund, the fund’s managers will establish their ethical expectations and screen prospective companies based on this. Similarly, an ethical financial adviser will have a broad view of what they deem ethical, while also taking their clients’ specific needs into account. If you are investing independently, it will be up to you to decide what’s non-negotiable and what’s acceptable. To give you an idea of how the big superannuation funds and ethical investment firms decide what’s ethical and what’s not, here’s a list of the ways their investments might be screened. It’s still not foolproof, but it’s a start. Negative screening The negative screening process involves putting companies through assessments to find out if they’re invested in things that people broadly deem unethical. If they produce an addictive product or service (tobacco, gambling), they’re unlikely to get over the ethical hurdle. Likewise, if they engage in poor labour practices, they can be struck off the list of potential investment. Negative screening is a good place to start when deciding what you will and won’t invest in. If you are staunchly opposed to tobacco, obviously you won’t want your investment portfolio to include a company that makes cigarettes. Positive or ‘best-in-class’ screening This involves seeking out companies that have good social and ethical values, such as a zero-carbon-emissions policy, a gender-diverse board and exemplary treatment of staff in the production of goods and services. In essence, they turn a profit by doing the right thing. Ideally, they do everything right, but depending on who’s screening, they might only need to meet one or a handful of items in the criteria to make the cut. Companies that perform well in a positive screening process often make a tangible difference to environmental or social outcomes. And, in a perfect world, they’re a good investment too. This might include sectors such as healthcare, education and renewable energy. All super funds, managed funds and exchange-traded fund managers will do a form of screening, but the screens vary and therefore you may also need to apply your own ethical lens to see if it’s a good fit. Minimum standards or ‘norms-based’ screening This approach uses the minimum standard of company, government or international standards. The minimum standards depend on which filter they’re put through. So, for example, they may be subject to assessment based on the Ten Principles of the UN Global Compact. These principles are based, in part, on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The principles cover topics such as: • Human rights (non-compliance in human rights abuses) • Labour (recognition of the right to collective bargaining and elimination of compulsory labour and child labour; elimination of discrimination) • The environment (precautionary approaches to environmental concerns, environmental responsibility and the development of environmentally friendly technologies) • Anti-corruption Depending on the fund, or financial product, specific screens will be applied. For example, Verve Superannuation applies a specific gender equality screening. This might be important to you. Alternatively, if you seek vegan and animal-friendly investments, you’d be looking for a specific screen layer. Ethics are personal, and therefore no one broad screen is likely to fit your ethical goals. Sustainability investing This is a specific environmental approach, and it means actively seeking out funds or investment opportunities in clean-water programs, renewable energy, infrastructure, recycling, waste management and more. Environmental, social and governance (ESG) investing ESG covers environmental, social and governance screening principles. If this is the screen you’re using, you might need to dig a bit to see just how good a company’s governance is. That can mean a fair amount of time and effort on your part: reading company reports, understanding the financial situation and continuing to keep track of the company’s activity once you’ve invested. Because ESG covers these sweeping, general areas, it makes it possible for businesses to claim they’re meeting the ESG criteria when, in fact, it’s a regular business where people are paid the nominated award wages and there’s a recycling bin next to the printer. Perhaps they report on sustainability during their annual general meeting, but potentially there’s little real change being driven. That’s not to say there aren’t companies with a great commitment to ESG, but you need to be comfortable with where they sit on what is a massive spectrum. Impact investing If you choose impact investing as a key screen, you’re ultimately looking to see physical results from your investment. That might come in the form of improved transport and infrastructure, schools or hospitals. Equally, the impact might be improved social outcomes locally or internationally. Either way, you’ll seek to get a return on investment while hopefully being able to see an actual result. If you’re unsure where to start, an ethical financial adviser could help you establish a strategy. The cost of personal advice can be prohibitive, which means you may have to do your own research. The first step might be to call your superannuation fund and find out where your money is invested. If they can’t tell you, look for funds that can provide more transparency, so you can consider the contents of the portfolios and how they align with your values. This is an edited extract of The Ethical Investor by Nicole Haddow, published by Nero and available nowWill this be the aged care election? One would like to think so, given the carnage the federal government has wreaked in the sector. On Wednesday, Senate estimates heard that so far in 2022, more than 700 aged care residents have perished from Covid, a toll already greater than throughout all of last year. In response to questioning, the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, said that “the performance in managing Covid-19 has improved” and then blamed Labor for bullying him. Some might object he hasn’t been bullied enough. Colbeck says any suggestion he has “put his sporting commitments ahead of the health and wellbeing of senior Australians … [was] completely misguided” because his attendance at a Test was “part of his commitments as minister for sport and senator for Tasmania”; he also says he had performed other Covid-related duties on that day and the “Test was a day-nighter [that] did not start until late afternoon”. Nevertheless, the fact remains that, as the wave of fatalities swelled in mid-January, Colbeck declared himself too busy to attend a committee on the crisis … and then spent three days at the cricket. At least Nero gave the Romans some music. Meanwhile, although Scott Morrison pledged to alleviate staff shortages by sending in the ADF (increasingly, an all-purpose remedy for failed policy), aged care providers say they haven’t yet been told how to access the promised help, even as the lack of staff has meant closures. Everybody ages. If they don’t need support now, either for themselves or their relatives, one day they will. At the polls, they’ll vote accordingly, right? Well, it’s not quite so simple. The Adam Smith Institute, a neoliberal thinktank, recently released a paper arguing that to “turbocharge scientific discovery and give all humanity a greater stake in space exploration”, the moon should be privatised (yes, really!). Back here on planet Earth, most of us recognise that while Elon Musk might do well from unregulated market forces, the weak and the poor do not. Yet for decades, Australia has relied on Adam Smith’s invisible hand to look after elderly people, with John Howard’s Aged Care Act in 1997 inviting big business to make money from the nation’s most vulnerable people. The results have been much as you’d predict. The report from the royal commission into aged care quality and safety described an absolute horror show: residents lying in their own filth, widespread malnutrition, rampant over-medication, sexual and physical assaults, underpaid and undervalued staff and much else besides. The prime minister launched that inquiry in 2018, explaining, in characteristic Morrisonese, that he wanted to be “fair dinkum” about understanding the full extent of the problems. But here’s the thing, since 1997, we’ve had no less than 18 major reviews and investigations into aged care. In other words, everyone knows the system’s stuffed – and they have for a long, long time. Yet that awareness hasn’t translated into political action. In 2020, when Catholic Health Australia polled voters in Eden Monaro, 84% of respondents described aged care as “in crisis”. Yet, asked to list the issues that mattered to them, less than 4% nominated the treatment of elderly people. We might blame an innate reluctance to dwell on old age and the various indignities it brings. But actually, there’s nothing inevitable about it at all. Other cultures, in other times, have venerated seniors, taking collective pride in the respect they accord to elderly people. It’s more accurate to attribute our indifference to the priorities of an atomised society, in which the value of an individual decreases precipitously once they’re no longer consider an economic asset. And, just possibly, attitudes are changing. The Covid-19 pandemic wreaked havoc in aged care. But it also showed that the vast majority of the public wanted to safeguard older citizens and were prepared to alter their behaviour (by getting vaccinated, wearing masks, etc) to do so. In particular, younger Australians – many of whom weren’t necessarily at great risk themselves – accepted significant sacrifices in the fight against the virus. Having done their bit to protect their grandparents, when they get to the polling booth, they may well be inclined to punish Colbeck and Morrison for not doing enough. Of course, much will depend on the willingness of Labor to offer a palpable alternative. In Victoria, the stark contrast between a high proportion of Covid cases and deaths in private facilities and the much less affected publicly run homes shows what could be possible. So far, Anthony Albanese hasn’t offered definite promises about increasing wages to the desperately underpaid staff in the sector. A bold alternative policy would go a long way to putting aged care on the electoral agenda. The hundreds of dead deserve at least that.The messaging around the severity of the Omicron Covid variant and a degree of pandemic fatigue is slowing Australia’s booster rollout, as some Australians shun the third dose. Clinton, who asked for his last name not to be used, is pro-vaccine – he got his first two doses as soon as he could, choosing AstraZeneca because he believed it was slightly more effective. But because the illness caused by Omicron is less severe than other variants, Clinton has decided not to get the booster. “May as well just wait to catch it, stay home, recover, and enjoy natural immunity thereafter,” he said. “But hypothetically if the ’rona got really mean again I would likely get a booster.” As of Friday, 10,583,499 Australians, or 51% of those aged 16-plus, had received a booster, with analysis from Guardian Australia showing recently the rollout was still lagging at least a month behind the “ideal” schedule. About half of the currently eligible Australians had not received their third shot. The Burnet Institute epidemiologist, Mike Toole, said this time the slow rollout could not be put down to supply issues. “The messaging around Omicron, that it is mild, has inhibited the uptake of boosters for adults and first and second doses for kids,” Toole said. “I think that’s been quite dangerous. The country had 66 deaths on Thursday, 64 on Wednesday, 46 on Tuesday. That’s still a lot of deaths.” He said last week a lab study showed the BA.2 variant was spreading faster, and causing more severe illness than the original version of Omicron. “Third doses in adults and first courses in kids are important to protect us and to get the cases down before another variant hits us,” Toole said. “I think it’s going to put us in a vulnerable position as we approach winter. We could be hit with a double whammy – Covid and a flu outbreak.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Last week Atagi changed its recommendation on vaccines, saying a third dose was necessary to be considered “up to date” with vaccinations and everyone 16 and over is recommended to now get the jab. While states such as South Australia and Victoria have made three jabs mandatory for some workers, a large-scale workplace order is unlikely. Because of this, a small minority of people who felt coerced into getting the vaccine will refuse to get a third. Jacqui Taylor is one of these people. “I’m not an anti-vax, I’m pro-choice,” she said. All her four children, aged 8 to 22, have had their childhood vaccinations, but she will not vaccinate the youngest against Covid. She had the first two doses so she could continue to work, but will not be getting her third. “I will not be having a booster and a lot of people I talk to say they aren’t either,” she said. “When is it going to stop, one, two, three, seven, eight, nine ... jabs?” Prof Adrian Esterman, from the University of South Australia, said although some people may have got vaccinated just because of the mandate, forcing people to have a booster shot was not the answer. “I think there are some professions where mandates are essential but they are far and few,” Esterman said. “The vast majority don’t need mandates, we need good public health measures from governments. The messaging has been so poor that people need to be persuaded to have a booster.” He said there were two key areas where the messaging needed to be better. First around the prevalence of long Covid, which can impact even asymptomatic cases. Second around the emergence of new variants like BA.2, which looks to be more severe. “Two doses doesn’t protect you from infection,” Esterman said. “What’s happening now is states and territories are beginning to relax public health measures. We have BA.2 hitting us and potential for more variants. Our numbers have plateaued but they’ll probably start going up again. So it’s like a yo-yo.”Jan Pieńkowski, who has died aged 85, was a most original illustrator, writer and designer of pop-up books, whose Polish childhood and experiences as a wartime refugee fed into his mesmerising work. He published more than 140 books for children and described the essence of his prodigious output simply as telling stories in pictures. Pieńkowski’s characteristic style is immediately recognisable. For younger readers he worked in bright colours and used bold shapes. For older children, he often used a more varied palette with his trademark colourful ink washes as a background to black paper cut-outs. One of his most successful titles, in collaboration with the writer Helen Nicoll from 1972 until her death in 2012, was Meg and Mog, a series of illustrated adventures about a somewhat hapless witch and her stripy cat. Pieńkowski said in an interview that Meg and Mog gave him the opportunity to use terrible monsters from his childhood and make them into harmless toys. He won the Kate Greenaway award in 1971 with the writer Joan Aiken for their second collaboration, The Kingdom Under the Sea. This was composed of the eastern European fairy tales that were close to Pieńkowski’s heart and featured an early appearance of his beautiful silhouette illustrations. Their first collaboration was the equally delicately illustrated A Necklace of Raindrops (1968). His interest in paper cut-outs, he said, stemmed from a wartime experience in an air raid shelter in Warsaw, where a soldier had kept the young Pieńkowski amused by cutting newspapers into wonderful shapes. The masterful Haunted House won Pieńkowski his second Greenaway award, in 1979. This deliciously scary yet funny pop-up book changed what could be achieved through paper engineering and he went on to explore this genre with titles including the inventive and funny Robot (1981) and the thrilling Little Monsters (1986). One or two critics questioned the frightening nature of many of his picture books, and he certainly had a tendency towards the macabre and gothic. Another inspiration for Pieńkowski was comics. As he put it, “the violence and hyperbole of the Old Testament stories found an echo in Desperate Dan and Dennis the Menace. They also gave me my palette.” He insisted that children like to be frightened in a safe place, although he did admit that some Slavic folk tales are pretty terrifying. Born in Warsaw, Jan was the only child of Jerzy Pieńkowski, a country squire before the second world war, and Wanda (nee Garlicka), a scientist. It was while being cared for by a neighbour that Jan first encountered the terrifying tales about a Baba Yaga-type figure. The woman would tell him “these totally unsuitable stories, get to a cliffhanger – and stop. I used to have terrible dreams, nightmares, of this witch, always chasing me and trying to put me in a pot … I think in a way she gave birth to Meg.” Rural life on a farm was cut short, however, when the Nazis invaded Poland in 1939. The family moved to Warsaw, where his mother’s family lived, and his father worked briefly as a bailiff. When Jan was five years old, Jerzy, who had helped organise resistance groups, had to go underground for a year. The family then left Warsaw and travelled around Europe, including to Vienna, Italy and Germany, experiencing many hazards. They often lived in extreme hardship, and for a period they were forced to sleep in pits under train tracks. In 1946, they finally moved to Britain. Pieńkowski almost broke down when talking about this time in his life on Desert Island Discs in 2009, saying that shrill sounds and screaming still frightened him. As a young child, Pieńkowski was taught by his mother, who encouraged his passion for drawing and making things. On arrival in Britain, aged 10, he was sent to Lucton boarding school in Herefordshire, and added English to his already fluent German, Italian and Polish. His passion for art developed further after he started life-drawing classes at the age of 13. When the family moved to London, he attended the Cardinal Vaughan Memorial school in Holland Park, where he learned Latin and Greek, before going on to King’s College, Cambridge, to study classics and English. There he got to know Nicholas Tucker, the psychologist, critic and writer on children’s literature, and an enduring friendship began. Although he was studying literature, even then Pieńkowski was busy illustrating for Granta magazine and designing posters for university theatre productions – in the process developing a lifelong interest in stage design. Before Cambridge, Pieńkowski had spent a couple of months in Rome, one of his favourite cities, where he discovered opera. This love of the arts was a constant in his life. In the early days of his career Pieńkowski was employed to draw live on a BBC television children’s programme, Watch!, and it was through that work that he first met Nicoll, then the producer of the show. He also worked in book-jacket design, advertising and greeting cards. After Nicoll died in 2012, he added further Meg and Mog titles with new stories written by his partner, David Walser. Pieńkowski and Walser, a translator, artist, musician and writer, had been together for more than 40 years when they became civil partners in 2005 – as soon as it was possible to do so – settling in Hammersmith, west London. A devout Catholic, Pieńkowski was sorry not to be able to have the union solemnised in church, although his priest said vespers for the couple. He produced several books with religious themes, such as The First Christmas (2014) and In the Beginning (2010), the latter with Walser’s masterful adaptations from the King James bible. Other collaborations with Walser included a take on ETA Hoffmann’s original Nutcracker story (2008), The Glass Mountain: Tales from Poland (2016), and a picture book retelling of Homer’s The Odyssey (2019). Pieńkowski was charming, good humoured and popular, with a streak of eccentricity. He was deeply attached to Britain and enjoyed life in London, but still felt close to his homeland, spoke Polish and had many Polish friends. He had a habit of picking up old discarded clothing and wearing it – probably a leftover from having had so little in the war years. Never without a little black notebook, he was constantly drawing from life. In 2019 he was awarded the Booktrust lifetime achievement award. He is survived by Walser. • Jan Michał Pieńkowski, illustrator, writer and designer, born 8 August 1936; died 19 February 2022LeBron James has spoken about the possibility of playing alongside his son and a return to the Cleveland Cavaliers as he contemplates the final stages of his career. The 37-year-old’s two-year, $85m contract with the Los Angeles Lakers expires next season, meaning he would be a free-agent heading into the 2023-24 season. James started his career with the Cavaliers, who are based a short drive from his hometown of Akron, in 2003 and returned for a second stint in 2014, winning the NBA title in 2016. “The door’s not closed on [a return to the Cavaliers],” James told The Athletic this weekend, in the run-up to Sunday’s All-Star game. “I’m not saying I’m coming back and playing, I don’t know. I don’t know what my future holds. I don’t even know when I’m free.” One point James was more certain on was his oldest son. Bronny James is a 17-year-old point guard for Sierra Canyon School in Chatsworth, California and is considered one of the country’s best prospects in his age group. He would be eligible for the NBA draft in 2024 when his father will be 39. James told the Athletic he would be willing to take a lower salary to play with his son. “My last year will be played with my son,” James said. “Wherever Bronny is at, that’s where I’ll be. I would do whatever it takes to play with my son for one year. It’s not about the money at that point.”The good, the bad, the ugly and the, frankly, chaotic combined as Manchester United took a significant step towards Europe and Leeds moved too close to the Championship for comfort. The latest renewal of one of English football’s greatest rivalries was undeniably exhilarating but depressingly unpleasant undertones were evident as missiles were hurled from the stands at visiting players, with one hitting the Manchester United substitute Anthony Elanga. A defiant Leeds drew level, albeit briefly, after falling two goals behind, while Jadon Sancho had arguably his best game for Ralf Rangnick’s side as questions concerning Marcelo Bielsa’s future at Leeds resurfaced. Manchester United’s first visit to a full Elland Road since 2003 coincided with a day of torrential rain and capriciously gusty winds, with the hazardous underfoot conditions more than matched by the hostile atmosphere. To say there is antipathy between these two sets of fans would be putting it mildly and a competing soundtrack featuring, most politely, the Leeds anthem Marching On Together and the visitors’ favourite Pride Of All Europe heightened the frenetic onfield intensity. With Bielsa’s side struggling to retain possession on the heavy, sodden, surface, Rangnick’s players exerted greater control and cohesion. They swiftly set the tone when the initially influential Paul Pogba nutmegged a startled Diego Llorente before crossing and seeing Cristiano Ronaldo denied by Illan Meslier’s knee. Rangnick held talks with senior players last week, apparently in response to tensions centring on Ronaldo. Harry Maguire has denied suggestions of a rift and the pair combined to positive effect as Manchester United showed they can still score from corners after all. With Ronaldo serving as a decoy and Meslier wrong-footed, Maguire lost Llorente, met Luke Shaw’s delivery and headed in his first United goal since January 2021. Perhaps Rangnick’s psychologist, Sascha Lense, really is as good as advertised. Back in August Bruno Fernandes scored a hat-trick as Leeds went down 5-1 at Old Trafford and, shortly before half-time, Rangnick’s attacking playmaker got on the scoresheet here. Fernandes’s header will have reminded Leeds fans why they pine for their injured central-midfield enforcer, Kalvin Phillips. With a head wound forcing Robin Koch’s withdrawal, that department proved worryingly understaffed. Tellingly, Fernandes was left completely unattended as Victor Lindelöf played a slick one-two with Jesse Lingard – making his first Premier League start this season – and pinged an astute pass towards the excellent Sancho. Sancho’s cross exposed the alarming lack of home resistance and Fernandes was entirely unopposed as he glanced a header beyond Meslier from near point-blank range. With the hosts’ optimism fast evaporating, Bielsa – who seems increasingly unlikely to be at Elland Road next season – desperately needed to change things. On came Raphinha and within minutes of the talismanic, if recently jaded-looking, Brazilian right-winger’s introduction at the start of the second half, an unlikely Leeds comeback suddenly looked possible. Their temporary renaissance began with a little luck, Rodrigo reducing the deficit with a wickedly swerving, apparently fluke, cross-shot which deceived and evaded David de Gea. Inside a minute Bielsa’s players had levelled with Raphinha tapping in Dan James’s clever cross as Shaw, the Brazilian’s supposed marker, dozed. When that equaliser survived a VAR review occasioned by Adam Forshaw’s perceived foul on Fernandes in the buildup, the celebratory roar may well have been audible on the other side of the Pennines. After Ronaldo had been booked for dissent, the moment for Rangnick – who will have noted the ease with which James dodged Lingard and Aaron Wan-Bissaka – really to earn his money arrived. The German duly hooked the fading Lingard and, rather more contentiously, Pogba, introducing Fred and Elanga. Talk about inspired. Shortly after that switch, a fluid Manchester United counterattack concluded with Sancho contributing the cutest of layoffs and Fred lashing home a superlative goal. The celebrations, and the occasion, were scarred when an object struck Elanga on the head. Sadly it would not prove an isolated incident – Maguire picked another missile up from the pitch as the teams trooped off at half-time and presented it to the referee, Paul Tierney. Mercifully Elanga was not badly hurt and was able to rejoin the increasingly helter-skelter drama. After watching De Gea divert Stuart Dallas’s volley, Rangnick decided caution was called for and switched to a back three, replacing Ronaldo with Raphaël Varane. Elanga appeared to have had the last word, the 19-year-old Swede sliding Manchester United’s fourth beneath Meslier after Fernandes’s exquisite flick confounded Pascal Struijk. It seemed a fitting finale but a less pleasing reality intruded as Junior Firpo’s foul on Elanga provoked a minor mass melee entirely in keeping with the mildly manic tenor of this latest instalment of an ancient rivalry.Thank you very much for your company today. Here is Louise Taylor’s report from a wet and windy Elland Road. Honorable mention for Lindelof today who did some incredible working bringing out the ball from the back to instigate a number of attacks. Wolves v Leicester is a decent game, you will be pleased to know. A lively start at Molineux. Very exciting to see Pogba come back into form for Manchester United. Such a great player on his day who has found some consistency in recent weeks. Rangnick will also be pleased that Sancho is settling at Old Trafford, with another impressive display today, earning Man of the Match from Gary Neville. This happened in Manchester last night ... There were some positives for Bielsa as the Leeds frontline cut through the Man United defence impressively at times but their own backline was mildly farcical. In excellent news ... Alex Hess is taking you through the joys of Wolves v Leicester. What a day! Maguire on winning from 2-2: “I think that is the most pleasing aspect of the game. We have to start the second half better. The first goal is really lucky on their behalf. Then they scored a good goal. We had to fight back - and we did that.” On scoring Man United’s first goal from a corner this season. “Every time I see the stat, I am embarrassed. As a team and a group we know it’s not been good enough. If we score more from set-plays we’d be further up the table.” On weather: “The conditions in the second half were really bad. The half we were defending was really waterlogged.” A good day for drenched fans in the away end. Shame they have to deal with a train strike in their attempt to get home. I wouldn’t advise walking back to Manchester. “Marvellous nostalgic game in the rain. So reminiscent of Man U v Leeds of yesteryear,” says Dean Kinsella. The double changes paid off for both sides as Raphinha and Gelhardt had a big impact on Leeds’ attacking play, while Fred and Elanga made the difference on the scoresheet. A good day for managers, in a way. What a cracking game in impressively awful conditions. There were some great moments of quality from both team but Man United deserve the victory thanks to their clinical attacking and finishing. 90+4 mins: Just before Leeds conceded the fourth I was about to post how tired they looked. It’s fair to say that since the Elanga goal things have slowed down. 90+2 mins: Rangnick goes onto the pitch to calm things down. The referee gets a few of the players around him and tells them all to calm down. Junior Firpo is cautioned for his efforts. Luke Shaw is booked for legging it across the pitch to remonstrate. We are well into the five minutes of added time. 90 mins: Elanga will enjoy his goal after getting coined by the home fans. One in the eye for the tosser who through the item. He is cleaned out by Junior Firpo and then a lot of players get involved in a melee as they do not like the challenge. Fernandes slips the ball through to Elanga who calmly slots his shot under Meslier. Game over. 86 mins: Ronaldo is replaced by Varane as Man United look to shut up shop. Varane will play in between Maguire and Lindelof. 84 mins: Leeds are very much on top here and Man United are holding on. The fans are trying to give their team one last push. Rodrigo is the latest to try his luck but his shot from 30 yards is wild and off target. 82 mins: McTominay commits another foul. The Leeds players sprint over to shout at the referee as they want the Scot to be sent off for a second booking. The only person who is booked is Raphinha for his complaints. The free-kick ends with De Gea tipping over a dipping shot from distance. 80 mins: A low cross from James is met at the near post by a man in Red and lumped out for a throw. 78 mins: McTominay is cautioned for his fifth foul of the day after crunching into Gelhardt a touch late. 76 mins: Forshaw is booked for stopping Fred from counter-attacking. 74 mins: Tackles flying in on the halfway line as players from box sides happily throw themselves around. Ends with a Leeds free-kick. The conditions are good for a slide challenge. Klich gets another chance inside the area but his effort is poor from 17 yards and De Gea holds on. 72 mins: It looks like Elanga was hit in the head by something thrown from the crowd. The Swede almost angers the Leeds fans some more by getting the ball in space in the box but his finish is weak, allowing Meslier to grab hold. Leeds look very open at the back. What an impact. A freeflowing move ends with Sancho and Fred combining in the box, allowing the Brazilian to whack home from close range. Lots of things thrown from the crowd at the Man United players, you will not be shocked to hear. 67 mins: Lingard and Pogba are off - Elanga and Fred on. Very odd that Pogba has been withdrawn, seeing as he’s been Man United’s best player. Thomas Stratford says: “A lot of fans questioning Bielsa’s judgement of late but in these conditions my vote’s for the manager who had the foresight to bring a bucket with him… “Hope whoever’s covering this live for the Guardian has found a vaguely dry spot to perch in this.” 65 mins: Lindelof strides out of defence, making it to the edge of the Leeds box, before laying the ball off to Ronaldo who quickly moves it to Sancho whose effort is deflected wide. 63 mins: Fred and Elanga are being summoned by Rangnick. 61 mins: Forshaw flicks a pass through to Gelhardt, he gets it out of his feet and drives a low shot towards goal but De Gea gets down well and holds on. Struilk is booked for taking down Fernandes. 59 mins: Fernandes is snapping into challenges, fuming that he was not awarded a free-kick in the buildup to the second Leeds goal. 57 mins: The cat has been sent out to meet the pigeons. What a start to the second half. Man United really have fallen apart quickly here. They need to recover. 55 mins: It does not look like a foul to me. No idea why they are watching this challenge by Forshaw on Fernandes so many times. GOAL GIVEN! James crosses and finds Raphinha at the back post to tap in. There is a VAR check for a foul on Fernandes ... Rodrigo gets the ball on the left wing and sends in a cross to the back post but it drifts over De Gea and into the net. Very lucky for Leeds. GAME ON! 51 mins: Pogba drifts past Klich on the right flank and whips a dangerous cross along the six-yard line but there is no one there to convert. “Leeds players would be wise to concentrate play in the deepest body of water,” says Ian Copestake. Get the armbands on. 49 mins: Rodrigo slides in on Wan-Bissaka from about five yards away and ends up going five yards past him thanks to the slippy surface. When Koch was taken off, Leeds did not stipulate it as a concussion sub for some reason, even though it was justified, meaning they could now have an extra sub. Odd decision-making. 47 mins: Gelhardt shows some promise as he drives at the defence and then passes to Klich whose shot from 25 yards is deflected wide. There is a very good amount of water on the playing surface now ... Here we go again! Raphinha and Gelhardt are coming on for Leeds. That is all their subs made now. A bold decision in conditions bad for hamstrings. Harrison and Llorente off - the latter was bloody awful. The weather is so awful here that I am refusing to take my neighbours their milk which I have. If you are reading this, could you come and get it as I don’t want to drown out there. I am imagining second half carnage. You’d have to think Raphinha will need to be sent on sooner or later if Leeds are to get back into this. Bielsa will outthink me and stick Bate on instead. Finally! I am in the north - 52 miles from Elland Road - and I can confirm the weather is utterly horrific. The game has been relatively tight but all the moments of quality have come from Manchester United. Leeds’ best chance now is that the rain causes plenty of puddles and gets the match called off, as they look dejected by the scoreline. Lindelof drives the visitors forward before laying the ball out to Sancho on the right, from where he clips in a cross for Fernandes to head home from six yards. 45+4 mins: Klich picks up the ball 40 yards from goal and gets it out of his feet before launching a shot from distance but it flies well over the bar. 45+2 mins: There is plenty of surface water and the ball is being slowed down. I anticipate lots of people in oversized coats pushing the water to the side at half time. 45 mins: Six minutes added on. Gary Neville thinks if the rain continues the game could be at risk ... 44 mins: Shambles at the back for Leeds! Fernandes pings a ball over the top for Ronaldo to chase but Meslier reads it and comes out to collect, only to see Llorente get there first and knock it over his own goalkeeper for a corner. The corner is swung in by Shaw but beats everyone, including the two Man United who are left on the floor for some reasons or other. 42 mins: Klich receives a cross from Junior Firpo, which he holds up and lays back to Forshaw. The midfielder lines up the shot but sends it high and wide. Klich catches Ronaldo, allowing the Portuguese the chance to roll around on the soaking turf for a few seconds. 40 mins: Sancho picks up a loose ball on the edge of the box, he draws in a defender and then fires off a rising shot with his left foot which goes over. 38 mins: Leeds have recovered relatively well from the goal, having a decent spell of possession but the crowd seem to have been somewhat subdued. 36 mins: A flare has been thrown onto the pitch from the away end to add a little red mist to proceedings. Pogba is looking in fine fettle today. He brushes off Forshaw once more, before passing to Fernandes who curls a shot towards the corner but Meslier dives to his left to repel his effort. The resulting corner is swung into the box by Shaw and Maguire rises highest to nod in. 32 mins: Sancho has his first run at the Leeds defence; he tries to shimmy and cut inside but he is forced sideways, and eventually out. Junior Firpo is on for the departed Koch. 30 mins: Koch is down and indicating to the medical staff he isn’t too happy with something or other. He makes a flashing sign to those treating him. If he has suffered a head injury, it might be sensible to bring him off. Ronaldo has walked over to offer his expertise on head injuries. Koch walks offer, helped by the medical staff. One wonders why he was allowed to continue in the first place. 28 mins: Fernandes whips a deep free-kick into the box but it is met by a Leeds head. The way the ball is holding up in the turf does make me think there will soon be a comical moment with a backpass. 26 mins: Meslier messes up his clearance, sending the ball straight to Sancho. He passes it to Pogba who slides a pass through for McTominay but it is misdirected and the goalkeeper comes out to collect the loose ball. What a save! The ball is slid across the six-yard box by Pogba for Ronaldo to tap in from close range but Meslier dives across to block the shot. Incredible stuff. 24 mins: James is the latest person to writhe around in pain. His issue caused by Shaw’s hand catching him in the face. The pitch is drenched with rain and passes are starting to slow on the surface. 22 mins: Once again Fernandes is down, shouting at the ref as he thinks he is the victim of a late foul. Tierney shakes his head again. Fernandes carries on his complaints for the next minute, standing alongside the referee to make sure he is understood. De Gea is called into action as Forshaw drives into the box and fires a shot across the goalkeeper but he reads it, allowing him to fist the ball clear. 20 mins: Ronaldo applauds a McTominay cross while watching it go over his head. I think he could have at least jumped before clapping. “Never mind about cookies,” no one appreciates this comment Richard Harris. “United were drenched at Burnley, soaked to the skin at Old Trafford against Brighton and are now getting another hosing here today. Limp biscuits all round.” Got to know how long to dunk for in these situations. 18 mins: The game is going again after that unfortunate break. It has done nothing to subdue the crowd who are jeering and booing accordingly. Leeds are looking lively in attack, quickly countering and turning the Man United defence, something they do not appreciate. 16 mins: Koch gets to his feet after being bandaged up, although more layers are added once he’s vertical. On the upside, Koch gets a nice clean shirt ... and shorts, which shows how much blood there was. 14 mins: Koch is down getting seen to by the medics. McTominay comes over to apologise and check on his opponent’s welfare, which is the least he can do after catching Koch late and by surprise. 12 mins: Koch gets absolutely smashed by McTominay and it immediately creates a wound and a lot of blood. That will need stitches. “Like the sound of your cookies, but which of the players on t’park today represents a hazelnut &amp; double choc chip?” asks Shane O’Leary. Hazelnut is Maguire. Choc chip is ... ermmm ... the sweet and smooth Dan James. 10 mins: Harrison is fouled by McTominay on the edge of the Leeds box, leading to plenty of ire aimed at the Scotland midfielder. Pogba has Man United’s first shot as Forshaw bounces off him, allowing the Frenchman to drive into space from where he thwacks a low shot at goal but his compatriot Meslier grabs hold of the slippy ball at the second attempt. Weather update: it is still hammering it down. 8 mins: Fernandes is on the deck receiving treatment after being the victim of a robust but fair challenge. He eventually gets up and walks to the sidelines and should be OK to carry on. 6 mins: The first chance of the match comes after a Wan-Bissaka clearance reaches a white shirt and Leeds counter. The ball is chipped over the top for Harrison who enters the space vacated by Wan-Bissaka, who is on the ground after being fouled but referee Tierney waves it away, luckily for the visitors the shot from Harrison goes just wide. Man United players go to bemoan Tierney who arrogantly waves them away despite the fact he’s made an incorrect decision 4 mins: Things are pretty lively in the stands and frantic on the pitch. Whenever it looks like Leeds are about to attack, the noise goes up a few extra decibels. 2 mins: Every touch from a red shirt is being jeered, while Leeds are being cheered when in possession. I expect plenty of this. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! Everyone in the studio is expecting a fiery encounter, aided by the fact it is absolutely teeming it down in Leeds. The packed stands are creating a great atmosphere. Man United are greeted by boos, naturally. Just eating a double choc chip and hazelnut cookie. I made a batch yesterday, so feel very pleased with myself. Justin Kavanagh emails: “I hope, for Ragnick’s sake, that Varane is carrying a knock, because anyone who chooses Lindelof over the Frenchman for any other reason has lost the plot. It’s beginning to sound like a bad joke: An Englishman, a Portugueezer, and a Frenchman walk into a dressing room.…” Some big calls in defence. This is what we need. Dean Kinsella emails: “Afternoon everyone. Also surprised to see Dalot dropped. I feel for AWB though. In another time his tackling ability would make him stand out as a defender but it seems you also have to a great attacker as a fullback now - especially after the example set at LFC. I sometimes wonder whether he might be best re-educated to be a centre back or a holding midfielder.” Lingard has not started in the Premier League for Manchester United for two years. Ruddy hell. Rangnick: “He [Lingard] looked sharp in training, he has a lot of experience.” “Your being too young to have experienced Cantona has made me feel old!” sorry, Ian Copestake, “But not as old as Cantona now looks. I can’t see him flying over any more advertising hoardings to sort out WORD RETRACTED not very nice people.” It is nice and rainy in Leeds. Karen Carney on United. Wan-Bissaka in for Dalot is an interesting one, as I think the former has been awful this season, while Dalot has impressed. A big call. Quite possibly ... Sky currently showing a package about Eric Cantona’s arrival at Leeds (and I assumed his move to Manchester United). He is one of those players where I was a bit too young to appreciate. I think I would have enjoyed his style, on and off the pitch. Liew on Bielsa. Lovely day for it. Rangnick: the solution. Raphinha only makes the bench for Leeds. He was taken off at half-time against Everton and Bielsa has made a point by leaving him out today. Some vaguely interesting team news as Lingard starts for Manchester United. I make that his first league start of the season but I could be very wrong and too lazy to find out if I am right. Varane only makes the bench which is a bit of a surprise but Rangnick will have his reasons. Leeds: Meslier, Ayling, Koch, Llorente, Struijk, Dallas, Forshaw, Klich, James, Harrison, Rodrigo. Subs: Klaesson, Firpo, Raphinha, Roberts, Bate, Gelhardt, Cresswell, Shackleton, Kenneh. Manchester United: De Gea, Wan-Bissaka, Lindelof, Maguire, Shaw, McTominay, Fernandes, Pogba, Lingard, Sancho, Ronaldo. Subs: Henderson, Mata, Rashford, Fred, Varane, Dalot, Telles, Matic, Elanga. Two of the great rivals of English football meet once again in front of a packed out at Elland Road. Two teams in positions lower than their players and fans desire, meaning both will be want to put on a show this afternoon in order to earn a much-needed boost. Leeds are a helter-skelter team, putting it all the line to get what they can out of any game. Manchester United are a more ponderous outfit at the moment, unable to kill off games they should be winning with ease and looking susceptible at the back. Marcelo Bielsa’s side sit five points above the relegation zone and will be looking over their shoulder, especially after the wins for Watford and Burnley on Saturday, in addition to Newcastle’s much-improved form since their takeover. They have not beaten Manchester United in the Premier League since 2002, something they will want to put right today. Manchester United’s underwhelming defence welcomes back Raphael Varane. The Frenchman is by far the club’s best centre-back and his absence is felt whenever he is not in the team. If he helps United to a cleansheet today, it will be the first time in 49 matches they have kept back to back cleansheets, a sign of their struggles. Here’s to a cracker! Kick-off 2pm GMT.The Republican senator Ted Cruz complained on Sunday that Joe Biden’s promise to nominate a Black woman to the supreme court was an instance of racial discrimination – but also claimed the GOP would not drag the eventual nominee “into the gutter” in confirmation hearings. “Democrats today believe in racial discrimination,” Cruz told Fox News Sunday. “They’re they’re committed to it as a political proposition. I think it is wrong to stand up and say, ‘We’re going to discriminate.’” Biden made his promise on the campaign trail in 2020. Stephen Breyer, the oldest justice on the court, announced his retirement last month. James Clyburn, the South Carolina congressman and House whip, was instrumental in securing Biden’s promise. He has pushed for the nomination of J Michelle Childs, a judge from his state who has also attracted support from Lindsey Graham, like Cruz an influential Republican on the Senate judiciary committee. Childs is reported to be on a short list of three. “This administration is going to discriminate,” Cruz insisted. “What the president said is that only African American women are eligible for this slot, that 94% of Americans are ineligible.” The Texas senator’s host, Bill Hemmer, did not point out that justices have been chosen on grounds of identity before. The last Republican president, Donald Trump, promised to pick a woman to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg, then did so when the liberal lion died in September 2020. Cruz championed the nominee, Amy Coney Barrett, a hardline Catholic conservative. As a result of Trump’s three picks, conservatives outnumber liberals on the court 6-3. The replacement of Breyer, which could be Biden’s sole nomination if Republicans win back the Senate, will not alter that balance. Cruz is an accomplished conservative provocateur. On Sunday, he chose a provocative example of a jurist who he said would not qualify for consideration by Biden: Merrick Garland. “Merrick Garland, whom Barack Obama nominated to the supreme court, was told, ‘Sorry, you’re the wrong skin color and wrong gender, you’re not eligible to be considered.’” Garland is now attorney general, and thus unlikely to be considered for a supreme court seat in any eventuality. Furthermore, Cruz was among Senate Republicans who were not sorry to block even a hearing for Garland when he was nominated to replace Antonin Scalia in early 2016, claiming the conservative died too close to an election for a replacement to be considered. Cruz was also among Republicans who were not sorry to replace Ginsburg with Coney Barrett less than two months before the 2020 election. The Texas senator also said he would consider Biden’s nominee “on the record and I’m confident the Senate judiciary committee will have a vigorous process examining that nominee’s record. And what I can tell you right now is we’re not going to do what the Democrats did with Brett Kavanaugh.” Kavanaugh faced accusations of sexual assault, which he vehemently denied. Democratic failed to block his confirmation. “We’re not going to go into the gutter,” Cruz said. “We’re not going to engage in personal slime and attacks. We’re going to focus on the nominee’s record on substance and what kind of justice she would make. And that’s the constitutional responsibility of the Senate.”In 1962 I was one of eight members of the union drama group at Manchester University, invited to form two guinea-pig teams for a new TV quiz show to be named University Challenge. Sitting at two trestle tables in an empty studio at Granada TV, and with a brief to be a bit “studenty”, we were there to help audition prospective candidates to chair it. No buzzers yet, simply a sharp tap on the table with a pencil. The winner stood out head and shoulders above the others. Kind, witty, urbane, scholarly, old beyond his years and already in charge of the format, it was, of course, Bamber Gascoigne, setting the show’s tone for the next 25 years. Peter Kenvyn Jones Bamber Gascoigne displayed a sustained commitment to Liberal politics. He regularly put his name to appeals for the Liberal party and, more recently, the Liberal Democrats, seeing a natural connection between his involvement in the world of the arts and Liberal values. Michael Meadowcroft Michael Frayn once said to me of his Cambridge friend Bamber Gascoigne: “Beneath the surface charm is a heart of pure gold. He is one of the best, most morally good, people I know.” I saw an instance of this while preparing to film a National Trust walk at Hadrian’s Wall. A middle-aged woman, tripping awkwardly, broke her leg. In great pain, she surveyed the group, then gestured towards Bamber Gascoigne. He knelt over her, and a whispered conversation followed. Later I asked about it. It seemed that the woman never left home without all her jewellery hidden on her person. Realising that she was about to be helicoptered to an unknown hospital, she thought it safer to entrust her valuables to a wholly good person. Bamber was the obvious choice. Edward MirzoeffThis week, England arrives at a moment that will fit the Boris Johnson era to perfection. Even if the pandemic is not quite over – something symbolised by news of the Queen testing positive – everything is being arranged to convince us that it is. On Monday, the prime minister is expected to explain his government’s “living with Covid” strategy, and on Thursday, most remaining Covid rules and restrictions will be lifted. Although Northern Ireland seems to be taking a similar route, Scotland and Wales are once again sticking to more cautious policies, but that is presumably the way Johnson likes it. Here is an opportunity for him to show the libertarian, Brexity backbench hardcore which seems to now run the Conservative party that their home country is blazing a trail towards the dazzling uplands of freedom and easy living, and all is once again well. Clearly, it isn’t. This latest set of moves only highlights a basic fact of life in early 2022 that has been strangely overlooked. Thankfully, the pandemic is winding down, but after two years of sacrifice, bereavement and hurt, there is no sign of any political payback for what people have suffered. The worsening situation in Ukraine may make such talk look rather misplaced, but we were chivvied through the worst of the Covid crisis with endless comparisons to wartime and the supposed glories of the Blitz spirit, our equivalent of “peace” is impossible living costs, cuts to public spending and the inertia of a government completely consumed with its own problems. If the public mood feels almost numb, this is a big part of the reason why. As ever, the everyday state of things is highlighted by the position of city and local government. A new financial year looms, and any extra money from Whitehall does not meet the rising need for the most basic local services, nor cover financial deficits caused by the Covid crisis (a good example is the loss of town and city centre parking charges). So, Nottingham city council has to hack £28m from its spending, and is shutting children’s centres and youth services. In Sheffield, they are reviewing library services and considering cutting vulnerable people’s home care; in Croydon, the council is about to get rid of the council tax support worth up to £29 a week to thousands of the borough’s most vulnerable people. Tory-run Hampshire, meanwhile, is trying to somehow save £80m over two years, which means cuts to children’s social care, work with young offenders, education services and school transport. Through 2020 and 2021, the government endlessly employed a slogan that had been in sporadic circulation for at least 15 years, and was soon adopted by Joe Biden: “Build back better”. Now, at the very point you might have thought those three words would be more ubiquitous than ever, they are nowhere to be seen. We all know that Covid infections and perhaps death rates were made worse by poor and overcrowded homes, but the Conservative approach to the one thing that definitely needs to be built remains as standoffish as ever. Between March 2020 and April last year, about 6,000 homes for social rent were delivered in England, amounting to roughly one for every 190 households stuck on waiting lists. Our Covid death toll highlighted the often appalling state of public health in the UK, but that issue seems to be simply grinding on. During our three national lockdowns, it was briefly fashionable to focus on the huge sacrifices made by children and young people and imagine some kind of programme of reparations, but nothing has materialised. All told, the government’s pandemic story seems to be yet another case study in that very English habit of undergoing trauma and misery, being reminded that everything rests on the ricketiest of foundations, and then pretending nothing has happened. More than ever, Johnson says whatever he thinks suits the moment and then moves on to something else. But even if he was halfway serious about using the state to radically rebalance the economy and society, Rishi Sunak’s Treasury would balk at the kind of spending involved – and in any case, an ideological shift is afoot in the Conservative party that looks likely to jettison even the meek kind of interventionism laid out in the recent “levelling up” white paper. Johnson’s new chief of staff, the MP Steve Barclay, says that the prime minister is now “taking a close look” at how the government can be hacked back, and that “it is a priority to restore a smaller state – both financially and in taking a step back from people’s lives”. For these Tories, the pandemic’s sudden burst of interventionism and collectivist thinking was terrifying: now they are reaching for the rewind button. Labour clearly has different intentions, but still risks being complicit in Westminster’s state of willed amnesia. Keir Starmer currently seems to be deep into the “I’m not Jeremy Corbyn” stage of his leadership, which is understandable but is also getting in the way of him convincingly speaking to the moment. His three watchwords are “security, prosperity and respect”, all abstract nouns, presumably chosen because they come up in focus groups, but not exactly brimming with meaning or topicality. In a technocratic lingo reminiscent of the 1990s, Labour’s plans for the economy promise a “learning”, “investing”, “innovating” and “trading” Britain, too often omitting the moral aspects of life and work that Covid has pushed to the surface. From time to time, Starmer talks about what we have all been through, but there is still no real sense of a centre-left party confidently speaking to a country reeling from the loss of 180,000 people, and the experience of every aspect of its collective life being upended. If you want to instantly understand the normality we are returning to, consider the weekend’s reports in the Sunday Times about the Conservative party’s “advisory board” of 14 unbelievably wealthy donors, and allegations that some of them lobbied ministers to prematurely relax “measures designed to stop [Covid] transmission”, as well as voicing their opposition to “higher tax for the ultra-rich”. When I read that, I thought straight away of something George Orwell wrote in 1941, about the kind of Tory who believed that when the second world war was over, the country could be pushed “back to ‘democracy’, ie capitalism, back to dole queues and the Rolls-Royce cars, back to the grey top hats and the sponge-bag trousers”. England is a country with a tragic habit of simultaneously being obsessed with tradition and forgetting its own history. It says something about where we have arrived that those words sound less like a blast from the past than a very urgent warning. John Harris is a Guardian columnistIn popular culture, there is nowhere safer to stash your cash than the vault of a Swiss bank. From thrillers to spy novels, Swiss bankers are depicted as discreet men in suits who know which questions not to ask. As James Bond quipped in The World Is Not Enough: “If you can’t trust a Swiss banker, what’s the world come to?” Switzerland dismisses such stereotypes as lazy and outdated. But its reputation as one of the premier tax havens has not come out of nowhere. The country has nurtured, codified and even advertised the discretion of its bankers for centuries, enjoying lucrative returns as wealthy elites flocked to the Alps to stockpile their riches. Over the past decade, however, things have started to change. When Switzerland began requiring its banks to share client data with some foreign authorities under a global exchange system to combat tax evasion in 2018, it was heralded as a watershed moment. Some even called it the end of Swiss banking secrecy. Our reporting suggests that conclusion was overblown. Swiss banks do share client data with many countries, but many developing nations are excluded from the global exchange system set up to combat tax evasion and fraud. Meanwhile, Switzerland’s famed banking secrecy law – article 47 of the 1934 Federal Law on Banks – remains in force. Those who fall foul of it risk a five-year prison sentence. Not that long ago Switzerland strengthened its banking secrecy law, which had originally applied only to bankers and other insiders. Since 2015, the law could theoretically be applied to any third party who “reveals” or “exploits” a secret that has come from within a Swiss bank. The wording is sufficiently vague that an overzealous prosecutor might think about using it against a journalist exposing wrongdoing by a Swiss bank or its clients. Any such move would be considered a brazen attack on free expression, not least in a country such as Switzerland, which is among the top 10 countries in the World Press Freedom Index. But it is not outside the realms of possibility. The UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Irene Khan, told a reporter in the consortium of journalists investigating Credit Suisse that she was assessing article 47. “I can say very clearly that international law gives journalists the right to publish information that is in the public interest, and financial or banking information can fall into that category, for instance if it concerns public personalities,” she said. “The right to privacy cannot be used as grounds to restrict the right of the media to publish information that may be of public interest.” While far-fetched, the possibility that Switzerland’s prosecutors might use its banking secrecy statute to criminalise journalists led to the decision to protect Swiss media outlets from such a scenario by excluding them from the consortium investigating the leaked data. There were more than 160 reporters from 48 media outlets involved in the Suisse secrets project – but none of them were in Switzerland. Perversely, Swiss citizens wanting to read how the country’s second-largest lender provided services to corrupt leaders and money launderers can do so only via the foreign press. “This law is a massive restriction of press freedom in Switzerland,” said Arthur Rutishauser, the editor-in-chief of Tamedia, which would have been a logical Swiss partner in the project. “The law can protect criminals and their assets. Journalists who try to expose them risk criminal proceedings for doing so.” For media outside of Switzerland, including the Guardian, the country’s radical banking secrecy law was also a consideration, albeit a less direct one. It was among many factors considered when we weighed the public interest case for reviewing the leaked data – and, more recently, decided to publish some of it. There are legitimate reasons why some Credit Suisse clients might want an offshore account, and it is not illegal to have one – assuming it is declared to the tax authorities. The 30,000 Credit Suisse clients in the leaked data include customers who have done nothing wrong and have an entirely reasonable expectation of privacy in their financial affairs. Their data was never of interest to investigative journalists focused on exposing wrongdoing and contributing to public debate about the banking system. However, decades of scandals have made clear that Swiss banks generally – and Credit Suisse in particular – have attracted illicit funds from tax evaders, kleptocrats and money launderers. Financial crime is a serious issue of global public interest. When it involves corruption in the developing world, the impact on the world’s poorest can be profound. When an anonymous source leaked the Credit Suisse data to Süddeutsche Zeitung, Germany’s largest broadsheet newspaper, they knew exactly what they were doing. This was not a dump of data on the darknet or a sale to the highest bidder. The recipients of the leak – Frederik Obermaier and Bastian Obermayer – are the award-winning investigative reporters behind the massive offshore leaks that led to the Panama and Paradise papers. In leaking the data to them, the source appears to have made a moral choice to circumvent what they said were Switzerland’s “immoral” banking secrecy laws. Months of painstaking reporting have unearthed evidence that Credit Suisse had clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering and corruption. Some were allowed to open bank accounts years after they had been convicted for serious financial crimes. In other cases, the data raises questions about unexplained wealth, or whether Credit Suisse asked basic questions about the origin of a client’s funds. Deciding to publish these stories has been a balancing exercise. On one side: personal issues of privacy, confidentiality and data protection, and a Swiss banking secrecy law that could be used to censor reporting. On the other: the public’s right to know about wrongdoing. And our duty to reveal it. Credit Suisse response to Suisse secrets disclosures available here. Support independent investigative Guardian journalism Make a contribution from just £1 Become a digital subscriber and get something in return for your moneyCredit Suisse had a message for investors during its recent earnings call. The bank was planning to change course after a tumultuous 12 months in which it was embroiled in the collapse of the US hedge fund Archegos and the supply-chain finance company Greensill Capital. “This will not be a quick fix, and we expect 2022 will be a transition year,” the chief executive, Thomas Gottstein, said on a conference call on 10 February. “But we have made clear progress in creating the conditions for a much more stable and predictable bank.” More “predictable”, in banking parlance, was code for reining in its riskier investment bank – which offers trading, fundraising services and deal advice to firms – and pivoting towards a more stable source of income: wealth management. Yet that pillar of Credit Suisse’s business – cultivating rich clients for a range of banking services – is precisely what has come under the spotlight in the revelations in the Suisse secrets project. A massive leak has revealed that Credit Suisse harboured the hidden wealth of clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. The revelations point to apparently widespread failures of due diligence by the lender, despite repeated pledges to weed out dubious clients and stamp out illicit funds. In response, Credit Suisse said it was unable to comment on specific clients but “strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices”, which it said were “based on partial, selective information taken out of context, resulting in tendentious interpretations of the bank’s business conduct”. However, the simultaneous disclosures by 48 media organisations have raised painful questions for the bank. For anyone who has followed the string of scandals in recent years, they will have a familiar ring. Has Credit Suisse had a high tolerance for risky clients? Has it done enough to strengthen internal due diligence controls? Was there a culture in which bankers held their noses and looked the other way when taking or keeping money from dubious clients, particularly public officials who might have been involved in corruption? Did profit take priority over ethics? In its response to the media, the bank says these are historical matters relating to a tiny fraction of its customers. It says it has kept pace with banking regulations across the sector, putting in place a strict zero-tolerance policy towards tax evasion and stringent control measures to counter money laundering. Yet Credit Suisse has spent decades apologising for past horrors, only for more skeletons to emerge from its cupboards. Its newly installed chairman, Axel Lehmann, will be hoping the Suisse secrets leak will be just another public relations crisis for the bank, and there have been no shortage of those. In the past six months, the lender admitted to defrauding investors as part of the historical Mozambique “tuna bonds” loan scandal and Lehmann’s immediate predecessor, António Horta-Osório, resigned over Covid regulation breaches. But these disclosures also threaten to throw a spanner in the works of an aggressive restructuring plan that relies on squeezing more money out of its wealth management division. Credit Suisse is one of the largest wealth managers in the world, handling more than 1.6tn Swiss francs (CHF) (£1.3tn) for clients. With plans to divert 3bn CHF-worth (£2.4bn) of resources from the investment bank and towards the wealth management division by 2024, and hire at least 500 relationship managers to find and serve wealthy customers, the overhaul has been viewed by analysts as a sensible response to recent woes involving complex investment products and its services to hedge funds. Part of the bank’s growth strategy will involve courting clients in emerging markets, where there is a greater risk of corruption. Credit Suisse has struggled in recent years to keep bosses in the job long enough to see through significant changes. But if Gottstein and Lehmann are to regain the trust of markets and regulators, they will have to prove their aversion to dubious clients, no matter how lucrative their accounts may be.A massive leak from one of the world’s biggest private banks, Credit Suisse, has exposed the hidden wealth of clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. Details of accounts linked to 30,000 Credit Suisse clients all over the world are contained in the leak, which unmasks the beneficiaries of more than 100bn Swiss francs (£80bn)* held in one of Switzerland’s best-known financial institutions. The leak points to widespread failures of due diligence by Credit Suisse, despite repeated pledges over decades to weed out dubious clients and illicit funds. The Guardian is part of a consortium of media outlets given exclusive access to the data. We can reveal how Credit Suisse repeatedly either opened or maintained bank accounts for a panoramic array of high-risk clients across the world. They include a human trafficker in the Philippines, a Hong Kong stock exchange boss jailed for bribery, a billionaire who ordered the murder of his Lebanese pop star girlfriend and executives who looted Venezuela’s state oil company, as well as corrupt politicians from Egypt to Ukraine. One Vatican-owned account in the data was used to spend €350m (£290m) in an allegedly fraudulent investment in London property that is at the centre of an ongoing criminal trial of several defendants, including a cardinal. The huge trove of banking data was leaked by an anonymous whistleblower to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. “I believe that Swiss banking secrecy laws are immoral,” the whistleblower source said in a statement. “The pretext of protecting financial privacy is merely a fig leaf covering the shameful role of Swiss banks as collaborators of tax evaders.” Credit Suisse said that Switzerland’s strict banking secrecy laws prevented it from commenting on claims relating to individual clients. “Credit Suisse strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices,” the bank said in a statement, arguing that the matters uncovered by reporters are based on “selective information taken out of context, resulting in tendentious interpretations of the bank’s business conduct.” The bank also said the allegations were largely historical, in some instances dating back to a time when “laws, practices and expectations of financial institutions were very different from where they are now”. While some accounts in the data were open as far back as the 1940s, more than two-thirds were opened since 2000. Many of those were still open well into the last decade, and a portion remain open today. The timing of the leak could hardly be worse for Credit Suisse, which has recently been beset by major scandals. Last month, it lost its chairman, António Horta-Osório, after he twice broke Covid-19 regulations. That capped an unprecedented year of controversies in which the bank became embroiled in the collapse of the supply chain finance firm Greensill Capital and the US hedge fund Archegos Capital, and was fined £350m over its role in a loan scandal in Mozambique. This month, Credit Suisse became the first major Swiss bank in the country’s history to face criminal charges – which it denies – relating to allegation it helped launder money from the cocaine trade on behalf of the Bulgarian mafia. However, the repercussions of the leak could be much broader than one bank, threatening a crisis for Switzerland, which retains one of the world’s most secretive banking laws. Swiss financial institutions manage about 7.9tn CHF (£6.3tn) in assets, nearly half of which belongs to foreign clients. The Suisse secrets project sheds a rare light on one of the world’s largest financial centres, which has grown used to operating in the shadows. It identifies the convicts and money launderers who were able to open bank accounts, or keep them open for years after their crimes emerged. And it reveals how Switzerland’s famed banking secrecy laws helped facilitate the looting of countries in the developing world. * * * Disgraced executives, fraudsters, traffickers – clients When Ronald Li Fook-shiu approached a banker to open an account in 2000, he is unlikely to have been viewed as a run-of-the-mill client. A former chairman of the Hong Kong stock exchange, he was one of the wealthiest people in the city, where he was known as the “godfather of the stock market”. But he was perhaps better known for the time he spent in a maximum security prison. Li’s career had ended in disgrace in 1990, when he was convicted of taking bribes in exchange for listing companies on the stock exchange. However, a decade later Li was nonetheless able to open an account that later held 59m CHF (£26.3m), according to the leak. He has since died, but his case is one of dozens discovered by reporters appearing to show Credit Suisse opened or maintained accounts for clients who had serious convictions that might be expected to show up in due diligence checks. There are other instances in which Credit Suisse may have taken quick action after red flags emerged, but the case nonetheless shows that dubious clients have been attracted to the bank. Like every other bank in the world, Credit Suisse professes to have stringent control mechanisms to carry out extensive due diligence on its customers to “ensure that the highest standards of conduct are upheld”. In banking parlance, such controls are called know-your-client or KYC checks. A 2017 leaked report commissioned by Switzerland’s financial regulator shed some light on the bank’s internal procedures at that time. Clients would face intensified scrutiny when flagged as a politically exposed person from a high-risk country, or a person involved in a high-risk activity such as gambling, weapons trading, financial services or mining, the report said. Relationship managers were expected to use external sources to verify customers and their risk levels, according to the leak, including news articles or databases such as the Thomson Reuters World-Check platform, which is used widely in the financial services sector to flag when people are arrested, charged, investigated or convicted of a serious crime. Such controls might be expected to prevent a bank from opening accounts for clients such as Rodoljub Radulović, a Serbian securities fraudster indicted in 2001 by the US Securities and Exchange Commission. However, the leaked data identifies him as the co-signatory of two Credit Suisse company accounts. The first was opened in 2005, the year after the SEC had secured a default judgment against Radulović for running a pump-and-dump scheme. One of Radulović’s company accounts held 3.4m CHF (£2.2m) before they closed in 2010. He was recently given a 10-year prison sentence by a court in Belgrade for his role trafficking cocaine from South America for the organised crime boss Darko Šarić. Radulović’s lawyer did not respond to multiple requests for comment. Due diligence is not only for new clients. Banks are required to continually reassess existing customers. The 2017 report said Credit Suisse screened customers at least every three years and as often as once a year for the riskiest clients. Lawyers for Credit Suisse told the Guardian these periodic reviews were introduced “more than 15 years ago”, meaning it was continually running due diligence on existing clients from 2007. The bank might, therefore, have been expected to have discovered that its German client Eduard Seidel was convicted of bribery in 2008. Seidel was an employee of Siemens. As the multinational’s lead in Nigeria, he oversaw a campaign of industrial-scale bribery to secure lucrative contracts for his employer by funnelling cash to corrupt Nigerian politicians. After German authorities raided the Munich headquarters of Siemens in 2006, Seidel immediately confessed his role in the bribery scheme, though he said he had never stolen from the company or appropriated its slush funds. His involvement in the corruption led to his name being entered into the Thomson Reuters World-Check database in 2007. However, the leaked Credit Suisse data shows his accounts were left open until at least well into the last decade. At one point after he left Siemens, one account was worth 54m CHF (£24m). Seidel’s lawyer declined to say whether the accounts were his. He said his client had addressed all outstanding matters relating to his bribery offences and wished to move on with his life. The lawyer did not respond to repeated invitations to explain the source of the 54m CHF. Siemens said it did not know about the money and that its review of its own cashflows shed no light on the account. While Credit Suisse said in its statement it could not comment on any specific clients, the bank said “actions have been taken in line with applicable policies and regulatory requirements at the relevant times, and that related issues have already been addressed”. In some instances, Credit Suisse is understood to have frozen accounts belonging to problematic clients. Yet questions remain about how quickly the bank moved to close them. One client, Stefan Sederholm, a Swedish computer technician who opened an account with Credit Suisse in 2008, was able to keep it open for two-and-a-half years after his widely reported conviction for human trafficking in the Philippines, for which he was given a life sentence. Sederholm’s crime first came to light in 2009, when police in Manila raided a storefront purporting to be the local chapter of the Mindanao Peoples’ Peace Movement, and discovered about 17 women in cubicles with webcams performing sex shows for foreign customers. He was convicted in 2011. A representative for Sederholm said Credit Suisse never froze his accounts and did not close them until 2013 when he was unable to provide due diligence material. Asked why Sederholm needed a Swiss account, they said that he was living in Thailand when it was opened, adding: “Can you please tell me if you would prefer to put your money in a Thai or Swiss bank?” * * * Ferdinand and Imelda pillage the Philippines Swiss banks have cultivated their trusted reputation since as far back as 1713, when the Great Council of Geneva prohibited bankers from revealing details about the fortunes being deposited by European aristocrats. Switzerland soon became a tax haven for many of the world’s elites and its bankers nurtured a “duty of absolute silence” about their clients affairs. The custom was enshrined in statute in 1934 with the introduction of Switzerland’s banking secrecy law, which criminalised the disclosure of client banking information to foreign authorities. Within decades, wealthy clients from all over the world were flocking to Swiss banks. Sometimes, that meant clients with something to hide. One of the most notorious cases in Credit Suisse’s history involved the corrupt Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos and his wife, Imelda. The couple are estimated to have siphoned as much as $10bn from the Philippines during the three terms Ferdinand was president, which ended in 1986. It has long been known that Credit Suisse was one of the first banks to help the Marcoses ravage their own country and in one infamous episode even helped them open Swiss accounts under the fake names “William Saunders” and “Jane Ryan”. In 1995, a Zurich court ordered Credit Suisse and another bank to return $500m of stolen funds to the Philippines. The leaked data contains an account that belonged to Helen Rivilla, an attorney convicted in 1992 for helping launder money on behalf of Ferdinand Marcos. Despite this, she was able to open a Swiss account in 2000, as was her husband, Antonio, who faced similar charges that were subsequently dropped. It is hard to know how Credit Suisse could have missed the money-laundering case linking the couple to the corrupt Philippine leader, which was reported by the Associated Press. The couple, who could not be reached for comment, were able to hold about 8m CHF (£3.6m) with the bank before their accounts were closed in 2006. One former Credit Suisse employee at the time alleges there was a deeply ingrained culture in Swiss banking of looking the other way when it came to problematic clients. “The bank’s compliance departments [were] masters of plausible deniability,” they told a reporter from the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, one of the coordinators of the Suisse secrets project. “Never write anything down that could expose an account that is non-compliant and never ask a question you do not want to know the answer to.” The 2000s was also a decade in which foreign regulators and tax authorities became increasingly frustrated at their inability to penetrate the Swiss financial system. That changed in 2007, when the UBS banker Bradley Birkenfeld voluntarily approached US authorities with information about how the bank was helping thousands of wealthy Americans evade tax with secret accounts. Birkenfeld was viewed as a traitor in Switzerland, where banking whistleblowers are often held in contempt. However, a wide-ranging US Senate investigation later uncovered the aggressive tactics used by UBS and Credit Suisse, the latter of which was found to have sent bankers to high-end events to recruit clients, courted a potential customer with free gold, and in one case even delivered sensitive bank statements hidden in the pages of a Sports Illustrated magazine. The revelations sent shock waves through Switzerland’s financial sector and enraged the US, which pressured Switzerland into unilaterally disclosing which of its taxpayers had secret Swiss accounts from 2014. That same year, Switzerland reluctantly signed up to the international convention on the automatic exchange of banking Information. By adopting the so-called common reporting standard (CRS) for sharing tax data, Switzerland in effect agreed that its banks would in the future exchange information about their clients with tax authorities in foreign countries. They started doing so in 2018. Membership of the global exchange system is often cited by Switzerland’s banking industry as a turning point. “There is no longer Swiss bank client confidentiality for clients abroad,” the Swiss Bankers Association told the Guardian. “We are transparent, there is nothing to hide in Switzerland.” Switzerland’s almost 90-year-old banking secrecy law, however, remains in force – and was recently broadened. The Tax Justice Network estimates that countries around the world collectively lose $21bn (£15.4bn) each year in tax revenues because of Switzerland. Many of those countries will be poorer nations that have not signed up to the CRS data exchange. More than 90 countries, most of which are in the developing world, remain in the dark when their wealthy taxpayers hide their money in Swiss accounts. This inequity in the system was cited by the whistleblower behind the leaked data, who said the CRS system “imposes a disproportionate financial and infrastructural burden on developing nations, perpetuating their exclusion from the system in the foreseeable future”. “This situation enables corruption and starves developing countries of much-needed tax revenue. These countries are the ones that therefore suffer most from Switzerland’s reverse-Robin-Hood stunt,” they said. The whistleblower acknowledged that the leak would contain accounts that were legitimate and declared by the client to their tax authority. “I am aware that having an offshore Swiss bank account does not necessarily imply tax evasion or any other financial crime,” they said. “However, it is likely that a significant number of these accounts were opened with the sole purpose of hiding their holder’s wealth from fiscal institutions and/or avoiding the payment of taxes on capital gains.” It was not possible for journalists in the Suisse secrets project to establish how many of the more than 18,000 accounts in the leak were declared to relevant tax authorities. Media partners in the consortium wrote to more than 100 Credit Suisse clients in the data, asking whether they had disclosed their Swiss accounts to tax authorities. Five confirmed they had done so. Six said they were not required to declare their Swiss accounts. No others replied. * * * Links to another dictator … and another Ferdinand Marcos may have been Credit Suisse’s most notorious client. He is arguably rivalled only by relatives of the brutal Nigerian dictator Sani Abacha, who is believed to have stolen as much as $5bn from his people in just six years. It has long been known that Credit Suisse provided services to Abacha’s sons, opening Swiss accounts in which they deposited $214m. Credit Suisse was publicly contrite after being kicked off a sustainable investment index over the affair. “We understand that the index was not really happy with us being involved with Abacha – we were not happy ourselves,” a spokesperson said in 1999. “But we have addressed those problems and for several years we have taken internal measures to make sure nothing similar happens in the future.” Banks that enable kleptocrats to launder their money are complicit in a particularly far-reaching crime. The consequences for already impoverished populations can be devastating, as state coffers are siphoned, basic standards are eroded and trust in democracy plummets. Politicians and state officials are among the riskiest customers for banks because of their access to public funds, particularly in developing nations with fewer legal safeguards against corruption. Banks and other financial institutions are required to subject politically exposed persons, or PEPs, to the most stringent checks, known as “enhanced due diligence”. The leaked Credit Suisse data is peppered with politicians and their allies who have been linked to corruption before, during or after they had their accounts. None are as well known as the Marcoses or the Abachas, but several wielded great power in countries from Syria to Madagascar, where they amassed personal fortunes. They include Pavlo Lazarenko, who served a corrupt single year as prime minister of Ukraine between 1997 and 1998 before applying for an account at Credit Suisse. One month after pressure from rivals forced Lazarenko to announce his resignation, he opened his first of two Credit Suisse accounts. One was later valued at almost 8m CHF (£3.6m). Lazarenko was later estimated by Transparency International to have looted $200m from the Ukrainian government, allegedly by threatening to harm businesses unless they paid him 50% of their profits. He pleaded guilty to money laundering in Switzerland in 2000, and was later indicted in the US for corruption and sentenced to nine years in prison in 2006 in relation to bribes received from a Ukrainian businessman. His lawyer said those convictions did not relate to the theft of any money from the people of Ukraine. Lazarenko, who reportedly lives in California, has resisted returning to the country, where he still faces accusations he stole $17m. His lawyer said his Credit Suisse accounts had not been accessed for two decades and were frozen in connection with court proceedings against him. It remains unclear why Credit Suisse allowed Lazarenko to open an account and deposit such huge sums in the first place, given his background; before entering politics, Lazarenko was a functionary in charge of a collective farm. Monika Roth, an expert on money laundering and a professor at Lucerne University, said Swiss banks had for a long time struggled to properly challenge politicians and public officials who, after stints in public office on relatively modest salaries, turned up with huge sums to deposit. She said: “Nobody wants to have asked the question: how is that possible?” Around the time it was doing business with Lazarenko, Credit Suisse appears to have also made inroads into the Egyptian political establishment under the dictator Hosni Mubarak, who was president for three decades until 2011. The bank’s clients included Mubarak’s sons, Alaa and Gamal, who established business empires in Egypt. The brothers’ relationship with the bank spanned decades, with the earliest joint account opened by the brothers in 1993. By 2010 – the year before the popular revolt that ousted their father – an account belonging to Alaa held 232m CHF (£138m). After the Arab spring uprisings their fortunes changed, and in 2015 the brothers and their father were sentenced to three years in jail by an Egyptian court for embezzlement and corruption. They say the case was politically motivated, but after an unsuccessful appeal Alaa and Gamal paid an estimated $17.6m to the Egyptian government in a settlement agreement that made no admissions of guilt. Lawyers for the brothers reject any suggestion they were corrupt, saying their rights were violated during the Egyptian case, and 10 years of wide-ranging and intrusive investigations into their global assets by foreign authorities has not uncovered any legal violations. They added that their Swiss accounts had been frozen for over a decade, pending the resolution of investigations by the Swiss authorities. Other Credit Suisse clients linked to Hosni Mubarak were the late tycoon Hussein Salem – who acted as a financial consigliere for the dictator for nearly three decades, amassed a fortune through preferred tender deals and died in exile after facing money-laundering charges – and Hisham Talaat Moustafa, a billionaire politician in Mubarak’s party. Moustafa, who could not be reached for comment, was convicted in 2009 of hiring a hitman to murder his ex-girlfriend, the Lebanese pop star Suzanne Tamim – but his account was not closed until 2014. Another Mubarak henchman linked to Credit Suisse’s banking services was his former spy chief Omar Suleiman. His associates are listed in the data as beneficial owners of an account that held 63m CHF (£26m) in 2007. Suleiman was a feared figure in Egypt, where he oversaw widespread torture and human rights abuses. The data reveals Credit Suisse accounts held by several more intelligence and military figures and their family members, including in Pakistan, Jordan, Yemen and Iraq. One Algerian client was Khaled Nezzar, who served as minister of defence until 1993 and participated in a coup that precipitated a brutal civil war in which the military junta he was part of was accused of disappearances, mass detentions, torture and execution of detainees. Nezzar’s alleged role in human rights abuses had been widely documented by 2004, when his account was opened. It contained a maximum balance of 2m CHF (£900,000) and remained open until 2013, two years after he was arrested in Switzerland for suspected war crimes. He denies wrongdoing and the investigation is ongoing. If ordinary Algerians, Egyptians and Ukrainians have reason to complain that Credit Suisse may have aided nefarious leaders, their grievances pale in comparison with Venezuelans. Reporters working on the Suisse secrets project identified Credit Suisse accounts linked to almost two dozen business people, officials and politicians implicated in corrupt schemes in Venezuela, most of which revolved around the state oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela (PDVSA). “Corruption has always been around in PDVSA, in varying degrees and levels,” said César Mata-Garcia, an academic at the University of Dundee specialising in international petroleum law. “The words ‘Venezuela’, ‘PDVSA’ and ‘oil’ are an alarm bell for banks.” If so, that does not appear to have stopped Credit Suisse acquiring clients later revealed to be involved in numerous US investigations and prosecutions linked to PDVSA and the looting of the Venezuelan economy. One case involves two US-based businessmen with Venezuelan connections, Roberto Rincón Fernández and Abraham Shiera Bastidas, who in 2009 set about bribing officials in exchange for lucrative PDVSA contracts with the help of an associate, Fernando Ardila Rueda. Among those who allegedly received bungs were the energy vice-minister, Nervis Villalobos Cárdenas, and a senior PDVSA official, Luis De Léon Perez. In 2015, US prosecutors began indicting the participants; court papers make repeated reference to payments into accounts in an unnamed Swiss bank. However, the leaked data reveals all five men had Credit Suisse accounts active at the time of the offences. Of the five, four have pleaded guilty. The exception, Villalobos, is resisting extradition to the US from Spain. Some of the Venezuela-linked Credit Suisse accounts contained enormous sums; Villalobos had as much as 9.5m CHF (£6.3m) in his account and De Léon had as much as 22m (£15.5m). Rincón, the businessman paying their bribes, had more than 68m CHF (£44.2m) in his account as of November 2015, the month prior to his arrest. * * * ‘How many rogue bankers before you become a rogue bank?’ When Credit Suisse’s ornate headquarters were constructed in the 1870s in Zurich, they were designed to symbolise “Switzerland as a financial centre”. More than 150 years later, Credit Suisse occupies the same grand premises and Switzerland remains a global offshore centre, much as it has done for the last 300 years. It is only in recent decades that Credit Suisse, one of Switzerland’s oldest and most cherished banks, acquired its reputation for calamity. As one commentator observed earlier this week: “The bank boasts that its purpose is to serve its wealthy clients ‘with care and entrepreneurial spirit’, but at this stage most of them would probably be happy if it could just avoid yet another major scandal.” Horta-Osório lasted less than a year before resigning last month. Shortly after Credit Suisse appointed its new chairman, Axel Lehmann, the bank reported a loss of 1.6bn CHF (£1.3bn) in the fourth quarter, in part because it had put aside more than 400m CHF (£320m) to deal with unspecified “legacy litigation matters”. And there is no shortage of those. The scandals involving Greensill, Archegos and Mozambique bonds have dogged the bank over the past year. Over the past three decades, Credit Suisse has faced at least a dozen penalties and sanctions for offences involving tax evasion, money laundering, the deliberate violation of US sanctions and frauds carried out against its own customers that span multiple decades and jurisdictions. In total, it has racked up more than $4.2bn in fines or settlements. That includes the $2.6bn the Swiss bank agreed to pay US authorities after pleading guilty to conspiring to aid tax evasion in 2014; the $536m it was fined by the US five years before for deliberately circumventing US sanctions against countries including Iran and Sudan in 2009, and other payouts to Germany and Italy over tax evasion allegations. Against this backdrop, the Suisse secrets revelations may fuel questions over whether Credit Suisse’s challenges are indicative of a deep malaise at the bank. Jeff Neiman, a Florida-based attorney who represents a number of Credit Suisse whistleblowers, believes the sheer number of scandals involving the bank indicates a deeper problem. “The bank likes to say it’s just rogue bankers. But how many rogue bankers do you need to have before you start having a rogue bank?” he said. Neiman alleges there has been a culture at the bank “which encourages its bankers probably from the top down to hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil, bury their heads in the sand on a good day, and on many days, actively assist folks to skirt whatever the law may be in order to best protect assets under management”.” Such allegations are strongly rejected by Credit Suisse. “In line with financial reforms across the sector and in Switzerland, Credit Suisse has taken a series of significant additional measures over the last decade, including considerable further investments in combating financial crime,” the bank said in its statement, adding that it upheld “the highest standards of conduct”. Its lawyers said it had fully cooperated with many of the investigations cited by the Guardian and that any past individual failings by the bank did not reflect its current business policies, practices or culture. In November, it announced it would put “risk management at the very core of the bank”. The bank said its “preliminary review” of the accounts flagged by the Suisse secrets reporting project had established that more than 90% of those reviewed were now closed or “were in the process of closure prior to receipt of the press inquiries”. Of the remaining accounts, which remain active, the bank said it was “comfortable that appropriate due diligence, reviews and other control-related steps were taken, including pending account closures”. The Credit Suisse statement added: “These media allegations appear to be a concerted effort to discredit the bank and the Swiss financial marketplace, which has undergone significant changes over the last several years.” The debate over whether Switzerland’s banking industry has undergone sufficient reforms is likely to be renewed in light of the leak. The whistleblower who shared the data suggested that banks alone should not be blamed for the state of affairs, as they are “simply being good capitalists by maximising profits within the legal framework they operate in”. “Simply put, Swiss legislators are responsible for enabling financial crimes and – by virtue of their direct democracy – the Swiss people have the power to do something about it. While I am aware that banking secrecy laws are partly responsible for the Swiss economic success story, it is my strong opinion that such a wealthy country should be able to afford a conscience.” * Currency conversions are based on historical rates.The first stop for Ella Fyodorova after she fled her home in eastern Ukraine was a windblown tent camp just across the Russian border, part of a mass evacuation effort that observers fear may become the pretext for Russia to launch a formal intervention in Ukraine. “I wanted to stay, but my husband came home, and said: ‘Get your things together, we’re going,’” she said as she wrestled her two-year-old son into a blue snowsuit to walk to the public toilets nearby. The recent escalation in fighting had not touched her home city of Starobesheve, she said, but warnings from the Russian-backed separatist government of an imminent attack by Ukraine had driven many families to gather their children and flee. Her husband, who dropped her at the border, had to turn back. Now she sat in the dim light of a medical tent alongside other mothers holding their children, all waiting for the next bus to take them further into Russia. Many left carrying just the basics: clothing, medicine, some food. “I don’t know where we’re going,” she said. “I don’t know anything. Tomorrow we need to start searching for a place to live.” Other evacuees who spoke with the Guardian during a recent trip to the Rostov border region said they left because of the resumption of heavy artillery fire that reminded them of the most dangerous phase of the war in 2014. “It’s dangerous – I live by the airport so I heard salvoes all night… until four in the morning I couldn’t fall asleep,” said Natalia Klimchuk, 35, who was there with her three-year-old daughter. “I got my daughter and said, ‘It’s time to get out of here.’” There is evidence suggesting that the sudden evacuations of the Russian-controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were planned and likely to have been designed to set the stage for a formal Russian intervention in the country’s east. The leaders of the Russian proxy states in eastern Ukraine filmed their announcements of the evacuations days before they were made public, according to video metadata. But for the women, children, and others who are being evacuated, the result is undeniably real and traumatic, as they arrive by the hundreds in a neighbouring region that appears unprepared for the tide of evacuees. In the early chaos of that effort, some said they felt like pawns in a larger game. “Maybe they’ll shoot and then it will quiet down,” said Viktoria from Donetsk, who was also at the tent camp on the border. “I think it’s a farce, though. Like when there’s a fuss and then that’s all … a staged event.” More than 300 evacuees were sent to the Krasny Desant sanatorium just 20 miles from the border. Inside, children ran through the hallways as their parents filled out intake forms and received small handouts such as sim cards. The grounds were patrolled by police, including at least one officer with an automatic rifle (they forced a Guardian correspondent to leave the sanatorium). In a nearby church, Natalia Chetveryakova, 61, said the seaside camp had housed evacuees in 2014 when the war began in eastern Ukraine and had even hosted refugees in 2008 after the Georgian war. Some said they were happy to be placed so close to the border and were thankful for the stipend of 10,000 roubles (£95) that the Russian government has promised to give to evacuees. Others expected better conditions. Beckoning us into her room, where she was staying with her daughter and granddaughter, Sonya, seven, Lyudmila Barskaya showed off the spartan but liveable conditions with an air of resign. “Here are the beds, and that’s all there is,” she said. “All you can do is cry. I understand that it’s like this for us. But nothing more for the children?” Organisation has been a problem. A day earlier, 150 evacuees from Donetsk arrived at a nearby sanatorium only to be told there was no space for them. “We made a mistake when we chose to leave,” one told a reporter for Meduza. A similar scene unfolded at the Congress hotel in nearby Taganrog, where buses full of stressed and tired evacuees arrived only to be turned away. Other residents in the Russian-controlled territories have decided to ignore the evacuation order and stay at home. “We have been hearing about Ukrainian attacks for years – I don’t think it is different this time,” said Tamara Fomina, 64, a pensioner from Donetsk, the largest city in the region. Almost half of the prewar population of 3.8 million left the separatist-controlled Donbas areas after the unrest in 2014, and those who stayed appeared to be numb to the separatist warnings of a Ukrainian invasion. “This is my home; we have been through a lot. If I die, I die, so let it be! But I am not leaving this house to go to live in some tent in Rostov,” Fomina said in a telephone interview. But many are taking steps to prepare for an uncertain future. After the mass evacuation announcement, photographs showed people standing in long lines to use a cash machine in Donetsk. On Saturday, the central bank of the self-proclaimed Donetsk republic announced a maximum withdrawal limit of 10,000 roubles a day from ATMs. “There are lines everywhere. Lines for gas, for money, for food. People are worried shops won’t buy new supplies,” said Donetsk local Vlada Vologina, 34. Vologina also claimed that public transport in Donetsk was paralysed because authorities used the city’s buses as part of the mass evacuation operation. Some men in Donetsk expressed worry after receiving call-up papers ordering them to report to the headquarters of the local militia on Sunday. “When I came back from work last night, I saw the paper in my mailbox. This is all moving very fast,” said Vadim, who asked for his last name to be withheld. “I don’t know who is at fault for all of this, but I don’t want war. My wife is pregnant and fighting a war was never in my plans,” he added, saying he was still undecided whether he would go to the militia headquarters. Meanwhile, there are signs that Russia is ramping up the evacuation efforts: a local sporting facility has been converted into a makeshift centre for more than 300 evacuees and buses are taking more to a local train station, where they were put on a train destined for Nizhny Novgorod on Sunday. Some of those arriving at the station did not realise they were being sent hundreds of miles north. Some said they believe the latest events will force Russia to step in and officially recognise or even annex the territories that it has run as proxies since 2014. “All of us who left are thinking and hoping that this is the last time,” said Elena Kravchenko, a post office worker from the Starobesheve district. “That [Russia] will come in and clean them out.”San Francisco school board members recalled from their posts this week allowed themselves to become distracted by politics, the city’s mayor said on Sunday. Voters overwhelmingly approved the recall of board president Gabriela López, vice-president Faauuga Moliga and commissioner Alison Collins. The board was enveloped in controversy over Covid regulations and closures; an attempt to rename 44 schools deemed to be named for figures linked to racism, sexism and other injustices, among them Abraham Lincoln; and remarks by Collins about Asian Americans. The mayor of San Francisco, London Breed, spoke to NBC’s Meet the Press. Discussing her obligation to name replacements, she said: “I’m going to be looking for people that are going to focus on the priorities of the school district and not on politics, and not on what it means to run for office, and stepping stones, and so on and so forth. “We need people who want to be on the school board to make a difference, and who meet those qualifications to do the job.” Breed sidestepped suggestions the recall showed voters rejecting progressive policies. “My take is that it was really about the frustration of the board of education [not] doing their fundamental job,” she said. “And that is to make sure that our children are getting educated, that they get back into the classroom. And that did not occur. They were focusing on other things that were clearly a distraction. “Not to say that those other things around renaming schools and conversations around changes to our school district weren’t important, but what was most important is the fact that our kids were not in the classroom. “And San Francisco … we’ve been a leader during this Covid pandemic. In some cases, we have put forth the most conservative policies to ensure the safety of all San Franciscans. And our vaccination rates, and our death rates and other numbers demonstrate that we are a clear leader. “But we failed our children. Parents were upset. The city as a whole was upset, and the decision to recall school board members was a result of that.” School boards have become battlegrounds across the US, often as conservative parents and activists look to control what children are taught and how schools deal with Covid. Breed said: “This is not a Democratic/Republican issue. This is an issue about the education of our children.” She also said parents wanted “someone who is going to focus on … making sure that children get the education that they need in our schools, dealing with the challenges of learning loss, dealing with the mental health challenges that exist”. López, the board president, said her recall was the “consequence” of her “fight for racial justice”, and added: “White supremacists are enjoying this, and the support of the recall is aligned with this.” Breed said: “Well, of course [that’s] not the right kind of reaction. And the fact that we’re still even listening to any of the recalled school board members is definitely a problem. “… This person is making it about them when it really should be about our kids who have suffered, not just in San Francisco but all over this country as a result of this pandemic.” Her host, Chuck Todd, asked: “How much of this was about renaming the schools of George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln, and [Senator] Dianne Feinstein [and] how much of it was also parents upset that the rules were changed at how you got into some specific magnet schools?” Breed said it “was probably both. But at the end of the day, our kids were not in school. And they should’ve been.” “… And yes, of course there were people who were probably upset about some of the proposed changes. But those are discussions that are important to have, but not at the expense of making sure that the priority of what the school district is there to do is met.”The image of the Queen sitting alone while mourning the death of Prince Philip has become a symbol of public sacrifice during the pandemic. And the 95-year-old monarch appears to have been fastidious in abiding by public health guidance, routinely wearing a face mask, scaling-back Christmas celebrations and publicly confirming her vaccination status. However, with continuing very high levels of Covid-19 in the community, even the most cautious are at risk of infection. Throughout the pandemic, older people have been disproportionately at risk from Covid-19. During the first wave, about 10% of those aged 80 years and over who were infected died. And since March 2020, more than 5% of England’s population of those over 90 years old have died within 28 days of a positive Covid test. But during the past year, things have improved dramatically for the oldest people in society. Vaccination has offered a crucial wall of defence. The Queen had her first vaccine in January 2021 and is thought to have had all her follow-up doses. Early on, there was concern that vaccines would be less effective in older age groups due to the immune system being less responsive. And it does seem likely that older people are more susceptible to infection, even when vaccinated. A study of more than 200,000 people published this week, found that older people have significantly lower concentrations of antibodies in their blood after vaccination than younger people and their levels of antibodies wane more quickly. But lower rates of infection suggest that older age groups more than compensate for this higher susceptibility by behaving more cautiously and having fewer social contacts. Protection against severe disease in older age groups appears to be holding up well. Research by the UK Health Security Agency shows that around three months after they received the third jab, protection against mild infection among those aged 65 and over dropped to about 30%. But protection against hospitalisation remains at about 90%. Omicron has also turned out to be a milder variant, with the chance of hospital attendance in those over 70 years being reduced by more than one-third. In January, the prevalence of Covid infections in the over-70 category rose above 3% – the highest at any time during the pandemic – and remain hovering above 2%. But there has not been a huge surge in deaths. Buckingham Palace indicates that the Queen’s symptoms are mild. Even so, there are other protections that the Queen’s doctors may be considering. In a recent trial, the Pfizer antiviral pill, Paxlovid, reduced the risk of hospitalisation or death by 88% when given within five days of symptoms. The pill, along with another antiviral made by Merck, is automatically available to clinically extremely vulnerable people who test positive on a PCR test. Outside this high-risk category, the drugs can also be accessed by those aged over 50 who have a health condition, such as heart disease or asthma, or who are considered by their doctor to be vulnerable, through the Panoramic trial. Doctors also sometimes recommend monitoring for more vulnerable patients using an oximetry device to keep track of blood oxygenation at home. Prof Paul Hunter, an infectious disease expert at the University of East Anglia, said someone in their 90s would be at increased risk of severe disease compared with younger people, even if they had been triple vaccinated. Nearly all severe Covid infections begin with mild symptoms, he explained. Prof Hunter told the PA news agency: “With somebody in their mid-90s, even if they’re triple vaccinated you are concerned that they could gradually deteriorate over coming days and so you would need to keep a very careful eye on them. “You would, I think, almost certainly be considering giving antiviral drugs, of which there are a number around at the moment.” He added: “If you do get them early enough it does reduce the risk of severe disease developing so I would imagine any doctor for a patient in their 90s would be considering giving these antivirals out.” The Queen’s diagnosis comes as the government plans to lift all remaining Covid restrictions, including the legal requirement for people who test positive for Covid to self-isolate, in the coming days.Ukrainian officials have accused international monitors working in the conflict zone in the country’s east of succumbing to pro-Russian bias, after the mission was depleted when the US, British and Canadian governments withdrew their citizens. The mission, run by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), is made up of hundreds of unarmed monitors, often former diplomats from OSCE member states. Their armoured vehicles crisscross the territory on both sides of the lines to report ceasefire violations. As Moscow looks ready to exploit the tense situation in the conflict zone to provide a pretext for the further invasion of Ukraine, the work of the monitors is more important than ever. However, just when they are most needed, their ability to work has been hampered by the decision by several countries to evacuate, due to the risk of a Russian invasion. “We have asked for France and Germany to increase the number of monitors they have in place, and we want the OSCE to return to working according to its mandate,” said the Ukrainian deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereschuk, speaking on Saturday in Stanytsia Luhanska, a town in Ukrainian-controlled territory right on the frontline. Russia insists Ukraine is planning an offensive in the east. Ukraine and western countries believe Russian claims of escalation are merely a smokescreen to give it a pretext to launch a military assault. “It’s very important for everyone to understand that it’s the Russian Federation that’s behind this. Ukraine has no offensive plans,” said Vereschuk, after a visit to a kindergarten in Stanytsia Luhanska that was shelled on Thursday. Impact marks suggest the kindergarten was hit from the south, where the Russia-backed separatists have positions, but Russian media have suggested the incident could have been a setup. Although journalists were given access to the scene on Thursday and again on Saturday, in their daily report the OSCE said its staff were not permitted to approach closer than 50 metres to the school and were thus “unable to determine the weapons used or the direction of fire”. “This did not happen,” said Vereschuk. “Unfortunately, we are able to state that the OSCE special monitoring mission was not completely objective about the situation with the kindergarten.” Serhiy Haidai, the Kyiv-appointed governor of Luhansk region, went further, suggesting the departure of British, American and Canadian monitors had led to a pro-Russian bias. “Those who are left are representatives of Russia and the former Soviet countries, and they can look at things very one-sidedly. They don’t go where they know they will find proof of shelling of civilian buildings, but they are very happy to look at our military installations, and this creates a big question for us,” he told the Guardian in Stanytsia Luhanska. The mission’s 680 monitors come from more than 40 countries, and the withdrawn American, British, Canadian and Dutch delegations represent 57, 40, 28 and seven people respectively, according to a January OSCE report. The OSCE mission has long come under suspicion on both sides of the lines, though impediments to work on the separatist side have usually been more frequent and greater. “The Ukrainians were always suspicious of the Russian and Belarusian monitors, while the separatists were suspicious of Americans and Poles,” said Nikolaus von Twickel, a Berlin-based analyst who previously worked for the mission. A spokesperson for the mission did not comment on the Ukrainian accusations, but after this article was published, the Twitter account of the mission posted a message from the chief monitor: “In response to a media item today, I underline that all staff are bound by the mission’s code of conduct – the ethical principles and norms of the OSCE – and perform their duties impartially and neutrally.” Sources inside the OSCE mission dismissed Ukrainian claims of bias. “The idea that a change in personnel would influence the report … This just isn’t how it works. There are so many layers of checks,” said one source inside the mission, who spoke on condition of anonymity. However, there is great unease at the decision by some countries to withdraw monitors. In a video call with about 450 staff last Monday, the head of the monitoring mission, Yaşar Halit Çevik, said evacuated staff with office jobs would not be able to work remotely, according to one source who was on the call. Çevik also said that if monitors from countries that had not ordered evacuations were worried about the situation, they could take annual leave. Many staff have done so, further depleting the mission. One member of the mission described the OSCE plans for evacuation if there is a Russian escalation as “shaky at best, and still in progress”, which was a factor that led many to opt to take leave. However, among the monitors stationed in the most dangerous parts of eastern Ukraine there is a feeling that the US, British and Canadian withdrawal is an overreaction. “There is a strong opinion among colleagues that it’s a bad idea,” said one monitor, from a country that has not evacuated its citizens. “There are colleagues who served in Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq. People knew they were signing up to be sent into a war zone. And now, when the mission is more important than ever before, they are being pulled out.”It’s a pity the English language hasn’t also adopted the word mitfreude (“with joy”) from the German, but only its negative opposite – schadenfreude (‘The pleasure of a chancer unmasked’: why we are living in the age of schadenfreude, 16 February). Mitfreude is the joyful emotion we experience when we delight in others’ good news, happiness or joy. How strange that we don’t seem to have a word for it. Martina Crowther-Menn Cambridge • Arwa Mahdawi refers to the Adam Smith Institute’s proposals (Privatising the moon may sound like a crazy idea but the sky’s no limit for avarice, 17 February), but this is not new. The influential sci-fi author Robert A Heinlein published The Man Who Sold the Moon in 1950, describing predatory late capitalism trying to do just that. John Wilson London • Interesting to read suggestions of gigs that changed music (Letters, 18 February), but I am upset by your error in saying Buddy Holly was the first rock’n’roll act to tour the country when we had rocked and rolled to Bill Haley a year earlier. Valerie Gidlow Faversham, Kent • Having had a childhood in rural Wales, it was always amusing when visiting my widowed mother – who was living away from Wales – that we took our shoes off by the front door and wiped the soles with disinfectant (Letters, 18 February). My mother was keen to keep well living on her own – she died at 96. Helen Evans Ruthin, Denbighshire • I look to the shoes and slippers to see who’s home. Lucie Galvin Balboa Island, California, US • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sir Tim Smit’s intemperate denunciation of Cornish people as “tossers” for looking back to the good old days helps to highlight a number of things about contemporary Cornwall (Eden Project co-founder under fire for rant about Cornish people, 16 February). First, we should understand why many look back to a time before tourism and mass immigration made affording a decent home, or a home at all, beyond the reach of many Cornish people. The Cornish are now a minority in Cornwall, and are more likely to experience unemployment, low wages and poor health than non-Cornish residents. Second, Smit’s remarks are not just offensive, they are possibly racist insofar as the Cornish are a recognised ethnic minority, a protected characteristic. Perhaps Mr Smit should look a little further into what Cornish people are doing to develop their economy, culture and language, and be supportive rather than abusive. Prof Malcolm Williams Cardiff University • Surely Cornish folk need to lighten up a little about Tim Smit’s words. When I was a lad up north, I don’t recall being unduly troubled by that old favourite: “Derbyshire born and Derbyshire bred: strong in the arm and weak in the head.” Alan Hallsworth Waterlooville, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.At 97, getting to sleep can be a complicated affair (Letters, 16 February). I greet my first God, Jehovah, with a little prayer, then say “hello” to Allah followed by my Hindu friend, and finally turn to Buddha before counting to 100, doing relaxation exercises. Turning from my right to left side, I start all over again. Somehow, I must sleep because I wake up in the early hours to relieve myself. And bingo, returning to bed I think back to the good days when I was 20. Getting up to shower is an effort that is manageable between 8am and 10am. And the day begins. Gabriel Aitman Northwood, London • When I have trouble getting to sleep, or actually more often getting back to sleep after having had to go to the loo at around 3am, I have tried to develop a strategy (counting anything has never worked for me) whereby I have to use all the letters in the alphabet for lists in a particular category. Capital cities, English football clubs (I do ignore X and Z, but thank you QPR). The single-word names of pop groups (ie Abba) work, but not the Beatles. However, here’s the thing about the Beatles. I’ve tried to recall A-Z Beatles songs (here I use every word in the title) repeatedly over the years. There is no V. Maybe Lennon and McCartney knew and kept a song back? I have had to watch every second of the eight hours of Get Back through the night for clues – a hard day’s night indeed. Help! Frank Newhofer Oxford • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Martin Kettle’s thoughtful article on the future of the monarchy (16 February) ended with the phrase “a story about the kind of country we choose to be”. Am I unduly pessimistic in thinking we have very little choice? The norms of our society are set primarily by huge international technology companies and their relationship with advertising and social discourse. Our politics is conducted under systems and conventions that are no longer fit for purpose, where the House of Lords seems more representative of democracy and justice than either the Commons or the government. Not even supporters of Brexit can have chosen to bring the country to its present sorry state. And there is nothing we (the people) can do, until the powers allow us another vote. Yes, the monarchy needs changing (or for some, abolishing), but the whole structure is in desperate need of reform. The status of the monarchy, the power and structure of the executive, the powers of legislation and scrutiny of parliament, the methods of election and appointment, justice and accountability – all these and no doubt other matters need to be examined publicly and forensically in citizens’ assemblies. Then “we” can choose, and it is to be hoped that our political establishment will listen and put through parliament the bulk of our wishes, regardless of the vested interests against them. Hugh Legge Northampton • It is unfortunate that Simon Jenkins (Whisper it, but the time is right for the Queen to abdicate, 14 February) does not stay with his thought that the head of state being chosen by birth and religion is inherently absurd. It is also inherently undemocratic. Tom Nairn, in his work The Enchanted Glass, proposes that the “constitutional monarchy” is “both the apex and essence of the British state, the symbol of its backwardness”. It is simply not the case that the monarchy’s role is powerless and “emphatically detached from political partisanship”. The powers are real, even if not usually exercised. The recent revelations of the process of Queen’s consent further undermine the notion of being free from partisanship and independent of the political process. The removal of the crown from the constitution and an elected second house are minimum requirements for a modern and mature democracy. Nigel Florence Mevagissey, Cornwall • It is refreshing to see Polly Toynbee argue clearly for the end of our feudal and anachronistic monarchy (Clearly Britain loses more than it gains from the monarchy. Let us be brave and end it, 17 February). The Queen is rightly admired for her lifelong service, even by many of us who advocate for a republican Britain. This is the time to do it with minimum fuss and rancour, almost a celebration of Her Majesty as Polly shrewdly recommends, before moving on to becoming a modern European state. There is no guarantee that the Queen’s successors will be like her. Electing our head of state would allow all the safeguards that Polly mentions to come into effect. Most importantly, it will pull the rug away from class-based entitlement that has bred a nation of inequality. And let’s have some meaningful honours – drop the “empire” as if it were alive and well, and something that citizens who serve their country and society should be made “members” of. Christopher Tanner Llandovery, Carmarthenshire • Polly Toynbee is right. The future of the monarchy is worthy of a full-blown inquiry. It will take time to reach its conclusions, but who seriously thinks that hereditary peers is a feature we should be happy with in the 21st century, and will there ever be a more suitable monarch to be the last? It is time to start the process. Andrew Dean Exeter • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Italian ambassador to Australia has died after falling from a balcony in her home town in Foligno in the Umbria region. According to reports, Ambassador Francesca Tardioli, 56, was found dead outside her house after apparently falling from the third floor. The incident is being investigated by the police in Italy. “Heartbreaking news on the passing of Ambassador Francesca Tardioli. Dear friend. Brilliant colleague. Greatly respected diplomat,” wrote Australia’s ambassador to Italy, Margaret Twomey, on Twitter. “Our thoughts are with her family, friends.’’ Twomey described Tardioli as one of Italy’s greatest gifts to Australia. The embassy and Italy’s foreign affairs ministry also mourned her on social media. ‘’It is with profound sorrow that we weep for the loss of Francesca Tardioli and join the family’s grief. She was a great diplomat and servant of the State,’’ said the Italy’s foreign ministry on Twitter. “She allegedly lost her balance while leaning over her balcony,’’ Italian news agency AGI reported. Tardioli, who held the position of ambassador since September 2019 and was fluent in English and French and had a good knowledge of German and Spanish. She joined the Italian National Diplomatic Service in 1991.There may have been some raised eyebrows at the unusual starting XI to play Spain but a gutsy and focused performance against a team laden with Barcelona’s Champions League winners earned a 0-0 draw and demonstrated there is serious depth to England’s squad looking ahead to the European Championship this summer. In front of an impressive crowd of 14,284, with rail replacement buses disrupting travel to Carrow Road and the lashing rain, Lauren Hemp went closest for the Lionesses, smacking an effort against the post shortly after the restart on the second day of Arnold Clark Cup fixtures. “I’m happy with the performance. I thought this performance was more mature than against Canada. That’s development,” Sarina Wiegman, the England manager, said. “We want to win every game. That’s how we approach a game. But we also say we don’t win the Euros now. We’re trying to stay really neutral if we win or lose. This is just another stop on our journey to the Euros. We want to take every bit of information out of it.” Wiegman had promised “some changes” to the starting XI to face the Catalan-heavy Spain and she delivered, with nine to the side that put in one of the best first-half performances the Lionesses have produced in years in their 1-1 draw with Canada on Thursday. Only Rachel Daly and Alex Greenwood remained, with the former shifted from right-back to left-back as backup options for Demi Stokes on the left are explored. The successful double pivot partnership of Keira Walsh and Leah Williamson was relegated to the bench, with Manchester City’s Georgia Stanway instead operating as a single pivot in front of Greenwood and fellow centre-back Jess Carter. The England manager had said she wanted to “do a little more research” on the double pivot and try it again, but added: “We want to see other things, too, this week. We want to try out different players in positions and see how they connect to each other, so it’s absolutely something that we want to see again. But we’ll try out some other things too. “In football things are dynamic,” she said. “When you take a picture in a certain moment it’s two pivots, and when you take a picture of a certain other moment it might be one pivot, so we’re trying things out with other players, too.” Spain had made five changes but the heartbeat of the side – the Ballon d’Or and Fifa best winner and Uefa player of the year, Alexia Putellas – remained with her fellow Barcelona midfielders Aitana Bonmatí and Patri Guijarro. Despite the tricky trio helping Spain to dominate possession with 66% of the ball, the England triumvirate of Stanway, the Arsenal midfielder Jordan Nobbs and team veteran Jill Scott, impressed as the visiting team were limited to four shots on target and only one in the first half. Keeping Spain at bay is no mean feat – they had scored 97 goals in their previous 17 games before this match in Norwich – but the unorthodox backline sitting in front of the debutant Hannah Hampton, whose distribution throughout was top notch, stood firm. It is rare that you are left wondering what has to be done to Scott, a physical presence herself, for a foul to be given, but Spain were aggressive in the middle, conceding 14 fouls to England’s seven. There was an urgency and intensity to England’s play that kept them in the game but Spain looked patient, their passing crisp, and they seemed happy to wait for the opening. Despite the pre-Euros hype, Spain have yet to win a knockout game at a major tournament and are very much newly competitive on the international stage. The arrival of the direct, Norwich-produced winger Hemp in the second half almost immediately caught the visiting side off-guard, though, as she shifted the ball on to her left foot 30 seconds after coming on before cracking the ball off the left-hand post with Misa Rodríguez beaten. Wiegman had given a heads up on the change that would come around the hour. With Spain in the ascendancy but Lucía García shooting poorly wide from 10 yards out in their best attempt, the excellent Stanway was shifted forward and Walsh and Williamson came on for Scott and Nobbs as England attempted to maintain their intensity and solidity. England created a handful of chances late on but they lacked an end product. Hampton also did well to stop a blistering late shot from the substitute and player of the match Athenea del Castillo. “I would be worried if we weren’t creating chances,” said the Spain manager, Jorge Vilda, whose team drew 1-1 with Germany in their opening game of the tournament. “Perhaps a little more cutting edge is needed to score the goals that we are after. We will work on this ahead of the Euros.”Thank you so much for joining me for this cracker between England and Spain! The Arnold Clark Cup is still all to play for and anyone could take it. There’s one England match to go, they will play Germany on Wednesday and it’s the Lionesses’ last chance to win the tournament. But for now, if you want to delve into the England performance we have just seen - read Suzy Wrack’s report here! England manager Sarina Wiegman told ITV: “A game of a very high level. 0-0 sounds boring but it wasn’t. “We were dangerous, we had about six chances. First of all we have many player in our squad, the team is very strong. “We had a plan and I think we did a pretty good job. That’s what we take from it.” England top the table in the Arnold Clark Cup despite having the same points as Spain. It’s their disciplinary records which separates the teams. Canada and Germany have the chance to knock the Lionesses off top spot this evening. The kick-off in that game coming at 7.45pm. England player Lauren Hemp told ITV: “Spain were unbelievable, they played us out the park at times. “We had plenty of chances but we couldn’t get it away. It was a 0-0 draw, we will take the positives away and we have things to work on but we’ll work on those. “It’s every kid’s dream to play for England and to do it at the place I call home is amazing.” The all important winner couldn’t be found and the teams share the spoils. Spain are the favourites for the Euros and England outplayed them, in my opinion. It was a stellar defensive performance but their final touches in attack let them down. Hampton has proven her worth, as well as Bronze, Hemp and Carter. Hermoso, Putellas and Del Castillo were the stand out Spanish players. It was a cracking battle with close chances for both sides. The draw means the Arnold Clark Cup is yet to see a match with a winner. Can Canada and Germany change that this evening? 90 + 3 min: Hemp has proven she desrves the starting shirt with this second half performance. She has been so slick. And Earps and Roebuck must be nervous watching Hampton’s debut, she has been almost flawless in this game. England’s defence continues to stand tall as Spain look for a late winner. 90 +1 min: Four minutes added as England set up a free kick and they need to throw everything at this. Greenwood takes the kick, White heads the ball but it doesn’t reach Daly. Spain counter and Del Castillo strikes. I thought that was going in but Hampton has a sensational save. Wow!! 88 min: I honestly can’t believe England haven’t scored from that period of possession. The Lionesses have been the better side, particularly in this second half, but they can’t punish their opponents when they need to. Spain build from deep and they seem to be winding down the clock, maybe hoping for a late winner? My heart goes in my mouth as Del Castillo almost gets a goal but it goes wide. Del Castillo is named Player of the Match. 86 min: Wow! Del Castillo sprints for her life to get to a Putellas pass and she does. As well as that she wins a corner! England manage to clear the ball but Spain rally it back into the box and Hampton calmly collects it. Her goal kick is pinpoint to England’s midfield but again the final touch isn’t clean. They come again and White almost gets a head to it. It comes back out to Kirby and she doesn’t take the shot. Hermoso has come off for Gonzales. 83 min: Del Castillo has been a superb sub for Spain and she does well to create a chance in the box. Her beautiful pass isn’t read by her teammates and England manage to clear. Over 14,000 at Carrow Road to watch this enthralling battle. A great turnout, considering how awful the weather is. 81 min: Hampton is sensational, it’s hard to believe this is her debut. A ball rockets towards her and she calmly catches to send England on the attack once again. Ahead of the play, Stanway now comes off for Ella Toone. Emma Hayes has praised the Manchester City star but I don’t think she’s had her best performance. Greenwood fires the ball and Bronze does amazingly well to fight off two defenders. But the attempt ends in a great defensive move from Rodriguez. So close yet so far. 78 min: Garcia does so well to read the ball being sent it as she prevents Hemp getting a head on target. They counter well but Carter, who has been amazing in defence, quells the attack once again. White is clattered in the midfield to win a free kick but again possession is turned over. The ball is pinballing around both teams at the moment. 76 min: England have to build from deep and Bronze wins a header at the halfway to feed Kirby. The ball bounces back into the midfield with Greenwood’s pass read well to be intercepted. Spain make another change as L Garcia comes off for Sarriegi. 74 min: England have had momentum for over ten minutes and Wiegman could have sent Kirby on to be clinical with the final touch - the only thing England are missing right now. Bronze battles to the edge of the box but she doesn’t cross it and it ends up in Spain’s possession. Though England’s attack is frustrating, their defence are holding up. 72 min: Hemp you beauty! A Spaniard slips and the Manchester City star steals the ball. She passes to White who waits a second too long to take a shot and is swarmed by red shirts. So close for England but it just isn’t’ coming together. Another change for England as Beth Mead makes way for Fran Kirby. 70 min: Putellas hunts down the ball but Hampton doesn’t let her presence pressure her and she sends England on an attack. Mead makes a great break and passes to Bronze who’s attempt find a Spanish player. Anyone else totally frustrated but the sloppiness of the final pass from the hosts? I may or may not have screamed at the TV. 68 min: Free kick from that Stanway challenge sees Leon take the ball and it sails over the wall. Hampton reads it well and she collects the effort. Mead has been clattered in the midfield with a free kick going England’s way. Greenwood takes it but it’s easily cleared. 66 min: It’s gone from keeper to keeper but Spain now look to breach England’s defence. Hermoso makes a great pass but Carter says ‘you shall not pass’ and swarms the ball to halt the danger. Stanway, who I thought had gone off I apologise for that, has received a yellow for standing on a calf. Not the best match for the star. 63 min: Here they come again, the English defenders must be knackered after this spell from Spain. Greenwood tackles Putellas excellently to stop the Ballon d’Or winner getting a shot away. There are changes for both sides as Batlle comes off for Carmona and England put Walsh and Williamson on for Nobbs and Stanway. Hampton puts in another smashing save - what a debut for the Aston Villa star. 60 min: How, oh how, has L Garcia missed that? England’s defence falters on the third attempt for a goal and the Spaniard found herself with a one-one-one with Hampton. But she fires the shot way wide. It’s an awful miss which could have seen England out of the game. Also hearing England are about to make another change, no confirmation on who it is yet. 58 min: A rare poor touch from Hermoso gifts the ball to Scott who gets it away to Mead, but she coughs up possession through a foul. She makes up for it with a fantastic challenge as Spain looked to threaten their defences. This second half is much better from both sides but England are looking the stronger. They need to follow it up with a goal before they lose this momentum! 56 min: In the words of DJ Khaled, another one! Stanway gets the ball outside of the box and has a chance but Rodriguez collects. It’s been exciting from England in the last few minutes but again it’s the final touch which isn’t clinical enough. Spain now on the attack, can they punish England? 53 min: Hemp has been a jolt of energy in this England team, livened them up and has also been excellent in defence too. Another close chance for England as Nobbs gets in a great position. Her slice goes across the face of goal but the hosts are edging closer. 51 min: Well done Daly, she puts a pinpoint challenge on to steal the ball. England rally and White gets to it but Leon tackles her perfectly to quell the danger. The early chance from Hemp has woken both sides up with chances for both. An ebb of slow build-up play now with Spain in possession. 49 min: England’s scintillating start to the second 45 has been cooled as Mead gets a yellow for a foul on Hermoso. The resulting free kick sees a shot come off but Greenwood blocks. Hermoso eventually hits it out of play but Spain are alive and kicking now. 47 min: Immediate impact from Hemp as she snatches the ball just outside the box. She rockets a shot and it rattles the woodwork. So, so close! The Manchester City star is just breath-taking. We are back underway at Carrow Road. England have made their first change with Parris coming off for Lauren Hemp. It’s disappointing for Parris, who is yet to put her stamp on the 21/22 season. Spain have also gone to their bench as Cardona is off for Athenea del Castillo. Will there be a goal in this game? We will find out soon ... I love a cheeky statistic and boy do I have some good ones for you! I spoke earlier about there being no clear cut chances for either side and I am happy the numbers are backing me up. There’s only been one shot on target and it was from a Spanish foot. The visitors have had 66% possession to England 34%, Spain have put in eight fouls to England’s three and each side have had a corner each. What a defensive performance from England, they have repelled all of Spain’s attacks with Putellas starting to hit her stride. There haven’t been clear chances for either side and the main headline is how brutal this encounter is. Daly has had an elbow to the face, Batlle is putting in some heavy challenges and White has been cut down more than once. Can the deadlock be broken in the second half? 45 min: Spain’s Leon sails the ball into the box but it has too much on it and it goes out of play. England have a chance to break the deadlock ahead of half-time with a throw in. They work it back to the halfway line and it ends with Bronze hitting it into touch. But they win the ball back with Mead and Nobbs working well together. However, they can’t get the final touch to it, the story of England’s attack it seems. One minute added at Carrow Road. 42 min: Putellas has a delightful pass to Cardona who makes a great break and picks out Garcia. She sends a curling ball towards goal but Hampton catches. A lot of chat surrounding the bench, who would you like to see make an appearance? Let me know! 40 min: Mead has had a steady match and is ever dependable when in the final third as she crosses again. None of her teammates are in position to get a foot to it but this is more promising from the hosts. There hasn’t been a break in the deadlock and it is a testament to the England defence. Apart from the miscommunication between Hampton and Carter, it has been perfect. 38 min: Carter deals well with a ball rocketing into the box but it was a deflection from Bronze who calmed the Spanish threat. Leon sends the ball out of play and Spain work their way back to their keeper. Now England start an attack with Mead firing the ball to White who is a whisker away from scoring. 36 min: Putellas wrestles the ball back after an England throw in and Hermoso almost gets a tap in. Spain aren’t looking their best but with every touch they are improving. Here they come again ... 33 min: Scott puts in a dicey challenge and wins the ball back for England but Greenwood is wrestled off the ball. Possession is changing hands faster than I can type! England finally get a free kick from a challenge, this time Andres on White and the Spaniard receives a yellow card. The kick is taken from halfway and Bronze feeds White with a long kick but, again, the captain is offside. She scrunches her face up in frustration, the feeling is mutual. The final third mistakes are hampering England. 29 min: How has Batlle not received a yellow with that foul on Mead? She chops the Arsenal star down but the ref doesn’t blow the whistle. England look to build but White is ruled offside. It’s so frustrating, England put in all the hard work and then can’t quite finish off the play. They’ll have to do so soon, Spain have scored 97 goals in their last 17 games - a cracking stat! 27 min: Stanway loses the ball in the midfield again and Spain pounce. That’s the second time the Manchester City star has lost it. While it was an England mistake that led to chance, Hampton shows why she’s in the starting shirt with a fantastic block. Spain still going through the phases, they have settled into this one and they are building. Will they have the opener? 24 min: What a play from Spain! Putellas sets up L Garcia for a cross but England clear it and concede a corner - Spain’s first of the match. Hermoso takes the kick but Greenwood heads away. Parris does well to again repel Spain. The visitors haven’t got into third gear yet but even in second they look deadly. 22 min: This start from England is impressive. They are all over Spain when they come forward and have had promising moments on the counter and at set-piece. The question is how long can they keep this up? If it’s up to Bronze and Parris it will continue the entire match as they team up to muscle the ball out of play for an England goal kick. 19 min: The crowd boos as Bronze is penalised and to be fair it looked like a harsh call from the ref. It quells the England attack and Spain look to control the ball more. But then an almost horror moment for England’s defence as a miscommunication nearly ended in a Spain goal! Hampton calls the ball but Carter came into clear it, the ball spilling from both of them. Carter does well to clear it. 16 min: Wow! I said brilliant moments would come and we’ve just seen one! England make a break through Nobbs, who has started well, and she passes to Mead who dances around the Spanish defence. Mead crosses in but Rodriguez collects. The Lionesses then win a corner, which Greenwood takes. Rodriguez jumps and punches the ball away, England throw in to come. 14 min: Daly has had an elbow to the face and she had stayed on the floor since the challenge. It took a little while for play to stop for her to receive medical attention. She is back on her feet and will continue. What a warrior! 12 min: This is a brutal match, so many players protesting they are being fouled, the latest being Batlle after Parris went for the ball. The referee seems reluctant to give free kicks and so the appeals are soon silent. Is it just me who thinks the game needs a energy injection? It’s quite stop start at the moment. But with these giants battling it’s inevitable we will see some brilliant moments. 10 min: How good is Lucy Bronze? She reads a Batlle play so well and intercepts to give possession back to England. Greenwood has pulled Cardona’s shirt which is frustrating as the Lionesses need to get a rhythm here. Spain launch the ball into the box but Hampton handles it well, it’s been a bright start for the keeper so far. 8 min: The free kick sees England retain possession and they are attempting to build attack. They are nearly through from Nobbs but they recycle the ball with it coming to Scott. She takes a shot but it goes wide. The Aston Villa loanee protests she was challenged but the whistle isn’t blown. The Lionesses continue to hammer away at Spain’s defence. Yet to have a spark in this match so far. 6 min: Stanway loses the ball in Spain’s half and Hermoso battles her way into the box. this is the first real test of England’s defence and they did well - repelling a shot from Batlle. Parris then frustrates Spain as England get the ball back as she earns a free kick after being pushed to the floor. Ivana then concedes another free kick with a heavy challenge on captain White. 4 min: Garcia tries to feed Hermoso but the pass isn’t clinical enough, so the Spanish attack slows. They remain in possession. At the moment both teams seem to be getting a foot in the game, the intensity isn’t as high as it was in the opening exchanges between England and Canada. 2 min: There was an early chance for England as the ball was fired into the box but Nikita Parris was swarmed so couldn’t get a shot away. And now the Spanish possession begins. We will see if they continue their record of having the lion share of the ball. Carter manages a Spain attack well by tapping the ball back to Hampton. The stadium isn’t full but there’s a hearty crowd who have made themselves known with the cheers ringing out ahead of the anthems. Hannah Hampton has a beaming smile as she prepares to make her senior England debut! We are underway, after the players take a knee, who is your winner? Kick-off is just over ten minutes away and I for one cannot wait for this one to get going. England produced a beautiful display against Canada for the first 45 and if they can bring that and sustain it this afternoon we have a proper game on our hands. There will be long periods the Lionesses don’t have the ball as Spain have 70% possession on average in their matches. So it’ll be a test for the defence. The teams are on their way out ... Weather chat alert! The weather at Carrow Road looks bad as the rain splashes down on the thousands of fans. It looks may not be great conditions for a monumental test in football but it will still deliver for the hype! Is there a better way to spend a Sunday? I didn’t think so. Ballon d’Or winner Alexia Putellas starts for Spain this afternoon and she is excited for the big test. “England are a great team, one of the best in the world,” said Putellas. “I always love playing against big teams like them. “I believe that we have improved a lot since [Spain last played England, securing a 1-0 win at] the 2020 SheBelieves Cup. We are a better team now. Tomorrow will be a really tough test. It will be a really high quality contest. We’ll need to be at the top of our game to win. We need to do the little things right.” What a day for Hannah Hampton! She has lit up the Women’s Super League for the past few seasons for Aston Villa with manager Carla Ward and fans championing the goalkeeper to get her senior England debut. And the day has finally arrived as she will aim to stop shots from the likes of Alexia Putellas. A great opportunity for the star to prove she deserves the shirt over Mary Earps and Ellie Roebuck. If the captaincy has confused any supporters who didn’t tune into the last fixture, regular skipper Steph Houghton is out with injury. Leah Williamson took the title against Canada but starts from the bench this afternoon and so Ellen White steps in. Wiegman hasn’t named an out-and-out captain in her reign which could be because Houghton has been unavailable to display her leadership. I wonder if she’ll bestow the title to one player ahead of the Euros? If she does, who would you like to see take it? Let me know by sending an email or popping me a tweet! Lionesses fans may be slightly more nervous about this afternoon’s fixture because of Spain’s fantastic form of late. The goal they conceded against Germany was the first time they haven’t had a clean sheet since March 2020. It was a phenomenal record and Spain will look to hold onto their unbeaten run in today’s game. But they won’t under-estimate their opponents and England have received the highest praise from Spain’s manager Jorge Vilda, who says he believes the current Lionesses are the best England team ever. “We’ve prepared well for this game, they’ve been training really well and we’ve been doing exercises based on dealing with high intensity opponents,” said Vilda. “I personally believe that this is perhaps the best England team ever. They’ve got plenty of youth in the side, players who play with coverage.” Let’s see if they live up to the title today ... Wiegman was true to her word as England make nine changes. She explained her decision to shake things up for the match against Spain in the build-up to the match. She said: “We want to see some things, we want to develop our style of play and we want to see combinations of players together to see how they connect, so tomorrow we have that opportunity and we will make some changes.” The team news has dropped and boy, oh, boy England have made a whole host of changes! Nine changes in the starting team and there is also a swap of skipper with all-time Lionesses scorer Ellen White taking the captaincy. The starting Xi is: Hampton, Daly, Greenwood, White, Bronze, Stanway, Carter, Mead, Parris, Nobbs, Scott. Substitutes: Earps, Stokes, Walsh, Bright, Kirby, Williamson, Toone, Hemp, Charles, Roebuck, Russo, Zelem. Spain have announced their team and Jorge Vilda has made four changes The starting XI is: Rodriguez, Batlle, Leon, Andres, S Garcia, Guijarro, Putellas, Bonmati, L Garcia, Cardona, Hermoso. Spain’s Twitter haven’t said who is on the bench but I’ll have a research and update as soon as I can! Preamble Welcome back to the Arnold Clark Cup! England will aim to bag their first win of the tournament, as will their opponents Spain. The first round of matches saw two 1-1 draws meaning each team are level on points heading into their second fixtures. Spain had an agonising result as they were leading Germany until the 88th minute. Lea Schuller scored the late equaliser to bag a point for her side after Alexia Putellas had fired Spain ahead. In the later fixture, England were the ones in control at half-time after a stunning Millie Bright strike. But Canada can never be counted out and Janine Beckie scored a beauty to level the scores. The brilliant fixture we have in store this afternoon will also have the added layer of the Euro talk with Spain the favourites. It will be a good test for Sarina Wiegman’s side to play the best in Europe, to correct any wrongs before they get it right in the summer. The manager has said she is making a lot of changes to the team that faced Canada with goalkeeper Hannah Hampton thought to be handed her debut. The starting XI’s will be revealed shortly ahead of kick-off at 3.15pm.The Manchester United manager, Ralf Rangnick, condemned the unsavoury scenes which led to Anthony Elanga being struck by a coin from the Leeds United stand during a fiery contest at Elland Road on Sunday, with the hosts investigating the incident. Elanga was hit by an object from the crowd in the aftermath of Fred’s goal which made it 3-2 in the visitors’ favour. The 19-year-old was unhurt and recovered to score United’s fourth in stoppage time and secure a vital three points on an afternoon when Rangnick’s side had earlier squandered a 2-0 half-time lead thanks to two second-half goals in two minutes from Rodrigo and Raphinha. “As far as I know there is some investigation going on from Leeds United,” Rangnick said afterwards. “In the end, Anthony looked well and he was happy about scoring. Obviously things like that should not happen.” The Press Association reported after the game that the Football Association are also going to investigate the incident, one that cast a shadow over a fiercely contested encounter, with no shortage of talking points. Rangnick praised his side for the maturity they showed in responding to being pulled back level and eventually going on to win the game. “It was a very intense game and if you were a neutral, you could say it was entertaining,” he said. “There were only few moments when nothing happened. “At half-time we were fully aware they’d have a go at us and play with more aggression. Rodrigo didn’t intend to play the ball where he did but within two minutes, it’s 2-2. We showed maturity and showed unity on the pitch and in the end we deserved to win.” The victory moves United four points clear of fifth-placed West Ham after the Hammers’ draw with Newcastle on Saturday, while Leeds remain firmly entrenched in the relegation battle. They remain five points clear of the bottom three but are now only the second side to concede 50 Premier League goals this season. They lost Robin Koch to a head injury in the first half, but only after the game had already been stopped because of an earlier collision which left Koch bloodied and needing treatment. When he was replaced, Leeds did not use a concussion substitute but Marcelo Bielsa appeared to suggest his withdrawal was not because of concussion concerns. “He had a cut in his head and what excludes him is the cut. If the cut is the most significant thing than the knock he received, I acted in accordance to that.”With the Queen approaching her 96th birthday in April, there was always going to be concern about her contracting Covid, but the monarch has tested positive against a radically different backdrop from when the virus arrived in the UK. In addition to the protection afforded by her vaccinations – and she is understood to have had a booster – she could also be given antiviral drugs approved by UK authorities as recently as December. While engaging in “light duties”, she will be cared for at Windsor Castle by the medical household – staff who are part of the royal household. At the forefront of decisions about her care will be the Queen’s physician, Sir Huw Thomas, who is a consultant at St Mary’s hospital in London and professor of gastrointestinal genetics at Imperial College London, as well as the head of the medical household. He may choose to prescribe one or more antivirals designed to protect the most vulnerable, a decision that potentially might have to be made within days. Despite the press and public being told that the Queen is suffering from “mild, cold-like symptoms”, experts stress that nearly all severe Covid infections can begin with mild symptoms. Prof Paul Hunter, an infectious disease expert at the University of East Anglia, said that with anyone in their mid-90s, even if triple-vaccinated, there would be concerns that they could gradually deteriorate. “You would, I think, almost certainly be considering giving antiviral drugs, of which there are a number around at the moment.” Drugs that could be considered include Ronapreve, which was approved in August last year, and which contains types of proteins called monoclonal antibodies. It has been shown to reduce the risk of hospital admission or death by 70% in those with mild to moderate Covid-19. Other options are two drugs approved in the UK in the last part of last year: Molnupiravir, which clinical trials suggest reduces the risk of hospital admission or death by 30%; and Pfizer’s Paxlovid, which has been shown to be around 90% effective in preventing the need for hospital admission. There are three other drugs – Sotovimab, Remdesivir and Dexamethasone – though Hunter said that the first two would need to be given within three days for them to have the best impact. The Queen has been known for her strong constitution and infrequent ill health and as recently as June 2020 was pictured riding a Fell pony at Windsor while isolating. On Wednesday, the sovereign, standing holding a walking stick, remarked during an in-person audience: “Well, as you can see, I can’t move.” Buckingham Palace declined to comment, but the Queen was understood to have been feeling slightly stiff, rather than having injured herself or being unwell. She missed the Remembrance Sunday event at the Cenotaph on 14 November last year due to a sprained back. Before that, she attended a busy reception for business leaders at Windsor Castle on 19 October. But the next day she cancelled a trip to Northern Ireland on medical advice and was admitted to hospital for a night to undergo preliminary tests. She then spent more than three months only carrying out light duties on doctors’ orders. That hospital stay was her first in eight years. In 2013, she was treated at the private clinic for a bout of gastroenteritis, and she also stayed for one night. Nevertheless, as Age UK has noted, age is not the only characteristic that influences individual risk from Covid, which should be considered alongside other characteristics that influence risk, including sex, ethnicity, and some pre-existing medical conditions. The charity also pointed out that, during the last few months of last year, older people had remained less likely than other age groups to have coronavirus. While reiterating that there was evidence that the protection afforded by vaccines waned over time, the charity also said that protection against serious illness remained very high for at least five months, and urged the elderly to get a booster. Buckingham Palace has declined to say when the Queen received a booster, or indeed confirm if she has had one. The monarch herself expressed enthusiasm in public last year for vaccinations as she encouraged people to “think about other people rather than themselves” and get the Covid-19 jab, in a video call with health officials leading the deployment of the vaccine across the UK. “Once you’ve had the vaccine, you have a feeling of … you know, you’re protected, which is I think very important,” she said.At the end of a Winter Olympics like no other, moments before a furious barrage of fireworks tattooed the Beijing skyline, the German president of the International Olympic Committee gave an extraordinarily upbeat assessment of these Games. “The Olympic spirit could only shine so brightly because the Chinese people set the stage in such an excellent way – and in a safe way,” Thomas Bach said. “The Olympic villages were outstanding. The venues – magnificent. The organisation – extraordinary. On behalf of the best winter sport athletes of the world, I say: Thank you, our Chinese friends!” It had been, Bach added, a “truly exceptional” Winter Games. Exceptional? Yes. But in myriad ways: good and bad. However, if there is a lasting requiem to these Games, it was soundtracked by Kirill Richter’s enchanting melody In Memoriam, the music to which the 15-year-old skater Kamila Valieva leapt and spun, performing the first quad in Olympic history during the team event. It was the Russian’s calling card to the world. Another came less than 48 hours later when she failed a drugs test for the banned heart medication TMZ. What followed was one of the most extraordinary – and desperate weeks – in Olympic history. By turns Valieva was vilified, hounded, supported, temporarily reprieved by the court of arbitration for sport and then – with the eyes of the world boring down on her in the individual event – her world finally fell apart. She fell twice. Departed the ice in tears. And then another twist of the knife as her coach, Eteri Tutberidze, lashed out at her. As a spectacle it was compelling, appalling and utterly sad. Not since Ben Johnson tested positive at the Seoul Games in 1988 has a drugs scandal so discombobulated our sensibilities; so shocked the world. This, after all, is a 15-year-old. She could never have acquired banned drugs by herself. Essentially it was cold abuse by a different name. Another tragedy: Valieva, who is widely regarded as the greatest female skater the world has seen, will probably never compete in a Winter Olympics again. She was not the only extraordinary story that night. The runner-up, Alexandra Trusova, performed five quads but still lost to another Russian, Anna Shcherbakova. “I hate skating. I hate it. I hate this sport,” she shouted afterwards. “I will never go out on the ice again!” It made Tonya and Nancy look tame. It was the story of these Games and then some. However, Valieva’s drug case may not be settled for months and there was huge sympathy for the US and Japan teams that came second behind the Russian Olympic Committee in the team skating. They never got to enjoy their moment on the podium in Beijing. Chatting to Max Cobb, the president and chief executive of US biathlon, reminded me over the weekend that this is not new. “Over the last three decades I have been a part of every Olympic Winter Games, as a coach, organiser or official,” he said. “Sadly, I have witnessed more than my fair share of doping scandals and what I can say with 100% certainty is that the athletes who were cheated were the last ones the system served. “The victims were the biggest losers. Their moments of glory were stolen from them only to have scant recognition which in far too many instances came years later.” Of course there were incredible sporting moments, too. For 16 years Lindsey Jacobellis was known as the snowboarder who was miles clear of the Turin 2006 Olympics board cross final – until she fell on the penultimate jump while showing off by taking a celebratory grab of her board. At the ripe old age of 36 she redeemed herself by winning two snowboard cross golds. There was the heartache and bravery of Mikaela Shiffrin, who came into these Games hunting five medals but left with none – and yet still found time to speak powerfully about her loss to the media. The US figure skater Nathan Chen was extraordinary as he won Olympic gold. The Norwegian biathlete Johannes Thingnes Boe won four gold medals as his country dominated the medal table again. But these Games will linger in the memory for other reasons, too – in particular the extraordinary closed-loop system, which meant that athletes, officials and journalists were not allowed any interaction with mainline China. But such a policy, while immensely suffocating, was a success – at least to those who were not tripped by the sensitivity of the PCR tests. More than 1.8m tests were taken during the Games, with only 437 positives reported. However those who had to go to Chinese government isolation facilities faced a lonely and often terrifying experience. Spare a thought for US figure skater Vincent Zhou, who was unable to collect his medal in the team event because of the Valieva case, then caught Covid and missed the individual event, and then was unable to attend the final night’s celebrations when recovered. “Before boarding the bus, they flagged me as a Covid ‘close contact’ risk and would not allow me to proceed any further. I have tested negative 14 days in a row,” he wrote. “I am 100% healthy and normal.” It wasn’t nearly as much fun as a normal Olympics. However, China will be delighted with how these Games went. After all, these were an Olympics that began under a series of shadows: with spiky questions over human rights, particularly in the western Xinjiang region – where more than a million Uyghurs are in re-education camps – and the fate of the tennis player Peng Shuai. But while these issues bubbled under, particularly when China chose the Uyghur cross-country skier Dinigeer Yilamujiang to light the flame, and when the Beijing spokesman Yan Jiarong claimed that “so-called forced labour” in the region was “lies” – they never dominated the discourse. China also ended these Games third in the table with 15 medals, including nine golds. They would certainly have taken that beforehand. Notably at the closing ceremony their two biggest stars, the 18-year-olds Su Yiming and Eileen Gu, walked into the stadium together for the parade. As they did so, Xi Jinping applauded in approval. And, if you looked closely, you could even detect a smile.Indications that Britain and the US are secretly preparing to arm resistance fighters in Ukraine in the event of an invasion should raise red flags, and not just of the Russian variety. The effectiveness and wisdom of intervening in other people’s conflicts by proxy, however vital the principle and however seemingly justified the cause, are open to serious question, as much of cold war-era history suggests. Mere mention of the word “resistance” conjures up, in some British minds at least, images of gallant bicyclists in berets, night-time airstrips lit by torches, and furtive wireless operators valiantly plotting to thwart the “Boche”. The recent film Munich: the Edge of War, in which “good” Germans conspire against “bad” ones, is a reminder that things are usually more complicated. Resistance has many faces. Tentative plans under discussion in Washington and London to supply weapons and other military equipment to Ukrainians who object to Kremlin-enforced regime change presuppose that Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, will launch the long-anticipated invasion and succeed in overthrowing Kyiv’s elected government. Neither eventuality is a given. Putin may continue indefinitely to mess with western heads. An invasion could be repelled. Yet since Joe Biden, the US president, and Boris Johnson, his little trumpet boy, seem convinced the worst will happen – the “biggest war in Europe since 1945”, in the British prime minister’s melodramatic words – it’s only logical to assume the secret talks about post-invasion strategies acquired a new urgency. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, reportedly briefed Congress last week on plans to deliver additional lethal aid to Ukrainians. In truth, it’s not even a big secret. “In discussions with allies, senior Biden officials have made clear that the CIA (covertly) and the Pentagon (overtly) would both seek to help any Ukrainian insurgency,” the New York Times reported last month. Asked recently whether Britain would arm resistance fighters, Johnson replied: “It’s possible, I don’t want to rule this out.” Most public opinion undoubtedly sympathises with the Ukrainian citizens contemplating the destruction of their country’s independence and democracy at the point of a gun. Understandably, many people’s gut instinct would be to resist by all means possible. All the same, officially encouraging what could quickly turn into an extremely violent, long-running, possibly unwinnable struggle requires careful, calm consideration. It’s easy to agitate for a fight when someone else is doing the fighting and when it’s happening a long way away. There’s a moral issue here: if you yourself decline to bloody your hands, should you really be egging on others to do so? If that does not give pause, then think about the practical implications. By helping Ukrainian guerrillas or freedom fighters or people’s militias (the terminology alone is problematic) to kill Russian soldiers, the US and Britain would, in effect, be waging a proxy war against Russia. Russia would know this. Would it passively accept it? Or would it return fire in similarly unpleasant, asymmetrical and hybrid ways? Of course it would. Has Johnson thought about that? Then again, western powers are pretty hopeless at fighting proxy wars via resistance groups. Think of Ronald Reagan’s disastrous Contra war in Nicaragua in the 1980s. Think of the Cuban Bay of Pigs, or how Iraq’s Shias and Kurds were urged to revolt in 1991 by George HW Bush and subsequently betrayed. Saddam Hussein slaughtered them by the thousand. Western politicians, prating about principle then as now, utterly failed them. Resistance groups can be hard to control. They travel unexpected paths. The most notorious example is Afghanistan, where some US-armed mujahideen groups fighting the post-1979 Soviet occupation went on to create the Taliban, who turned on their creators like Mary Shelley’s monster. Perhaps Johnson, unlike the former Texas congressman Charlie Wilson, who was behind the US covert mission, knows what he’s doing. Or is he, in familiar style, already making promises to Ukrainians he cannot and will not keep? Proxy wars often do more harm than good, and western powers are not their only proponents. Consider the misery inflicted upon Yemen’s desperate people by the proxy fight between regional rivals Iran and Saudi Arabia. History is littered with examples of countries where liberators, in overthrowing oppression, became oppressors. Look at Iran, look at Angola. The contrary argument, of course, is that each case is different. Ukraine is different. And so it is, at present. But a western-backed insurgency there could easily morph into civil war, spread to the neighbouring Baltic republics and elsewhere, and become in time a head-on, undisguised, unlimited confrontation with Russia. It’s easy to see Johnson starting such a fight. Knowing him as we do, it’s hard to see him finishing it. Ukraine needs all the support it can get at this moment of enormous, looming trauma. But the best way to help – if it is generally agreed that is the right thing to do – is not to start a potentially endless dirty war of assassinations, bombings, midnight terror, disappearances, bottomless abuses, broken families and broken hearts. If Johnson and Biden truly want to make a difference – and ensure Putin backs off – they should assume the risk themselves, by offering full Nato membership to Ukraine’s government while it still has one. Don’t send out young Ukrainians to fight and die for democracy and freedom while you sit at home, declaring how terrible it all is. Stand up for what you say you believe, or pipe down. Simon Tisdall is a foreign affairs commentatorThe Home Office is investigating allegations of racist WhatsApp messages sent by immigration staff, as the contracting firm Mitie admitted that they received complaints two years ago but failed to “escalate them”. The messages by workers for Mitie, revealed by the Sunday Mirror, include derogatory references to Chinese people and the mocking of the Syrian refugee crisis. Mitie told the newspaper: “As soon as we were made aware we commenced an investigation, which is ongoing. We have suspended those about whom complaints have been made, pending the investigation outcome.” However, Mitie later told the Guardian: “It has been brought to our attention that an allegation was previously raised but was not escalated in line with internal procedures. This is not acceptable and we are sharing details of our whistleblowing policy with all colleagues and reminding our mangers of their responsibilities to take any such allegations with the utmost seriousness.” The offensive messages were posted by Mitie staff who were members of a 120-strong WhatsApp group called “escorts meet and greet” set up in mid-2019. The group has recently been closed down. Mitie has a contract with the Home Office to do escorting and deportation work, which is thought to be worth tens of millions each year. It is understood that eight members of staff have been suspended after the WhatsApp revelations. One remark posted in the group was a comment next to a photo of a Chinese restaurant with a closed sign shortly after the first Covid lockdown in March 2020. A Mitie worker had written underneath the photo: “Closed due to slanty eyed cunts”, a reference to reports that Covid originated in the Chinese city of Wuhan. A whistleblower first raised concerns about this racist post on the WhatsApp group almost two years ago, soon after it was posted. Another photo shared on the group showed migrants in a dinghy with the caption “Where Gary Lineker’s house?” – a reference to the Match of the Day star housing a refugee. In a reference to Syrian refugees arriving by sea, a member wrote: “They can only stay if they swim all the way,” with another replying: “What, you mean from Syria?” However, part of the post also states that Syrian refugees should be allowed to stay in the UK if they are desperate enough to take such extreme measures. The shadow immigration minister, Stephen Kinnock, described the reports of racism as “sickening” and called on Mitie to launch an immediate investigation. “The Home Office must review this contract without delay as well as its own procedures and strategy,” he said. One Mitie worker said: “Things are the worst they’ve ever been with bullying and racism. People are too scared to speak out for fear of facing further bullying or being sacked.” This is not the first time Mitie has been accused of racism. A south London employment tribunal in a judgment published in June 2021 said that it was “deeply concerned” about Mitie workers having used the racist term “cotton pickers” to describe their black colleagues. However, the claim brought by a Mitie worker of Pakistani heritage, Muqaddas Zaib, based on race and disability discrimination, was rejected. Two witnesses who claimed that the term was used by some staff were found to be “credible and honest” by the tribunal. It is a derogatory reference to black enslaved people in the southern US. One of these witnesses, a black detention custody officer manager called Denise Heslop, told the court that another member of staff said to her: “You’re nothing but a cotton picker.” The Guardian has seen another Islamophobic post from a Mitie worker on a Facebook group. It was posted before Mitie took over the Home Office escorting contract but concern was raised about the post last year. In another case, Janika Frimpong spoke to the Mirror about a recording in which colleagues are heard making racist comments such as: “Black people have a smell about them.” Frimpong, who was working as a Mitie receptionist at another company, said she unintentionally left her phone recording as she left her desk at work – only to later find it had recorded an exchange between two fellow workers. Mitie sources said that an investigation into the incident had now concluded and appropriate action had been taken in line with its disciplinary policies. A Home Office spokesperson said the department’s professional standards unit was investigating the WhatsApp messages. “The Home Office is investigating the allegations relating to Mitie staff’s behaviour and conduct. Mitie will update the immigration minister next week on the steps being taken to ensure the highest standards are always met and that individuals in their care are treated with dignity and respect.” Karen Doyle from the Movement for Justice called for Mitie to be stripped of its Home Office contract: “The racism in these organisations is institutional, systemic and starts at the top. Mitie can’t be allowed to get away with a cover-up, sack a few escorts and then return to business as usual. Mitie must go.” The Mitie spokesperson said: “There is no place for racism, bullying or discrimination in our business and we encourage our colleagues to raise any concerns via our whistleblowing procedures so that we can take appropriate action. We know it can take courage to challenge unacceptable behaviour, and this is something we encourage all of our colleagues to do.A contradiction sits at the heart of the British education system, and most particularly the English one. This has been the case since most secondary schools in England switched from a selective system to a comprehensive one in the 1960s. The contradiction is that the mixed-ability principle was never extended to higher education, which continues to be highly stratified. Entry to a handful of elite institutions remains the ultimate prize. As schools policy sought to create a less divided society, in which people from different backgrounds were expected to mix, universities (and the policymakers overseeing them) have clung to hierarchies. Admissions data over decades has shown these to be social as well as intellectual, with the more affluent claiming a disproportionate share of places. The development of a new cadre of super-selective state sixth forms, which the government has promised to accelerate as part of its levelling up strategy, is designed to address this. Comprehensives struggle to compete with the hothouse conditions of independent and grammar schools, some of which have links to Oxbridge dating back centuries. A few academically elite sixth forms have had striking successes. If the aim is to boost the chances of a handful of underprivileged teenagers getting their hands on one of these golden tickets, teaching them in a highly competitive environment might seem to make sense. The problem is that the purpose of post-16 education is much broader than this. We need a system that benefits society overall, including by putting more resources behind improved vocational options, as advocated by the three-year-old Augar review. The worrying signs are that the trend towards increased selection at 16 will magnify the damaging tendency to concentrate too much on a few, while ignoring the rest. While around 85% of 17-year-olds in England are in full-time education, fewer than half of 16- to 18-year-olds do A-levels. The further education sector is currently battling to save BTecs, whose replacement with T-levels has been delayed. Of course, competition is part of life, which young people must learn to cope with. The brightest sixth-formers in poor areas have every right to aim high. But increased selection brings defeats as well as successes. And there are good reasons to defer painful experiences of rejection (the impact of failing the 11-plus was one reason why comprehensives replaced grammars in the first place). This is all the more pressing given extremely worrying evidence about young people’s declining mental health. Education, and particularly skills and training, is crucial to any inequality-reducing strategy. Age 16 (when most pupils sit GCSEs) is a crucial staging post. But there is no evidence that dividing students up at this point results in higher attainment. Strong results posted by selective sixth forms may simply show that they have successfully creamed off the most capable and determined members of a cohort. The levelling up agenda promised by the Tories should have led them straight to colleges, which were particularly hard-hit by austerity, and also to the underresourced careers service. But instead of investing in local institutions, developing their links with employers and improving their offer to older learners, ministers have held out the promise of a few more ladders to top universities, at the same time as reducing access to higher education overall. Elite sixth forms are a gimmick, not an answer to the question of how to level up.In the lead-up to Cop26 in November, Boris Johnson was at his most panglossian as he extolled the economic benefits of the country’s transition to net zero. “The UK’s path to ending our contribution to climate change,” the prime minister forecast, “will be paved with well-paid jobs, billions in investment and thriving green industries … by moving first and taking bold action, we will build a defining competitive edge in electric vehicles, offshore wind, carbon capture technology and more.” Back in the real world, matters stand rather differently. Far from forging ahead of the rest, Britain risks falling behind in the new industrial revolution, as latest figures from the Office for National Statistics make depressingly clear. The green economy more or less flatlined between 2014 and 2020, the ONS found. Employment in the low-carbon and renewable energy sectors – which include manufacturing, energy supply and construction – actually fell. This dismal state of affairs predated the Covid pandemic and the accompanying recession. The present administration cannot be blamed for the poor performance of its Tory predecessors, but it is signally failing to learn from their mistakes. Windy rhetoric is not enough. To a far greater extent, the state must play a strategic role in shaping and investing in the green economy. In the renewable energy sector, a reliance on importing turbines and other components means that too many of the well-paid “green-collar” jobs to which Mr Johnson refers are located abroad. Similarly, the government’s instinctive aversion to state intervention has led to a failure to properly invest in a green future for the steel industry. Green steel will be fundamental to a net zero economy, but as Stephen Kinnock, the Labour MP for Port Talbot, has pointed out, other countries are leaving the UK behind in the race to modernise. A national retrofit programme is urgently needed to increase energy efficiency in people’s homes. But the government’s reluctance to adequately pump-prime a nascent market means another chance to secure good jobs linked to the green transition is being squandered. Sadly, the government’s ideological direction of travel is towards less, not more, intervention. As Mr Johnson attempts merely to survive in office following partygate, influential sections of his party are determined to force his administration to adopt a still more laissez-faire approach. Last week, the prime minister’s new chief of staff, Stephen Barclay, suggested that in the wake of the pandemic, it was time to for the government to “step back” from people’s lives. The Treasury’s determination to rein in public spending post-Covid signals that necessary green subsidies and investment will not be forthcoming, and the cost-of-living crisis is being used by Conservative backbenchers such as Steve Baker to present the green agenda as an expensive imposition on the less well-off. Welcome developments, such as £100m of government money for a car battery manufacturing startup in Blyth, are too small-scale and too ad hoc. Last week’s ONS report must be a wake-up call. An enormous opportunity risks being wasted through a combination of misplaced ideology, blinkered short-termism and lack of strategic imagination and ambition in Whitehall. In the parts of the country that suffered most from ruthless and precipitate deindustrialisation in the 1980s, the path to net zero can be a catalyst for renewal. The state, the private sector, trade unions and local communities can deliver this by working together. But only if the scale of Johnsonian rhetoric is matched by deeds.Dreaming is for free, as someone round these parts once said, and Daniel Podence’s second-half winner means Wolves are now two points behind fifth place in the Premier League with two games in hand and both Arsenal and West Ham, the two teams immediately above them, to play away this coming week. Bruno Lage’s team also have two games in hand on Manchester United, who sit six points above them in the final Champions League place, and the Molineux diehards were blasting out their song about following the Wanderers around Europe again even as Leicester piled on the pressure in the closing stages, Kasper Schmeichel coming up for a corner. But Wolves, having taken the lead through Rúben Neves before Ademola Lookman equalised, held on to reclaim seventh place, and had the bonus of reintroducing one of the best players, Pedro Neto, out for a year with a fractured kneecap, for the final 10 minutes. No team have won more Premier League games in 2022 than Wolves and, crucially, they have lost only once in the 52 league games in which they have taken the lead since winning promotion four years ago. Leicester played strongly and created enough chances to have won but they are now winless in six domestic matches, their worst run since the latter days of Claude Puel’s reign three years ago. They have not kept a clean sheet away from home in the Premier League for more than a year since they last played at Molineux. Brendan Rodgers, confirming Jamie Vardy is “seven to 10 days away” from returning to contention, was much encouraged by his team’s showing. “Sometimes after you lose there is disappointment or frustration but I am very enthused,” the Leicester manager said. “I have seen us starting to return to our levels of play and creativity. It is just disappointing, they had two shots from outside the box and it’s two goals.” With a three-goal advantage to take to Denmark this Thursday for the second leg of their European Conference League second round, Leicester still have European ambitions of their own. But they are nearer the relegation zone than the top seven and gave themselves a statistical and tactical mountain to climb by conceding within nine minutes. Neves’s superb opener gave Wolves the kind of platform they relish. The Portugal playmaker, in the form of his life, pinged a sweet crossfield pass out to Podence. When his cross was unconvincingly cleared by Daniel Amartey and Leander Dendoncker headed the ball back inside, Raúl Jiménez was allowed time to tee up Neves whose unerring first-time shot from just outside the penalty area Schmeichel could only help into the net. This was Wolves’ first goal against Leicester in six Premier League meetings and, with the hosts having the fifth best defensive record in Europe’s top five leagues, Leicester looked there for the taking at this stage. Yet apart from the visitors suffering from the heebie‑jeebies every time Wolves had a corner, Leicester thoroughly deserved to be level by half-time. The number of dangerous balls they fed across the face of goal was a constant source of concern for the home team, who were guilty of sitting too deep, and so it was no surprise when Lookman slid in to score his sixth goal of the season from Marc Albrighton’s low cross after Youri Tielemans’ brilliant through ball. It was only the second time in 16 games Wolves had conceded a first-half goal. Yet it was when Rodgers’ team were clearly on top that Wolves regained the lead midway through the second half. For once when a Leicester attack broke down, Wolves had players the offensive side of the ball and Rayan Aït-Nouri did well to tease Ricardo Pereira in making inroads down the left. Dendoncker squared the ball along the edge of the penalty area where Podence shot low into the bottom corner. There was a VAR delay to check that Schmeichel’s view had not been compromised by Jiménez’s presence before Wolves could complete their celebrations. If it was Nuno Espírito Santo who set Wolves fans dreaming, it may be Bruno Lage who converts this into reality. “For my part, this is no time for anyone to relax,” the Wolves head coach said. “In December, January and February, we are coming with solid performances, scoring goals, winning games. If we keep doing it, with important players coming back, we can do something special.”Jan Pieńkowski, the beloved illustrator and author of more than 140 children’s books, has died aged 85. Pieńkowski, whose work included the Meg and Mog pop-up books, had been living with Alzheimer’s. Francesca Dow, the managing director of Penguin Random House Children’s Books, confirmed that he died on Saturday morning. Pieńkowski’s work was often inspired by his Polish childhood and experiences as a wartime refugee. His interest in paper cut-outs stemmed from his time in an air raid shelter in Warsaw, where a soldier had kept him amused by cutting newspapers into shapes for him. Meg and Mog, completed in collaboration with the late writer Helen Nicoll, was a series of illustrated adventures about a hapless witch and her stripy cat. Pieńkowski said in an interview that the series gave him the opportunity to turn monsters from his childhood into harmless toys. He took his palette from comic strips such as Desperate Dan and Dennis the Menace. “Jan was one of the great storytellers: an exceptionally talented creator, who was led by what interested him, and who treated children as his equals,” Dow said on Sunday. “There was an impatience and wonderful curiosity to him, as he looked for new ways to tell stories: drawing on his Polish roots with his cut-out and silhouette work; his extraordinary use of colour; his pioneering interest in drawing on the computer; and of course his award-winning pop-ups which challenged publishers and printers to find new ways to create his books.” Pieńkowski, she added, pored over every detail meticulously “and yet achieved the near-impossible: simple, magical storytelling, which is why his books – such as my personal and our family favourites, the brilliant Meg and Mog stories – endure. I was very lucky to have had the chance to know him and to work with him.” After Nicoll died in 2012, Pieńkowski worked on new Meg and Mog titles with his civil partner, David Walser, a translator, artist, musician and writer. “One thing I’ve noticed over the years is that Jan never treats children as children,” Walser said a few years ago. “It wouldn’t occur to him to talk down to them, he just behaves perfectly normally … When he works with children, he’s one of them.” The British author Ed Vere, who is godson to Walser, said: “Jan Pieńkowski lived an inspiring life dedicated to making books of the very highest standard – pioneering, intelligent, beautifully considered, and always created with a mischievous sense of fun.” He added: “Full of love, curiosity, art, thought, enjoyment and laughter. He will be much missed, as a man, and as a towering figure in children’s books.” For his work as a children’s author, Pieńkowski was awarded the 2019 Booktrust lifetime achievement award, which has in the past gone to some of the greatest names in children’s books, including Shirley Hughes, Raymond Briggs and Judith Kerr. The critic Nicolette Jones, who chaired the judges selecting Pieńkowski for the award, said he “brought magic to children’s illustration”, while her fellow judge, the author SF Said, said: “Books such as Meg and Mog have shaped so many generations now that they have become part of the fabric of British childhood and culture in general.” Pieńkowski was also twice the UK nominee – in 1982 and 2008 – for the international Hans Christian Andersen award, the highest recognition available to creators of children’s books. He won the Kate Greenaway award in 1971 with the writer Joan Aiken for their second collaboration, The Kingdom Under the Sea, which was comprised of eastern European fairytales. He won his second Greenaway award in 1979 for the scary pop-up book Haunted House, which demonstrated his tendency towards the gothic. Pieńkowski was born in Warsaw to a country squire father and a scientist mother. He was three when the Nazis invaded Poland in 1939, forcing the family to move around Europe before they eventually settled in England in 1946. In London, he attended the Cardinal Vaughan Memorial school in Holland Park, where he learned Latin and Greek, before going on to King’s College, Cambridge, to study classics and English. He illustrated for Granta magazine and designed posters for university theatre productions. At the beginning of his career, Pieńkowski was employed to draw live on the BBC children’s programme Watch!, before the book world discovered him. Along with Meg and Mog and his pop-up books, he is known for his illustrations of fairytales by Perrault and the Brothers Grimm, The Nutcracker, and The Glass Mountain: Tales from Poland. Fans paid tribute to Pieńkowski on social media following news of his death. The children’s author Christopher Edge wrote: “When I think back to my earliest memories of childhood reading, the Meg and Mog books shine bright. Thank you, Jan Pieńkowski.” The children’s author and illustrator Shoo Rayner added: “Sad news – Jan Pieńkowski was an inspiration to me when I was starting out.” The London Review Bookshop posted: “RIP Jan Pieńkowski – Haunted House is one of the best books in the shop, every time a kid comes across it browsing in the children’s section it blows their mind.”This was an afternoon of blood and roses in Yorkshire, a fun, bruising, furious mess of a game. Midway through the second half there was an interlude where six players joined in a kind of rolling, whirling maul close to the centre circle, bodies entwined like a multicoloured octopus writhing on the quayside, the ball punted, thrashed, semi-forgotten. At times Manchester United almost seemed to get a hold on the day, to take the air out of this fury, only for a misplaced pass or a splash of the sodden pitch to leave them chasing back once again. But by the end it was an afternoon that seemed to offer something else too, a significant note in this ongoing, oddly fraught United mini-era. There had been strange noises around the red side of Manchester all week, whispers and groans, the sense of something rotten in the state of Ralf Rangnick. Nothing was resolved here. A rousing 4-2 win offered three more points en route to the season-saving goal of a place in the Champions League. But it felt like a purging experience all the same. This is a clattery metal hangar of a ground, the corrugated stands creating a uniquely footballing sound, like the tonal quality on a vinyl LP. At times that shared energy seemed to spill from the stands to the pitch, lines blurring as goals were scored, intruders wrestled by stewards, objects thrown. It was wild out there, a wild fixture on a wild afternoon at a wild moment in time. In the middle of all this, it was also a very good game for Jadon Sancho, who has begun to find himself here in recent weeks. Starting on the right, Sancho was neat, effective and constantly involved. He grew more assured as the game went on. He made more dribbles and had more passes in the attacking third than any other player. Sancho is like this at his best, a relentless source of pressure with the skill to produce his own bespoke little moments of skill and incision. Wind him up and let him go: he really should be nothing but an asset to this team. He also gave the final pass for two of the goals, although on both occasions others played a larger part in breaking Leeds open. Sancho is also still only 21 years old, an itinerant presence who has never played in an occasion quite like this, but still produced his best game at United. It felt like a block to build around. Not to mention an interesting point of comparison with Paul Pogba, who started in a risky-looking midfield duo with Scott McTominay. In his hour and a bit on the pitch Elland Road witnessed a perfect running tableau of Pogba-ism, a rounded picture of inalienable strengths and inalienable weaknesses. Some will point to his almost total disappearance as Leeds came back to make it 2-2, a man suddenly doing a very slow cross-country jog in the middle of a rain-sodden football match. But Pogba was also United’s main source of incision early on. At times he looked like the only person “playing football” in the middle of all that blunt and necessary energy. Pogba lost the ball, misplaced 40% of his passes, was rolled like a revolving door in the centre circle and left face-down in the mulch. But he kept getting up. And he did the two best things in the opening half-hour. First he produced an opportunity so beautifully gift-wrapped it seemed to glimmer with spangles and rolled ribbons, standing up against Adam Forshaw, leaning one way, feinting back, then gliding into open space. The cross found a route through Diego Llorente’s legs only for Illan Meslier to produce a sublime one‑handed save as Cristiano Ronaldo scuffed his connection. A few minutes later Pogba did it again, wriggling and bouncing away from two white shirts in the tiniest of spaces, like a man getting changed in a telephone box, then laying on a nudged pass for Bruno Fernandes to shoot. From the corner that followed Harry Maguire opened the scoring, holding off Forshaw and butting the ball into the net. Fernandes scored United’s second in first-half stoppage time. Victor Lindelöf spotted a huge open space and simply galloping forward. His pass found Sancho with time to hang a cross up for Fernandes to nod home almost inside the six-yard box. Leeds were energised at the start of the second half. Rodrigo pulled one back. After which point a simple short Manchester United pass into Fernandes, standing 45 yards from goal, stopped on the marshy grass and was duly stolen from his toe, leaving Fernandes in a wailing heap as Dan James’s cross was turned in by Raphina. With 70 minutes gone it was 3-2. Fred provided the finish, snaking in behind Sancho to take his elegant little layoff, then spanking the ball in from a sharp angle. Anthony Elanga added a fourth. And in that final 20 minutes there was something else, a rare sense of grace for this cut-and-shut team, crammed with oddities, pressed-men, monuments to managers past. Faced with this obstacle, Ralf’s United, a place of schisms and cliques, had produced something coherent and spirited. This was the real beauty of an occasion that felt at times like a trip into some rousing and deeply stylised version of the footballing past. Whatever the systemic issues, the weird structures, the sharp commercial teeth driving this club, the game still gets in at the edges. With Sancho beginning to bloom, this short-lived United team will feel it has something that passes for momentum.Here’s our report from Molineux. And that’s all from me. Thanks for reading! Schmeichel comes up for the corner, and even leaps to challenge Sa for a half-cleared high ball! The defending keeper punches clear and Wolves break. The eventual shot towards Schmeichel’s unmanned goal goes wide, but that’s the last kick of the game. Wolves win! 94 mins: Thomas trots forward from left-back, rides a tackles and crosses into the box. Coady clears as far as Tielemans, whose 20-yards strike is cleanly hit but well-saved by Sa at full-stretch. 92 mins: Ricardo, endlessly fouled today, goes some way to evening things up with a clumsy lunge on Hwang. Yellow card. Leicester recover the ball and Tielemans looks for Lookman, only to see his wildly overhit pass sail out of play. Lookman gives him a very forlorn, very generous thumbs-up. 88 mins: Marcal, just off the bench, brings down Ricardo near the byline. Maddison crosses – cleared. Tielemans shoots – blocked. Ricardo dribbles forward – tackled. Wolves are in no mood to concede. 85 mins: Albrighton lays off to Maddison on the edge of the box, and despite having to deal with an awkwardly bouncing ball the midfielder bends a dangerous shot just outside the far post. He watches it fly wide and grimaces, head in hands, time running out. 79 mins: Lookman, who has probably seen more of the ball today than anyone, picks up the ball on the left but his dinked cross goes straight into the hands of Sa. Podence makes way for Pedro Neto, making his comeback after 10 months out and coming on to a rousing reception. 77 mins: … and Maddison’s whipped effort gets a nick off the wall and flies just over the bar. The corner is cleared. 75 mins: Previous service resumes: Leicester keeping the ball and making steady inroads towards the Wolves box, with the home defence standing firm. Lookman’s cutback from the left is cleared away by Coady, before Maddison gathers the ball and drifts past Neves, who fouls him and gets a booking. The free-kick is 25 yards out. 73 mins: Rodgers sends on Iheanacho for Daka, who has struggled to impress himself on this game. And Maddison comes on for Ndidi. 70 mins: That’s tough on Leicester, who have done everything right since half-time in terms of upping the tempo and increasing the pressure on Wolves’ defence. Then again, this is what Wolves specialise in – and this has been a minor masterclass in Scrooge-like counterattacking football. You’re welcome, Wolves fans. The hosts’ first attack of the half occurs when Kilman forages down the left before turning back and passes to Dendoncker, who squares to Podence just outside the box. The Portuguese gets a difficult pass out of his feet expertly and dispatches a laser-guided right-footed shot into the bottom corner. Great goal – and he’s deserved that for all the thankless running he’s done today. 75 mins: Ricardo gets fouled again in the Wolves half, drawing a free-kick from which Tielemans puts in a great inswinging cross that is well seen to by Kilman. Wolves can’t get out of their half . 62 mins: Daka sets Lookman away on the left and the winger picks out Tielemans, arriving from the other flank just inside the box. The Belgian’s first touch, to kill the ball with his right foot, is perfect but the second – a curled shot with his left – not so much: the ball sails a few inches wide of the far post. 61 mins: … Neves sets the ball down carefully, takes aim, and wallops it miles over the bar. 61 mins: Hwang’s first touch sees him collect a nice lay-off from Jimenez draw a foul from Ndidi and win a free-kick well within Neves territory … 60 mins: Lookman collect the ball from a throw-in on the Leicester left, dummies to shoot from 20 yards then dances into the box and tries to shape a shot inside the far post. Sa saves, but that’s nice confident play from Lookman. 58 mins: Lage shuffles his pack: Hwang Hee-chan on for Moutinho. 56 mins: Ricardo bounds forward once again and his deflected pass falls at the feet of Daka, whose snapshot from inside the box is saved comfortably by Sa. 54 mins: Albrighton cuts inside, lays off to Daka and scurries into the box to look for the return pass, which is cut out by Coady. Then Ricardo wins another foul in the Wolves’ defensive third. On the Wolves bench, Hwang is readying himself to come on. 50 mins: Leicester have begun this half superbly. First Dewsbury-Hall, Thomas and Lookman work the ball well down the left. The eventual cross is headed away, but Tielemans snaps into a challenge to win the ball straight back, and the ball is funnelled over to Ricardo, whose blocked shot is blocked goes behind. A flurry of Leicester corners concludes when Sa catches and blams a clearance up towards Podence, who takes it down well but in the end is too isolated and finds himself dispossessed. 48 mins: Good feet from Ricardo, who draws a foul on the touchline to win a free-kick in a good area, but Dewsbury-Hall’s lofted cross is gathered easily enough by Sa. 46 mins: Back at Molineux, we’re under way again. No changes for either side. In the Arnold Clark Cup at Carrow Road, England’s Lionesses have held their nerve against Spain’s attacking riches and got a goalless draw. More here: JR writes in: “Ait-Nouri was actually booked for a blatant dive in the middle of the field just a little before he fouled Albrighton. It’s not that big a deal that you missed that but I just like to make sure divers get the discredit they deserve.” Quite right – I stand corrected. Good fun, that. And with neither side likely to want to settle for a point, we can expect more of the same second half. Get the kettle on! 45 mins: Leicester muck up a great counterattacking situation - it’s three on three with Tielemanscarrying the ball forward, but his this time his through-ball isn’t quite on the money. He underhits the pass to Lookman, allowing Sededo to cut it out. Leicester draw level and it’s a gem of a pass from Tielemans that creates the goal. He picks up the ball on the edge of the box, waits a beat, then slides a perfect through-ball into the path of the onrushing Albrighton, whose first time cross is turned in from close range by Lookman. Tielemans won’t get the goal, nor the assist, but technicalities aside, that goal is all his. 38 mins: Semedo fouls Lookman. Lookman falls over. Podence belts the ball at Lookman. Lookman shoves Podence. Podence falls over. Yellow cards all round. 36 mins: Another Wolves corner from the right, another mini-panic in the Leicester area. Moutinho’s delivery pinballs between defenders before Jimenez drags a snapshot wide. Albrighton is booked retrospectively for a late lunge on Jimenez. 34 mins: Leicester are turning the screw. Another forward rove from Dewsbury-Hall wins a corner, which Tielemans delivers right under the keeper’s crossbar, but the ball gets no killer touch and Wolves hoof it away. 31 mins: Ait-Nouri is next into the book, clattering Albrighton on Leicester’s right. The resulting free-kick is swung into the back post where Lookman brings it down well but scuffs his left-foot shot, which trickles across the six-yard box and out for a goal-kick. 29 mins: Nélson Semedo gathers the ball in his own half, steams past Dewsbury-Hall on the halfway line and is promptly taken out by an unrepentant Soyuncu. Booking. 26 mins: Nice give-and-go between Dewsbury-Hall and Lookman, with the midfielder gliding into the box to deliver a low cutback that Coady clears behind for a corner, which comes to nothing. 24 mins: Moutinho delivers another deep corner from the right, which bobbles around in the Leicester box before Podence takes control of the ball on the left, leaving Tielemans for dead with an exquisite Cruyff turn and squaring for Aït-Nouri, who hits his left-foot shot perfectly and sends the ball millimetres wide. 21 mins: Not for the first time this game, Aït-Nouri takes it upon himself to make up some ground for Wolves, bringing down a tricky ball and slaloming into Leicester territory before being brought down for a free-kick. Good, positive play. 18 mins: Moutinho’s deep corner is met by Jimenez, whose downward header is straight at a grateful Schmeichel. 17 mins: More possession from Leicester, who are nice and unhurried, Ricardo and Albrighton exchanging passes on the right before the latter lifts in a cross to Lookman, who is crowded out of it in the box. Wolves counter instantly through Podence, who scampers into the Leicester box and win a corner after his shot is blocked. 14 mins: Leicester’s first sustained spell of possession is a good one, the midfield trio linking nicely and pulling Wolves’ defenders around before Tielemans unleashes a firmly hit shot from distance. Sa keeps it out, and it’s not long before Daka rattles in a long-ranger which is again matched by Sa. Good response from Leicester. 12 mins: That’s exactly what Leicester will not have wanted. The onus is now on them to break down a side who are at their happiest sitting back and soaking up pressure. On the flip side, they have the whole game to do so – a test of Leicester’s mettle. It’s a Ruben Neves special! And it’s the midfielder who starts the attack, picking out Podence with a glorious diagonal from the centre circle. The winger’s cross from the left is cut out by Amartey but Leicester fail to properly clear and when Jimenez lays the ball off to Neves on the edge of the box there’s only one outcome. His shot is belted right-footed past Schmeichel, who pain is only compounded by the fact he gets a hand to it. 7 mins: Wolves break quickly with Podence picking out Dendocker on the right. He scuttles forward and tries to pick out Jimenez who is peeling away at the far post, but an alert Ricardo slides across to clear. Smart defending. 5 mins: Wolves win the game’s first corner and Moutinho’s inswinging ball isn’t bad but Leicester clear comfortably. 3 mins: Leicester acquaint themselves with the ball before Soyuncu pings a raking pass to Lookman, who drifts in from the left and picks out Tielemans who is arriving into the box bang on time. The layoff is perfect for the Belgian, but he sidefoots timidly wide from 15 yards – poor, really. A good chance wasted Dean Kinsella tempts fate via email: “Between the trans-pennine battle earlier and the north/south encounter at the Etihad yesterday we’ve been royally entertained this weekend. No pressure on keeping the level up here today!” 1 min: Both sides take the knee before kickoff, and then we’re away. Wolves ping the ball about between their defence for a bit before Aït-Nouri strides upfield into the Leicester half and gets a throw for his troubles. A bit of a clash of styles today. Attack v defence. Grit v flair. Patience v haste. Michael Haneke v Michael Bay. HBO v ITV. James Joyce v John Grisham. Who’s your money on? Rodgers says Harvey Barnes is not involved today because he’s carrying a knock from Thursday. The weather at Molineux is wet and windswept – which often means the football can be fun and frenzied. Here’s hoping. And another must-read preview from Jonathan Wilson, on Brendan Rodgers’ need to arrest the slump: Some fascinating pre-match reading, on the fraternal alliance fuelling Wolves’ rise up the table: The final whistle has gone at Elland Road, where Manchester United have won a very tasty derby-not-derby. More here: So Wolves make one change from last week’s smash-and-grab defeat of Spurs, the fit-again Joao Moutinho coming in for Luke Cundle in midfield. For Leicester, James Maddison is only fit enough for the bench after a bout of illness and Patson Daka keeps his place ahead of Kelechi Iheanacho after his goalscoring display in Europe on Thursday. Cundle was great last week but Moutinho’s return adds know-how to a strong-looking Wolves engine room. Leicester’s midfield is not short of quality either, of course, but lots will depend on whether Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall can step up alongside Youri Tielemans and Wilfred Ndidi in Leicester’s attempts to raise the game’s tempo. Wolves: Sa; Semedo, Kilman, Coady, Saiss; Ait-Nouri, Dendoncker, Neves, Moutinho; Jimenez, Podence. Subs: Ruddy, Marcal, Neto, Trincao, Silva, Jonny, Toti, Hwang, Cundle. Leicester: Schmeichel; Ricardo, Amartey, Soyuncu, Thomas; Dewsbury-Hall, Tielemans, Ndidi; Lookman, Albrighton, Daka. Subs: Ward, Jakupović, Vestergaard, Choudhury, Mendy, Soumaré, Maddison, Pérez, Iheanacho. Brendan Rodgers once said that management is like “trying to build an aircraft while it’s in flight”. Should Leicester’s recent form continue for much longer, he may soon be stranded on a desert island whittling a life-raft for his coaching career. Perhaps that’s overstating the case a bit – Rodgers’ pedigree remains high – but his third season at Leicester has been an object lesson in how quickly an ostensibly excellent team can hit the skids. His previously freewheeling FA Cup holders have won just seven Premier League games all season, amassed 13 points since the start of November and are currently winless in four. Any hopes of retaining their FA Cup went extinguished with last month’s tonking by their Midlands rivals. Much of the blame for this tailspin can be placed on a backline responsible for the worst defensive record outside the bottom seven. And should Rodgers be in the markets for advice on the matter, he could do a lot worse than consult his opposite number today. If Bruno Lage’s Wolves have gone relatively unnoticed, it’s because they have not quickened the pulses of too many neutrals. They score very few goals and they concede even fewer. No one will ever describe them as freewheeling. But right now, having flown for much of the season under the radar, Lage’s sensibly constructed aircraft is climbing with steady resolve. Three points today would lift them above Spurs and, when games in hand are accounted for, confirm their place in the annual mad dash for the top four. Leicester can entertain no such ambitions for now. They need a win to boost morale and to quieten the growing whispers about Rodgers’ three-year life cycle. But Thursday’s hammering of Randers was a reminder that this side is not short of flair, finesse or goals. If they can show that today, at the home of the Premier League’s foremost asphyxiators, then the Rodgers project will remain airborne and the turbulence becalmed … for now. Stay tuned!The only Black Republican in the Senate, Tim Scott of South Carolina, has indicated a willingness to be Donald Trump’s running mate should the former president mount another White House campaign. Asked by Fox News if he would consider joining a Trump ticket in 2024, Scott said: “Everybody wants to be on President Trump’s bandwagon, without any question.” The remark prompted criticism, in light of Trump’s long history of incendiary rhetoric on race. Mehdi Hasan, an MSNBC host, listed some examples when he wrote: “Shithole countries, go back to where you came from, very fine people, white people don’t get vaccines, stand back and stand by … none of it matters to Tim Scott.” Scott, 56, is widely seen as a contender for the Republican nomination itself, though most observers think it remains Trump’s for the taking. The former president is free to run after Republicans, including Scott, voted to acquit in his second impeachment trial, for inciting the deadly Capitol attack. Tensions between the party establishment and Trump supporters have increased, particularly after the Republican National Committee called Trump’s lie about election fraud and the attack on Congress it fueled “legitimate political discourse”. On Sunday, Scott told Fox News: “One of the things that I said to the president is he gets to decide the future of our party and our country because he is still the loudest voice.” On Saturday, the Washington Post ranked its top 10 contenders for the Republican nomination. Trump was first, Scott sixth. Pointing to the South Carolinian’s aggressive fundraising, the paper said Scott was “raising huge money – $7m last quarter – for something which should, by all accounts, be a pretty sleepy re-election race. He’s also doing something lots of presidential candidates do before running: release a book.” The paper made the Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, second-favourite. The former South Carolina governor and UN ambassador Nikki Haley was third, former vice-president Mike Pence fourth and Donald Trump Jr fifth. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas was seventh, Virginia governor Glenn Youngkin eighth, New Hampshire governor Chris Sununu ninth and former secretary of state Mike Pompeo 10th. Scott said: “What I hope happens is that we rally around the principles that lead to our greatest success. I am not looking for a seat on a ticket at this point. I am however looking to be re-elected in South Carolina. “So my hope is that you win next Friday’s football game before thinking about any other one. So that’s my primary responsibility.”Dean Richards, the Newcastle director of rugby, could not hide his frustration after Callum Chick was sent off during the first half before Exeter pilfered the points late on to move ominously towards the play-off places. Chick, the Falcons captain and No 8, was shown a red card by the referee Christophe Ridley in the 25th minute for a high shot on Josh Hodge, Exeter’s erstwhile Newcastle full-back. Richards queried the haste with which the officials decided that Chick’s shoulder had made contact with Hodge’s head, arguing that the offence warranted no more than a yellow card. Newcastle fought valiantly with 14 men and were on course for a famous victory until the closing stages when the Exeter captain, Joe Simmonds, kicked a penalty to win it. Richards, the former England captain said: “Josh Hodge clearly dropped his height. One of the issues we’re having at the moment is they’re trying to get to a really quick decision, rather than the correct decision. “I would have accepted a yellow card, but you can’t make such a critical decision in such a big game as this, as quickly as they did. I thought it was really poor from them. You need to take the time to make the decision correctly, but they don’t want to spend time on TMO decisions. When you’re playing with people’s livelihoods and careers, you can’t do that.” Rob Baxter, the Exeter director of rugby, said: “It’s not about whether it’s an accident or not. It’s a matter of contact to the head and it gets dealt with that way.” Defeat felt cruel on Newcastle on an emotionally fraught afternoon at a bitterly cold, windswept Kingston Park. Before kick-off, the retiring club legend Mark Wilson was introduced to the crowd and was given a rapturous reception as he walked across the pitch with his children, son Zach and daughter Ella. The passing of Steve Black, the hugely popular former Falcons coach, sports psychologist and mentor to Jonny Wilkinson and Danny Cipriani, was also marked. As an image of the man universally known as Blackie was shown on Kingston Park’s big screen, the stadium announcer said: “Blackie, you were a true one-off, a north-east sporting legend who will never be forgotten.” Intriguingly, among the crowd was a sizeable contingent from the Argentinian club Champagnat’s Under-19 side, who are on tour in England. They took up a block of seats in the West Stand and sang their songs with gusto, supporting Exeter’s former Falcon Santiago Grondona, who hails from the same area near Buenos Aires. Newcastle opened the scoring in the 23rd minute when Will Haydon-Wood seized on an errant Exeter offload and showed impressive pace to race 80 metres inside the left channel to cross the line, outpacing Hodge en route. Kingston Park erupted and Haydon-Wood then did superbly well to boot the conversion from close to the touchline. Two minutes later, though, Hodge fielded a high bomb in midfield and was caught high by Chick, who was shown a red card after consultation with Claire Hodnett, the television match official. Exeter sought to capitalise on their numerical advantage and went close when Hodge grubbered into the left corner for Tom O’Flaherty, who could only knock on just yards from the line. But as the interval approached, the Chiefs were not to be denied. A scrum penalty led to Baxter’s team kicking to the left corner for a lineout five metres out and from the subsequent maul Patrick Schickerling emerged from a thicket of bodies to barrel expertly over the line. Simmonds applied the conversion to level matters at 7-7 at half-time, when Hodge was replaced at full-back by Facundo Cordero. Exeter began to dominate territory and three minutes into the second half they scored again when Jack Innard finished off from a lineout rolling maul inside the right channel. Simmonds could not convert but Newcastle roused themselves and hit back with a second try of their own in exhilarating fashion as the hooker George McGuigan charged over the line from close range after excellent work from George Wacokecoke and Matías Orlando. After Simmonds’s late penalty handed Exeter victory, Baxter said: “Over four games now, we’ve collected 12 points and are up to fifth. That shows you how important today was.”Potentially fatal blows to Saudi Arabia’s hopes of presiding over a breakaway tour have been delivered by Bryson DeChambeau and Dustin Johnson, who have both committed to golf’s existing ecosystem. Until now DeChambeau had been by far the most high-profile player linked with the Saudi scheme. But on Sunday he said: “While there has been a lot of speculation surrounding my support for another tour, I want to make it very clear that as long as the best players in the world are playing on the PGA Tour, so will I.” The PGA and DP World Tours have been staunchly opposed to the Saudi disruption model. Rory McIlroy, Jon Rahm, Tiger Woods, Brooks Koepka, Justin Thomas, Jordan Spieth and Collin Morikawa had already pledged support to the PGA Tour. Against such resistance, it appears highly doubtful that the Saudi plan, which is fronted by Greg Norman, can proceed in meaningful fashion. Saudi’s plans are hugely controversial, given the kingdom’s human‑rights record and reported involvement in the 2018 murder of a journalist, Jamal Khashoggi. Players had been tempted by huge financial incentives to join a Super Golf League. Addressing “speculation about an alternative tour” Johnson, the world No 6, said: “I am fully committed to the PGA Tour. I am grateful for the opportunity to play on the best tour in the world and for all it has provided me and my family. While there will always be areas where our Tour can improve and evolve, I am thankful for our leadership and the many sponsors who make the PGA Tour golf’s premier tour.” Attention now turns towards Phil Mickelson. The US PGA champion recently lambasted the “obnoxious greed” of the PGA Tour. A subsequently released interview with Mickelson implied he had been actively working with the Saudis in a bid to earn leverage against the PGA Tour. “We know they killed Khashoggi and have a horrible record on human rights,” he was quoted saying by a biographer. “They execute people over there for being gay. Knowing all of this, why would I even consider it? Because this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to reshape how the PGA Tour operates. “They’ve been able to get by with manipulative, coercive, strong-arm tactics because we, the players, had no recourse. I’m not sure I even want [the SGL] to succeed but just the idea of it is allowing us to get things done with the PGA Tour.” The Tour is yet to publicly address the Mickelson scenario. Saudi’s crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman Al Saud, has denied ordering Khashoggi’s killing in Istanbul. However, a report published by the UN in June 2019 concluded that Khashoggi “has been the victim of a deliberate, premeditated execution, an extrajudicial killing for which the state of Saudi Arabia is responsible under international human-rights law”.When thousands of protesters against Covid restrictions arrived in Ottawa last month, it would have seemed unimaginable that they would take over parts of the Canadian capital with little resistance. To their own disbelief, the rightwing protesters soon controlled the streets outside parliament, brazenly flouting the law in the belief nothing could or would stop them. This weekend, however, the blockade ended in incredulity, accusations of betrayal and questions over the future of the protest movement. On Friday and Saturday, hundreds of officers conducted one of Canada’s largest police operations, working to clear Parliament Hill and the surrounding area of trucks, camper vans and structures that had blocked roads for nearly a month, in protest of coronavirus-related public health restrictions and, in general, the government of Justin Trudeau. Deploying riot squads, mounted units and armed vehicles, police cleared large parts of the area. By Sunday morning, more than 191 had been arrested and 57 vehicles had been towed. Protesters remained in some areas but Wellington Street, in front of Parliament Hill, was empty. A sense of normalcy was on the horizon for residents of Ottawa but police warned the operation wasn’t finished. “We are in this until it is over,” interim chief Steve Bell said, as officers worked to end the “unlawful occupation”. The rapid dismantling of the blockades stood in stark contrast to weeks of bold protest as truckers flouted bylaws, blaring horns at all hours. Even as police threatened to break up the blockades and the prime minister, Trudeau, invoked the Emergencies Act, many protesters were unfazed, arguing police didn’t have the authority to break up the protests. Key influencers in the movement, including Pat King, repeatedly reinforced this message. “King told protesters the warnings from police weren’t official because they didn’t have signatures on them or that the city didn’t have a police chief so no one could give the order,” said Kurt Phillips of the Canadian Anti-Hate Network. “And he was telling this to people who don’t really understand how government works.” But in the waning days of the blockade, amid reports some leaders had their bank accounts frozen, defiance gave way to uncertainty. The night before the police operation, some drivers left the city after trucking companies, fearing ruin, ordered them home. Still, even as police swarmed the area on Friday, many protesters expressed disbelief that arrests were possible. “You can’t do this. You can’t do this. You have no right,” pleaded one woman as a line of police pushed towards a blockade on Rideau Street. Another broke down in tears as protesters were hauled off. As footage of arrests and scuffles spread, on the secure-messaging site Telegram groups supporting the truckers reacted with shock and skepticism. One user claimed the officers were with the United Nations, part of a common conspiracy theory which holds that Canada’s government is linked to globalist networks. “If they had this many officers, there would be no crime in the city,” the user wrote. A number of police forces, including the Ottawa city police, the Ontario provincial police, the Royal Canadian Mounted police and the Sûreté du Québec, participated in the operation to clear the streets. Others were told, often by protest leaders and organizers, the police supported their movement. “They honestly believe that all of Canada supports them. And so it’s shocking to them to learn they aren’t seen as heroes,” said Carmen Celestini, a postdoctoral fellow with the Disinformation Project at Simon Fraser University, adding that many believed police officers were on their side. “And now they’ve realized that’s not true.” Police arrested nearly all protest leaders who called on demonstrators to “hold the line”. But the perceived ease with which some handed themselves over sparked a sense of betrayal. One user on a Telegram group accused Tamara Lich, the lead fundraiser, of having ties to the financier George Soros. “A lot of patriotic Canadian[s] were duped into believing this [convoy] was real,” the user wrote. Benjamin Dichter, a protest leader, called on supporters to stand their ground but left Ottawa before he could be arrested. His decision prompted one Telegram user to call him a “globalist operative subverting the freedom convoy”. “Influential figures were really pushing disinformation to keep the protesters there,” said Celestini. “But even though they told supporters to ‘hold the line’, they really didn’t have a plan for what to do when arrests occurred. The leaders knew that they would have an escape plan and that they’d be OK. But their decision to leaving their supporters out there to face the consequences helps you see their character.” The conspiracy theories and populist anger underpinning the truckers’ moment are unlikely to disappear. Experts said supporters will likely try to spin the result of the barricade as a victory or the catalyst for a bigger war. Furthermore, mainstream and fringe politicians have started vying for influence among the movement’s supporters. “There are a number of politicians looking to use this as a springboard,” said Phillips, warning of a “disruptive force” in Canadian politics. False rumours of a woman killed by a police horse have spread throughout Canada and into the US, amplified by far-right figures. Celestini worries such misinformation, rapidly spread by live streaming and encrypted chat networks, will be a problem. “We’ve been ignoring people like this for decades. But now we’re seeing the fruits of how we ignored and dismissed people who believed these things,” she said. “The distrust that people have in institutions will remain. And that leave a real possibility for something similar to fester or grow.”Labour has accused Boris Johnson of creating a “cash-for-access culture” in the Conservative party after it emerged that a secret advisory board of wealthy donors were regularly invited to private briefings with the prime minister and his top team. Concerns were raised when the Sunday Times reported that members of the board, whose investments spanned property, construction and big tobacco, lobbied the government to provide more support for their businesses during the Covid crisis. A witness was quoted by the paper saying that the donors believed their advice and the concerns “would go straight up to the PM”. It was also claimed that board members were granted the contact details of ministers and advisers, which they used to discuss the pandemic strategy and procurement offers – as well as make requests for help and advice on applying for public appointments. There were 12 figures named who had been invited to meetings since the Covid-19 crisis began in March 2020, including Lubov Chernukhin, a former banker who is the wife of Vladimir Putin’s former deputy finance minister Vladimir Chernukhin. In total, the board members were said to have donated £22m to the Conservatives, including £9.9m since Johnson became prime minister less than two years ago. The two figures central in putting the board together and maintaining its access were named by the Sunday Times as Lord Lister, Johnson’s former chief strategic adviser, and Ben Elliot, the Conservative party’s co-chair. Lister and Elliot have been contacted for comment. After the government promised a crackdown on money laundering from Russian oligarchs in light of the escalating military tensions in Ukraine, Labour accused the Conservatives of having “ignored warnings about how Russian money and influence is used in the UK”. Anneliese Dodds, Labour’s chair, said the UK had become “a laundromat for kleptocrats’ dirty money” and that “our institutions have been damaged and an entire cottage industry has grown up dedicated to lobbying for and protecting those close to the Kremlin”. In a letter to Johnson, which was seen by the Guardian, Dodds disparaged the “ethical standards in your party” and said the media report over the weekend “raises serious questions about the cash for access culture that you have created at the heart of government”. Dodds said Johnson had allowed Elliot to “blur the lines between private business activities and his public responsibilities in order to boost Tory coffers”. Given concerns about the source of the money donated to the Conservative party, Dodds said Johnson should “return every penny of the millions of pounds of Russian-linked cash that has been donated to your party and its MPs since 2019 – including any received from advisory board donors – and reverse your plans to allow unlimited donations from abroad”. Dodds also called for Elliot to be fired and told Johnson he should get his “own house in order and restore public confidence that your party is committed to cleaning up its act”. Downing Street and the Conservative party were contacted for comment. A spokesperson for the Conservatives told the Sunday Times: “We can confirm that, on occasion, senior Conservative politicians, just like senior Labour and Liberal Democrat politicians, do in fact attempt to raise funds for the party they represent.”Good morning. There will be excitement at airports today as Australia’s international border reopens to vaccinated travellers, nearly two years after the border closed to help stop coronavirus from spreading. Vladimir Putin and Emmanuel Macron have agreed to try to secure a ceasefire in the east of Ukraine and to put together an urgent summit at the highest level on the future of the country, the Élysée Palace said in a statement. The two leaders spoke on the phone for 105 minutes, and the outcome, broadly confirmed by the Kremlin, suggests Russia might be willing to step back from the brink of a full invasion of Ukraine to allow renewed diplomatic discussions. Meanwhile, Russian troops sent to Belarus for military exercises will remain in the country indefinitely, Belarus’s defence ministry has said, in a decision that will further fuel concerns Moscow is planning an imminent Ukraine invasion. The messaging around the severity of the Omicron Covid variant and a degree of pandemic fatigue is slowing Australia’s booster rollout, as some Australians shun the third dose. The Burnet Institute epidemiologist, Mike Toole, said this time the slow rollout could not be put down to supply issues. “The messaging around Omicron, that it is mild, has inhibited the uptake of boosters for adults and first and second doses for kids,” Toole said. “I think that’s been quite dangerous. The country had 66 deaths on Thursday, 64 on Wednesday, 46 on Tuesday. That’s still a lot of deaths.” The Queen has tested positive for Covid-19, ahead of the expected ending of all coronavirus restrictions in England in the coming days. Buckingham Palace said the monarch, 95, was experiencing “mild cold-like symptoms” but expected to continue carrying out light duties this week. Meanwhile, Boris Johnson said the country is “in a different world” from when the Covid pandemic started, meaning the last remaining restrictions can begin to be lifted from next week. Ahead of an announcement on Monday about the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, the prime minister signalled free mass testing would end imminently and told people to return to the office and “get their confidence back”. Australia Australia’s largest immigration detention centre is “awash with drugs”, sources inside the Villawood detention centre say, with several detailing an extensive drug-smuggling operation. Tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and the Canadian asset management giant Brookfield have launched an extraordinary joint bid to take over AGL Energy, Australia’s most polluting company, with the goal to shut its coal power plants earlier than planned. The first travellers in nearly two years are on their way to Australia, but tourism operators say it could be more than a year before they truly return to business as usual. A historic decision by the Lismore city council to hand back land to First Nations people will proceed, despite a contentious motion by a newly elected councillor to halt the return of 37 hectares at the southern end of Sleeping Lizard Hill, or North Lismore Plateau. The world Large parts of the United Kingdom were braced for another day of travel chaos and power cuts on Monday as Storm Franklin brought hurricane-force winds and flooding in the wake of the deadly Storm Eunice. Hundreds of families in south Manchester were urged to evacuate their homes on Sunday night while nearly 80,000 households remained without power following the worst UK storm in decades. The Italian ambassador to Australia has died after falling from a balcony in her home town in Foligno in the Umbria region. Victims of a French modelling agent’s alleged sexual abuse have expressed shock and dismay after he was found dead in his cell, in an apparent echo of the prison suicide of his close associate, the disgraced US financier Jeffrey Epstein. The west has inflicted catastrophic damage on Afghanistan and its own reputation by imposing a policy of starvation on the country, according to David Miliband, the former UK foreign secretary and chief executive of the International Rescue Committee. Recommended reads As the new Lord of the Rings series gears up for its September launch on Amazon, the company finds itself navigating treacherous, if familiar, waters and has already triggered a fierce debate over race by introducing characters of colour into JRR Tolkien’s fantasy world. Companies are facing increasing consumer and shareholder pressure to ensure the investments they make are ethical. But how do they define what’s ethical? There is no hard and fast definition of what makes an investment ethical. Knowing how your investments are screened, though, is a good start. Cillian Murphy’s icy stare has transfixed viewers around the world as Brummie gang boss Tommy Shelby in Peaky Blinders. As the stellar series reaches its finale, he talks about music, empathy and trying not to overthink things Listen For months Prince Andrew has been clear about the accusations of sexual assault he faced from Virginia Giuffre: they were baseless and he would fight them all the way in court. In the past week he agreed to a settlement that states he had “never intended to malign Ms Giuffre’s character” and that he recognised she had “suffered both as an established victim of abuse and as a result of unfair public attacks”. Andrew also pledged to “demonstrate his regret for his association” with the sex offender financier Jeffrey Epstein. The surprise out-of-court agreement means Prince Andrew makes no admission of guilt over the claims. He has always denied the allegations. The Guardian’s Caroline Davies tells Nosheen Iqbal that this will, in effect, end the Duke of York’s career as a public figure. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport When does keeping a low profile transition into being forgotten? How much are supporters willing to endure? Can you promote your way into a good product? After a week in which it felt like several tipping points were reached at once, these appear to be the metaphysical predicaments confronting the A-Leagues and its handlers, the Australian Professional Leagues. Media roundup Foreign policy is normally not a decider in federal elections but that could change this year, as parties debate how Australia should engage with China moving forward, the ABC reports. The Morrison government is facing a damaging health funding squabble with both Liberal and Labor states on the eve of the federal election, the WAToday reports. And if you’ve read this far … We’ve ranked the 15 most interesting Australian frogs. You’d be hopping mad to not be fascinated by the weird, wacky and wonderful amphibians on this list. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Donald Trump’s rightwing riposte to Twitter – his new social media app Truth Social – is supposed to launch on Monday. But the rollout of what the former president hopes will be the start of a new media empire continues to be shrouded in confusion and secrecy. Devin Nunes, the former Republican congressman and Trump loyalist who heads Trump Media &amp; Technology Group (TMTG), told Fox News on Sunday Truth Social would make its debut on the Apple App Store this week. The app is featured on the store, with the notice “Expected Feb 21”. But the launch has been beset with delays. On the Fox News show Sunday Morning Futures, Nunes indicated that a full service was still weeks away. “Our goal is, I think we’re going to hit it, I think by the end of March we’re going to be fully operational at least within the United States,” he said. Truth Social is Trump’s answer to having been permanently thrown off Twitter after the company ruled that the then president’s tweets leading up to the US Capitol attack on 6 January 2021 violated its policy against glorification of violence. The decision cut Trump off from direct contact with almost 90m followers. Facebook has also suspended Trump for comments inciting violence at the Capitol, but has left open the possibility of a return. Glimpses of what Truth Social will look like have been given in the past few days, prompting the observation that it looks remarkably similar to Twitter. Instead of blue ticks to denote verified accounts, it will use red ticks. Trump’s eldest son, Donald Jr, tweeted a screenshot of his father’s first post on Truth Social, which said: “Get ready! Your favorite President will see you soon!” The remark was much less memorable than the fact that the Truth Social screenshot and Donald Jr’s actual tweet looked virtually identical. Truth Social describes itself as a “big tent” social media platform “that encourages an open, free, and honest global conversation without discriminating against political ideology”. But given the initial teething problems of the launch, the former president could find it difficult to fill the hole in his public profile left by his banishment from established social media. Twitter records more than 200 million daily active users and Facebook almost 2 billion. By contrast Gettr, a social media outlet set up by Jason Miller, a former Trump adviser, claims 4 million users on average per month. Gettr is part of a growing number of social media start-ups vying to take on tech giants they accuse of censoring rightwing ideology. Gettr, Parler and Gab all present as rightwing alternatives to Twitter. Rumble is a video platform that sets itself up as conservative competition to YouTube. The company has said it will be providing video on the Truth Social app. The proliferation of rightwing social media sites, despite their relatively small reach compared with Silicon Valley giants, is prompting concern about their political impact. Observers have questioned whether the start-ups, which present themselves as forums for open untrammeled discussion, will act as breeding grounds for misinformation on subjects such as vaccinations, the climate crisis and election integrity. Truth Social has promised to ensure that its contents is “family friendly” and has reportedly entered a partnership with a San Francisco company, Hive, which will moderate posts using cloud-based artificial intelligence. Even the new app’s name is likely to be controversial, given Trump’s legendary struggles with veracity. The Washington Post calculated that in the four years of his presidency, the man now behind Truth Social made 30,573 false or misleading claims.• There were several wrong notes in an article on live shows: Buddy Holly and the Crickets were said to consist of “two guitars, bass, and drums”, whereas by their 1958 UK tour they were a trio, with Holly the sole guitarist; the “Hammersmith Apollo”, which hosted David Bowie’s 1973 gig, was at that time the Hammersmith Odeon; and a blue plaque marking the Who’s 1970 University of Leeds show was installed by Leeds Civic Trust, not English Heritage (Now that’s what I call music…, 11 February, G2, p6). • Other recently amended articles include: Republicans who opposed racial justice protests hope truckers ‘clog up’ US cities What is common law and why is it being misinterpreted? Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.As we near the end of round seven of the AFLW’s 10-round home-and-away season, we would ordinarily be in a good position to assess overall team performance and identify genuine contenders for the premiership cup. But given the complexity of this season’s fixturing, care of Covid-19, and the varied and inequitable experiences of, and impact on, different clubs, a true measure of team performances would be loaded with qualifications, caveats and asterisks. On the face of it, the division between who can, who might, and who cannot is clear enough. The top six teams – from first position down: Adelaide, Fremantle, North Melbourne, Melbourne, Brisbane and Collingwood – share much in common, including the notable fact they are all foundation teams with five and a half seasons of AFLW experience behind them. Compare this to the bottom six – from last: St Kilda, West Coast, Geelong, GWS, Carlton and Richmond – which are almost all expansion teams. The two exceptions - GWS and Carlton – have unique challenges which could fill another article entirely at the very least. However, beyond the systemic differences facing each club, the many challenges thrown up by Covid in 2022 have served to highlight and exacerbate the differences in outcome and various inequities across the competition, and will continue to shape how the season plays out. At the end of this past weekend, both ladder leaders and premiership favourites, Adelaide and Fremantle – and third-placed North – have played one more match than their immediate challengers in fourth and fifth place, Melbourne and Brisbane. While this disparity will level out after Monday night’s match, when Brisbane host Melbourne at Metricon Stadium, this means Brisbane will have played four matches in 15 days including two on the road. Taking on the in-form Demons in such a tight turnaround, albeit at home, will present added difficulties for the reigning premiers, particularly as Melbourne have benefited from consistent week-long breaks and limited interstate travel. With (to be confirmed) matches scheduled against in-form North and the unpredictable Tigers at their Punt Road home, the run home will test the Lions’ conditioning and resilience. However, their true mettle might not be tested until the finals, as they will not face Fremantle before then. Given Brisbane’s only loss came at the hands of premiership contenders Adelaide in round one – a notoriously unreliable predictor of season outcomes – measuring the true potential of Brisbane’s back-to-back campaign is fraught, to say the least. By contrast, Fremantle’s match against Geelong was postponed so, when they face Adelaide at home on 26 February, they will be coming off a 14-day break – a much-needed rest after spending the first four weeks in an interstate hub. With only one loss to North (away), and this extended break aiding their recovery, even tough match-ups against Adelaide and then Melbourne would ordinarily bode well for them come finals. That is, if one ignores the uncertainty surrounding their final matches: the Cats match is yet to be rescheduled, and the AFL has not even proposed a round 10 opponent or venue for the Dockers. Melbourne’s performance this season has been consistent and impressive, aided by a favourable fixture, including meeting only one top six opponent to date. The run home will be harder. Their one loss was to Adelaide away and, with an – admittedly strained – Brisbane on the road followed by North and the Dockers away, Melbourne’s premiership potential will become clearer. North Melbourne’s comfortable dismissal of Collingwood to close out the weekend’s matches adds some spice to the finals contest, although they have not travelled well (beyond home matches in Tasmania), and with games against Melbourne and Brisbane to come will face their toughest test to date. To compound the complications of making any kind of predictions, there are three matches from previous rounds (rounds two, three and five) still to be played, while one played this week – Gold Coast v Brisbane – was brought forward from ‘round 11’, a round invented to clean up any outstanding matches, although not, presumably, intended to be carried out mid-season. Scheduling football matches while battling a global pandemic is a huge ask for any organisation. The constant re-fixturing has had a particularly deleterious impact on some clubs more than others, further compounded by inequitable travel requirements and turnaround times between matches. Given that Adelaide and Fremantle, two of the most Covid-affected of clubs, occupy the top two positions on the ladder, a premiership win for either should carry not an asterisk beside the result but, rather, five stars.Australian campers, survivalists and reality TV fans are all in for a treat, with SBS announcing the launch of an Australian version of Alone, the international hit that sees contestants compete to survive the longest in remote locations. SBS announced the new show on Monday as part of their 2022 programming slate. The show will follow the format of the American original, in which 10 people spread out over challenging terrain, taking only 10 items with them from an approved list. Contestants are left to film themselves and are never told how many others are still in the game, until one person remains. Casting for the first season opens on Monday, with a TV advertisement asking: “Do you have what it takes to protect yourself, feed yourself and stay alive in total isolation? Can you survive in the Australian wilderness alone?” SBS’s head of documentaries, Joseph Maxwell, said Alone was the most popular factual series on the channel’s streaming service, SBS On Demand, which now has more than 10 million registered users. “I’m slightly nervous how many applications will come in, due to [Alone’s] popularity,” Maxwell said. “It’s literally broken every record there is. We were aware that sitting on our shelf was this thing that was getting extraordinary engagement, so it made total sense to make an Australian version. “It’s been really exciting to start plotting – what would that look like, where would that be, how are we going to do it? It’s a terrifying show, it’s quite a scary idea.” Maxwell said SBS would be looking for contestants who could demonstrate advanced survival skills and an aptitude for filming, and who came from a range of cultural backgrounds, particularly Indigenous Australians. “There is no point someone going in there if they haven’t got the basic skills. You do need people with a certain resilience – the great thing is, you can’t predict that. And we really want to ensure cultural diversity, First Nations representation and also women as well,” he said. “I think [First Nations knowledge] is integral to the show. We’re always on First Nations land. And I think one of the things Alone has done quite usefully, with some of the First Nations Canadian stories, is effortlessly thread in that acknowledgment of the lands we’re on, that there might be certain customs or traditions that we’re able to inform people about.” A location for the show is yet to be finalised, but Maxwell said scouts were looking for cold locations to allow them to start filming in June, in Australia’s winter. The show will air in early 2023. “We’ve got some frontrunners,” he said. “You need to make sure there’s no line of sight [between camps], you need to make sure it’s a very large area. We are so lucky with Australia that we’ve got that space. We need to ensure that there’s no roads, there’s not little huts, do as much as we can to make sure they are fully isolated, day and night.” SBS could not confirm the prize money, but said it would be “life changing”. The original Alone, where the winner takes home US$500,000, has been syndicated around the world. Danish and Norwegian versions have launched as well. Monday’s announcement also confirmed the launch of a sixth free-to-air SBS channel, SBS WorldWatch, which will provide news in more than 35 languages, in May 2022. SBS said it will broadcast the Fifa World Cup in Qatar in November, and the first ever Tour de France Femmes – the much-awaited women’s Tour de France. Other shows announced included 200 more episodes of Adam Liaw’s The Cook Up, a new documentary on sexual consent hosted by Jess Hill called Yes, No, Maybe, and original drama Safe Home, from Offspring creator Imogen Banks, about a woman whose life gets turned upside down when she begins working at a women’s legal centre. SBS also confirmed the return of the Australia version of hit genealogy show Who Do You Think You Are?, with Matt Moran, Paula Duncan and Myf Warhurst among the celebrities exploring their family trees on the show’s 13th season.If there is one man England are keen to see back fit and singing the anthems at Twickenham, it is Manu Tuilagi. With the possible exception of Storm Eunice, few are better equipped to flatten anything in their path and the red-rose management are advising Wales to batten down the hatches when they head to Twickenham this weekend. With their opening-round defeat in Scotland having, in effect, left England needing to win all their remaining games to be title contenders, the news that Tuilagi is back fully fit and firing has been a tonic for the troops. Barring any mishaps in training this week, he is set to feature in a Six Nations fixture for the first time in 721 days. His last championship appearance was against Wales nearly two years ago, when he scored a try and then collected a red card in a breathless 33-30 home win. Now, having proved his fitness for Sale Sharks following the hamstring injury he suffered while scoring his fine early try against the world champions, South Africa, in November, he has impressed the England management in training and poses a clear threat to Welsh ambitions. According to England’s defence coach, Anthony Seibold, the Tuilagi effect is significant whether or not England are in possession. “On both sides of the ball he’s a powerful weapon,” says Seibold, who is no stranger to big physical units from his time in Australian rugby league. “That’s been him for the last 11 years, carrying the ball. But just as important, if not more so, his contact around the defence is very good. “You saw the first couple of actions against Quins the other day. He played the last 30 minutes and his first two or three shots in contact were dominant ones. He brings a physical presence, there’s no doubt about that. He also brings a lot of experience and smarts in terms of what we’re trying to do.” If that makes the 30-year-old a “big in” from the management’s perspective, the centre’s experience and popularity are also valuable at a time when England are busily rebuilding. “He’s got that personality and character that people get a lot of confidence from,” says Seibold. “Manu is a real glue [player], there’s no doubt. He’s a really enjoyable guy to coach.” All that said, Tuilagi’s record against Wales is not as imposing as it might be. In five previous Six Nations encounters he has finished on the winning side only twice, with one of those coming as a replacement. He has never won in Cardiff in an England jersey and, including World Cup warm-ups, has registered two tries in eight fixtures. Those figures also reflect the long, injury-enforced gaps in Tuilagi’s career, which at one stage prevented him from starting a Test for England for almost five years. His value to England, even so, remains high as Eddie Jones seeks to find a straight-running accomplice for Marcus Smith to enhance England’s midfield balance. Elliot Daly and Joe Marchant have filled in alongside Henry Slade against Scotland and Italy respectively but England’s inability to kick on in the second half in Rome highlighted the fact they are a work in progress. “We know we need to improve, there is no doubt about that,” says Seibold. “We weren’t infatuated by the scoreboard or parts of the performance against Italy. To be the team we want to become, we need to be consistent. Regardless of where we play, that’s what we’re trying to drive.” Wasps’ Alfie Barbeary could yet be another forceful contributor during this tournament, with Seibold suggesting he is not in the squad simply to make up the numbers. “We wouldn’t have had Alfie at this camp if we didn’t see the potential for him to push into this squad,” said the Australian, who has been working on improving Barbeary’s defensive work-rate. “Once he improves that part of his game he is going to be one hell of a player. He is as good a ball carrier as we have in the group.” Seibold is looking forward to coming up against Wales, where he took his first coaching role with the Celtic Crusaders rugby league side in 2006. His middle daughter was born in Bridgend, and he used to live in the nearby village of Tondu. “My first coaching job was in Wales. I’d finished playing and was a schoolteacher back in Australia. The RFL was setting up a rugby league franchise in South Wales, so one of the Brisbane Broncos assistant coaches asked me to come out and start the team because I’d played over here for Hull KR and London Broncos. It was a good experience.” During his time in south Wales, Seibold also spent valuable hours with his former team-mate Shaun Edwards. “He was the Wales defence coach at the time, so I spent a bit of time observing their sessions back in 2008. Shaun invited me in on a number of occasions. Their performances over a long period of time, first with Warren Gatland and now with Wayne Pivac as their head coach, have been very consistent.” Now, with Tuilagi’s assistance, he is aiming to batter the nation he once called home.US intelligence has detected evidence that Russian troops amassed close to the border with Ukraine have received actual orders to proceed with an invasion, according to news reports. CBS News was the first to report on Sunday that the Kremlin had given the green light to commanders among the more than 150,000 troops in potential attack positions. “Commanders on the ground are making specific plans for how they would manoeuvre in their sector of the battlefield,” Face the Nation reported. The New York Times also said the Kremlin had ordered an invasion. That intelligence prompted Joe Biden to say this week that the Russian president Vladimir Putin had decided to go ahead with an attack, the newspaper said. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, told CBS the Biden administration remains convinced that Russia is pressing ahead with attack plans. “As President Biden said, everything we are seeing tells us that the decision we believe President Putin has made to invade is moving forward,” he said. Pressed for details of why the US continues to believe an invasion is imminent despite repeated Russian denials, Blinken pointed to what he called “provocations” and “false flag operations” that could be used as justification for such a move. Russian-backed separatists have increased shelling in east Ukraine in the past few days. Blinken said that could be used as a pretext. “Now we have the news just this morning that the ‘exercises’ Russia was engaged with in Belarus, with 30,000 forces, which were supposed to end this weekend will now continue because of tensions in eastern Ukraine – tensions created by Russia.” Blinken’s interviews came amid a swirl of diplomatic activity that offered little clarity. As the top US diplomat was warning that Russia was moving ahead with invasion plans, Putin and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, were agreeing to push for a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine. Later on Sunday the US embassy in Russia warned Americans living in the country to prepare evacuation plans. It said there was a risk of attacks on Moscow and other major cities, and on Russian territory along the Ukraine border. “There have been threats of attacks against shopping centers, railway and metro stations, and other public gathering places in major urban areas, including Moscow and St Petersburg as well as in areas of heightened tension along the Russian border with Ukraine,” the embassy said. Lloyd Austin, the US defense secretary, told ABC’s This Week the extent and type of military capability built up by Russia along the border could support a swift attack on the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. “I don’t believe this is a bluff,” he said. “[Putin] has assembled the right kinds of things you would need to conduct a successful invasion.” The Texas senator Ted Cruz spoke for Republican critics of Biden’s foreign policy, telling Fox News Sunday the withdrawal from Afghanistan last year showed weakness and gave Russia a green light to invade its neighbour. “Joe Biden becoming president is the best thing that ever happened, strategically, for Vladimir Putin,” Cruz said. In Washington, Biden convened a meeting of the national security council and, the White House said, spoke to Emmanuel Macron, the French president who has staged talks with Putin. The White House also cancelled plans for Biden to go to Delaware for the Presidents’ Day holiday. Blinken had just returned from Munich, where he accompanied Kamala Harris, the vice-president, to a security conference. The secretary of state is scheduled to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, in Europe next week, but has stipulated that the encounter will be cancelled if an invasion occurs. On Saturday, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was sharply critical of allied leaders for waiting to impose sanctions until after any bombardment began. He accused world leaders of “appeasement”. “You’re telling me that it’s 100% that the war will start in a couple of days. Then what are you waiting for?” he said. Asked by CBS to respond, Blinken said: “We have put together in great detail the massive consequences that will befall Russia if it engages in this aggression. “The purpose of that is to deter the aggression, and once you trigger the sanctions you lose the deterrence.” Russian officials continued to insist there were no plans to invade. Anatoly Antonov, the Russian ambassador to Washington, told CBS the massive operation was limited to “sovereign Russian territory” – glossing over sizable forces and drills in Belarus. “We don’t threaten anyone,” Antonov said. “We have our legitimate right to have our troops where we want on Russian territory.” The ambassador added that the goal was to achieve “legally binding guarantees for Russian security” and to stop Nato expansion on its borders. “Nato is not a peace-loving NGO,” he said. “It’s a political-military machinery or block. We would like the United States to withdraw their troops and weaponry from those states because it’s our life, our guarantees for security for our people.” The Nato general secretary, Jens Stoltenberg, told CBS there were no immediate plans for Ukraine to join the alliance and stressed that any such decision would fall to the Ukrainian people. But he said that Nato had increased its collective defense presence towards the east in recent years and added: “We are ready to further re-enforce that.”AGL Energy has rejected a takeover bid by tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian asset management giant Brookfield, saying the preliminary offer “materially undervalues the company”. Brookfield and Cannon-Brookes’ Grok Ventures made the extraordinary offer to take over Australia’s most polluting company on Saturday, with a goal to shut its coal power plants earlier than planned. In a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange, AGL said it had rejected the unsolicited preliminary offer of $7.50 a share, which offered a 4.7% premium on Friday’s closing price of $7.16. Including AGL’s debt, the offer was in the range of $8bn. The company said it was not in the best interest of shareholders. Speaking on Monday, Cannon-Brookes said the consortium would continue to work on the potential takeover, which would involve Brookfield and Grok Ventures acquiring AGL’s power generation and energy retail divisions, which include coal, gas and renewable energy generation assets. If successful, the new owners would aim to bring forward AGL’s exit from coal-fired power. It would also halt a planned demerger that would have broken off the company’s fossil fuel assets into a separate entity, to be called Accel Energy. AGL chairman Peter Botten said the bid did not offer an adequate premium for a change of control of the company. “Under the unsolicited proposal, the board believes AGL Energy shareholders would be forgoing the opportunity to realise potential future value via AGL Energy’s proposed demerger, as both proposed organisations pursue decisive action on decarbonisation.” Cannon-Brookes said the consortium was confident it could close and replace AGL’s coal plants – Bayswater in New South Wales and Loy Yang A in Victoria – by 2030, and take the company to net zero emissions by 2035. “We have $20bn to fund that transition,” he told the ABC’s RN Breakfast. He said it should lead to lower bills for consumers, create more jobs and substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions. AGL is responsible for more than 8% of Australia’s annual emissions – more in its own right than Sweden, Ireland or New Zealand, he said. “On a global scale this is a massive decarbonisation effort. The economics stacks up, the science stacks up. What we require is just the gumption to go it and actually make it happen, and that’s what we’re trying to do,” Cannon-Brookes said. In a joint statement, Brookfield and Grok Ventures said it was disappointed with AGL’s response, and that its proposal was in the best interests of shareholders as it would avoid a “potentially value destructive” demerger and enable a “well-funded accelerated decarbonisation of Australia’s energy sources”. The consortium said its offer represented about a 20% premium on the three-month volume-weighted average price of $6.28 a share. It promised a transition plan consistent with limiting global heating to 1.5C that would require about $20bn of capital as about 7 gigawatts of fossil fuel capacity was replaced with at least 8GW of clean energy and storage. “It is intended AGL will be net zero by 2035,” the statement said. “The consortium is committed to working with all stakeholders and regulators to ensure the transition is achievable. Serving the company’s customers will remain the primary focus.” Brookfield managing partner Stewart Upson said the consortium had a “defined plan to significantly rationalise” AGL’s carbon-intensive coal plants once they were replaced through a “large-scale renewable build-out, supported by an identified project pipeline”. “To have a material impact on net zero transition, investors need to do more than simply avoid carbon-intensive businesses and we need to be willing to tackle emissions head on,” he said. The owners of Australia’s coal-fired generators are under increasing pressure, both economic due to the rise of cheap solar energy in the national grid, and from activist shareholders to act in line with the Paris climate agreement. Earlier this month, AGL brought forward the planned closure date of the Bayswater black coal plant in NSW to no later than 2033, and Loy Yang A in the Latrobe Valley to 2045. On Thursday, Origin Energy gave notice that the country’s biggest coal-fired power plant, Eraring, could shut seven years earlier than scheduled – in 2025, rather than 2032. Asked about the bid during a visit to Tasmania on Monday, Scott Morrison declared the government did not want ageing coal plants to close early. “We need to ensure that our coal-fired generation of electricity runs to its life, because if it doesn’t, electricity prices go up,” the prime minister said. While cheaper renewable energy generation is one of the factors driving lower power prices, the prime minister said his government was “very committed to sweating those [coal] assets” to ensure reliable electricity supply at affordable prices. The energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, said energy companies were providers of an essential service and had a responsibility to put consumers first. He said driving out “dispatchable” capacity – meaning coal plants – was a significant risk to electricity consumers “both in terms of reliability of the grid and electricity price impacts”. AGL’s share price rose about 12% on Monday morning, topping $8 for the first time since mid-July 2021. The prospect of AGL’s coal plants closing as soon as 2035 is broadly in line with scenarios published by the Australian Energy Market Operator in a draft integrated system plan – a blueprint for the future – published in December. Under its “step change” scenario, brown-coal plants in Victoria would shut by the early 2030s and the final black coal plants by the early 2040s. Speaking alongside Morrison, the treasurer Josh Frydenberg dead-batted a question about whether the proposal could be blocked by the Foreign Investment Review Board. He noted the bid had not yet been approved by AGL shareholders. Brookfield last November secured approval from the foreign investment review board for the $17.8bn takeover of transmission group AusNet Services. Given AGL’s role as a major energy generator and retailer – before the planned demerger – an agreed takeover may also attract attention from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. AGL’s demerger is being advised by Macquarie Bank, while the Brookfield-Grok duo is being advised by Citi. Cannon-Brookes, a renewable energy investor and vocal advocate for greater action on the climate crisis, previously expressed an interest in backing clean energy assets to replace AGL’s ageing Liddell coal plant, which is due to shut next year.Pep Guardiola has said that Manchester City are in a fight for the Premier League title after their 3-2 home defeat against Tottenham on Saturday. City’s first loss in 17 Premier League games leaves the champions on 63 points, six ahead of Liverpool, who have a match in hand and visit the Etihad Stadium on 9 April. Guardiola was clear that City are now in a tussle with the Merseyside club, having led by 12 points earlier this month. “We have to fight for every game and every game we are going to win we will be closer,” the City manager said. “I said weeks ago we have to make a lot of points to be champions and this is what we will try to do. “I think we performed well – honestly. I never said the title race was over. It’s normal. In January and February the teams at the bottom won their games because everyone fights for everything. It will be difficult. We know it. “But it’s happened. We lost a game. We will recover with training sessions and prepare for the next game.” City were never ahead in the match, having to equalise strikes from Dejan Kulusevski and Harry Kane before the latter’s 95th‑minute winner. “They defended in the 18-yard box and it was so difficult,” Guardiola said. “They allowed us to go outside and closed all the channels inside, and then after that they could run with their quality but they didn’t run much. It was difficult. Every time we played inside we had to then move outside and we arrived there and crossed. But for many reasons we were not there to score. “The first goal came from the quality they have and the second is difficult to defend and the third was our mistake. We were close to drawing, and maybe winning, but congratulations to Spurs.” The victory halted a run of three consecutive league defeats for Antonio Conte’s team. Eric Dier said: “This win is important if we take it in the right way. If we recognise that if we play with that intensity, with that commitment, that unity; if we play with that every game we can really push on from this. “I think we have to take this win in the right way, not get carried away but recognise what we need to do as a team to get results and play well. We have to take it with humility and understand that as a team we can be very good.”Boris Johnson will proclaim that the lifting of all remaining Covid restrictions in England this week marks a “moment of pride” when he unveils the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus, despite concerns from scientists, health experts and Labour that the move is premature. The legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned, while free PCR and lateral flow tests for everyone will be axed to rein in public spending and attempt to restore people’s confidence that life can return to normality. The tests will reportedly be kept for the over-80s. The national contact tracing service is expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. Fresh guidance is expected to be issued, similar to that already published about seasonal flu, designed to let individuals make their own judgments about the risk of catching or transmitting Covid. Following meetings over the weekend the cabinet will be assembled to rubber stamp the plans on Monday before a Commons statement by the prime minister and a press conference in the evening, likely to feature the government’s two leading pandemic advisers, Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance. The changes will be announced on Monday and start to come into effect from later in the week. On Sunday Johnson insisted the country was “in a different world” from when the pandemic started and said he wanted to “shift the balance” away from rules to advice for dealing with Covid. He told the BBC that people should still be careful and that coronavirus “remains a dangerous disease” for vulnerable and unvaccinated people, but said it was time “to see our country really getting back on its feet”, with workers going back to their offices “in the normal way”. To prepare for the threat of new variants emerging, it is understood that some measures will be kept in reserve. Health sources suggested these could include lab capacity for sequencing tests and back up contact tracing and mobile testing. So far, 91.4% of those eligible for a vaccine have had their first dose, falling to 85% for the second and 66.1% for the third. Daily case numbers have fallen to around a fifth of the record peak seen at the start of January 2022, while deaths have remained below 200 a day for the past week. Labour argued the move to scrap all remaining Covid restrictions was premature, and accused ministers of wanting to “declare victory before the war is over”. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said Johnson was acting like a football manager whose team was 2-1 up in the closing minutes of a game and decided to take off the best defender. “I’m not clear that the scientific advice supports this,” he said, adding that he stood with those groups who had raised concerns, such as the NHS Confederation, World Health Organization and British Medical Association, “any day of the week and twice on Sunday”. He accused Johnson of having been motivated by “political weakness, not by public health”. Tory MPs welcomed the move, particularly given it would “put daylight between us and the opposition”. However, one critic of the prime minister said it had “been brought forward as a galvanising effort for the party” given the pressure Johnson is under for being investigated by police over parties at No 10 during lockdown. A source claimed no modelling had been commissioned by the government to examine the possible effect on Covid rates of charging for tests. David Spiegelhalter, professor of public understanding of risk at the University of Cambridge, said there was significant uncertainty about the impact of the plans. “I can see the figures are looking encouraging, but the consequences are very difficult to predict. It may be fine, it may not be,” he said – adding that surveillance of the virus should continue through the Office for National Statistics’ infection survey. Dr Michael Head, a senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton, said Johnson’s plans were the “latest in a long line of reckless policies”. “Keeping some measures in place, including, for example, the requirement to wear masks in indoor spaces and requirements to self-isolate for a few more weeks would be helpful,” he said. “Breaking chains of transmission means there would be fewer people unwell and in hospital, healthcare resources would be freer to address their extensive backlogs, and more people would have received their booster doses thus ensuring they are better protected.” Experts have expressed particular concern about clinically extremely vulnerable people, for whom Covid still poses a more serious risk. The specialist guidance that has been in place for much of the pandemic is not expected to continue. Gemma Peters, chief executive of Blood Cancer UK, said that the government had “deliberately abandoned” this group. Removing free lateral flow tests would “create a massive health inequality” for clinically vulnerable people whose friends, family and colleagues could not afford to take tests before contact, Peters said, while removing the requirement to self-isolate would further ramp up “risk and anxiety”.Jamal Edwards, known for founding media platform SBTV, which helped catapult grime and a wave of new artists to a global audience, died on Sunday morning aged 31. Edwards was also a director, author, DJ, entrepreneur and designer, and was awarded an MBE in 2014 – when he was 24 – for his work in music. The careers of some of the world’s most successful musicians – including Ed Sheeran, Dave and Jessie J in a long list – were launched through SBTV, Edwards’ platform, which began as a YouTube channel, before they were signed by major labels. Edwards said he started SBTV “on a £20 phone” while he was still at school and grew it into a leading online youth broadcaster. His YouTube channel was established in 2006 and now boasts 1.2m subscribers and nearly 1bn total views. The channel, named after Edwards’ rap name SmokeyBarz, featured early music from artists including Stormzy, Rita Ora, Krept &amp; Konan, Bugzy Malone and more. “I always looked on grime like the punk movement, in terms of lyrics and rebellious attitude,” Edwards told the Guardian in a 2017 interview. A trademark format was SBTV’s F64 – a fresh 64 bars of new and original lyrics – which featured anyone from established artists like Wiley to newcomers and up-and-coming stars. Edwards was born in Luton in 1990 and grew up in Acton, west London. He received a BTec diploma in media moving image from Ealing College and worked at retail chain Topman to financially support himself while developing SBTV. When he found success, Edwards undertook extensive philanthropic work, including in mental health and the funding of youth centres. He worked to break down taboos about men’s mental health, speaking of his own anxiety, and in 2021 launched a project aimed at refurbishing and reopening youth centres. Tributes poured in for Edwards on social media from people in the music industry, politics, the sports world and beyond. Rapper AJ Tracey posted: “RIP Jamal Edwards, west london legend status.” Dave added: “Thank you for everything … words cannot explain.” Lethal Bizzle called Edwards “one of the pioneers in UK music”. Musician Example wrote on Instagram: “Can’t believe you’re gone. 31 years old. Can’t find the words right now.” Edwards was also an ambassador for the Prince of Wales’s charity, the Prince’s Trust. “Today I was on set when I found out the tragic news that my good friend Jamal Edwards had passed away and I’m honestly heartbroken,” Bafta-winning actor Adam Deacon said on Twitter. “Jamal was one of the nicest, most down to earth and humble men I’ve met in this industry. He always gave me time even when no one else would.” Deacon added: “He was an inspiration and what he achieved in life was truly remarkable. Thinking of his friends and family at this devastating time. RIP Jamal Edwards.” “Rest in peace Jamal Edwards,” England and Chelsea footballer Reece James said. “I’m lost for words.” “Giving God thanks that you did what he sent you to do ❤️ So many of us owe our careers to you bro,” George the Poet said on Twitter. “Thank you for everything,”The last time I hugged my mum was early on a July morning in 2019 as I put her in a taxi outside my house in Canterbury, Kent. I should have been driving her to Heathrow myself. I’d picked her up at 6am when she’d arrived from Australia, but I was feeling fractious after five weeks together in my cramped terrace house, the longest we’d spent under one roof in 20 years. And I knew she’d be back before long. I blamed the baby, said she wasn’t in the mood for a four-hour round trip, and ordered a taxi instead. The day was already warm and Mum was wearing a striped T-shirt. She cried as I hugged her, but after living overseas for 15 years I was used to that. She wondered when we’d see each other again or, more to the point, when she’d see my one-year-old daughter, her only grandchild. We talked tentatively about Christmas, but I was due at my in-laws that year so I said we’d wait and see. Almost as soon as she got home she emailed to ask if she could book another five-week trip for November. Exhausted by work and the baby, I said it wasn’t a good time, but we’d arrange something soon. We tried for my daughter’s 2nd birthday the following May, but by then the pandemic was well and truly in the way. In the end she stopped rebooking flights and accepted the airline’s travel voucher. My mum died on another July morning, almost two years to the day after the last time I saw her. I woke up to the message every expat fears – call home, urgent – and I knew. She’d been due to have surgery on a broken ankle, and I guessed she must have died on the operating table. My stomach churned as I dialled and heard my aunt’s voice, barely a whisper between our sobs. “She’s gone, Katie. She died.” I’m just one of many Australians overseas who lost someone close during the pandemic and never got the chance to say goodbye in person. While I’m thrilled to see joyful reunions playing out at airports across the country this week, it’s also incredibly painful for those of us who will never have that moment. Mum died suddenly and unexpectedly, not on the operating table after all but of a pulmonary embolism while waiting for surgery, 12 days after falling over while on holiday. She was only 68. It happened so quickly that even if we were living in the same country I might not have been there in her final moments. But if the borders hadn’t been shut for two years she would have at least got more than one Christmas, one birthday and one airport reunion with the granddaughter she had waited so long for. And my daughter would have something more than just a face on a screen to remember her by. I’m lucky I didn’t have to face the pain of knowing Mum was terminally ill when I couldn’t get home to her, like so many others did. Watching a loved one waste away through a screen – or worse, hearing they’ve died while you’re still biting your fingernails through quarantine – must have been hell on earth. I was also lucky that, against the odds, I made it to her funeral. The day Mum died I tweeted about not being able to get home, and it was widely shared. Somebody tagged Australia’s high commissioner to the UK, George Brandis, and the next morning I woke up to a message from him offering to help on compassionate grounds. Within minutes, someone from his office had gotten in touch and the wheels began to turn. We forked out thousands for airfares and PCR tests, but we were on the plane to Sydney within three days. There were 13 people in economy, and when we got there we discovered Katie Hopkins was in the same hotel – both facts were infuriating. After two weeks of quarantine with my three-year-old (exactly as fun as it sounds), I was home at last in Mum’s house. I’d thought if I could just lie on her bed, open her wardrobe and sink my face into her clothes, touch her fingerprints on her phone screen, I’d get the goodbye I needed. I didn’t, of course. I felt nothing when I stepped into her house. Even when I went to see her the day before the funeral and held her hand at last, I felt empty. Her body was there in the casket – bruised and disappearing after waiting so long for me – but she was gone. Still, that day in her house I gathered up the pieces that meant something. The striped T-shirt. A diary. Two of the rings she always wore, one a narrow band of tiny diamonds handed down from eldest daughter to eldest daughter for four generations, that I never take off. It’s the lost moments I find hardest to reconcile. Saying no to that trip she so desperately wanted to make. Not driving her to the airport that day. Maybe if I had we would have talked about some of the things we needed to. She always liked to corner me into tricky conversations in the car. A classic mum move. For all these reasons this week will be hard, despite how happy I am it’s finally here. Yet today the wattle is blooming in the park across the road. They call it mimosa here, but it has the same army-green leaves and fluffy yellow flowers as the trees behind the house I grew up in. I breathe in its unmistakable scent and I’m eight again, twisting off a stringy branch to give Mum, which she puts in a little crystal vase on the windowsill. I have moments like this every day, and they give me hope that perhaps goodbyes don’t really matter. She is with me, no matter what happened or didn’t happen later. She is with me. • Kate Guest is a UK-based Australian journalist