A monumental masterpiece depicting a 17th-century naval battle in silk and wool that is so fragile it has not been seen in public for 22 years is the subject of an urgent crowdfunding appeal to complete its delicate conservation. Royal Museums Greenwich needs to raise an extra £15,000 from the public in the next 28 days to save the tapestry, which was commissioned by Charles II and designed by the father and son team Willem van de Velde the Elder and Younger. The Burning of the Royal James at the Battle of Solebay, 28 May 1672, commemorates a naval battle fought off the Suffolk coast in the third Anglo-Dutch war. More than 160 ships and 55,000 men – including the Duke of York, who later became James II – took part. The tapestry depicts the Royal James engulfed in flames against a backdrop of delicately hued sea and sky, with tiny figures pitching themselves into the waves to escape the blazing ship. Cherubim battling with sea monsters decorate its borders, and a weavers’ mark has been woven into its galloon. But it has become structurally unstable due to age and its huge expanses of fragile silk weft, and the original vibrant colours have faded as a result of light damage. The first phase of conservation was completed last year when the tapestry was sent for cleaning in Belgium. It is now with specialist conservators in the UK with the aim of it being rehung at Royal Museums Greenwich next year. The tapestry has undergone about 350 hours of preparatory work to date, and conservators at Zenzie Tinker Conservation in Brighton have begun detailed repairs that will take until December. About £179,000 has been allocated to the project so far, but an additional £15,000 is needed for its final stages, including rehanging the tapestry in Greenwich. “This is a very complex tapestry to conserve,” said Zenzie Tinker. “It’s very finely and skilfully woven, with large expanses of silk. There is extraordinary colour, billowing clouds, cresting waves. If it was conserved badly, you’d lose all that detail.” Measuring almost 4 metres by 6 metres, it is the largest tapestry Tinker’s team has worked on. They have divided it into 20cm wide sections, each of which will take an average of 100 hours of painstaking and backbreaking work. The team has dyed wool in more than 60 shades to match the original tapestry, and is using a combination of fine cotton and polyester to replace silk that has degenerated. “We need this to last indefinitely. Silk is too shiny, and degrades too quickly,” said Tinker. Some earlier repairs, dating from the 18th and 19th centuries, need to be unpicked and rewoven. But almost all the original weaving will be preserved and reinforced. Hazel Arnott, the lead conservator on the tapestry, said the work was intensive, requiring regular breaks to avoid eye strain and muscular pain. Although there was a lot of consultation and planning among the three conservators working on the tapestry, she also liked to listen to audio books – currently Anthony Trollope – while stitching. The £15,000 appeal is being made through Art Happens with Art Fund, a crowdfunding platform for museums and galleries which sets a one-month deadline to raise money.The UK car industry has warned of a “growing regional divide” in the provision of electric car chargers, as it called for a new regulator to oversee legally binding targets for charger installation. The number of publicly available chargers has not grown fast enough to keep up with the soaring number of battery-powered electric cars on British roads, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), a lobby group. Public charger numbers rose by 82% between 2019 and 2021, but this pales in comparison with the 600% jump in the number of electric cars during the same period. The disparity between the number of chargers and cars is growing faster in the north of England than in the south, the SMMT said. Unequal charger provision across the country has long been a concern for the industry and analysts, with fears that customers will be put off buying new electric vehicles if they do not have a place to charge them regularly. A third of the UK’s households – mainly in towns and cities – do not have their own dedicated parking space where a private charge point could be installed. Investors, led by the oil companies Shell and BP and the French energy company EDF, are pouring money into the public charger industry. Nevertheless, those investments have overwhelmingly targeted wealthier areas of the country, led by London, as well as rapid chargers for fast recharging on popular routes. The UK has more rapid chargers per electric vehicle than any other nation barring China, South Korea and Japan, the SMMT said. That has left some parts of the country underserved. Greater Manchester has only 17 chargers per 100,000 people, compared with 102 per 100,000 in London, according to data from ZapMap that are relied upon by the government. Scotland is the second best region for chargers per 100,000 people, with 52 – although they are spread over a vast geographical area. Northern Ireland is the worst, with only 18 per 100,000 people. Mike Hawes, the SMMT’s chief executive, said that “range anxiety” – the often misplaced fear that an electric car will not have enough battery capacity – had been replaced by “charge anxiety” – the fear that drivers would be unable to find an open charge point. The SMMT said the charger mandate should be overseen by a new regulator it nicknamed “Ofcharge”, which would also have powers to set pricing, minimum standards and ensure “social equity” in provision. That would accompany a zero-emission-vehicle (ZEV) mandate announced by the government in October. Under the mandate, details of which are yet to be confirmed, carmakers will be expected to sell a growing proportion of electric vehicles and vans every year. The mandate is expected to accelerate the UK’s transition to electric cars, but it could mean that manufacturers are not able to sell as many petrol and diesel cars, as well as hybrids that combine a battery with an internal combustion engine. Those cars are currently more profitable for carmakers, although the gap is expected to disappear in the coming years once factories are building electric cars at the same scale. Hawes said plans to ban the sale of cars and vans with internal combustion engines by 2035 “would put the UK ahead of every major market in the world”, but added that it “needs more than automotive investment”. He said: “With clear, equivalent targets and support for operators and local authorities that match consumer needs, government can ensure the UK has a chargepoint network that makes electric mobility a reality for all, cutting emissions, driving growth and supporting consumers across the UK.” Ben Nelmes, the head of policy and research at New AutoMotive, a thinktank focused on the transition to zero-emissions vehicles, said the ZEV mandate should not be conditional on charger numbers. “The rising issue we’ve seen with charge points isn’t the number of chargers available,” Nelmes said. “We need to create a nationwide charging system based on the needs of the drivers, but this issue should not prevent an ambitious zero-emission vehicle mandate from the UK government. This is the key to secure the UK’s net zero targets, as well as giving people more access to electric vehicles at a lower cost and with more model ranges available.”Disabled children and young people should get 20 minutes of exercise each day and strength and balance activity three times a week in the first ever physical activity guidelines released for them by the four chief medical officers in the UK. The recommendations, underpinned by research from Durham University, the University of Bristol and Disability Rights UK, note that the health and wellbeing benefits include stronger muscles and improved confidence. While chief medical officers have previously issued physical activity guidelines for UK children and young people, it is the first time such recommendations have been made for those with disabilities. The chief medical officers, Sir Chris Whitty, Sir Michael McBride, Sir Gregor Smith and Sir Frank Atherton, said: “We are delighted to present this report and infographic which are an important step forward in addressing the gap in physical activity guidelines for disabled children and disabled young people. “We encourage schools, parents, carers and healthcare professionals to communicate and promote these guidelines across their wider professional networks to enable appropriate physical activity opportunities for disabled children and disabled young people in their communities.” Brett Smith, professor of disability and physical activity at Durham University, who led the work, said while many disabled children and young people wanted to be active, they and their parents often had questions, including whether it was safe for them to exercise and how much they should do. “They don’t have any guidance to say physical activity done at certain levels is really good for you. They need that reassurance that it’s good,” he said. Indeed, the evidence showed that physical activity could be just as beneficial for disabled children and young people as those who did not have a disability. But Smith said it was also crucial that disabled children and young people had access to spaces such as playgrounds and leisure facilities. “From a public health perspective, we can say x amount of physical activity is good for you or not, but until we have inclusive environments, until we have equality in those contexts, then children will always struggle, and their parents will always struggle to be able to do that,” he said. The new guidelines recommend that disabled children and young people aim for 120 to 180 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous intensity aerobic activity a week, or 20 minutes a day, and engage in strength and balance-focused activities around three times a week. “We don’t have any evidence to make a minutes recommendation for strength and balance,” said Charlie Foster, professor of physical activity and public health at the University of Bristol, who was also involved in developing the guidelines. He said strength and balance-focused activities included dance, yoga and gymnastics. Foster added that, as for other groups of individuals, all movement mattered and all “bite-size chunks of activity” counted – a phrasing he said was preferred by the disabled children and young people involved in communicating the guidelines. Smith said that the participants stressed that while the amount of physical activity was a useful message, it was important to them to emphasise equality, inclusivity, fun and exploring what made them feel good. “The lesson they taught us [is] that public health resources and messages will have more impact if they are co-produced in genuine partnership with people with lived experience,” Foster said. He also suggested the approach could prove useful for other areas of public health, including the uptake of Covid vaccines. The guidelines did not break down recommendations by different impairment groups, not least because evidence specific to some groups was lacking. Instead the team said it was important for people to find what worked for them, and to tailor exercise to what they could do on that day – a point raised by the disabled children and young people themselves. The guidelines, said Smith, were important not only from a public health perspective, but also because they covered a group of individuals that were often forgotten. “If people have forgotten about the health disparities, the health inequalities are just perpetuated implicitly if not explicitly on that,” he said, adding that disabled people had often been overlooked during the Covid pandemic. “It’s just putting disabled people and disabled young people at the forefront of policy, at the forefront of our agenda, at the forefront of our thinking, because there are so many young disabled people in society,” he said. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022 because an earlier version misnamed Disability Rights UK as Disabilities Rights UK.The proportion of patients who are intolerant to statins is far lower than previous estimates suggest, according to the world’s largest study of the issue. According to the British Heart Foundation, an estimated 7-8 million adults in the UK take statins, which reduce the risk of heart attack and strokes. However, concerns around side-effects mean some people reduce their dose or stop taking them altogether. Previous studies have estimated that the prevalence of statin intolerance may be as high as 50%, but new research drawing on data from more than 4 million people suggests it is likely below 10%. Prof Maciej Banach of the Medical University of Łódź and the University of Zielona Góra in Poland, who led the work, said it had been known for some time that most cases of statin intolerance were down to patients’ expectations of side-effects as a result of information they had received from the internet, neighbours or other sources. While the new research supports this view, Banach said it also shed light on characteristics of people who may be at risk of statin intolerance. “Our analysis gives strong message for the physicians, that there are some risk factors and conditions that might increase the risk of statin intolerance that everyone should always take into account,” he said, adding that it could help to exclude other reasons for an apparent statin intolerance and help doctors to think about using alternative treatments or doses. Writing in the European Heart Journal, Banach and colleagues report how they analysed data from 4,143,517 patients worldwide across 176 studies, including about 200,000 participants across 112 randomised control trials. The team’s analysis involved several different definitions for statin intolerance, including symptoms bad enough for patients to stop taking the drugs, an inability to tolerate the drugs at the dose needed for their cardiovascular risk, or a rise in levels of certain biological molecules or muscle symptoms that come and go as the pills are started or stopped. The results showed a prevalence of 9.1% when a range of definitions were considered, and as low as 5.9% under some individual definitions. The team said statin intolerance was associated with a number of factors including being older, female, black or Asian, drinking alcohol, having diabetes, being obese, or taking certain medications such as calcium channel blockers. The study adds to a growing body of evidence that statins have few side-effects. Research published last year revealed that statins are generally not behind the muscle aches and pains that persuade some people to ditch the drugs, while other studies have found that patients experience the same or fewer side-effects from taking statins than from placebo pills. Riyaz Patel, a professor of cardiology at University College London and a consultant cardiologist at Barts Health NHS trust, who was not involved in the study, said one limitation was that the prevalence of side-effects differed between different types of studies. Indeed, while the prevalence of statin intolerance was almost 5% when randomised control trials alone were considered, it was 17% among observational studies. Prof Liam Smeeth, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said the higher levels in observational studies were possibly because of biases or factors such as the “drucebo” effect, where people expect side-effects when taking a certain drug. The authors noted, however, it was also possible randomised control trials underestimated the prevalence by excluding certain patients. Nonetheless, Patel suggested the findings chimed with previous research. “Based on what we know about statin side-effects to date, the results are likely to be broadly valid, and indicate that we should not overestimate statin side-effects or be too quick to stop statins without due consideration,” he said. Smeeth suggested the results should offer reassurance. “It is a reality that statins can cause symptomatic side-effects that can be quite bad. But they are relatively rare,” he said, adding that the drugs would be well tolerated by the vast majority of people. “When you look at how effective and cheap [statins] are, reducing your risk of a heart attack by a third or more, it is a huge benefit.”“Move fast”, “build awesome things” and “live in the future” were among Meta’s new internal values introduced by Mark Zuckerberg on Tuesday, as the company grapples with growing pains in its pivot towards virtual reality and the “metaverse”. Speaking at an all-hands meeting on Tuesday, the CEO unveiled a number of new slogans and internal branding changes at the company, previously called Facebook. In a post shared to his own Facebook page, Zuckerberg said Meta was now “a metaverse company, building the future of social connection” rather than primarily a social media company. The company is also now calling its employees “metamates”, which according to one executive is a reference to the naval slogan “ship, shipmate, self”. Following the recent name change, Zuckerberg said that he wanted to recalibrate company policies and values – which had not been updated since 2007. He also encouraged workers to “focus on long-term impact” – perhaps a nod to investor concerns about immediate fallout from the pivot. “‘Focus on long-term impact’ emphasizes long-term thinking and encourages us to extend the timeline for the impact we have, rather than optimizing for near-term wins,” he wrote in his post. “We should take on the challenges that will be the most impactful, even if the full results won’t be seen for years.” The meeting comes as employees confront the company’s rapid shift away from the social media business it has spent decades building. Engineers at Instagram and Facebook have reportedly been encouraged to apply for jobs in the metaverse and artificial reality departments at the company, and Meta has hired thousands of new workers from rival companies such as Apple. Employees are not the only ones spooked by the changes: investors seem wary as well. Meta’s stocks took a historic plunge following its most recent earnings report, leading the company to lose more than $230bn in market value. But Zuckerberg has appeared to remain steadfast in his belief that the metaverse is a worthy venture, and has invested $10bn in the project already. In a recent earnings call, he assured investors: “I’m pleased with the momentum and the progress that we’ve made so far and I’m confident these are the right investments for us to focus on going forward.” Meta not only changed internal rules but also external branding. It said Tuesday it had rebranded the News Feed – one of its best-known products – changing the name to simply “Feed”. It also announced on Tuesday it had officially acquired Kustomer, a customer service management platform (the acquisition had been in the works since it was announced in November 2020). The flurry of rebrands on Tuesday comes after Meta settled one of its many controversies this week – a decade-old class action lawsuit over the company’s use of “cookies” in 2010 and 2011 that tracked people online even after they logged off the Facebook platform. As part of the proposed settlement, which must still be approved by a judge, Meta has agreed to delete all the data it “wrongfully collected” during that period. The company, which posted profits of $39.37bn in 2021, will also pay $90m to users who filed a claim, after lawyer fees are deducted. “Reaching a settlement in this case, which is more than a decade old, is in the best interest of our community and our shareholders and we’re glad to move past this issue,” said a Meta spokesperson, Drew Pusateri, in a statement on Tuesday. The Associated Press contributed to this reportAustralia is holding people in immigration detention for an average of 689 days, the highest on record and more than 12 times longer than the United States, according to Human Rights Watch, which has renewed calls for an end to the “harsh and unlawful policy”. The brief detention of tennis star Novak Djokovic in Melbourne’s Park hotel recently brought global attention to Australia’s harsh immigration policies, but more than one month on, 32 refugees and asylum seekers remain in the same facility. Home affairs department figures suggest 1,459 people are being held in various immigration detention facilities in Australia, including more than 70 refugees and asylum seekers transferred from Nauru and Manus Island. The average length of detention has increased to 689 days, vastly longer than comparable countries like the United States and Canada, where the averages are 55 days and 14 days respectively, Human Rights Watch says. Eight people have now spent more than 10 years in Australian immigration detention, and 117 have been detained for longer than five years. “It just shows how completely alone Australia is in the world, in terms of how absolutely horrific indefinite detention is, that there’s no end date,” Human Rights Watch Australia researcher Sophie McNeill said. “Other like-minded countries don’t do anything like us.” One of those still trapped in Melbourne’s Park hotel is Mehdi Ali, who fled Iran as a child of 15, arriving by boat in Australia seeking sanctuary. Ali’s family, part of the persecuted Ahwazi Arab minority, urged him to flee in the hope he would find freedom in Australia. He was recognised as a refugee, meaning Australia owed him protection, but has since been detained for almost a decade across facilities on Nauru, in Brisbane and now Melbourne’s notorious Park hotel. “The residents of this building are desperately in need of freedom,” Ali said. “Some of them think about committing suicide every night before they go to sleep.” The joint standing committee on migration is examining a bill to end indefinite and arbitrary immigration detention. Human Rights Watch has made a submission to the committee arguing community-based alternatives have been used across Europe with success. They also greatly reduce the costs to government. The government recently revealed it was costing more than $56,000 a night to house 32 refugees and asylum seekers in the Park hotel in Melbourne. Labor said the government would save $19m by shifting the detainees into community detention, describing the ongoing cost as “an unbelievable waste of taxpayer money”. Elaine Pearson, Australia director at Human Rights Watch, said dismantling indefinite detention and shifting to community detention would bring Australia into line with its international obligations. “Detaining people solely due to their immigration status is harmful, expensive and ineffective as a deterrent to migration,” Pearson said. “The Australian government should stop punishing those who may have fled violence and other injustices and offer rights-respecting alternatives to detention.”Over the past couple of days the camp behind the convoy to Canberra has slowly broken up. After an eviction notice from the ACT government the majority of protesters left on their own on Sunday, with a few holdouts finally forcefully evicted on Monday. Observing the livestream of those who tried to hold on, I and many others noticed a deep sense of despair. Much of this desperation came from an intense belief in the goals of the movement, and a promise that was made that the protests would keep going until these goals were met. But it was about a lot more than that. Throughout the event many participants spoke about the strength of community at camp, with some describing it as one of the best times they’d had in years, or even their entire life. Observing this has led me to think about the convoy as being what theorists, including myself in my own PhD, describe as an “intimate public”. Intimate publics refer to groups who bond over a shared worldview and “emotional knowledge”. Individuals come together both through connections to ideas as well as through a collective feeling about their position in the world. They reject politics, believing they can change the world through the sheer force of their community and the feeling behind it. Intimate publics exist throughout our community, and this idea can be used to describe groups across the political spectrum. In her research, Lauren Berlant argued that the first intimate public was comprised of (primarily white) American women, who used texts such as romantic novels to create a collective complaint about their lives. Thinking about the convoy in this way provides valuable insights into the movement, how it formed and how we may respond to it. The makeup of the convoy was diverse and included those who are solely against mandates as well as anti-vaxxers, members of the far right, sovereign citizens and some grifters who were just there to make a buck. Community wasn’t central to everyone, with people turning up with disparate goals. Yet, elements of the convoy to Canberra certainly had many of the traits of an intimate public. Specifically, the movement was about more than just about ideology, but instead created a space in which individuals could be heard about their ideas and feelings of being shunned by society. Speakers on the stage did not just talk about their political beliefs, but also about their experiences of being critical of vaccines or mandates, and how they were rejected and ostracised by those around them because of these views. At one point a speaker asked the crowd: “How many of you have lost friends over your views?” Almost everyone put their hand up. In these movements this becomes reinforced by the creation and sharing of joint knowledge. Individuals share resources, ideas and materials, which become common texts through which they can understand the world. The convoy protests for example featured some doctors, nurses and other professionals who used the platform to speak out against vaccine mandates. Other protestors criticised those who disagreed with this view as being “fake news”. This approach separates them from the rest of the world, reinforcing a group sense of a shared worldview. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Many are rightfully concerned about the rise of these movements and what they mean for politics in Australia. While I agree with some of their positions (I am critical of mandates), I also find the rhetoric and tactics of some very worrying. At the same time, I have despaired as I have watched how those around me have responded to these movements. Being condescending and talking about everyone in the convoy as a stupid moron who has been duped by disinformation will not achieve anything except to push people further into these spaces. These attacks reinforce a sense of the convoy being under siege from those around them, resulting in groups bunkering down rather than reaching out. This is particularly true when we fail to recognise the genuine fears many of these individuals hold. The last two years have seen a huge societal upheaval. Yet many have acted shocked when individuals have raised concerns about decisions made by governments. They were often screamed at and accused of wanting to “let it rip”. It is no surprise then that these individuals are more inclined towards movements where they feel that people empathise with and listen to them. If we want to understand the convoy and the movements around them, we need to grasp these group dynamics. People are not simply being “duped” by misinformation, and calling them “cookers” achieves nothing but making ourselves feel superior. Individuals are finding a community in a world that is often deeply lacking in it. Some of them are expressing genuinely held feelings that we must seek to understand and address rather than simply dismiss. • Simon Copland is a PhD candidate in sociology at the Australian National University, studying online men’s rights groups and “manosphere” communities. He has research expertise in masculinity, the far right, online hate and digital media platformsJoe Biden’s speech sounded like a closing argument, one that had been honed for some time and one that suggested expectations are still high in the White House that Russia will take military action. Biden briefly nodded to Moscow’s claims to be withdrawing before abruptly contradicting them, raising the US estimate of the number of troops surrounding Ukraine to 150,000 in a “threatening position”. It was the sort of speech normally delivered on the eve of momentous action, usually military action, to prepare expectations of the population. Biden addressed the American people directly, telling them he was not going to “pretend this will be painless” and that they would feel it at the petrol pump. He promised his administration would do what it could to alleviate that. The president also sought to speak over Putin’s head to ordinary Russians, who have heard little from their own media about the unprecedented deployments of their soldiers around Ukraine. Biden talked about their “deep ties of family history and culture” to the Ukrainians, and warned a war would bloody the country’s reputation in the history books. The world, he said, would “not forget that Russia chose needless death and destruction”. He made clear that the US remained open for negotiations on mutual security concerns, saying they would pursue talks “as long as there is hope” for diplomacy, but he stuck to the US position there would no compromise on the fundamental principle of the right of Ukraine and other states to choose their alliances. Earlier in the day, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, had stressed that Ukrainian membership would not happen in the foreseeable future, but Biden did not echo that conciliatory note. The US has already concluded that such verbal assurances will not be enough for Putin. The speech was part of what seems to be a very deliberate policy of this administration to think out loud about the crisis, consistently briefing its worse fears, even if it means aggravating its allies in Kyiv. The logic seems to be: we don’t know for sure what Putin will do, but we do know he likes to control the narrative, and spring the surprises. So why not create an environment of worst-case predictions, in which the only way the Russian leader can surprise the west is to opt for peace. Biden’s concluding declaration – “If we do not stand for freedom where it is at risk today, we’ll surely pay a steeper price tomorrow” – is likely to be greeted with grim mirth in Kyiv, in the wake of the US embassy’s evacuation and the retreat of American diplomats to the western end of the country. But the US has kept up arms supplies, and is reportedly making arrangements to keep the weapons flowing to an Ukrainian insurgency if it comes to that. This administration is well aware that it has been portrayed as weak for the manner in which it left Afghanistan. But Biden had long ago lost faith in the US mission there, whereas he believes wholeheartedly in Nato. He used the word “sacrosanct” to describe America’s obligation to its allies. It was deliberately resonant language. Biden is clearly aware this could turn out to be a defining test of his presidency.Prince Andrew’s decision to settle his sex assault case takes precedence on most of the front pages on Wednesday, with many papers reporting that the Duke was ordered by the Queen and Prince Charles to make a deal. The out-of-court settlement in the US civil case means Andrew makes no admission of guilt over claims by Virginia Giuffre that he sexually assaulted her on three occasions when she was 17, allegations he has repeatedly denied. He had previously said he intended to fight to clear his name in court. A letter filed with the US judge on Tuesday said the parties had reached a “settlement in principle” for an undisclosed sum. The Mirror says Andrew was under “intense pressure from the very top” to come to an agreement with his accuser to avoid the risk of any courtroom drama overshadowing the Queen’s 70th Jubilee celebrations this year. “Andrew does £12m deal to halt sex claim”, its main headline says, in a deal done “under Queen and Charles’s orders”. The Sun’s splash headline is “His final disgrace”, and also reports that the deal – which it claims is worth up to £12m – was made so that the Queen’s big year was not overshadowed. “Lifetime exile from royal duties”, a subhead notes. The Mail’s front page has the headline “Duke’s final ‘£10 million’ humiliation”, and above that it says that “Andrew settles with accuser in grovelling climbdown – slamming the door on a royal return for ever”. The Express is in similar territory but wraps it all up in one emphatic headline. “Andrew cuts sex case deal … but there’s no way back”, it says. It puts the deal at £12m. The Guardian’s headline is “Prince settles Giuffre sex assault case out of court” while on the inside pages royal reporter Caroline Davies writes that the settlement raises lots of questions but answers none about what happened between the prince and Giuffre. The Telegraph’s main story is headlined “Queen to help pay for £12m settlement”, a claim that might become a big talking point. A pointed commentary by columnist Camilla Tominey promoted across the top of the page says “Royals are better off without Andrew”. The i has “Prince pays to settle sex assault claims” and the Metro says “Duke pays up at last”. The Times leads with “Biden doubts Russian withdrawal”, but it does have the Andrew story and picture on the front: “Duke agrees payout to settle sex assault case”. The Daily Record’s splash is “Andrew’s £12m deal to stop sex claim” while the Yorkshire Post has “Duke settles case on sex assault claim”.Some of Melbourne’s most beloved live music venues say they will shut their doors for the final time within months, after operating at a loss because of density restrictions with no end in sight. On Tuesday, The Curtin, which has been a cornerstone of Melbourne’s live music scene for decades, announced its future is uncertain beyond November, as the building freehold is to be sold. The Curtin news follows a concerning trend for live music fans, with Sydney venues The Lansdowne, Old 505 Theatre and Giant Dwarf all announcing they were closing within a week of each other earlier this month. Now several venues in Melbourne, including The Butterfly Club, Old Bar and The Leadbeater, are joining together to demand the state government review Covid density restrictions in Victoria and provide a date for when they will end. They say they need a lifeline or they will have to close their doors. “This city is going to be a car park,” says Paris Martine, booker at The Curtin. “This is basically what we’re doing. You can see the ‘for sale’ sign on the front of the pub.” Because of the Omicron wave, Victorian music venues were placed back under capacity restrictions on 6 January, with a limit of one person per two square metres in all indoor areas in hospitality venues. It’s not clear when this will be lifted and venues say they are running out of time. “The margins on live music are so tiny,” Martine says. “Basically, you rely upon your sold-out gigs to carry you through on the gigs that are actually smaller, which means you can’t take risks on booking lesser-known artists.” Without restrictions, Martine would be able to sell 200 tickets to a gig at The Curtin, but is only allowed to let in between 100 and 130 at the moment. Now if a show doesn’t sell out, they bleed money. “It’s not even viable,” she says. “You are opening up to turn over probably about $2,000 if you’re lucky … When you start getting down to those kinds of numbers, you’re opening knowing that you might lose money that night.” In November the Victorian government announced it would “reignite the state’s live music” scene with $8m in funding. But Martine says while she is sure “they will see that money” eventually, it hasn’t arrived yet and the situation is urgent. “We’ve all been on restrictions, devastating restrictions that are impacting our ability to survive,” she says. “And we haven’t seen a cent.” She questions why thousands of people could mosh at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl, or how people could be allowed to work out inside a gym at full capacity, but they couldn’t have 200 people at The Curtin. “If we’re open enough for a major event of 10,000 to 30,000 people to go ahead, there is no justification of one person per two square metres,” Martine says. On Wednesday, a Creative Victoria spokesperson defended the funding rollout, saying it was underway and would provide 160 venues with grants. “Creative Victoria has worked closely with the music industry since the onset of the pandemic, and we continue to support our live music sector,” the spokesperson said. For bands busting to play after two long years of lockdowns, opportunities are still few and far between. Loretta Miller from Melbourne band Jazz Party says the scene has already dried up in Sydney and she doesn’t want to see Melbourne follow suit. “We used to play shows in Sydney, we can’t really get them much any more. There are no venues to play at. It’s a really hard city to crack,” Miller says. “I don’t want Melbourne to be that. That’s terrifying to me. Because what do we do then? There’s nowhere to play.” Jazz Party played their first show in a year last week, at an outdoor venue in regional Victoria. Their performances pay for the livelihoods of the nine members of the band, their booker and manager. “We released an album six months ago, which we’re launching in two weeks, which may or may not go ahead,” Miller says. “That’s my full-time job, that’s what I do.” Cash Savage, who leads Cash Savage and the Last Drinks, says this summer was the quietest they have had since the band started in 2008. “It’s out of control. It’s deads-ville for us,” Savage says. “We’re recording an album in summer, which would normally be bananas but there’s not really anything else to do.” Simone Pulga, director of Melbourne venue The Butterfly Club, is also struggling with the density restrictions. “Unlike every other time we’ve been under restrictions, this time, there is no key indicator as to when we are going to be coming out of them,” Pulga says. “There are some venues that have six weeks left in the bank before they need to make some very unpleasant decisions. Some might have three months. This is bad.” The federal member for Melbourne, Adam Bandt, is calling on the government to intervene before the city loses any more venues. “If the Covid restrictions are staying, then live music venues and musicians need support to weather the storm,” he says. His state colleague, MP for Melbourne Ellen Sandell, who represents the seat The Curtin sits in, has accused the government of “ignoring the sector”. This week she wrote to the treasurer and creative industries minister, asking them to urgently provide extra support for smaller live music venues. “What an incredible shame it would be to lose live music from Melbourne just because the state government hasn’t listened to the industry about what they need,” Sandell wrote. On top of a review of density restrictions, Melbourne venues are asking for a plan that includes lifeline funding if restrictions come back as well as the reintroduction of the Live Music Roundtable, which facilitates dialogue between the industry and government ministers. Pulga says the state government has not consulted with small- to medium-sized venues since October last year. “There is no rule of nature that says that Melbourne must have a healthy music scene,” he says. “It took decades for it to build, for the expertise to build, for the people to gain the skills. Once it’s gone, there is nothing that says it is going to come back.”A micrometeorite slamming into a satellite was the likely cause of a seven-hour outage for NBN Co internet users in December, a Senate hearing has been told. About 46,500 of NBN Co’s 112,000 satellite users in regional and remote parts of Australia were left without internet between 8.30pm on 21 December and 3.20am the following morning due to the incident. NBN Co’s chief development officer for regional and remote Australia, Gavin Williams, told a Senate estimates hearing on Tuesday that after an investigation involving the company’s satellite operation partners, the most likely cause of the outage was determined to be a micrometeorite. “It cannot be 100% characterised as this but all the evidence points to a micrometeorite that impacted the satellite,” he said. “It effectively makes [the] satellite’s body rotate while it remains in its orbit. So the satellite is no longer pointing at the appropriate spot on Earth [and] the payload – the transmission system on that satellite – is effectively switched off for that period.” He said the satellite was able to recover itself. “Now that impacted about 46,500 customers. The satellite was able to find Earth again. You know you say ‘it’s not rocket science’, senator? This is rocket science.” The testing to restart the service took around seven hours, meaning customers were left without internet for that period. Williams said that 573 of these customers, however, went two weeks without internet after the incident. He said the NBN boxes in their homes were missing parameters in the configuration file, meaning they could not reconnect to the network, but it took NBN Co a long time to realise the issue. “So it meant that and, frankly, it took us you know, there was a course of action three times a day updates … but it took quite a long time actually to delve into what was wrong and how you could recover,” Williams said. The company had considered pulling staff away from annual leave to go out to each of the nearly 600 premises in regional and remote parts of Australia to try to fix it, but ultimately NBN Co was able to fix the issue remotely. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Williams said those customers who endured two weeks without internet services would be eligible for rebates, and the company had developed emergency patches to rapidly identify and recover services should the issue happen again. He admitted it was “not our finest hour” but said it was the first time such an event had occurred. “This kind of outage deserves the classification of being unprecedented,” he said. The NBN Co CEO, Stephen Rue, said the company would begin offering full fibre upgrades to fibre-to-the-node and fibre-to-the-curb customers in March and May respectively, but admitted the timing of the launch may be affected depending on when the election is called, and what the company’s obligations are during caretaker mode.The Victorian government has entered into exclusive negotiations to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games in the state’s regions, trumping Tasmania’s recent bid to host the event. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, announced a two-month exclusivity agreement was signed with the Commonwealth Games Federation on Tuesday night, with work now under way to assess the viability of hosting. He said the government’s submission would focus on the state’s regions, rather than Melbourne, which most recently held the event in 2006. “It’s not just about rerunning what was done back in 2006. Our vision is for this to be predominantly a regional Victorian event. It’s about taking this amazing competition across many, many different sports into regional cities and towns,” Andrews said on Wednesday. He said it was too soon to know what time of year the event would take place, which sports would be included and which cities and towns would participate, although he noted athletics facilities were available in Ballarat, while Bendigo Basketball Stadium had been recently upgraded and Geelong had an aquatics centre and GMHBA Stadium. “Our starting position is very strong but yes, there would need to be further investment made, and that’s how I’d see it – not as a cost but a massive investment, built by locals,” he said. “Just think about the number of small- and medium-sized businesses, tradesmen and women working across regional Victoria, building the infrastructure that we need – and then that infrastructure is there as a lasting legacy. “All of that makes perfect sense and all of it, I think, is more powerful the more further away from Melbourne you get.” He said the Gold Coast region saw a net economic benefit of $2.5bn when it hosted the 2018 games. The announcement follows reports the Commonwealth Games Federation was struggling to find a host for the 2026 games. Durban, South Africa, was stripped of the right to stage the 2022 Commonwealth Games due to financial issues and was replaced by Birmingham, England, which was originally scheduled as 2026 host, leaving a vacancy. Perth withdrew from the process earlier this year, with the Western Australian government citing the uncertainty posed by the Covid-19 pandemic and at least $1bn of investment required to establish the required infrastructure. Kuala Lumpur, Cardiff, Calgary, Edmonton and Adelaide had all earlier withdrawn from proposed bids. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Last week, Tasmania formally requested Hobart and Launceston be considered as host or co-host for the event. Andrews, however, said the government’s bid was for Victoria “to the exclusion of all others”. Tasmania’s premier, Peter Gutwein, said he was disappointed with Commonwealth Games Australia’s handling of the situation. “The first I heard that they were exclusively dealing with Victoria was through the media. I have a meeting with Commonwealth Games Australia later this week and I will have further discussions with them then,” he told reporters on Wednesday. Gutwein said he remained hopeful Tasmania could play a role in the 2026 games. “We offer some great co-hosting options,’” he said. Victoria Tourism Industry Council’s chief executive, Felicia Mariani, said hosting the 2026 games would “supercharge” the state’s visitor economy. She said the Covid-19 pandemic had wiped nearly $20bn from visitor spend in the state. “The implications of restrictions have decimated our tourism and events industry, which has truly emerged as the worst affected industry across the board,” Mariani said in a statement. “Initiatives such as this are exactly what’s needed to rebuild, reimagine and re-engineer the enviable position we have built up over two decades as we established Victoria’s global profile.”Exotic parrots are on a non-stop flight to becoming a menace in New Zealand, as pet owners release hundreds of them into the wild each year and, in doing so, put the survival of native birds at risk. Roughly 6% of New Zealanders own pet birds and an average of 331 of the animals are lost each year; 92% of these are exotic parrots, mostly in the Auckland region, according to the University of Auckland. The numbers are conservative because scientists rely heavily on bird-owners reporting that they have lost their parrot, the university’s associate professor in biological studies, Dr Margaret Stanley, said. In some cases, people would not report it online, and in other cases, they were deliberately releasing them, she said. She has run simulations on the probability of pet parrots of the same species being found in the wild together, which would give them an opportunity to breed and eventually compete for the same food and nest space as native birds. “We looked at all the details on survivorship and lifespan for these species, and what we found was that for the seven species that we modelled, it was more than an 80% chance that a male-female pair were at large in the same local board area, at any given time. That was actually 100% for the Indian ring-necked parakeet and the Alexandrine parakeet – even worse, because we know these two species can hybridise.” The parrots also run the risk of introducing diseases, which is bad news for the 40% of New Zealand’s birds already considered endangered. “Once they’re breeding, it’s very, very hard to eradicate or control them,” Stanley said. Auckland Council’s biosecurity principal biosecurity adviser Dr Imogen Bassett said the results do not surprise her. “We do see regular reports of parrots on ‘lost and found’ pages on websites, and we get people calling council saying they’ve seen parrots, so they’re definitely out there. I think people generally underestimate the extent to which they are around.” From 1 September, Aucklanders will be banned from breeding and selling a number of exotic parrots, including monk parakeets, ringneck parakeets, and rainbow lorikeets, under the city’s pest management plan. “They have a massive track record of being invasive in dozens of countries and posing a real problem,” Bassett said. “That’s why research like Margaret’s is particularly concerning because it does really highlight the depressing risk we have of joining all those other countries.” That’s riled some owners and breeders in Auckland, but Bassett said council will consult further, before considering regulation against some parrot species that are already common in the environment, including eastern rosellas. “The horse has already bolted [for rosellas], so the ones we are most concerned about are those that we don’t already have wild populations of.” Bassett says New Zealand has the opportunity to stamp out a parrot invasion now, unlike when possums, rats, rabbits and other pests were introduced to the country in the 19th century. “Now 150 years later, we’re picking up the pieces of that very expensive and messy problem. We know with biosecurity that prevention is better than cure.” Stanley added that it cannot be just a regional approach, there must be a nationwide ban. “At the moment you can buy one on TradeMe from Hamilton and get it sent to Auckland, and breeders are talking about moving out of Auckland to set up shop.” “[Regulation] is a little bit toothless if it’s not nationwide.”Melbourne entrepreneur Geoff Bainbridge, a co-founder of Grill’d, says he was the victim of a “sophisticated, continuing and recently escalated extortion” prior to the release of footage showing him intoxicated while purportedly smoking methamphetamine. Bainbridge resigned on Wednesday as chief executive of Lark Distillery, an ASX-listed alcohol company, after the footage was published in the Australian. “Although I consider myself a victim of a crime, I accept that I am also responsible for the circumstances I find myself in,” he said in a statement. “Ultimately, I put myself in a situation I shouldn’t have been in. I’m a victim of extortion but that wouldn’t have occurred without my poor judgment. I am deeply remorseful for my own actions.″ The Age and Sydney Morning Herald reported Bainbridge had received anonymous threats as recently as Tuesday that the footage – which he says was filmed in 2015 – would be released unless he chose to “negotiate”. In a statement, Bainbridge said the incident had taken place prior to his appointment as Lark chief executive while he was travelling abroad. He said he attended a “gathering” with people he didn’t know and can’t remember much about the night. The next morning, he said, it became clear he had been “set up as part of a shakedown”. He said the video was then used as part of a “sophisticated, continuing and recently escalated extortion”. He said he paid the extortionists and sought advice from a London-based threat assessment agency. He then stopped replying to the threats, something he said prompted the extortionists to release the footage to “several media outlets”. Bainbridge told the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald that he wasn’t an ice user and doesn’t know how he came to have the drug or what else he was given. News Corp Australia published the footage on Wednesday morning which appears to show Bainbridge smoking an unverified substance, purportedly methamphetamine, from a glass pipe while making sexually explicit comments. The board of Lark Distilling, which is worth $340m, met on Tuesday for an emergency board meeting about Bainbridge, who has been the company’s chief executive and managing director since mid-2020. On Wednesday, Lark announced that Bainbridge had resigned “effective immediately to enable him to manage a personal matter that was brought to the attention of the board on the afternoon of 15 February 2022”. Bainbridge, 50, helped to found the successful burger chain Grill’d, but recently ended his association with the company. In a statement to News Corp, Bainbridge’s lawyers said: “The attempted extortion of Mr Bainbridge commenced years before he had any involvement in Lark Distillery; and Mr Bainbridge has sought the assistance of London-based professionals with the extortion attempt.” Bainbridge has said the extortion attempt began in December 2015 while he was in south-east Asia.Joe Biden has claimed that 150,000 Russian troops remain in a “threatening position” around Ukraine, despite Russian claims of a withdrawal, and warned that an invasion “remains distinctly possible”, as Ukraine began to mark what its president called a “day of unity”. In a televised address from the White House on Tuesday afternoon, Biden combined a repeated offer of security talks with a warning of severe repercussions if Russia carries out an attack that US intelligence has reportedly assessed could take place as early as Wednesday. On Wednesday morning, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy spoke at a “day of unity” telethon, according to Interfax, saying that Ukrainians were “united by a single desire – to live, to live in peace, to live happily, with one family, with children, with parents.” He has previously urged people to fly flags and sing the national anthem at 10am. In his speech, Biden said he would “rally the world” to oppose Russian military action but made clear that the response would be primarily economic, saying: “I will not send American servicemen to fight in Ukraine.” But he made clear that any attack on Nato territory or harm to Americans would be treated differently. “We’re not seeking direct confrontation with Russia, though I’ve been clear that if Russia targets Americans and Ukraine, we will respond forcefully,” Biden said. “If Russia attacks the United States or our allies through asymmetric means, like disruptive cyber-attacks against our companies or critical infrastructure, we’re prepared to respond.” Earlier in the day, the websites run by the Ukrainian defence ministry, the armed forces and the country’s largest commercial bank, PrivatBank, and Oschadbank were closed down after a cyber-attack. The Washington Post cited intelligence sources as saying the attack was probably the work of Russian government hackers, but the White House said it could not comment on attribution. Ukraine’s data security agency said later that operations at the two banks resumed on Tuesday evening and that its national cybersecurity system was “taking all necessary measures to localise and resist the cyberattack”. Pavlo Kukhta, a Ukrainian economist and adviser to the energy minister, said it was possible the hackers were preparing to target the country’s “vulnerable” power grid. “The goal is quite simple: to sow panic, show what they are capable of, test the systems and see if they are vulnerable,” the New York Times quoted him as saying. Late on Tuesday, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, criticised Russia’s refusal to participate in talks at the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that were called for by Ukraine, saying it demonstrated Moscow’s “contempt for the commitments it freely signed up to”. “It is Russia that is the aggressor here,” she said in a statement. “The troops stationed on the border are clear threat to Ukraine. The UK and our allies urge the Kremlin to withdraw its troops and enter discussions based on the proposals put forward by Nato to improve transparency and reduce risk.” Earlier on Tuesday, Vladimir Putin had claimed that a “partial” drawdown of Russian forces from the Ukrainian border. Asked for the reason for the drawdown on Tuesday, Putin was not forthcoming. “It’s a partial withdrawal of troops from the areas of our exercises,” he said in response to a question during a press conference with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. “What is there to comment on?” In his televised address, Biden made clear the US was unconvinced by the Kremlin’s claims of a withdrawal. “We have not yet verified that Russian military units are returning to their home bases. Indeed our analysts indicate that they remain very much in a threatening position,” the president said. “The fact remains right now Russia has more than 150,000 troops encircling Ukraine and Belarus and along Ukraine’s border. An invasion remains distinctly possible.” Russia has always denied planning to invade Ukraine, saying it can exercise troops on its own territory as it sees fit. It has been pressing for a set of security guarantees from the west, including a guarantee that Ukraine will never join Nato. Biden repeated the US and Nato position that they will not compromise on the right of Ukraine and other countries to decide their own security policy, including alliances. “The United States has put on the table concrete ideas to establish a security environment in Europe. We’re proposing new arms control measures, new transparency measures, new strategic stability measures,” the president said. “We are willing to make practical result-oriented steps that can advance our common security. We will not sacrifice basic principles, though. Nations have a right to sovereignty and territorial integrity.” Addressing the Russian people directly, the president said: “You are not our enemy, and I do not believe you want a bloody destructive war against Ukraine, a country and the people with whom you share such deep ties of family history and culture.” “If Russia does invade in the days and weeks ahead, the human cost for Ukraine will be immense,” he said, adding it would be “a self-inflicted wound” for Russia. He also prepared Americans for consequences, saying: “I will not pretend this will be painless, there could be impact on our energy prices.” He pledged that his administration would take steps to mitigate that impact. In another sign of Russia turning the screw on Ukraine, the state duma voted on Tuesday to ask Putin to recognise the independence of the two Russian-controlled separatist regions in the east of the country. Putin, hinting that he intended to use them as leverage, said he would not recognise the “republics” immediately, but called on Nato to negotiate with him on Russia’s security guarantees before it was “too late”. “We hear that Ukraine is not ready to join Nato; we know that,” Putin said. “At the same time, they say it’s not going to join tomorrow. But by the time they get ready for it, it may be too late for us. So we have to decide this question now, right now, in the very near future, we have to have a negotiation process for this.” The drawdown was first announced on Tuesday morning by the defence ministry spokesperson, Igor Konashenkov, who described ongoing exercises that involved forces from “practically all military districts, fleets and the airborne forces”. The defence ministry released video apparently shot in Crimea of Russian tanks and other heavy weaponry from two brigades being loaded on to railway cars. Otherwise, the Russian military gave little information about which forces would be withdrawn and where they would be sent. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “We believe there is some ground for cautious optimism based on the signals and signs coming from Moscow, that they are ready to engage in a diplomatic effort and we are ready to continue to engage in a diplomatic effort.” Ukrainian officials said they would not take Moscow at its word about a drawdown. “Many statements are constantly being made from [Russia], so we have a rule: we’ll believe it when we see it,” said Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister. “If we see the withdrawal then we will believe in de-escalation.” The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, accused the west of manufacturing “manic information madness”. “We’ve always said the troops will return to their bases after the exercises are over. This is the case this time as well,” he said. Additional reporting by Daniel Boffey in Brussels and Patrick Wintour in LondonTraditional owners in the Northern Territory have launched a legal challenge against an “unconscionable” decision to grant the territory’s largest ever groundwater extraction licence to a Chinese-owned agribusiness company, saying the decision failed to consider Aboriginal cultural rights to the water. The NT government granted Fortune Agribusiness a free 30-year licence to extract up to 40,000 megalitres of groundwater a year from aquifers under Singleton station, about 400km north of Alice Springs. It’s the largest private water allocation in the territory. The licence was originally granted in April but was reviewed after a challenge by traditional owners before being re-granted in November with slightly different conditions. The Central Land Council (CLC) on Wednesday filed a challenge against the decision in the supreme court on behalf of native title holders the Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation, arguing that the decision contravened the NT Water Act and that minister Kate Worden failed to consider the Aboriginal cultural values. It is calling for the licence to be quashed. The CLC chief executive, Les Turner, said they would argue that Worden’s decision was “not even a proper decision because she left so many significant matters to be decided later”. “This uncertainty means that what Fortune Agribusiness is eventually allowed to do might be very different from what it proposed in its licence application,” Turner said. “The water licence decision is unconscionable considering the impacts of climate change on highly vulnerable desert communities.” The CLC has called on the NT government to halt all water licence allocations until the proposed review of the regional water allocation plan has been completed. Turner said the government lacked sufficient data about the aquifers to make such a significant water allocation, and that requirements under the revised licence issued to Fortune Agribusiness – that they carry out further investigations about the water resources at the site and complete an assessment of the impact of the groundwater extraction on “identified groundwater dependent cultural values” – was not sufficient. “We’re saying nothing should happen until the new plan is in place,” he said. “This includes Singleton. At the moment we need more knowledge and more science, more understanding of our aquifers and more respect for Aboriginal people. The government should not give away our water.” The case is happening against the backdrop of a national push to provide greater recognition of cultural water rights and strengthen water use rights under native title laws. Native title rights cover access to and use of water but do not provide water rights or use of water for commercial purposes. They are also extinguished by the granting of other commercial water licences. Turner said providing native title holders with concrete rights regarding cultural water flows would address many of the concerns of traditional owners. “There is all this talk about Fortune Agribusiness developing [the water resource] but Aboriginal people might want to develop it and produce stuff themselves,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Fortune Agribusiness plans to build a $150m, 3,500ha horticulture project growing food primarily for the export market. In November, chairman Peter Wood said the company wanted to work with traditional owners to create “genuine social and economic benefits” and that the project was expected to create 100 permanent and 1,300 seasonal jobs. Fortune Agribusiness told Guardian Australia that it had received the notice of claim by the CLC on Wednesday and would be “cooperating with all requirements”.It wasn’t the clean sweep of eight years ago, but a pair of Americans topped the men’s freeski slopestyle podium on Wednesday morning after Alex Hall soared to Olympic gold ahead of teammate Nick Goepper, who took the silver. Sweden’s Jesper Tjader won the bronze ahead of Andri Ragettli, the defending world champion from Switzerland who qualified in first place but ended up in fourth on another bitterly cold morning in the mountains roughly 120km northwest of Beijing. Twelve entrants made three trips apiece down the 665-metre course filled with rails, jumps and obstacles and an eye-catching replica of China’s Great Wall with the best score counting towards their final position. Hall, a 23-year-old born in Fairbanks, Alaska, wasted no time setting the target, putting down a spectacular opening run for a score of 90.01 that none of his rivals could approach. He punctuated it with a sensational final jump known as the right side double 1080 pretzel one, halting his rotation in mid-air before reversing his spin and landing cleanly, a trick Hall said he learned in the fall. “I definitely knew I wanted to try the trick after making it to finals but I wasn’t sure if I was going to be able to do it,” he said. “I’ve been doing it a little bit but it’s still a really, really hard trick for me just because it’s hard to judge the rotation and really tough when I don’t know my speed exactly and it’s been a little tough with wind this week.” Goepper, who was bidding for a complete set of Olympic slopestyle medals after taking bronze in 2014 and silver in 2018, went into second with a score of 86.48 after the best of the middle attempts. Neither of the American leaders could improve on their scores on their final trips and the outcome hung in the balance until the final run of the morning when Ragettli, who returned from an ACL injury to win slopestyle gold at last month’s X Games, was undone by a missed takeoff and shut it down early. Hall, Alaska-born but who grew up in Switzerland while his parents taught at the University of Zurich and now lives in Salt Lake City, won slopestyle silver at the 2016 Youth Olympics, then bronzes at last year’s world championships and the X Games. Now the sport’s most prestigious title is his. “It definitely was the best slopestyle run I’ve ever done, mainly because it embodied everything I love about skiing and how I approach skiing and I didn’t fade away from that to try and maybe get bigger scores or something,” Hall said. “I just kept it true to myself, and I think that’s the most important part about our sport is just doing it for the love and doing it how you want to do it and not changing that.” Colby Stevenson, the 24-year-old from Park City, Utah, who returned from a near-fatal car crash in 2016 that left him in a coma to win silver in big air last week, made a few too many mistakes on the upper rail sections on his final run and finished in seventh. That denied the Americans the podium sweep they achieved at the 2014 Sochi Olympics, when Joss Christensen, Gus Kenworthy and Goepper won the gold, silver and bronze, respectively. “Just making the Olympic team was such an honor after everything I’ve been through with the car crash,” Stevenson said. “It just seemed like stars had to align, and they definitely did.” He added: “I am so happy to show my stuff on the world stage and ski the way that I did. It wasn’t exactly what I wanted today, but that’s how it goes, man, when you’re laying it all on the line. Give it your best and make sure to have fun. You don’t want to get too upset if you don’t do well. We’re living it.” It marked the 20th time the United States has gone one-two in the history of the Winter Olympics and the first since the men’s freeski halfpipe in 2018.Labor has helped the Coalition pass the visa cancellation bill in the lower house in a bid to sidestep what the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, admits is a “test for Labor”. On Wednesday, the Morrison government confirmed it would relist two bills seeking to lower the bar for failure of the character test for visa cancellation and introduce mandatory minimum sentences for firearms offences. The move seeks to sharpen the contrasts with Labor on national security, as Scott Morrison explained in the party room on Tuesday, in a bid to recover the government’s position ahead of the 2022 election. Hawke told reporters in Canberra the government would put the visa bill to the Senate before the election, implying it would get a vote in the final two sitting days, in budget week in late March. In parliamentary debate, he claimed to have won Senate crossbench support. But in question time, Hawke accused Anthony Albanese of seeking to pass the bill in the lower house “and send it to the Senate when you know we have run out of time to pass the bill” – a possible admission it cannot be legislated this term. Kristina Keneally revealed on Wednesday that Labor would not oppose the bill in the House of Representatives. But in debate on Wednesday evening, the shadow assistant immigration minister, Andrew Giles, confirmed Labor would attempt to amend the bill in the Senate to remove retrospectivity and soften the impact on New Zealanders. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie labelled the bill a “blatant attempt by the government to pander to racism and xenophobia” and said it was “completely and utterly unprincipled” to vote for it. Nevertheless, the bill passed the lower house on Wednesday evening. Earlier, Hawke ruled out amendments. “Absolutely not,” he told reporters in Canberra. “The reason we’ve set this test for Labor is that Labor is, after two years of opposing this bill, seeking to run from the house and block it in the Senate.” Under current migration law, visas are automatically cancelled if a non-citizen is sentenced to 12 months or more in jail, but can also be cancelled if a person fails the “character test”. The proposed bill deems that a person convicted of a “designated offence”, such as violence or breaching a court order, is of bad character, making visa cancellation more likely, although a discretion not to do so remains. In October, Labor helped defeat the bill in the Senate, citing concerns that low-level offending should not be a trigger for deportation, retrospective application should be removed, and a ministerial direction should be issued to soften the impact on New Zealand citizens. Hawke told reporters there are “no trivial crimes captured by this legislation”. “The Morrison government will not negotiate over community safety … or serious and violent crime.” New Zealand’s foreign minister, Nanaia Mahuta, reiterated the country’s concerns about deportations. “We don’t agree with the policy and would be concerned at any moves to strengthen it,” Mahuta told Guardian Australia. “New Zealand accepts that Australia has the right to deport people. However, we are concerned that Australia continues to send people to New Zealand who have never lived here and have no family or support networks at all.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Asked about harms to Australia’s relationship with New Zealand, where most people whose visas are cancelled are sent, Hawke said the cancellation policy was “non-discriminatory”. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, defended the politicisation of the issue, arguing that Labor has “set a test for itself” by portraying itself as tough on national security with “very little evidence”. Andrews said Labor was so determined to present a “small target” in the election it was “folding in on itself”. Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said Labor should not help the Morrison government pass a bill that “will hurt people” including “splitting up families, many of who have lived here for years”. Earlier, the government also introduced its firearms bill, which increases maximum sentences for trafficking and sets a mandatory minimum sentence of five years in prison for firearms offences. Labor has a longstanding opposition to mandatory sentences, opposing a similar measure in 2015 under the Abbott government, but the bill is yet to be reconsidered by the caucus.Technical glitches during exams have left hundreds of trainee medical specialists in the lurch and unable to move on to advanced training and specialisation. On Monday, about 120 specialty medical trainees sitting an online written exam – which cost thousands of dollars to sit – were affected by technical failures that meant they could not complete what was, for many of them, their final exam. The Divisional Written Exam is only held once a year and sitting it is a requirement to enter specialty fields such as paediatrics, geriatrics, neurology and cardiology. It is not the first issue the Royal Australian College of Physicians (RACP) has had with online exams, with a catastrophic technical error in 2018 forcing a whole cohort of trainee doctors to resit a crucial test. Regarding the latest glitch, an RACP spokesperson said students were affected by logon delays or other IT issues for one of the two exams. “No examination data has been lost,” the spokesperson said. “We appreciate this is a very stressful situation for our trainees, and we are sorry that they have had this experience. We are reaching out to each of the affected trainees to understand the impact this had and how we can support them to resit the exam next month.” Meanwhile, 200 psychiatry trainees could not complete a compulsory online examination, the Objective Structured Clinical Exam (OSCE), in November due to a technical failure that the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP) said it was still investigating. Many of those students are still waiting to find out how to proceed. One final-year psychiatry registrar told Guardian Australia: “This was against a background of two years of bungled examination processes which has left a bottleneck of doctors unable to gain their final qualifications to practise as psychiatrists. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Some trainees reported having attempted to sit this final examination up to five times over the [last] two years, but could not do so as the RANZCP cancelled or significantly downscaled the number of examination spots available on each occasion.” The RANZCP president-elect, Dr Elizabeth Moore, said Covid had disrupted the psychiatry exams over the past two years, but the November exam had been affected by a technical issue still under investigation in which the online platform failed. The exam was a clinical examination broken into parts known as “stations”, with breaks between each. Trainees can complete this exam at any point from several months into their traineeship, but many opt to do it towards the end of their training as their final exam. The trainees affected by the technical glitch were able to complete their first stations in the morning, but were unable to log on and complete the afternoon component. However, Moore said the RANZCP had developed an alternative assessment pathway to help many of those students affected, in consultation with trainees. If they were assessed as having passed the two stations they had completed in the morning, they were given a pass for the whole exam. Those who failed the stations had their portfolio of work reviewed by assessors to look at the trend in their work over time and to see if they had reached the standards required for passing the exam. “If educationists were satisfied the data was there to support their competency, then they were also passed on the exam,” Moore said. The remaining students are being reviewed on a case-by-case basis, Moore said, a process which is still under way. A separate technical error led to some students receiving a message late in 2021 that they had passed the November exam when they in fact had not. “All we can do is apologise for that,” Moore said. Moore rejected that the cancellations and technical failures were contributing to shortages of psychiatry specialists, slowing the entry of new staff into an already overwhelmed mental health system. If anything, the alternative assessment arrangements RANZCP had implemented as a result of the glitch was ensuring trainees were advancing, she said. However, the whole examination system is under review, she added, including how to make exams less stressful and onerous on trainees.When it comes to ways to warm up a fashion crowd on a cold New York evening, singer Miguel performing Prince covers is probably a pretty safe bet. That’s what was served up at Michael Kors’ autumn/winter 2022 show at New York fashion week on Tuesday evening. If Kors’ shows are typically razzle-dazzle affairs with lots of invitees and celebrity guests – a February 2019 extravaganza had Barry Manilow singing Copacabana and a glitter gun – this had the star performer but it was a more intimate affair. It was the soundtrack to an equally “up” collection worn by models including Bella and Gigi Hadid, Paloma Elsesser and Natasha Poly. More watched online. The show had been teased on Kors’ Instagram account all week and it was live-streamed on his website. This was very much a collection aimed at life outside the home. It started with the uptown polish Kors is known for – with a series of impeccably cut camel coats worn with knitwear and high boots in the same shade. This was followed by little black dresses, concrete grey knits and coats in faux crocodile or a zingy shade of orange. Designs were either made for work (a short skirt suit, a fuchsia trouser suit), travel (some models carried XXL carry-on bags) or – often – nights out. About 100 people watched Miguel, in leather trousers and trench, with a live band on stage, sing Raspberry Beret and I Would Die 4 U. They saw a yellow sequin minidress, an asymmetric silver frock, oversized faux fur coats in crayon colours and a male model wearing a feather boa worthy of Harry Styles - or, indeed, Prince. On a video call the day before his show, Kors explained the thinking behind it. “It’s about resilience, confidence, strength, and really stepping out – stepping out and sort of strutting your stuff,” he said. Coming out of the pandemic made the designer think of other moments in his history. “I thought back in the early 90s, we were at the height of the Aids pandemic. We felt that the world was ending but yet we still craved going out … And when 9/11 happened … Everyone said no one would ever live downtown in New York again. And in fact, we saw this incredible explosion of energy and glamour.” Kors hopes this optimism – in wardrobes and lifestyles – will grow now, too. “We’ve all been on this crazy rollercoaster, in every city in the world. But … people just want to go back, to gather. There are lines at the bar at the Carlyle, here in New York.” Kors’ clothes, one can surmise, are what these people might wear for their new diary dates. “I love the evening clothes,” he said, of the collection. “Most of them are in jersey so they’re comfortable. You can actually move, you can dance, you can have fun all night long.” This optimism tallies with the projection from Capri, the group that owns the Michael Kors brand, that consumers will be buying more luxury products as the world comes out of lockdowns. In June 2021, the group raised its fiscal forecast for this year. Capri now expects annual revenue in 2022 to be about $5.15bn (£3.8bn), compared to previous forecast of about $5.10bn (£3.76bn).A video of a handful of screeching tanks and lumbering armoured vehicles mounting a transport train in Crimea accompanied the Russian defence ministry’s trumpeted announcement that some of the forces that have been encircling Ukraine will “head for their garrisons”. Such evidence is clearly far too tentative to amount to anything definitive, however. The movement of Russian forces towards Ukraine has been patiently documented by a group of open source intelligence analysts, relying on public domain information, including satellite imagery and a large supply of on the ground videos. Konrad Muzyka, one such specialist, and the president of Rochan Consulting, said any withdrawals would be a welcome development – but added that “previously announced withdrawals meant more Russian troop deployments near Ukraine” and it would take at best “a few days to verify” what, on balance, was happening. Redeployments in Crimea, in any event, may be of only limited significance given how many troops – about 150,000 on some estimates – have moved up to the border, or are still exercising in Belarus, officially until 20 February, menacing Kyiv from the most direct invasion route, to the north. Rob Lee, an analyst with the Foreign Policy Centre, said the key would be waiting to see where troops who have been called forward from Russia’s far off eastern and central military districts go, particularly when the joint exercises end. If they remain nearby “Russia will have the capacity to conduct a significant escalation, though possibly not on as short notice,” he tweeted on Thursday. But if the analysts were unconvinced, scepticism was even greater in Nato. “We have not seen any sign of de-escalation on the ground,” said the alliance’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, at lunchtime. Other western officials were clearer still: “We see no sign of Russian de-escalation. We see the opposite.” The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, who had held a Cobra crisis meeting earlier on Tuesday, said field hospitals were still being constructed on the border with Ukraine in Belarus – and the UK view is that forces number are still going up. Only a day earlier Britain said it believed several thousand more were in transit to the region. There is no shortage of other reasons why Russia might want to appear to sound conciliatory at this point. Over the weekend, reports circulated that US intelligence had received reports that an invasion could begin on Wednesday, an unusually precise prediction given any attack will almost certainly involve deception and surprise. Sending the opposite message the day before, and when the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, was visiting Moscow, was always going to be timely. Maria Zakharova, the Russian foreign ministry spokesperson, seized on the point with enthusiasm, posting on Facebook: “15 February 2022 will go into history as the day western war propaganda failed.” It was last spring, in March and April, that Russia first mobilised on the borders of Ukraine, massing as many as 100,000 troops. A drawdown was announced towards the end of April, but in reality many of the forces stayed within the region, and whose presence was again felt from late November. “We’ve also seen that sometimes they move into a position with combat ready troops and a lot of heavy equipment,” Stoltenberg said, referring to the earlier buildup. “And then they take out some of, or perhaps even most of, the troops but they leave the equipment behind.” It is easy, then to be sceptical about Russian intentions. But there are always good reasons not to go to war. The humanitarian consequences of any invasion of Ukraine, likely to be resisted by both the country’s military and its people, will be fearful. Henry Boyd, from the International Institute of Strategic Studies, argues that Russia has spent a decade expensively modernising its armed forces. The analyst argued on Tuesday that Russia would think twice about “spending this too freely in any kind of combat operation” and “given the length of time it takes to rebuild such capabilities, I think [that] will be strongly held in the minds of planners in Moscow”. But there are also reasons why Vladimir Putin might want to try and maintain the crisis at high pitch for several weeks or even months, as western officials fear. Cheaper and far less risky than an invasion would be for the Kremlin to keep Ukraine under a longer period of pressure, bringing troops back and forwards at will to try and hurt Kyiv economically and see if any opportunities emerge.Australia will become the first country outside the US to make a local series of the long-running police investigative drama NCIS. The cast of NCIS: Sydney has yet to be announced but Paramount+ and Network Ten have promised the show will feature Australian stories and Australian talent. The Australian executive producer of the original CBS drama and the creator of the spin-off NCIS: Los Angeles, Shane Brennan, will be involved in the project. The series is expected to debut globally in 2023. It is the first international spin off of the show, with other versions set in New Orleans and Hawaii. Now into its 19th season, NCIS – centred on a fictional team of naval criminal investigative service agents – is the second longest running US prime time drama after Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit. The franchise is shown in 200 markets worldwide and in 2021-22 remained the US’s most watched series. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning The chief content officer and executive vice-president of ViacomCBS Australia and New Zealand, Beverley McGarvey, said the Sydney spin-off would “incorporate the superior NCIS storytelling while introducing new Australian characters and locations”.This will hurt tomorrow morning, warns my ageing back. But it’s a year since the vegetable patch was dug and it has to be done: creeping buttercup has run riot. Ranunculus repens is a surreptitious invader whose stolons creep over the soil, sinking deep roots from their tips and sprouting new plants that repeat the performance. Give one plant an inch and its clonal progeny will take a square yard. The buttercups are consigned to the compost bin. Leaning on the garden fork, watching a blackbird pounce on uncovered worms, I can see another weed that I missed: lesser celandine (Ficaria verna), a close relative of buttercup. Its rosette of marbled, spoon-shaped leaves has unfurled and lies flat against the soil, intercepting every available photon of weak February sunshine. Every year, this ambitious wild flower appears somewhere new in the garden. The particular form that grows here is subspecies bulbifera, which reproduces via detachable buds called bulbils, about the size of a rice grain, that form in leaf stalk bases. By early summer the celandines will have withered, leaving these propagules on the soil surface, dormant until spring. Then, where there was one plant, there will be many cloned copies of their parent. Lifting this latest arrival in the vegetable garden reveals that it has already formed haemorrhoid-shaped underground tubers which, in accordance with the ancient doctrine of signatures, indicated its medicinal virtues and conferred its apothecary’s name, pilewort. “Bathed with the juice mixed with wine or with the sick man’s urine, [piles] are drawn together and dried up, and the pain quite taken away,” John Gerard assured sufferers in his 1597 book The Herball. For years, I’ve inadvertently transported bulbils around in mud on my boots. To a pernickety gardener, this proliferation of pilewort might seem a pain in the bum, but my aching back knows that there’s now no hope of digging it all out; nor would I want to. I like the idea of its starry yellow flowers blooming in my footsteps, providing pollen and nectar for tawny mining bees, bee flies and the first butterflies emerging from hibernation in spring. Meanwhile, the vegetable garden upstart has been transplanted under the hedge. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThanks for reading the blog. This one is closed now but you can follow all the developments at our new blog here: China may take advantage of the Ukraine crisis and do something “provocative” in Asia while western powers are focused on defusing tensions with Russia, a US general has warned. General Kenneth Wilsbach, the head of US Pacific Air Forces, noted that China had aligned itself with Russia in the crisis, Agence France-Presse reports. Wilsbach told reporters on the sidelines of the Singapore Airshow on Wednesday: From the standpoint of will China see what’s happening in Europe and... try to do something here in the Indo-Pacific - absolutely yes, that’s a concern. I do have my concerns that they would want to take advantage. It won’t be surprising if they tried something that may be provocative, and see how the international community reacts.” Wilsbach said that when Beijing expressed support for Russia in the Ukraine standoff, he held talks with his staff and other “entities” in the region about its implications. Based in Hawaii, Wilsbach’s command would play a central role if conflict erupts in the Pacific though he did not go into specifics about what China might do during the Ukraine crisis, saying only that there were “probably a number of options” for Beijing. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison responded to Russia’s claims it has pulled back its military presence from Ukraine, describing the reports as “unconvincing and unconfirmed”. Morrison said cyber attacks on Ukraine ran counter to reports that Russia was about to engage in a pullback. The Australian Associated Press reports he told colleagues in parliament on Wednesday: Russia must unconditionally withdraw. If Russia attacks Ukraine, it will be met with overwhelming international condemnation. The world will not forget that Russia chose needless death and destruction.” Tensions continue in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine as soldiers carry out training exercises in preparation for a potential war. Militants of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR), seen pictured below, prepare for battle on the line of separation from the Ukrainian armed forces near the rebel-controlled settlement of Staromykhailivka. Ukrainian servicemen are also seen carrying out training exercises. Japan continues to watch the situation in Ukraine unfold with grave concern despite a Russian announcement of a partial pullback of armed forces, Japan’s top government spokesperson said, as reported by Reuters. Chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno told a news conference on Wednesday: [US] President Biden has said the possibility of an invasion of Russian forces into Ukraine clearly remains. The Japanese government sees that the situation remains unpredictable, and we will keep a close eye on the situation with high alert and grave concern.” Russia’s refusal to participate in the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) talks demonstrates its contempt for the commitments it voluntarily signed, the UK foreign secretary has said. Responding to Russia’s failure to send a representative to an OSCE meeting about its military build-up, Liz Truss issued a statement reading: Russia is patently failing to live up to the international commitments it has made around transparency. If the Kremlin is serious about a diplomatic resolution, then it needs to show up to diplomatic meetings and commit to meaningful talks. Russia’s refusal to engage with the OSCE process demonstrates its contempt for the commitments it freely signed up to. It is Russia that is the aggressor here. The troops stationed on the border are clear threat to Ukraine. The UK and our allies urge the Kremlin to withdraw its troops and enter discussions based on the proposals put forward by NATO to improve transparency and reduce risk.” Hopes that Russia could be scaling back its military buildup on the border with Ukraine have boosted stocks in Asia at the start of Wednesday’s trading day. The Nikkei in Japan is up nearly 2% after two days of losses this week, while the Hang Seng is up more than 1% and so is the Kospi in Seoul. Another barometer of investor angst – Brent crude oil – was down slightly at $92.85 as it continued to slide back from seven-year highs hit on Monday. It’s still rallied $20 – or more than 20% – since August. Snaps from on the ground in Ukraine’s most populous city of Kyiv in the west of the country and Lviv in the north show life as normal for Ukraine citizens. Many in the Ukrainian capital remain sceptical about an attack taking place, regardless of the exodus of diplomats. Most locals are going about their lives as normal, Guardian correspondent Shaun Walker reports from Kyiv. A pair of Ukraine’s banking websites are back in operation following a suspected cyberattack. Websites for Oschadbank and Privatbank have resumed online operations, according to a statement from Ukraine’s data security agency. The statement reads: “Starting from the afternoon of February 15, 2022, there is a powerful DDoS attack being observed on a number of information resources of Ukraine. In particular, this caused interruptions in the work of web resources of Privatbank and Oschadbank. The websites of the ministry of defense and the armed forces of Ukraine were also attacked. As of 19:30, the work of banking web resources has been resumed. A working group of experts from the national cybersecurity is taking all necessary measures to localize and resist the cyberattack.” The websites of Ukraine’s defense ministry and armed forces were also impacted by a cyberattack on Tuesday, according to statements from Ukrainian government agencies. As we’ve been reporting, US president Joe Biden gave an update on the situation unfolding in Russia and Ukraine, warning that an invasion is “very much a possibility”, but that a diplomatic resolution was still possible. “If Russia proceeds, we will rally the world to oppose its aggression,” Biden said in Washington, confirming that export controls and other actions not pursued during the 2014 Russia-Crimea invasion will take place if Ukraine is invaded. Here are the highlights of the speech: Hello it’s Samantha Lock joining you on the blog as my colleague Maanvi Singh signs off. Here is a quick recap of the key developments over the past few hours: US president Joe Biden warned that an invasion from Russia is “very much a possibility” but a diplomatic resolution was still possible. He also warned that despite reports from Russia that some of its troops were returning to home bases, analysis from the US has not verified that and that Russian troops continue to remain in a threatening position. Ukraine’s defense ministry and two banks were knocked offline on Tuesday. “It is not ruled out that the aggressor used tactics of little dirty tricks because its aggressive plans are not working out on a large scale,” the Ukrainian Centre for Strategic Communications and Information Security, which is part of the culture ministry, said in a statement. The White House said it is aware of the cyberattacks and has offered its support though clarified it has nothing on attribution concerning the attacks, US press secretary Jen Psaki told a press briefing. The attacks likely affected Ukraine’s military, energy, and other key systems according to recently declassified US intelligence, the Washington Post reports. Boris Johnson said Russia was sending “mixed signals” over its intentions in Ukraine, despite the troop movement reports. “The intelligence we are seeing is not encouraging,” he said. The US and European allies agreed that harsh sanctions against Russia would be the most effective way to deter Putin as Biden proposed to halt Nord Stream 2, a Russian natural gas pipeline to Europe if Russia further invades. Oil prices fell as much as 4% and stocks were in positive territory in Asia Pacific on Wednesday morning on hopes of a de-escalation of the standoff. However, Biden also warned that sanctions against Russia could cause further oil spikes. US Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer and minority leader Mitch McConnell issued a joint statement saying they wanted to send “a bipartisan message of solidarity and resolve to the people of Ukraine” as negotiations over a sanctions package against Russia stall. Ukraine’s defense ministry and two banks were knocked offline on Tuesday, raising suspicions that Russia is to blame as tensions between the countries continue to rise. Ukraine has blamed Russia for similar attacks in the past, and has been on high alert for cyber-sabotage as fears of military action intensify. “It is not ruled out that the aggressor used tactics of little dirty tricks because its aggressive plans are not working out on a large scale,” the Ukrainian Centre for Strategic Communications and Information Security, which is part of the culture ministry, said in a statement. The websites were reportedly overwhelmed using a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack in which assailants direct an influx of traffic to a set of servers to take them down. The Ukrainian defense ministry tweeted that its website was apparently under a cyberattack and it was working on restoring access to it, and a message on its home page said it was under maintenance. Oshadbank also confirmed the cyberattack, according to Reuters, saying it resulted in the slowing down of some of its systems. Allies to Ukraine have been on high alert for such an attack, as White House press secretary Jen Psaki said there were “a range of means that we could respond – both seen and unseen – to a cyber attack or any other attack”. The attack on Tuesday appears to be small in scale and not particularly detrimental, yet, said Rick Holland, chief information security officer at computer security firm Digital Shadows. “[The attacks] could be a precursor to a significant attack or a component of a broader campaign to intimidate and confuse Ukraine,” he said. Joe Biden’s speech sounded like a closing argument, one that had been honed for some time and one that suggested expectations are still high in the White House that Russia will take military action. Biden briefly nodded to Moscow’s claims to be withdrawing before abruptly contradicting them, raising the US estimate of the number of troops surrounding Ukraine to 150,000 in a “threatening position”. It was the sort of speech normally delivered on the eve of momentous action, usually military action, to prepare expectations of the population. Biden addressed the American people directly, telling them he was not going to “pretend this will be painless” and that they would feel it at the petrol pump. He promised his administration would do what it could to alleviate that. The president also sought to speak over Putin’s head to ordinary Russians, who have heard little from their own media about the unprecedented deployments of their soldiers around Ukraine. Biden talked about their “deep ties of family history and culture” to the Ukrainians, and warned a war would bloody the country’s reputation in the history books. The world, he said, would “not forget that Russia chose needless death and destruction”. He made clear that the US remained open for negotiations on mutual security concerns, saying they would pursue talks “as long as there is hope” for diplomacy, but he stuck to the US position there would no compromise on the fundamental principle of the right of Ukraine and other states to choose their alliances. Earlier in the day, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, had stressed that Ukrainian membership would not happen in the foreseeable future, but Biden did not echo that conciliatory note. The US has already concluded that such verbal assurances will not be enough for Putin Biden’s concluding declaration, “If we do not stand for freedom. where it is that risk today, we’ll surely pay a steeper price tomorrow” is likely to be greeted with grim mirth in Kyiv, in the wake of the US embassy’s evacuation and the retreat of American diplomats to the western end of the country. But the US has kept up arms supplies, and is reportedly making arrangements to keep the weapons flowing to an Ukrainian insurgency if it comes to that. This administration is well aware that it has been portrayed as weak for the manner in which it left Afghanistan. But Biden had long ago lost faith in the US mission there, whereas he believes wholeheartedly in Nato. He used the word “sacrosanct” to describe America’s obligation to its allies. It was deliberately resonant language. Biden is clearly aware this could turn out to be a defining test of his presidency. Michael McFaul, who served as US ambassador to Russia from 2012 to 2014, is mixing metaphors and indicating that it’s still unclear whether Russia is looking to turn toward or away from diplomacy at the moment. In a joint statement, Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer, minority leader Mitch McConnell and other senators from both parties said they wanted to send “a bipartisan message of solidarity and resolve to the people of Ukraine”. They write: Should Vladimir Putin further escalate his ongoing assault on Ukraine’s sovereignty, Russia must be made to pay a severe price. We are prepared to fully support the immediate imposition of strong, robust and effective sanctions on Russia, as well as tough restrictions and controls on exports to Russia, and we will urge our allies and partners in Europe and around the world to join us. In the face of Russian escalation against Ukraine, we will continue to support robust security, economic, and humanitarian assistance for the people of Ukraine. The United States and our partners should also move quickly to ensure that the Government of Ukraine receives sustained emergency assistance to defend against an illegal Russian invasion. The statement comes as bipartisan negotiations over a sanctions package has stalled. Republicans have introduced their own package, which would impose immediate sanctions on Russian oligarchs and members of Vladimir Putin’s inner circle, regardless of whether Russia invades Ukraine. The bill would also mandate sanctions on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline if Russia invades, and authorize more security funding for Ukraine, and create a lend-lease program. Senate Foreign Relations chair Bob Menendez said the Republican bill amounted to “partisan posturing” and that the “latest proposal by Republicans is largely a reflection of what Democrats had already agreed to”. In his update today, Biden emphasized that a Russian invasion of Ukraine would affect Americans and European allies. “I will not pretend this will be painless,” he said, noting that economic sanctions against Russia could cause oil prices to rise even as the US copes with broader inflation. But the president said that the US and European allies agreed that harsh sanctions against Russia would be the most effective way to deter Putin. He proposed to halt Nord Stream 2, a Russian natural gas pipeline to Europe if Russia further invades. “When it comes to Nord Stream 2 pipeline that would bring natural gas from Russia to Germany if Russia further invades Ukraine, it will not happen,” he said Cyberattacks on Ukraine reported today likely affected Ukraine’s military, energy, and other key systems according to recently declassified US intelligence, reports the Washington Post. Russian government hackers have likely broadly penetrated Ukrainian military, energy and other critical computer networks to collect intelligence and position themselves potentially to disrupt those systems should Russia launch a military assault on Ukraine, according to newly declassified US intelligence. Moscow could seek to disrupt Ukrainian entities that provide critical services such as electricity, transportation, finance and telecommunications – either to support military operations or to sow panic in an attempt to destabilize the country, according to a senior administration official who described the intelligence. The US government has determined only that Russia could undertake disruptive cyber-activity, not that it will, said the official, who like several others spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the matter’s sensitivity. “We don’t know that they have intention to do so,” the official said. “But we have been working with Ukraine to strengthen their cyberdefenses.” A Kremlin spokesman did not respond to a request for comment. Read full article here (paywall). During today’s White House press briefing, the White House said that it has nothing on attribution concerning cyberattacks in Ukraine. “I don’t have anything on attribution at this time,” said US press secretary Jen Psaki during today’s press briefing. “What I can say is that we have been in touch with the Ukrainians, our allies and partners, working with them to deter and respond to malicious cyber activity,” said Psaki. Reactions to Biden’s speech on the Russia-Ukraine situation have started to come in as experts share their thoughts on Biden’s remarks. Here’s Dr. Jeffrey Lewis of the Middlebury Institute of International studies on Biden’s speech, with Lewis tweeting: That speech by Biden was the one POTUS gives if he still expects an invasion. I was quite struck by how much expectation setting Biden did. Ben Rhodes, Former Deputy National Security Advisor of the United States, also shared his thoughts on Twitter, writing: Biden did not seem optimistic about the latest Russian overtures - remained focused on warning of invasion, detailing consequences for Russia (and the world), not giving an inch on the core NATO issues that Putin has been focused on. During a speech updating on the Russia-Ukraine situation, Joe Biden warned that an invasion from Russia is “very much a possibility,” but that a diplomatic resolution was still possible. Today, Biden warned that despite reports from Russia that some of its troops were returning to home bases, analysis from the US has not verified that and that Russian troops remain in a threatening position. “An invasion remains distinctly possible,” said Biden, again announcing that Americans in Ukraine should leave now “before it is too late to leave safely.” Biden also confirmed that the US has engaged in “non-stop diplomacy” to prevent a Russian invasion, saying “We should give diplomacy every chance to succeed.” Biden also, again, noted that NATO allies are united in opposition to an invasion and prepared to respond with consequences. “The West is united and galvanised,” said Biden, noting that Russia invading Ukraine would be a “self-inflicting wound.” “If Russia proceeds, we will rally the world to oppose its aggression,” said Biden, confirming that export controls and other actions not pursued during the 2014 Russia-Crimea invasion will take place if Ukraine is invaded. Biden also confirmed again that Nord Stream 2 will not happen if Russia invades Ukraine. Joe Biden is currently speaking on the Russia-Ukraine situation, with video available here. Stay tuned! US Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York said that he will be releasing a “bipartisan” statement with US Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, along with ranking chairs from other relevant committees, on the Russia-Ukraine situation. The White House is aware of cyberattacks against Ukraine and has offered its support, reports Reuters. Today, following reports that Ukraine’s defense ministry website and at least two large banks had been subject to a cyber attack, the White House said it is aware of the cyberattacks and offered its support as an investigation continues. This story is developing. Russia has deployed fighter jets to its air base in Syria for naval exercises, reports Reuters. Russia has deployed MiG-31K fighter jets with hypersonic Kinzhal missiles and long-range Tupolev Tu-22M strategic bombers to its air base in Syria for naval exercises, Interfax news agency reported on Tuesday, citing the defence ministry. The aircraft dispatched to Russia’s Hmeimim air base will take part in exercises in the eastern Mediterranean, part of a surge of Russian military activity amid a standoff with the West over Ukraine and security in Europe. Moscow announced on Jan. 20 that its navy would stage an array of exercises involving all its fleets from the Pacific to the Atlantic, drawing on 10,000 servicemen, 140 warships and dozens of planes. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s Damascus has been a staunch ally of Moscow since Russia launched an air strike campaign in Syria in 2015. Apart from the Hmeimim air base, Russia also controls the Tartus naval facility. Read the full article here (paywall). Following up on Secretary of State Antony Blinken’s tweet about the US having “unwavering support” for Ukraine, here is a summary of the call between Blinken and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, according to United States Department of State spokesperson Ned Price: The Secretary reiterated the U.S. commitment to continue to pursue a diplomatic solution to the crisis Moscow has precipitated. He stated that the United States looks forward to receiving Russia’s written response to the U.S. and NATO papers shared with Moscow last month proposing concrete areas for discussion regarding European security in coordination with our Allies and partners. He noted the Foreign Minister’s statement that it would be transmitted within the coming days. Secretary Blinken reiterated our ongoing concerns that Russia has the capacity to launch an invasion of Ukraine at any moment and emphasized the need to see verifiable, credible, meaningful de-escalation. He underscored that, while further Russian aggression against Ukraine would result in a swift, severe, and united Transatlantic response, we remain committed to the diplomatic path and believe that a window remains to resolve the crisis peacefully. In addition to confirming US support of Ukraine, US chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley has also spoken with sources in Ukraine to confirm US support. A Reuters reporter tweeted that Milley spoke with a Ukrainian counterpart and “reaffirmed unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” according to sources from the Pentagon. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken has tweeted his country’s “unwavering support” for Ukraine. The New York Times’ Moscow bureau chief, Anton Troianovski, writes that following his joint press conference with Vladimir Putin, German chancellor Olaf Scholz told reporters in a separate briefing that “NATO membership for Ukraine is not on the agenda”. Scholz said: Everyone must step back a bit here and make it clear to themselves that we just can’t have a possible military conflict over a question that is not on the agenda. It is the question of leadership ability for all involved – in Russia, in Ukraine, in NATO – to make sure that we don’t have an absurd situation that would be about something like that. Andriy, a 34-year-old bank clerk living in Kyiv, was feeling very pleased with the announcement on Tuesday that some Russian troops had started to move away from the border with Ukraine. First, it seemed to lower the threat of an all-out Russian attack on Kyiv. And second, it meant he might win a bet with his sister. Most locals are going about their lives as normal. “She took a plane to Poland on Saturday with her kids because she was reading about all this war threat, but I didn’t believe in it, and also I wanted to stay because had a haircut booked,” he said, as he took a stroll in the sunshine on the central Khreshchatyk street on Tuesday afternoon. “We had a bet about whether the Russians would attack,” he said. In recent days, many Kyiv residents, while alarmed by the military buildup, have shared Andriy’s scepticism about American warnings that their lives were about to be disrupted by missile barrages and that tank incursions would come to pass. From the UK’s prime minister Boris Johnson: Russia failed to attend a meeting of members of the OSCE, the world’s largest security body, to explain its military buildup near the Ukraine border, a source confirmed to Agence France-Presse Kyiv had requested the meeting with Russia and other members of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe to “discuss the reinforcement and movement of Russian forces along our border” under the so-called Vienna Document. The agreement requires the Vienna-based body’s 57 members to share information about their military forces and notify each other about major activities. “The United States welcomes the decision by Ukraine to call for this meeting,” Michael Carpenter, the US ambassador to the OSCE, told the closed-door session. “Unfortunately and regrettably, though perhaps not surprisingly, the Russian Federation has absented itself today,” he added, according to his statement. Regions in Ukraine where Russians are allegedly facing human rights abuses are occupied by Russia, Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK has said. Vadym Prystaiko responded to claims by Vladimir Putin that there were human rights abuses in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine: Strangely enough when he claims that Russians are threatened in Ukraine, the only place where Russians are threatened in Ukraine is occupied by Russians as territory. He added that it was a “a very unfortunate development” that the Russian parliament had called for the two regions of Ukraine, seized by Russian-backed separatists, to be recognised as independent republics. US President Joe Biden will give remarks on the situation between Ukraine and Russia from the White House at 3.30pm EST (8.30pm GMT). Biden “will reiterate that the United States remains open to high-level diplomacy in close coordination with our Allies, building on the multiple diplomatic off-ramps we and our Allies and partners have offered Russia in recent months,” the White House said. What exactly does Putin want in Ukraine? The websites of Ukraine’s defence ministry, armed forces, state banks Privatbank and Oschadbank have been targeted by cyberattacks that could have could have Russian origins, according to reports. In a statement posted to its Facebook page, Ukraine’s national cybersecurity agency said the internet banking of Privat bank and Oshchadbank - two of the country’s largest financial institutions - were under attack but that some services were still functioning. It added that for now there are no risks to citizens’ money. Oshadbank confirmed the cyber attack saying that it resulted in slowing down of some of its systems. “There’s a possibility of further attacks,” says PrivatBank. The Ministry of Defense and Ukraine’s Armed Forces’ public-facing websites are not currently accessible. The defence ministry site showed an error message saying the site was “undergoing technical maintenance”. The ministry tweeted that its website was apparently under a cyber attack and it was working on restoring access to it. The Ukrainian Centre for Strategic Communications and Information Security did not say who was responsible for the attack, but a statement suggested it was pointing the finger at Russia: It is not ruled out that the aggressor used tactics of little dirty tricks because its aggressive plans are not working out on a large scale Russia’s president said he was “ready to work further” with the west on how to de-escalate the crisis on the Ukrainian border while Germany’s chancellor said the diplomatic channels were “not yet exhausted”, at a joint press conference also marked by subtle swipes and simmering historical resentment. “We are ready to work further together, we are ready to go down the negotiations track”, said Vladimir Putin, who denied that his country was seeking an invasion of Ukraine. “As to whether we want [war]. Of course not! That’s why we have made these proposals about negotiations, the results of which should be an agreement about equal security for all countries, including ours.” But Putin also complained he could not “turn a blind eye” to how Washington and Nato “freely interpreted” the principle of the indivisibility of security, that no country should strengthen its security at the expense of others. German leader Olaf Scholz, who travelled to Moscow a day after a state visit to Kyiv, said he refused to describe the diplomatic situation as “hopeless”. “For my generation war in Europe has become unthinkable,” the centre-left politician said. Politics, he added, had to ensure “that it remains that way.” Ukraine’s defence ministry has confirmed that its website likely experienced a cyber attack today. The United States has not seen evidence yet of any Russian troop pullback near Ukraine, Washington’s ambassador to the United Nations said. In a statement provided by her spokesperson, US Ambassador to the United Nations Linda Thomas-Greenfield said: It would be welcome news if it is legitimate. We have not seen evidence of that yet. Ukraine’s cybersecurity centre said websites of the Ukrainian defence ministry and banks Privatbank and Oshadbank have been subject under a cyber attack, Russia’s TASS news agency reported. The Ukrainian cybersecurity centre said Russia could be to blame for the attack, TASS reported. A message on the home page of the Ukrainian defence ministry website said it was under maintenance. In Washington, the secretary of state, Antony Blinken is on the phone to his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov, in the wake of positive noises from Lavrov about possible talks on intermediate-range missiles and other measures to reduce military risks. These are the sort of discussions the US and Nato allies have offered to hold in the written proposals they sent to Moscow. Joe Biden is due to speak to Emmanuel Macron later today, the White House says. Meanwhile, the Estonian prime minister, Kaja Kallas, has been telling CNN, that her government so far see no signs of Russian withdrawal. She said: We haven’t seen any de-escalation yet. We believe it when we see it but we don’t see it right now. She warned that even if the Russians pull back, it will by no means be the end of the threat to Ukraine. Putting the military around Ukraine and pulling them off is a tactic to confuse and tire the West. You know the fairy tale of a boy who cried wolf. Only Ukraine and NATO should determine Kyiv’s bid to join the alliance, Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba said after meeting his Italian counterpart Luigi Di Maio today. Kuleba said: No one but Ukraine and NATO members should have a say in the discussions about Ukraine’s future NATO membership. Here is a summary of the main news so far on another intense day of diplomacy aimed at averting war in Ukraine. Russia announced it is withdrawing troops from near Ukraine’s borders, but Kyiv and western diplomats voiced caution, saying they needed to see what Moscow did. The announcement from a Russian defence ministry spokesman did not reveal the numbers of troops being drawn down. Western officials estimate more than 60% of Russian ground forces have massed near Ukraine, with some units having travelled from the Russian Far East. Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said he had seen no sign yet of a withdrawal of troops and equipment from Ukraine’s border. Nato’s scepticism was echoed by UK prime minister Boris Johnson, who described the intelligence the UK government is seeing as “not encouraging”. Russian field hospitals were being constructed near Ukraine, which “only can be construed as preparation for an invasion” Johnson said. The Russian government mocked western claims of an imminent invasion, while Vladimir Putin said western assurances that Ukraine would not join Nato anytime soon were not good enough. Putin was speaking after he met German chancellor Olaf Scholz, where the Russian president again claimed that “human rights violations” were taking place in two breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine. The status of the self-declared ‘republics’ of Donetsk and Luhansk came into focus, after the Russian Duma called on Putin to recognise them as independent. Western leaders, including Stoltenberg at Nato and the EU’s foreign policy chief Josep Borrell, warned this would be a violation of international law and Ukraine’s sovereignty. Scholz, who like French President Emmanuel Macron spoke to Putin from one end of a very large table, welcomed the pullback of Russian troops and said diplomacy was not exhausted. The German leader reiterated Berlin’s view that the conviction of the Russian leader Alexei Navalny was not in line with the rule of law. Navalny was undergoing another criminal trial on Tuesday on charges widely believed to be trumped up that could land him in prison for 15 more years. His supporters fear that international attention on Ukraine, which is diverting attention from his trial, means the chances of him being killed in prison are far higher. That’s all from me, Jennifer Rankin, as I hand over to Leonie Chao-Fong. Thank you for following so far. Western officials say they have seen no sign of Russian de-escalation, but instead continuing reinforcements of forces close to the Ukrainian border, writes the Guardian’s diplomatic editor Patrick Wintour. “We see no sign of Russian de-escalation,” western officials said. “We see the opposite. We have seen reinforcements of combat and other capabilities close to the Ukraine border.” The officials did not rule out a full-scale invasion on Wednesday or Thursday as previously predicted despite firm Russian denials, but seemed to be placing more emphasis on the possibility that Russia will maintain this force level for an extended period. Overall, 60% of Russian land combat forces and 50% of its air combat power were now deployed. The officials could yet see a Russian “false flag” operation that will trigger an invasion, adding it would be wrong to select a date by which Putin will have to pull back his troops. The officials continued to insist that Putin has not yet made up his mind, and he may be being pressed by his military about the consequences of a second Russian Afghan-style crisis with body bags coming home to Russia. The official said the staged meeting between Putin and Sergei Lavrov on Monday may reflect a genuine decision by Putin to walk back from the brink, and accept some third-tier diplomatic concessions on arms controls treaty talks that have already been offered to him. A Russian reply to the Nato offer of talks has yet to be received. The officials added that one consequence of the crisis will be a strengthened Nato presence on the eastern flank and a determination that Nato conducts itself well as a new generation of younger Europeans come to experience the threat of war in Europe for the first time. Russian analysts have voiced doubts that the Kremlin will recognise the self-declared Donbass “people’s republics” in eastern Ukraine, a move that could shatter fragile hopes of peace. Earlier on Tuesday, the Russian Duma called on Vladimir Putin to recognise the breakaway regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, a popular cause for Russian nationalists that would destroy any hope of salvaging the Minsk accords, a largely unimplemented peace plan that emerged in 2015. In a report on the vote, the Moscow Times highlights the political games being played, in the view of well-connected analysts. Here is a flavour: “Recognising the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics means our departure from the Minsk Agreements and the destruction of our position on the resolution of this conflict,” Konstantin Zatulin, a United Russia lawmaker who is deputy chairman of a Duma commission on relations with the former Soviet Union, told the liberal Moscow Echo radio station Tuesday. “In that sense, [recognition] won’t benefit Russia or the republics.” “United Russia needed to close the question of the Donbas, and stop itself from being outflanked,” said Tatiana Stanovaya, the founder of R.Politik, a political consultancy, regarding the ruling party’s support for the motion. “But this doesn’t mean other elements in the government are on side,” said Stanovaya, who believes the Russian foreign ministry is particularly opposed. “At the end of the day, there won’t be any recognition.” And here is the Moscow Times’ full story: Russian parliament backs plan to recognise breakaway Ukrainian regions Vladimir Putin has said western assurances that Ukraine will not join Nato anytime soon were not good enough and that Russia needed to resolve the issue now. Speaking at his joint press conference with German chancellor Olaf Scholz, Putin also said Moscow was ready for talks with the US and Nato on limits for missile deployments and military transparency. Scholz said Ukraine’s membership was not on the agenda, using the opportunity to make a joke at Putin’s expense, according to the FT’s Max Seddon. Russia has been pressing for a veto on Ukraine’s Nato membership since the Kremlin set out a series of maximalist security demands last December, while members of the alliance have continually stressed their right to allow new countries to join. Putin also called for the conflict in eastern Ukraine to be resolved through the Minsk peace process. According to reporter Mark MacKinnon, Scholz also referred to Minsk and the vote in the Russian Duma, where deputies urged Putin to recognise the two breakaway self-declared republics in eastern Ukraine. Scholz said if that vote became reality, the [Minsk] process would end. The Minsk accords, a stalled 2015 agreement between Moscow and Kyiv, brokered by France and Germany, has also been highlighted by French president Emmanuel Macron as a way out of the current impasse. German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has welcomed the pullback of some Russian troops from near Ukraine on Tuesday, adding that a diplomatic solution remained possible, Reuters reports. The diplomatic possibilities are far from being exhausted … That we hear now some troops have withdrawn is a good sign, we hope more will follow. It should be possible to find a solution. No matter how difficult and serious the situation seems to be, I refuse to say it is hopeless. Speaking at a joint press conference with Vladimir Putin, after their meeting, he restated Germany’s position that the conviction of Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny was not in line with the rule of law. Asked about the Nord Stream 2 pipeline connecting Russia and Germany, Scholz said his government was committed to ensuring gas transit works via Ukraine. The Nord Stream 2 pipeline has long been seen by western analysts as a way to weaken Ukraine, by allowing Russia to bypass the country. Russian president Vladimir Putin has said there has been no constructive response to Russia’s proposals on security and once again claimed there are “human rights violations” in the Donbass in eastern Ukraine. Putin is speaking at a joint press conference with Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz, following their meeting. On a day when the Russian Duma called for recognition of the self-declared “republics” of Donetsk and Luhanks in eastern Ukraine, Putin also repeated his claim there was genocide in the Donbass region. I’ll bring you more as I get it. While Boris Johnson is talking tough on sanctions against Russia, it is worth remembering that successive UK governments missed chances to clamp down on suspicious Russian money in London. Now a former Conservative minister, once at the heart of efforts to clamp down on money laundering in London, goes further, by revealing that during Theresa May’s premiership, No 10 “leant on him” when he tabled amendments to introduce a public register of overseas property owners. Speaking to the Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour, Lord Faulks said he had first tried to put the register into the criminal finances bill in 2017 and then again into a government bill on money laundering in 2018. He had described the overseas ownership of dirty money in London as an obscenity. Faulks, a distinguished barrister and now an independent peer, said he was rung by Downing Street during May’s tenure and told to go to a meeting where he met civil servants from four government departments including the Foreign Office, business officials and the Home Office. They told him to drop the amendments – for which he had a voting majority in the Lords – because they assured him Whitehall had the issue in hand. He told the Guardian: “I was obviously misled because nothing has subsequently happened. I can only think a deluded desire to protect the City of London has led to all these delays. “Quite frankly, I was leant on. I was leant on by No 10 Downing Street and summoned to a meeting of officials from all sorts of different departments, who told me it was very unfortunate that I was going to do this because the matter was in hand.” Meanwhile, Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs committee, said the government had done “nothing” to stem the flow of illicit funds entering Britain from Russia. No 10 pressured me to drop anti-money laundering measures, says ex-minister Boris Johnson has said intelligence seen by the British government shows that Russia is still making plans to invade Ukraine, although Moscow was ‘open’ to talks. In a video statement released after Russia announced it would draw down some troops, the British prime minister said the government was getting “mixed signals” from Moscow. There are grounds for a conversation about Ukraine, with Ukraine and that’s good. We are seeing Russian openness to conversations. On the other hand, the intelligence that we are seeing today is still not encouraging. We’ve got Russian field hospitals being constructed near the border with Ukraine, in Belarus, for only what can be construed as a preparation for an invasion. We have got more battalions, tactical groups actually being being brought closer to the border with Ukraine, according to the intelligence that we are seeing. He said these “mixed signals” were all the more reason “to remain very tough and very united”. especially on economic sanctions. UK sanctions were “ready to go” if Russia was “so rash, so reckless” as to launch an invasion. Johnson said. He promised the UK government would take steps “to unpeel the facade” of Russian ownership of companies and property, as well as to stop Russian companies from raising money on London markets. The government last week missed its own 10 February deadline to have sanctions against Russia in place. High-stakes, socially distanced diplomacy in the Kremlin means one thing at least: Vladimir Putin’s very big table is back in the spotlight. Here are some pictures of German chancellor Olaf Scholz seated some metres away from the Russian president. With the cameras in the room, the two leaders each have little more on the table than a few notes (white cards for Putin, some A4 papers for Scholz), pens and pencils, and the interpretation devices. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has voiced caution about reports of a Russian troop withdrawal, saying “we believe what we see”. Writing in English on Twitter, aiming at an international audience, he echoes his earlier comments to Ukrainian media. The Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth has been taking a closer look at the Russian announcement of a troop withdrawal. A decision by Russia to recognise two separatist regions in eastern Ukraine would amount to a violation of international law, Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has warned. Asked about a potential Russian move to recognise the so-called “people’s republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk at a Nato press conference, Stoltenberg said: If that happens, that would be a blatant violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty once again. He said such an act would be “a violation of international law”, the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, as well as the Minsk agreements. Russia’s lower house of parliament voted on Tuesday to ask Vladimir Putin to recognise two Russian-backed breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine as independent, Reuters has reported. If approved, the move could inflame the wider standoff over Russia’s military buildup near Ukraine that has fuelled western fears of an invasion. Stoltenberg said Nato allies were “ready to engage with Russia” on Europe’s security. He said Nato had set out “concrete proposals for a substantive agenda” at a meeting on 26 January of the Nato-Russia council. Nato was ready to listen to Russia concerns, share its own and look for common ground, he said. Continuing the press conference, Stoltenberg has said Nato needs to see a “significant and enduring withdrawal of forces” of troops and equipment by Russia from Ukraine’s borders. Asked by Bloomberg what de-escalation looked like, the Nato secretary general said: What we have to see is a substantial withdrawal of troops, not only troops but equipment. Stoltenberg said Russia had moved out troops before, only to move them back again. De-escalation meant “significant and enduring withdrawal of forces, troops and not least, heavy equipment”, he said. In answer to another question from AP, he said: It’s too early to say whether we see anything on the ground, but we are following very closely what they are doing. Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has reiterated that Ukraine has the right join Nato. Asked by Interfax Ukraine about the country’s right to join Nato as outlined at the Bucharest summit in 2008, he said: “The Bucharest decision stands. Nato strongly believes that all nations have the right to choose their own path.” He added that the enlargement of Nato had been “a great success”, that helped to secure democracy, freedom and security in Europe. Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has said Russia’s announcement of a troop withdrawal gives grounds for optimism, but the alliance has yet to see real de-escalation. Ahead of a meeting of Nato defence ministers on Wednesday, Stoltenberg is briefing reporters. On the Russian troop withdrawal announcement, he said: This gives the grounds for cautious optimism, but so far we have not seen any sign of de-escalation on the ground. So far we have not seen any de-escalation on the ground, not seen any signs of reduced Russian military presence on the borders of Ukraine, but we will continue to monitor. He said Russia had amassed a “fighting force unprecedented since the cold war”. Everything is now on place for a new attack but Russia still has time to step back from the brink, stop preparing for war and start preparing for a peaceful solution. India has asked its nationals to “consider leaving” Ukraine on a temporary basis. The country’s embassy in Kyiv released a letter today saying the move was due to the “uncertainties of the current situation in Ukraine”. Several countries have updated their travel advice during the crisis. On Friday, the UK Foreign Office urged British citizens in Ukraine to leave while commercial means were still available. A day before, the US president Joe Biden called for all US citizens to leave, saying “things could go crazy very quickly”. German chancellor Olaf Scholz is attending a ceremony in Moscow ahead of his meeting with Putin. He laid flowers at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. While the world’s attention is focused on Ukraine, Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny is undergoing a new criminal trial in a case widely seen as politically motivated. Russia could extend Navalny’s imprisonment for up to a further decade in a trial that his supporters warn has been overshadowed by the crisis in Ukraine, writes the Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth. The Russian opposition leader is accused of embezzling donations to his FBK anti-corruption organisation, which has accused Vladimir Putin of owning a £1bn mansion and other top officials enriching themselves through corrupt schemes. Navalny has denied the charges and calls them politically motivated. Maria Pevchikh, a top Navalny ally, has said the danger to Navalny has increased as public attention has increasingly been diverted away from human rights concerns to the potential for a Russian attack on Ukraine. “The danger to Navalny’s life, ie the probability of him being killed in prison, will increase exponentially depending on what happens in Ukraine,” she wrote. “The odds are pretty bad already, but a full-on Russian invasion barely leaves him any chance to survive.” Read Andrew’s full report here: Alexei Navalny faces 10 more years in prison as focus shifts to Ukraine crisis The Kremlin has said it expects “prolonged” talks between Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz and Russian president Vladimir Putin, as they have “a lot of issues to discuss”, news agencies in Moscow report. A Kremlin spokesperson described warnings that Russia will launch a new attack on Ukraine on Wednesday as “baseless hysteria designed to ramp up tensions”. Asked about the Russian president’s reaction to western reports of a planned invasion, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Putin was already joking, asking if the western media had published “the exact time in hours when the war will begin”. The Kremlin would prefer to discuss each other’s concerns with western countries, rather than see “information campaigns”, Peskov said. Russia and western countries should discuss each other’s security concerns in earnest, he said. This is what President Putin is proposing. This is what President Putin wants. Addressing the Russian defence ministry announcement about a troop withdrawal, Peskov said Russia had always said troops would return to their base. We have always said that after the exercises are over … troops would return to their permanent bases. There’s nothing new here. This is a usual process. Quotes from Reuters, APF and Russian state agency Ria Novosti. The meeting between Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov and his Polish counterpart Zbigniew Rau appears to be wrapping up. Rau, who is currently chairing the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, has proposed a new dialogue with Russia, a proposal that Lavrov described as “interesting”, while stressing the importance Moscow attaches to talks with the US and Nato. Here are the snaps from Reuters: MOSCOW-POLISH FOREIGN MINISTER RAU SAYS WE PROPOSED NEW DIALOGUE ON SECURITY IN EUROPE RUSSIA’S LAVROV SAYS PROPOSALS ON RESUMPTION OF TALKS ON EUROPEAN SECURITY AT OSCE ARE “INTERESTING”, BUT OUR DIALOGUE WITH NATO, U.S. IS IMPORTANT RUSSIAS LAVROV AFTER TALKS WITH POLISH COUNTERPART SAYS TRUST AMONG OSCE COUNTRIES IS AT RECORD LOW Expect more footage of Vladimir Putin’s very big table from his meeting with the German chancellor Olaf Scholz. According to the Daily Telegraph’s Moscow correspondent, Nataliya Vasilyeva, Scholz has declined to take a PCR test in Russia, following the example of Emmanuel Macron. Macron refused to take a PCR test done by Russian authorities, so had to meet the Russian president under strict social-distancing protocols. The French president took a PCR test in France and did an antigen test in Russia administered by his own doctor, but did not want his DNA in the hands of the Russian state, according to French government sources. Ukraine is waiting for evidence that Russian troops really are being pulled back, its foreign minister has said, in response to Moscow’s announcement of a withdrawal of some forces. Ukraine’s foreign minister said Dmytro Kuleba said: If we see a withdrawal, we will believe in a de-escalation. The quote comes from Interfax Ukraine via Reuters. Poland’s foreign minister Zbigniew Rau is meeting his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov on Tuesday, as part of continuing diplomatic efforts to avert war. It comes on the same day as the more high-profile meeting between Germany’s new chancellor Olaf Scholz and Vladimir Putin. Rau said “a lot can be achieved through dialogue and diplomacy”, according to the Polish Press Agency (PAP). The Polish minister is currently chairing the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which counts Russia, Ukraine, EU countries and the US among its members. The spokesperson of Russia’s foreign ministry, Maria Zakharova, has posted this statement on her Facebook page. February 15 2022 will go down in history as the day of failure of western propaganda war. Embarrassed and destroyed without firing a shot. The Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline would not go ahead, if war broke out between Russia and Ukraine, the EU’s top diplomat Josep Borrell has said. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he said: “If there is a war between Russia and Ukraine, Nordstream 2 would not become operational.” Borrell was more direct than Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz, who has avoided giving a clear answer on the issue, although foreign minister Annalena Baerbock has spelt out Berlin’s position. EU sanctions are agreed by unanimity, and Borrell appears confident he has the backing of all 27 member states. Borrell also reiterated that the EU was ready to discuss Russia’s security concerns. Andrew Roth in Moscow has more on the announcement by Russia’s defence ministry that it will withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine in a possible de-escalation of the threat of a potential invasion. He cautions that the size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve just a fraction of Russia’s forces at the Ukrainian border, which western officials estimate at more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. He writes: The announcement of the withdrawal came in a statement from defence ministry spokesman Igor Konoshenkov, who described ongoing exercises that involved forces from “practically all military districts, fleets, and the airborne forces”. “Units of the Southern and Western Military Districts, which have accomplished their missions, are boarding trains and trucks and will head for their garrisons later today,” Konoshenkov said in the statement. The defence ministry also released a video of some Russian tanks and other heavy weaponry being loaded on to railway cars, the Interfax news service reported. Russia’s rouble currency reportedly posted gains following the announcement, indicating that investors hoped this would mark the beginning of a de-escalation of tensions between Russia and the west. Russia has previously announced the conclusion of military exercises near the Ukrainian border, but social media and satellite photography taken in the following days have not shown considerable changes to Russia’s force posture. Those exercises involved just a small number of troops. And many of the troops located close to the Ukrainian border are not involved in any formal trainings. When questioned on the buildup, Russia has merely said that it has the right to move troops as it wishes within its own territory. Russia is holding large joint exercises with Belarus scheduled to end on 20 February. Western countries have warned that those drills could be used as cover to prepare for an attack on Ukraine, while Russia has said those troops will return to base once the exercises have concluded. Russian government officials moved quickly to accuse the West of hysteria and argue that the withdrawal of troops showed that Nato warnings of an invasion were spurious. “February 15 2022 will go into history as the day western war propaganda failed,” Maria Zakharova, the Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman, wrote in a Facebook post after the announcement. “They have been disgraced and destroyed without a single shot being fired.” Reporters in Moscow are reacting cautiously to the announcement from the Russian defence ministry that troops are being withdrawn. And here is a view from a correspondent in Kyiv, Olga Tokariuk. The Russian rouble gained 1.5% soon after Russia’s defence ministry reported that some troops near Ukraine’s border were being withdrawn. The Russian currency has been under pressure because of investor fears about the impact of further western sanctions. Some troops in Russia’s military districts adjacent to Ukraine are returning to bases after completing drills, Russia’s defence ministry was quoted as saying on Tuesday, Reuters reports. Russia’s Interfax news agency cited the ministry as saying that while large-scale drills across the country continued, some units of the Southern and Western military districts have completed their exercises and started returning to bases. As the FT’s Moscow bureau chief reports, markets are reading this as a sign of de-escalation. For other analysts, it will be too early to tell if this really signals a shift. The UK foreign secretary Liz Truss has said there could be a “long protracted war” between Russia and Ukraine, as she warned an invasion was “highly likely”. Speaking to Times Radio, Truss said war “will not be easy or simple for Vladimir Putin”, pointing to the defensive weapons supplied to Ukraine by the UK and other allies. This could be a long, protracted war, which would, of course, create huge damage for both the people of Ukraine and the people of Russia as well as threatening European security. Earlier on Sky News, Truss said: “It is still the case that an invasion could be imminent, and it is highly likely.” During a round of media interviews on Tuesday, she was also asked about UK plans to clamp down on Russian oligarch money in London. The foreign secretary had promised laws would be in place by 10 February, but the timing has slipped, raising concerns the government was struggling to frame the sweeping new laws. The foreign secretary told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme there was still a British presence in Kyiv as it is “important that we are supporting British citizens” in Ukraine. Some UK staff had been moved to Lviv in western Ukraine, while some remained in Kyiv, she said. And in case you missed it: the Observer profiled Truss’s instagram diplomacy, following her photo opportunity on Red Square last week. Since she became foreign secretary five months ago, more than 700 photos featuring Truss have been uploaded to the government’s official photo-sharing website Flickr – an average of one photo for every five hours in the job. This is Jennifer Rankin, taking over the liveblog from Samantha Lock. New satellite images released by a US company reportedly show a flurry of Russian military activity at several locations near Ukraine, including Belarus, Crimea and western Russia. Maxar Technologies, which has been tracking the buildup of Russian forces on Ukraine’s border for weeks, said on Tuesday that images taken on Sunday and Monday captured significant new activity showing increased military activity in the regions. The images could not be independently verified by Reuters. Maxar pointed to the arrival of several large deployments of troops and attack helicopters as well new deployments of ground attack aircraft and fighter-bomber jets to forward locations. The images also captured the departure of multiple ground forces units from existing garrisons along with other combat units seen in convoy formation, Maxar said. Buzzfeed eastern Europe correspondent Christopher Miller also shared some images purported to be showing “Russia’s continuing buildup in the past 48 hours”. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has thanked the US and Canada for their financial support in the face of escalating tension with Russia. Zelenskiy thanked the two leaders on Tuesday. He tweeted: We are grateful to the United States for providing substantial financial support of $1 billion and $3 billion available for projects in Ukraine. Thank you [president Joe Biden] for the quick decision and concrete results after our conversation. Thank you Justin Trudeau for your timely decision to provide additional half a billion dollar package of financial assistance … we are much stronger together.” Germany says it is up to Russia to de-escalate the conflict around Ukraine, and has called for Moscow to withdraw its troops, as chancellor Olaf Scholz prepares to meet president Vladimir Putin over the crisis. Foreign minister Annalena Baerbock issued a statement on Tuesday, saying: The situation is particularly dangerous and can escalate at any moment. The responsibility for de-escalation is clearly with Russia, and it is for Moscow to withdraw its troops. The EU and Nato are united around Ukraine … we must use all opportunities for dialogue in order to reach a peaceful solution.” A Russian invasion of Ukraine is still highly likely and could take place imminently, Britain’s foreign secretary Liz Truss said on Tuesday, adding that the government was on alert for any false flag operations in the next few days. Truss told Sky News that were Russian troops to enter Ukraine, they could get to Kyiv quickly. “In terms of the timing of an attack, it could be imminent,” she said. She said Russian troops could get to Kyiv “very, very quickly”. British prime minister Boris Johnson will lead a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee today as western leaders voice concerns a Russian invasion of Ukraine could happen imminently. Johnson cut short his UK tour to return to London in order to convene the meeting to discuss the UK’s consular response. He is believed to have received an intelligence briefing upon his return after maintaining there is still time for a diplomatic solution to the Ukraine crisis. Foreign secretary Liz Truss will consider whether to change advice to UK diplomats in the country, after it issued new guidance on Friday advising British citizens in Ukraine to leave immediately while commercial flights are still available. It could be another turbulent day on the markets after Asian stocks fell sharply today in line with the big losses in London and Europe yesterday. The FTSE is due to lose about 0.4% at the opening although hopes of more diplomacy in Ukraine could take the edge off investor nerves. Oil has dropped about 1% today while the pound is flat at $1.353 and €1.196. Thousands more US service members have boarded flights from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, in preparation for deployment to Poland. The additional 3,000 soldiers will join the 3,000 who left last month for Poland and Germany. Australia’s prime minister has urged China to denounce Russian threats against Ukraine. Scott Morrison noted that Beijing and Moscow had announced they were pursuing closer relations since more than 100,000 Russian troops were sent to the Ukrainian border. Morrison told Parliament in Canberra earlier today: We would expect all nations, all governments around the world, to be denouncing what is taking place with the threats of violence against Ukraine. I do note that the Chinese government, together with the Russian government, have been banding together on this issue and that the Chinese government has not denounced what is occurring in Ukraine.” Morrison called on all federal lawmakers to join the Australian government in “urging the Chinese government to denounce those actions and to allow an appropriate response through the United Nations rather than resisting that being done” through its membership of the UN security council. Japan’s defence minister has also warned of an increased Russian naval presence in the Sea of Japan and the southern part of the Sea of Okhotsk. Defence minister Nobuo Kishi said in a tweet on Tuesday that “large-scale exercises by the entire fleet during this period are unusual”. In January-February, the entire Russian Navy fleet announced that it would conduct military exercises in the waters around the base, the Mediterranean Sea, the North Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk, the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean. It is thought that the intention is to show off the ability to operate in the east and west in response to the recent movement of the Russian army around Ukraine.” Japan’s ministry of defence also announced today that it has confirmed a total of 24 Russian ships known to have been operating in the waters of the Sea of Japan and the southern Okhotsk Sea since earlier this month, according to Sankei News. Japanese prime minister Fumio Kishida will speak with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Tuesday, a government source has said, as Tokyo expressed “grave concern” about the risk of a Russian invasion. Tokyo was preparing for the call on Tuesday evening local time while Kishida said Japan was “watching the situation with grave concern”, Agence France-Presse reports. Japan’s foreign minister Yoshimasa Hayashi stressed Tokyo’s support for “the integrity of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territory” in a statement earlier on Tuesday but declined to give details on what form any sanctions might take. He told reporters: First and foremost, Japan is strongly seeking a resolution through diplomatic dialogue. But if a Russian invasion takes place, Japan will take appropriate steps including possible sanctions, in response to what has actually happened, and in coordination with the G7 and international community.” Following a 40-minute call between Boris Johnson and Joe Biden on Monday night, the two leaders say they believe there remains a “crucial window for diplomacy and for Russia to step back from its threats towards Ukraine”. Britain said the pair emphasised the importance of unity and, while neither the UK nor the US will send troops to defend Ukraine, they insisted that any further Russian incursion “would result in a protracted crisis for Russia with far-reaching damage for both Russia and the world”. German chancellor Olaf Scholz will travel to Moscow today to meet Vladimir Putin in a bid to avert war. Scholz, who was in Kyiv on Monday, warned that any Russian attack on Ukraine would be met with heavy economic consequences, adding that the “territorial integrity of Ukraine is not negotiable”. The chancellor has said he will hammer home the message from the west that they are open to dialogue about Russia’s security concerns but will impose sanctions if it invades Ukraine. “We are ready for very far-reaching and effective sanctions in coordination with our allies,” he said on Monday. Germany is Russia’s number one trade partner in Europe and the biggest consumer of Russian natural gas. Scholz is under pressure to make his presence felt on the international stage after succeeding Angela Merkel last year. Canada’s announcement on Monday that it will supply lethal weapons to Ukraine has been labelled “unacceptable” by Russian ambassador to Ottawa, Oleg Stepanov. “Any supply of arms to a country with an unresolved internal armed conflict is unacceptable. This does not bring peace closer and only prolongs and aggravates the fratricidal conflict in Ukraine,” Stepanov told Russian state news agency TASS. “By providing weapons, western countries are pushing the Kiev regime to continue the war against its own people,” he added. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro is facing backlash after deciding to go ahead with an official visit to Russia to meet with Putin on Wednesday in what has been described as awkward timing, amid the tense standoff between Moscow and the west over Ukraine. Bolsonaro will go ahead with the visit despite pressure from Brazil’s traditional ally the United States and within his own cabinet. He says the visit is to build trade relations. Agence France-Presse quotes an interview with Bolsonaro on Radio Tupi on Saturday: President Putin has invited me. Brazil depends in large parts on fertilisers from Russia, Belarus. We pray to God that peace may reign in the world. We will also take with us a group of ministers who will deal with issues such as energy, defence and agriculture.” Shares in Asia came under renewed selling pressure on Tuesday amid continued concerns about the potential for conflict in Ukraine. The Nikkei slipped is down 0.73% in the afternoon session, while the Kospi index in Seoul is off 0.66% and the ASX is off 0.3% in Sydney. Hong Kong is also down around 0.7% but shares on the mainland are doing better, up 0.4%. Even so, the losses are mild compared to the bloodbath in London and Europe on Monday where somes indices such as the Dax in Germany shed 2%. Kyle Rodda at online trader IG in Melbourne said the outlook for the German economy was very uncertain with the possibility of war to the east. War in Europe would a blow to the economy and a driver of even greater inflation, in what would be a one-two punch for the Dax that would almost certainly see it break down. As US intelligence sources warn of an imminent Russian invasion, residents of the Ukrainian capital are refusing to be cowed. The Guardian’s Shaun Walker is in Kyiv and tells Michael Safi that, on the face of it, much of the city is continuing life as normal. Restaurants are open, shops are full and the snow-lined streets buzz with people going about their normal business. This is in stark contrast to many foreign diplomats who are scrambling to leave the Ukrainian capital before any military action that could begin within days or even hours. But how likely is the full-scale military assault being warned of by western intelligence agencies? And is there a diplomatic solution that could be sold to Vladimir Putin that would also satisfy the Ukrainian government? Listen to our latest podcast episode: How the Ukraine crisis looks from Kyiv. Hello, welcome to our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis, I’m Samantha Lock. This morning the German chancellor Olaf Scholz will fly to Moscow for a meeting with president Vladimir Putin, after spending Monday in Kyiv in the latest round of diplomacy aimed at averting a war in Europe. His visit comes as the US state department urged its citizens in Belarus to leave, citing an “increase in unusual and concerning Russian military activity near the border with Ukraine”. Here are some of the other recent developments: Brazillian president Jair Bolsonaro announced he would fly to Russia on Tuesday to meet Putin. During a carefully choreographed meeting on Monday with Putin, Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said “there is always a chance” of reaching an agreement with the West over Ukraine. Canada has said it will send lethal military weaponry to Ukraine with a promise to loan Kyiv $500m to help defend itself in the face of Russian aggression. British PM Boris Johnson and US president Joe Biden agreed there “remained a crucial window for diplomacy and for Russia to step back from its threats towards Ukraine”. Global stock markets steadied a little on Tuesday after taking a battering on Monday because of concern about a possible conflict in Ukraine. Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Monday called on the country’s people to fly flags and sing the national anthem in unison on 16 February, a date that some Western media predict Russian could invade. UN secretary-general Antonio Guterres spoke with the foreign ministers of Russia and Ukraine on Monday to express his serious concern over the heightened tensions and insisted “there is no alternative to diplomacy”. Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu told Putin that some of the drills were “ending” and more would end “in the near future”, signalling a possible easing of the crisis.Northern Territory senator Sam McMahon says a Darwin dog has tested positive for Covid, in what would be the first case of the virus in a canine in Australia. McMahon, who is a qualified vet, said the dog tested positive on a rapid antigen test. Despite concerns about the reliability of RAT results for animals, McMahon said she was satisfied with the accuracy. “The owner was diagnosed with Covid, and the dog started having some symptoms, which were mainly a little bit of lethargy, a cough and just wasn’t quite herself. “The owner told me they’d done a RAT test and it had come back positive, so I made inquiries as to how they’d done the test and was satisfied that had all been done correctly. “This is highly likely to be the first reported case in Australia,” McMahon said. The NT senator said the dog spends much of her time with her owner, and that she was sick for four days, before making a full recovery. McMahon suspected there were unreported cases of Covid in dogs. “It’s unusual and uncommon, but there have been quite a lot of cases reported overseas of pets catching Covid from the owners,” she said. “It is quite possible that there have been other cases where you know, the dog or cat has coughed a couple of times for a couple of days and people haven’t really attributed that to Covid and haven’t tested for it.” But RSPCA Australia senior scientific officer, Dr Sarah Zito, does not advise pet owners use RATs on their animals. “Due to the lack of evidence on the accuracy, reliability or safety of using RAT tests designed for use in people to test animals for Sars-CoV-2, the use of these tests is not advised at this time.” Zito told the Guardian testing for Covid in pets should be undertaken “on the advice of human and animal health authorities” and that confirmatory testing should be performed in the event of a positive result. She said it would be rare for a dog to become seriously ill with the virus, but advised people to avoid their pets if they do test positive. “The current evidence suggests that even if they do get infected with Sars-CoV-2, most dogs infected have no symptoms or just mild disease. “It may be possible for them to become seriously ill, but this seems to be rare if it does occur. “If you are infected with Sars-CoV-2, eliminate or limit contact with animals as well as other people, including your companion animals. “Someone else should care for any animals, including companion animals.” The RSPCA say there is no vaccine for dogs because the disease only mildly affects them. Zito added there was no evidence dogs or other animals could transmit the virus, only that humans can infect their pets. “The current evidence indicates that dogs shed minimal amounts of the virus if they are infected, and they are thought to pose a very low risk of infection to other animals.”An application by mining company Glencore to build a massive toxic tailings dump on the edge of a sacred site has been rejected by the Northern Territory government. The controversial McArthur River mine, which is one of world’s largest zinc and lead mines, is roughly 900km south-east of Darwin and borders the Barramundi Dreaming sacred site, near Borroloola. On Tuesday, NT heritage minister, Chansey Paech, tabled a decision in parliament to reject an application to build the rock dump – which would stand as the largest built structure in the Northern Territory – to within 35 metres of the site. Josie Davey, a Gudanji woman and traditional owner of the mine site, and her husband, Jack Green, a senior Garawa lawman, welcomed the decision saying the company would now have to negotiate properly with traditional owners. “It was the best thing,” Green said. “It should have happened before, properly, if they were to come and sit down and talk to the traditional owners of the area. All of us are happy now, it took us a long time to come to an agreement like this.” They described the proposal as a “new mountain” and Davey said significant damage had already been done by the company over the past two decades. “I feel sad at what they have done. Because this is my great, great-grandfather’s country. And for our people,” Davey said. Under its expansion plans, Glencore – which took over the mine in 2006 – sought to expand its tailings dump to within 35 metres of the Barramundi Dreaming sacred site, which rises to a height of 80 metres, and is one of 24 sacred sites on the mine lease. The dump would stand at a height of 140 metres, with a 6km square footprint, making it taller than the Sydney Harbour Bridge at 134 metres with an area larger than Uluru, which measures roughly 3.33km square. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The weight of the structure would have likely altered the groundwater table and would need to be monitored for 1,000 years due to the high acid content of the waste rock. The highly combustible rock dissolves easily and the chemical runoff can seep into groundwater and nearby river systems. There is also another valuable archaeological site in the area, an ancient stone quarry that is part of local songlines and where local Aboriginal people mass produced stone tools, axe heads, knives and spear tips. This site is not covered in Tuesday’s decision and Glencore has made a separate application with Paech to demolish it. The company continues to widen the tailings dump while it waits for approval to build higher. In making its application, the company claimed it had consulted with traditional owners but when the Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority (AAPA) reviewed the matter, they determined the agreement was invalid. None of the site’s 180 custodians had been consulted while the six signatories who had did not necessarily understand what they agreed to or were not given copies of the contract. AAPA CEO Dr Benedict Scambary said Tuesday’s decision demonstrated that negotiation with traditional owners was “not a box to be ticked”. “One of the things this decision will do is put other proponents of development in the Northern Territory on notice that murky deals done without representation, that are designed to disempower Aboriginal people in the protection of the sacred sites and cultural heritage, won’t pass muster,” he said. Co-director of the Environment Centre NT, Kirsty Howey, also said the decision was a “watershed” moment in the history of an “extraordinarily damaging mine authorised in extraordinary circumstances”. “We’ve never seen a Labor government minister in the NT back traditional owners on this mine which has been enormously destructive and damaging to traditional owners for years,” Howey said. “Minister Paech should be applauded for having the backbone to stand up to Glencore.” The NT Environment Centre is currently involved in legal action against the territory government over approvals given by Nicole Manison in 2020 for its expansion. A spokesperson for McArthur River mine said in a statement the company is in negotiations with the Northern Land Council, acting on behalf of traditional owners, but “remains committed to further developments at our mine site”. “We remain committed to these negotiations and broad consultation with traditional owners on a variety of matters, including sacred sites and cultural heritage protection, to ensure the benefits of our operations are shared with TOs and the wider community.” The McArthur River mine has been subject to several current and historical litigations, and was a suspected source of lead contamination in drinking water used by the Borroloola’s Aboriginal community until an investigation found there was no indication the contamination was related to the mine. An effort to keep the company from diverting the river in order to allow it to mine the riverbed was successful in court but ultimately overridden by the NT Government to allow work to proceed. The company apologised for its treatment of Aboriginal people and traditional owners in 2021, and specifically for the river diversion.When a group in black fatigues called Alpha Men Assemble began practising paramilitary manoeuvres in a park in Staffordshire at the beginning of this year, it looked pretty threatening. These men, we were warned, were about to launch an insurrection against vaccines and in favour of “the sovereign citizen”. Since then, silence. It wouldn’t be surprising if the group had dispersed: a society of self-proclaimed alphas is bound to fall apart. This was just one example of the incoherent protests now sweeping rich, English-speaking nations. Others include the truck blockade in Ottawa and its duplicates in Australia, New Zealand and the US, and the angry men outside the British parliament, waiting to pounce on passing politicians. By incoherent protest, I mean gatherings whose aims are simultaneously petty and grandiose. Their immediate objectives are small and often risible, attacking such minor inconveniences as face masks. The underlying aims are open-ended, massive and impossible to fulfil. Not just politically impossible, but mathematically impossible. Listening to these men (and most of them are men), it seems that every one of them wants to be king. The “sovereign citizen” theory is a powerful current running through these movements. Its adherents insist that they stand above the law. Some of them refuse to buy vehicle licences, or pay taxes or fines. They believe they are exempt from public health measures, such as lockdowns and vaccine passes. In other words, they arrogate to themselves sovereign powers that not even the monarch enjoys. They produce elaborate pseudo-legal documents to justify these claims. The “memorandum of understanding” published by two of the leading organisers of the Ottawa blockade, which makes impossible legal demands of the government, looks like a classic of the genre. It was supposedly signed by 320,000 people before the organisers withdrew it. What explains the appeal of this movement? Such claims of individual sovereignty arose in the 1970s with an antisemitic, racist agitation called Posse Comitatus. They appear to surge in hard times. Some people believe they can annul their debts or tax arrears by renouncing their citizenship. But I suspect it’s about more than money. The promise of capitalism is that one day we will all be alphas – just not yet. It is a formula for frustration and humiliation. The less equal the economic system becomes, the wider the gap between the promise and its fulfilment yawns. Humiliation, as Pankaj Mishra argued in his excellent book Age of Anger, is the motor of extremism. Noisy assertions of sovereignty look like an obvious attempt to overcome humiliation. There was a time, in the rich nations, when it seemed as if we could all triumph. From the second world war until the late 1970s, general prosperity rose steadily. The top 1% captured a decreasing proportion of total income. But then, in the US, the UK, Canada, Ireland and Australia, the curve suddenly turned, and the 1% began to grab an ever greater share. The trend has continued to this day, sustained by the neoliberal doctrines that were first imposed in the rich world by Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan. The ultra-rich have gained most: since the beginning of the pandemic, the world’s 10 richest men have doubled their wealth, while 163 million people have been pushed below the poverty line. Wages for many people in the Anglosphere have stagnated, but the costs of living, especially housing, have soared. But even during the “glory years” (1945 to 1975) the universal triumph capitalism promised was an illusion. The general rise of prosperity in rich nations was financed, in part, by poor ones. Decolonisation was resisted by the rich world with extreme violence and oppression, then partly reversed through coups and assassinations (such as the overthrow of Mohammad Mosaddegh in Iran in 1953, the crushing of Jacobo Árbenz’s government in Guatemala in 1954, the murder of Patrice Lumumba in Congo in 1961, Suharto’s coup in Indonesia in 1967 and Augusto Pinochet’s in Chile in 1973). Today, such extreme measures are seldom required, as the transfer of wealth is secured by other means. The rich world’s wealth continues in large part to rely on the exploitation of black and brown people. Incoherent protest movements tend to be infested with racism and white supremacy. Some of the key organisers of the Ottawa action are reported to have a grisly history of racist statements, and some of the protesters have flown swastikas and Confederate flags. When black and brown people assume positions of power and authority, and appear more alpha than those who expected tribute from them, this is perceived as an intolerable reversal. The current wave of incoherent protest began in the US with the reaction against Barack Obama’s government, and soon evolved, with the encouragement of Donald Trump and others, into undisguised white supremacism. Some of the Ottawa organisers also have a history of attacks on trade unions. The “independence” they demand means freedom from the decencies owed to other people, freedom from the obligations of civic life. In pursuing these selfish freedoms, they reinforce the neoliberal policies – such as the crushing of organised labour – that helped cause the impoverishment and insecurity suffered by those they claim to represent. Canadian truckers, for example, especially immigrant workers, now suffer from wage theft, unsafe conditions and other brutal forms of exploitation, caused in part by a loss of collective bargaining power. But the protest organisers seem uninterested. Sovereignty and solidarity are not compatible. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThe three-part documentary series Jeen-Yuhs: A Kanye Trilogy (Netflix) opens with footage of Kanye West behaving exactly like a seasoned observer of Kanye West’s recent career might expect the 44-year-old rapper to behave. He is in the Dominican Republic, simultaneously recording a vocal, urging his people to push forward with his desperately ill-considered and disastrous 2020 presidential run, dealing with the contracts pertaining to the documentary you’re watching and tweeting something that’s clearly incautious. “Don’t tweet that?” he snaps at someone off-camera, who has evidently suggested he think twice, before firmly pressing the send button. Then the footage cuts out. According to the documentary’s makers Clarence “Coodie” Simmons and Chike Ozah, in the Dominican Republic they felt obliged to stop filming in order to spare viewers West’s notorious and long-winded rants: fuelled, Simmons has suggested, by West drinking on top of medication for his bipolar disorder, much against doctor’s orders. It’s a choice that speaks volumes about their longstanding relationship with the rapper, which began more than 20 years ago, when Simmons was making a public access TV show about Chicago’s hip-hop scene and West was a local talent: Simmons suggested he follow West’s attempts to make it, and West agreed; the resulting footage accounts for most of Jeen-Yuhs’s running time. There’s something genuinely touching about Simmons’ actions – “He wasn’t himself,” he said later, “this is my brother right here.” The Kanye West that Jeen-Yuhs depicts via hours of video shot in the early 00s seems noticeably different to the popular image of Kanye West today. He is certainly self-assured, but he’s extremely charming and funny with it. It would take quite an effort on the part of the viewer not to warm to him, and a frankly superhuman effort not to love his late mother Donda. A constant source of support and wise counsel, her beaming pride in her son doesn’t preclude her giving him a talking-to on the difference between confidence and arrogance – a scene it’s hard to watch without thinking that her death in 2007 might have robbed her son of a few more lectures that wouldn’t have gone amiss. The film captures West attempting to transition from his role as a hotly tipped producer to a career as a rapper, initially with little success. You see him move to New York in pursuit of his dream, and recording the songs that would form his debut album The College Dropout, in his apartment and hotel rooms. Despite the fact that Jay-Z’s album The Blueprint – partly produced by West – had just sold 2m copies, West is reduced to wandering the corridors of Jay-Z’s record label Roc-A-Fella, rapping for uninterested secretaries in the hope of attracting attention. Other labels express fleeting interest but ultimately don’t sign him. Other artists are happy to provide a little encomium for Simmons’ camera about West’s talent, but not much else. In one quite heart-rending scene, West manages to get Houston MC Scarface into the studio with a view to him adding a guest verse to one of his tracks: there’s a palpable hint of desperation about West’s pleading, but no guest appearance is forthcoming. Even when Roc-A-Fella comes through with a deal, it seems designed more to stop West producing for other artists than actually making records of his own. The label’s co-founder Damon Dash is visibly uninterested in his efforts. On one level, all of this amounts to a heartwarming tale of persistence, struggle against the odds and justified self-belief. His record label eventually gave way. The College Dropout went on to sell 4m copies, spawn a string of hit singles and be nominated for 10 Grammys. The song the secretaries wouldn’t listen to West performing, All Falls Down, has now been streamed nearly 248m times on one platform alone; the track Scarface declined to contribute to, Jesus Walks, regularly makes lists of the best songs of the 2000s and the greatest hip-hop tracks of all time. However, West’s abilities as a musician are frequently close to being overshadowed by his image as an opprobrium-attracting blowhard, who is a Trump-supporting fan of rightwing crank Candace Owens. So there’s another, more troubling, interpretation of the story Jeen-Yuhs tells. West has charged through the rest of his career, evidently fuelled by an unshakeable conviction that he is always right and that refusing to listen is an untrammelled virtue. You can see how the events depicted in Jeen-Yuhs might have led him to those beliefs.Not so long ago, Jane Lynch was walking her dog, happy as could be, and she paused and said out loud to herself: “God, I love being Jane Lynch.” She laughs at herself. “As if ‘she’ were something outside of me.” But things do seem pretty good: she recently finished her run of cabaret dates with her friend, the actor Kate Flannery. There’s a reboot of the underrated sitcom Party Down coming, and a fourth series of the Amazon show The Marvelous Mrs Maisel is about to start. Lynch won an Emmy for her role as Sophie Lennon, a bawdy superstar comic housewife from Queens (in reality, an upper-class Manhattanite, slumming it for financial gain and self-expression). This year, Lynch takes to Broadway, to be in Funny Girl, the fulfilment, at the age of 61, of a childhood dream. Last year, she got married for the second time. “I live in this really cute house in a little beach town,” she says. “I’ve got a beautiful dog, a fantastic wife.” She seems to marvel at it – she doesn’t sound remotely boastful, just grateful. Things haven’t always been so good. Lynch has been through divorce and alcoholism – giving up alcohol for the second time only fairly recently, after slipping back into addiction. As a teenager, she carried deep shame about her sexuality. Well into her 30s, she felt lonely and alienated, and it wasn’t until her 40s that her career took off. Lynch might be the perfect embodiment of the idea that It Will Get Better. She is dazzlingly good company, even over Zoom. Funny and radiant, it’s obvious why Lynch has become such a renowned scene-stealer in just about everything she has been in. Lynch is the funniest thing in The 40-year-old Virgin, likewise Role Models. She has been a regular cast member in Christopher Guest’s work – she has been four of his recent films, including Best in Show and A Mighty Wind – and your eye is always drawn to Lynch, the tall blond woman with precision timing. She is still best known as Sue Sylvester, the maniacal cheerleading coach in Glee, the musical high school drama that ran from 2009 to 2015. At the end of Glee, Sylvester – by now the US vice-president – announces her ambition to run for the presidency in 2024 (please someone, make that show). “She would be Maga,” says Lynch, laughing. I don’t know if we were describing people as “problematic” even as recently as 2015, when Glee ended, but Sylvester goes way beyond that. As the villain, she is clearly deliberately awful, but I wonder if she would be able to get away with the things she said – racist, fat-shaming – were Glee still running. “I think there would have been people out there who would have wanted to cancel Sue Sylvester,” says Lynch. “I don’t know that we could have done that show today, and it was only like … We started that 10 years ago.” Does she think comedy writers are second-guessing how their material will be perceived? “I think so,” she says. “There’s kind of a rabid anonymous group of folks who can really change somebody’s life; they could take away their career. Some of it is about time – some of these people have got called on their stuff [from the past]. But I think we get carried away. This preoccupation with going ‘Aha!’, that’s a drag. Hopefully we’ll get over that soon. I was just thinking this morning about something that we did in Chicago called the Co-Ed Prison Sluts [it became one of Chicago’s longest-running fringe musicals]. It was not politically correct; it would not go over well today.” Sophie Lennon in The Marvelous Mrs Maisel is another megawatt character. The Amazon Prime show set in 1950s and 60s New York follows a young housewife, Midge, who becomes a standup star. Lennon is the old guard, a rare woman who has made it. “What Sophie was dealing with, as it continues to be the deal really, is that it’s a man’s game,” says Lynch. “In order to break through, you had to have material that spoke to men because the club owners were men, the TV producers, the late-night hosts.” Things have clearly improved for women in comedy, although perhaps not by much. Lynch isn’t a standup, but she has heard female comics talk about their experiences. “Any time you look at a comedy club, the headliners are guys. Every once in a while, they might throw a woman in there. It’s harder to work your way up as a woman and, like anything else where you’re trying to break a mould, you have to be exceptional.” In the last series, Sophie unravelled after a disastrous attempt to be a “real” theatre actress on Broadway, slipping back into her shtick as a Queens housewife. “I understand her,” says Lynch. “She is really talented and smart but insecure, and is so afraid of being found out.” She is embarrassed of her act, says Lynch, “even though it’s made her rich and made her a star. She wants to do more, like so many of us in the acting profession: ‘Don’t typecast me. I’m more than just this.’” How much of that describes Lynch? “Oh, not at all,” she says, laughing. “I’ll do the same thing over and over again. I don’t care. I love it.” Many of Lynch’s roles were originally written for men, which goes some way to explain why she often plays such deranged authority figures. “I’m obsessed with that random exercise of power, power for power’s sake,” she says, especially if they also have an element of the ridiculous about them. “God forbid they have real power.” Donald Trump is the obvious example. “He was kind of that guy that we used to laugh at. Look at that goof.” She almost spits out the word. Lots of Lynch’s characters seem driven by insecurity, as if they have something to prove, or need to count in some way. Reading Lynch’s 2011 memoir, there is something of that in Lynch’s life too. “Oh, absolutely,” she says. “Fanny Brice had this too,” she says of the Broadway star on whose life Funny Girl is based. “Comparing myself to Fanny Brice! Please forgive me. I think a lot of us feel this way, but especially actors. You have something inside of you that you know is fantastic and nobody knows. Fanny says: ‘I’m the greatest star, but no one knows it.’ And I had that as a kid: I was in a little suburb that didn’t get the nuance of my comedy. Sometimes even with my own family – and I was brought up by pretty funny people – I would do something and they’d just roll their eyes. It was like, ‘Somebody see me!’” She laughs. Lynch grew up outside Chicago, her childhood the picture of American suburbia: her father went to work in a bank and her parents would have cocktails on his return. Lynch had always thought she was “a depressed child” but she recently saw some home movies of herself and was struck by how full of life she was. “Always dancing to the camera; air guitar. I was a real free spirit and I loved to perform. And then, of course, high school happens, and maybe even before that when you start to realise: ‘Oh my God, I may be gay but I don’t even have a word for it.’” She longed to be on stage but, carrying so much shame – she’d heard school friends talk about gay people with disgust – she was also afraid of being so visible. Lynch was cast in a play but walked out. “The fear started to come in, and the light that I think I projected as a younger person just started to go deep inside.” Glee was praised for its portrayal of LGBT teenagers. What would it have meant to have had a show like that when she was growing up? “It would have been such a relief,” says Lynch. “If I had something like Glee, where it was stories that you could relate to on a deep level, that maybe as a person in high school you couldn’t express, yeah, I would have loved it. I don’t mean to overstate it, but I do think it might really have helped a lot of kids.” In her book, she wrote that one of the few times she felt “safe” was while acting, playing a role. “I still feel that way. These people have to talk to me because they have to say lines,” she says with a laugh. “I was always afraid of being thrown away, socially. Like if someone really saw what was inside of me, they wouldn’t want me. And the great thing about being in a play is they can’t – at least for the time you’re on stage.” Lynch had started drinking as a teenager and carried on, drinking almost every day, into her 30s. “The first time you [have a drink], it’s like: ‘Ah, I found it. I feel happy in my body, this feeling of bliss. No one can say anything to me that would make me upset or feel badly about myself right now.’ And then maybe the next time you drink, you get it again. Before you know it, it’s not doing it for you. So for the most part, when I was in the throes of addiction, it wasn’t working. You end up chasing [that feeling]. And then if you’re not chasing that, what are you doing? Who are you? You have to really face this emptiness.” She was a functioning alcoholic, working steadily in theatre, even if some nights she would still be in the bar at 7am the next morning, or would find vomit in her bathroom and have no idea how it got there. One day, she just decided to stop, “a kind of magical lifting of my compulsion to drink”, poured her glass of wine down the sink and joined Alcoholics Anonymous, which she loved. “I felt sorry for people who weren’t alcoholics: I just loved AA,” she says, smiling. “It was very much a gift; it was almost like I was struck sober.” It stuck, until about five years ago, when Lynch thought she’d had enough therapy and was grownup enough to enjoy a glass of wine with dinner. “And I loved it,” she says, deadpan. “I became a connoisseur of wine in a way that only an alcoholic can. I went back into denial, after all those years of sobriety and self-knowledge. I fooled myself – I woke up one day and went: ‘I’m back.’ It took about three years. I’m telling people I’m drinking one glass of wine a night, and I’m drinking five.” She wouldn’t allow herself to drink until 5pm. “I was tied to this thing again, to some hope of what it was going to do for me, and the rest of the day didn’t matter. The only part of the day that really mattered was five o’clock.” What was going on for her at that time? Her career was going brilliantly, although she had come out of a divorce from her first wife a couple of years earlier. “I think boredom,” she says. “I think I got to a point where nothing was doing it for me any more.” Was she surprised to find herself back there? “Yes,” she says. “I was a little ashamed, and also the denial, the justifications. My friends were fooled. I remember a friend said: ‘I told you you’re not an alcoholic any more.’ I’d go: ‘I know!’” A perfectly timed grimace. “I was.” Lynch wonders aloud to herself if she was drinking when she started filming Mrs Maisel, but thinks not. “I was during The Good Fight, though. I couldn’t wait to be done and go have a drink by myself.” She was, she says, “scared of it”. She remembers going to a Glee event, negotiating with herself: “I’m not going to drink on the plane, but as soon as I get to the hotel I’m going to have a drink.” And she remembers thinking, “Shit, did I squander this?” when reflecting on her years of sobriety and what it had brought her: a successful career; a good therapist who had given her the courage to come out to her family. It took Lynch another six months to stop. Again, she says she was struck sober, “like the sober fairy said: ‘OK, I’m giving you one more chance.’ And it was over. Five o’clock would come and I didn’t notice it.” After the first time she got sober, Lynch spent years working hard as an actor, taking whatever she could get – theatre, TV and film roles, adverts, voiceovers. “I just had a lot of white-hot ambition,” she says. She wrote and performed in a one-woman show, which “blew the doors off my confidence”. The sadness she had been feeling began to dissolve. “I was just in a really good space and all of that loneliness and alienation didn’t have a place to land any more.” She met Christopher Guest on a breakfast cereal advert he was directing, then bumped into him in a coffee shop several months later; he offered her a part in Best in Show, which gave Lynch’s career as a character actor a huge boost. It must have also given her great confidence to be one of Guest’s chosen people, alongside actors such as Eugene Levy and Jennifer Coolidge. “Oh, yeah,” she says. “John Michael Higgins [another Guest regular] always says it’s a preposterous fantasy come true.” Lynch was 40 when Best in Show came out; she was nearly 49 when Glee made her a star. Throughout all the knockbacks – among them, she was part of the renowned Chicago improv theatre group The Second City but was told she’d never make it to their main stage – she kept faith that it would work out. Even as a child, her mother warned her that she would probably never become a successful actor, and when she wrote a letter to the head of casting at Universal Studios – Lynch was 13 and had let them know her availability – she received a letter back that would have crushed most children. She carried on. “All I knew was that I loved doing it,” she says, smiling. Lynch was having this conversation recently with her friend Kate Flannery. “We always say ‘we’re of show’ because we’ll do it no matter what.” Season four of The Marvelous Mrs Maisel begins on Amazon Prime Video on 18 February.Workers are entitled to ask for a pay rise after a gruelling pandemic and faced with a severe cost-of-living crisis, Keir Starmer has said as official figures showed wages falling in real terms. The Labour leader’s call came in contrast to comments by the Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, who warned this month that wage rises would fuel inflation, saying the UK needed to see “restraint in pay bargaining, otherwise it will get out of control”. Data from the Office for National Statistics on Tuesday showed real wages fell behind increasing inflation, which is likely to exacerbate the cost-of-living squeeze from rising prices, high energy bills and a national insurance rise this April. In an interview with the Guardian on Tuesday, Starmer also said: Labour would oppose the end of free Covid testing – though he stopped short of calling for mandatory isolation to continue in England beyond next week. Sadiq Khan, the London mayor, made the right decision to force out Cressida Dick as commissioner of the Metropolitan police. Dozens of Conservative MPs had been in private contact with him expressing dismay at Boris Johnson’s false claim he had failed to prosecute the child abuser Jimmy Savile. In veiled criticism of Bailey’s comments on pay, Starmer said it was reasonable for workers to demand higher wages but said he wanted to put the main onus on the government to tackle the cost of living. “It’s very difficult to universally say to people – you are not entitled to even ask for a pay rise,” he said. Bailey’s remarks, which were prompted by fears that higher wage demands could push companies to increase prices further, sparked widespread criticism including from trade unions and the chair of Tesco, plus a rebuke from Downing Street. Official figures are expected to confirm on Wednesday an inflation rate of close to 5.4% in January – the highest level in three decades. The Bank has said the measure for the annual increase in the cost of living could peak at about 7.25% by April as surging energy prices feed through. Starmer said ministers should cancel the pending rise in national insurance and intervene more directly in the cost of families’ energy bills, repeating calls for a windfall tax on oil and gas companies who have outperformed projections. “The government is forever saying these are forces beyond its control, that it can’t do anything because this is all global,” he said. “Actually, those tax increases are the government’s own deliberate policy and half their own side don’t think they’re right.” Last week, BP’s chief executive dismissed calls for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies but also described his company as a “cash machine” given gas prices reached all-time highs and oil prices hit a seven-year record. Starmer said the comments were a “a pretty honest reflection of the situation they think they find themselves in” but said the government had made the choice for the burden to be borne by working families. “To hear the prime minister say that he wants to protect oil and gas companies and their windfall profits at the expense of working families is a very clear answer to the question, you know, whose side are you on?” he said. Labour has been keen to draw a dividing line with the Tories on issues beyond the “partygate” scandal, while Westminster waits for the Met police inquiry to conclude. Labour sources said Starmer would keep his focus on divisive issues such as tax and the cost of living during prime minister’s questions to keep the heat on Tory divisions, as well as put the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in the spotlight. Johnson, who has been given seven days since Friday to answer a police questionnaire along with at least 50 other staffers and aides, is expected to deny any wrongdoing and will make the argument that No 10 is both his home and workplace. Starmer said the public’s verdict on Johnson was likely to be the same whatever the Met’s conclusion. “There aren’t many members of the public that don’t think that Boris Johnson was involved in parties,” he said. “Not many members of the public think Boris Johnson has been honest about this. But if you take the public for fools, you’re making a huge mistake because people see through this.” Starmer admitted there was a wider concern that all politicians were tarnished by the recent scandals, saying “dozens” of Tory MPs had been in touch about Johnson’s remark that Starmer had failed to prosecute Savile a decade ago. Starmer did not take the decision as director of public prosecutions but did apologise for institutional failings. The Labour leader said Johnson wanted to “degrade the rules and drag everybody down with it”, adding: “And that degrades politics. And it means that more and more people feel disaffected, it ends up with a situation where too many people feel that politics simply can’t be a force for good.” The investigation into Johnson and Downing Street lockdown parties is expected to continue as the Met begins its search for a replacement for Dick, who resigned after Khan withdrew his backing following a string of police scandals. Starmer said Khan was right to take the action that forced her resignation. “It’s a huge job now in terms of the culture change that’s needed in the Metropolitan police. But this is not just the Metropolitan police. This is across the wider police force across the country. We need that cultural change, leadership change, training changes. So there’s a big job of work to be done now,” he said. Johnson will return to parliament next week to lay out plans for “living with Covid” with measures that are widely expected to lift all mandatory isolation periods after a positive test and end free testing for the virus. Starmer said it was “a mistake to end free Covid tests” – a measure which Sunak is pushing. But he said he would reserve judgment on ending isolation until the proposals are put forward next week.The news that the longtime accounting firm for the Trump Organization has cut ties with the company and retracted 10 years of its financial statements is a new and serious blow to Donald Trump’s increasingly frenzied battle to fend off the legal investigations that are rapidly engulfing him. The revelation that Mazars USA last week ended its relationship with the Trump family comes at a perilous moment for the former president as he strives to protect himself, his family and his business from legal threats that are now coming thick and fast. A Guardian tally this month found that Trump was facing a total of 19 legal challenges, six of which involve alleged financial irregularities. By withdrawing its stamp of approval from the documents, Mazars leaves Trump potentially exposed to substantial legal and financial trouble. The papers, known as statements of financial condition, were used by Trump and his family business to attract and secure hundreds of millions of dollars in loans. They are also at the centre of an escalating investigation by the New York state attorney general, Letitia James. Last month James tightened the screws on Trump and the Trump Organization by releasing details in a filing of several instances involving golf courses, real estate and other assets where the family had allegedly “falsely and fraudulently valued multiple assets and misrepresented those values to financial institutions for economic benefit”. In a letter dated 9 February, Mazars’ general counsel, William Kelly, told the Trump Organization that the annual financial statements it had prepared for the family business between 2011 and 2020 were no longer reliable. The accountants said they had based their decision partly on their own investigation into Trump’s finances and on the “totality of the circumstances”, concluding that “we are not able to provide any new work product to the Trump Organization”. On the back of James’s latest attack, Michael Cohen, Trump’s former personal attorney and an ex-vice president of the Trump Organization, told the Guardian that in his opinion “the House of Trump is crumbling”. James’s investigation is one of the most advanced and potentially dangerous of all the 19 legal actions bearing down on Trump. The inquiry is being pursued on both civil and criminal lines. James is working in tandem with a separate criminal investigation by the Manhattan district attorney, Alvin Bragg. That inquiry is also looking into whether Trump and his family concern defrauded lenders or underpaid taxes by falsely representing his assets. The disclosure that Mazars had broken off relations with Trump was included in a new court filing from James on Monday as part of her ongoing attempt to force Trump and his two eldest children, Donald Jr and Ivanka, to testify under subpoena. Trump has consistently denied financial impropriety and has attempted to cast doubt on James’s investigation by denouncing it as a partisan witch-hunt. James is a Democrat, while Trump won the presidency in 2016 as a Republican. The Trump Organization said it was “disappointed” by Mazars’ decision but tried to spin the development in a positive light. It selectively cited a line in the Mazars letter that said that “we have not concluded that the various financial statements, as a whole, contain material discrepancies”, adding that the comment rendered the James and Bragg investigations “moot”. As Trump’s legal and financial woes deepen, he is also being assailed by a flurry of bad news surrounding the congressional investigation into the January 6 insurrection at the US Capitol. Trump, who is at the centre of the House select committee inquiry given that his “big lie” that the 2020 election was stolen from him drew thousands of his supporters to the Capitol building that day, has been trying to persuade his closest advisers not to cooperate. This week it was revealed that John Eastman, a conservative law professor who was integral to attempts to persuade the then vice president, Mike Pence, to delay certification of Joe Biden’s victory on January 6, has handed over 8,000 pages of emails to the committee. It has also become known that Rudy Giuliani, who as Trump’s lawyer was a key figure in the campaign to overturn the presidential election results, has opened a dialogue with the committee that could see him testifying in some form.There are rainforests in Britain. These are woodlands drenched in rain, humid and mild, with gnarled old trees covered in shaggy green blankets of mosses, lichens and ferns. Few other places in the world have these temperate rainforests, and in Britain they once covered much of the wet western side of the country, but are now reduced to pockets of woodland in steep gullies and slopes where they manage to cling on in parts of west Scotland, Wales, the Lake District and south-west England. And these rare habitats are threatened by farming, invasive plants and conifer plantations. But a project in Snowdonia national park in north Wales is restoring and expanding the rainforest there. Rhododendron ponticum is a shrub from the Mediterranean that can grow so vigorously it smothers other plants and can dominate woodlands. In a £7m project, the alien rhododendrons are being ripped out with all their roots, or the stems on each bush are injected with small amounts of herbicide to kill the entire plant. Once the rhododendrons are eradicated, a few highland cattle are used to keep down bracken and brambles and leave the ground open for native trees and plants to regenerate naturally.I am in the heady throes of a new relationship. That buoyant, lusty state that’s so electrified we sometimes mistake it for love. We are illegally in her cell, on her bed, mostly naked, so deep into our lovemaking that we are deaf to the guard’s keys jingling down the long corridor. By the time we realise, she is at the doorway, snatching down the curtain. We are scrambling to put on our clothes and sit up in some semblance of propriety. Sweaty, embarrassed, scared. “Give me your IDs,” she says, sternly. We hand them to her, knowing she is going to write us up for numerous charges that will lead to our being separated into different housing units, possibly removed from our jobs. “Get dressed, go to your rooms and stay there,” she says. As she leaves, I say: “Let me go talk to her.” My partner is new to prison, but I have been here for over a decade. I know my way around. As I walk towards the officer’s station, I try to strike a balance between being contrite for breaking a rule and putting the guard in an awkward position, while remaining unashamed of my intimacy. I think back to my pre-prison years of coming out and fighting for gay liberation to help me keep my cool. I suspect that this guard is also a lesbian. I look her straight in her eye as I barter for our freedom. Finally, she gives me back our IDs and I promise her two weeks of cleaning tasks. I go back to my partner’s room to give her her ID and crow. I am giddy with relief. She is not. She is embarrassed and stressed. She is traumatised, and this trauma reverberates with so many prior traumas. As her fear morphs into anger, she snarls at me. It is a moment that does not last long, but will be repeated many times during our relationship, triggered by the distorted circumstances of sexual repression that define our lives inside. I want to talk about sex in women’s prisons. Not about sexual abuse. Not sex for the sake of mass audiences’ titillation. Not a sociologist’s study of ersatz family configurations in women’s prisons. I want to talk about how sex, sexuality and touch are human needs and human rights, denied and distorted, criminalised and repressed when we enter the prison system. I want to talk about what that does to those of us who spend our prime years inside; what that does to women whose experience of trauma paved their roads to harm, self-harm and prison itself. Even now, out of prison for almost three years, I feel dizzy as I write this piece. Four decades of forbidden lovemaking, closet quickies and silent, suppressed orgasms; of being forbidden to dance in my partner’s arms or hold hands while we walk down the hill to work. Four decades of longing and hiding, and always having to listen out. Of pat frisks and strip searches and squatting and coughing and spreading my butt cheeks, of urinating in front of uniformed strangers; of being threatened with misbehaviour reports for hugging a youngster in tears or in celebration; of only being allowed 15 minutes of a “privacy curtain” to undress in the non-privacy of my own cell. My neck and shoulders ache as adrenaline rushes through my body. Past and present collapse. I feel a giant lump in my throat of suppressed desire and unspoken fury, of woman love and woman rage, of the decades-long cry of satisfaction and dissatisfaction, demanding a voice that reverberates inside and out. Judith Clark is a political activistSarah Vaughan has Boris Johnson to thank, at least in part, for the genesis of her bestselling thriller Anatomy of a Scandal. The former Guardian reporter was on call on a Sunday in November 2004, the day after Johnson had been sacked from the Conservative frontbench because he’d lied about having an affair with Petronella Wyatt, and Johnson had telephoned her about the story. “It was the fact he had no compunction in lying that struck me,” says Vaughan. “There was a lot of flummery and flannel; lots of chuntering and ‘all chaps together’-ness about it. He was writing a lot for the Telegraph so there was a definite sense that we were hacks together who wouldn’t stitch each other up – but yes, he confirmed the story was true and didn’t seem to express any remorse. It was the first time I was aware of a public figure admitting to lying and not seeming to be bothered by it.” Then, in October 2014, the footballer Ched Evans was released after serving a prison sentence for rape – he was later found not guilty on appeal – and “Allison Pearson wrote a column in the Telegraph where she quoted girls from a local beauticians saying that when this 19-year-old girl who was picked up in a pizza parlour went back to his Premier Inn, she wasn’t expecting to have a game of Scrabble,” says Vaughan. “And I just thought about how women judge each other.” The two observations came together, and Vaughan’s story of James Whitehouse, an Old Etonian, Oxford-educated minister who is accused of raping the parliamentary aide he’s been having an affair with, was born. The novel, her third, was published in 2018 and became an instant bestseller. A screen adaptation, starring Rupert Friend as James, Sienna Miller as his wife, Sophie, Michelle Dockery as prosecuting barrister Kate and Naomi Scott as the aide, will be on Netflix in April. “To me, Anatomy is really about entitlement and the scandal of entitlement,” says Vaughan. With her journalistic hat still on, she carefully stresses that Johnson is “not in any way James”. “I obviously don’t think he’s guilty of any sort of sexual offence. It was his approach to the truth that interested me. As Theresa May put it in the Commons recently, either he ‘didn’t read the rules, or [he] didn’t understand them, or [he] didn’t think they applied to him’.” Or, as James puts it in Anatomy of a Scandal: “I told the truth, near enough. Or the truth as I saw it.” Anatomy, with its exploration of consent and privilege, felt uncannily timely when it was published four years ago. Vaughan’s forthcoming novel, Reputation, might be even more so. It opens with a body at the bottom of the stairs – that of a tabloid journalist – and goes on to explore how MP Emma Webster ended up standing over the corpse. Webster is a Labour backbencher and single mother who is relentlessly trolled when she starts a campaign against revenge porn. She tries to keep the worst of it from her teenage daughter, Flora. But Flora has social problems of her own, and Emma – the name a nod to John Webster’s revenge tragedy about reputation, The Duchess of Malfi – finds her life spiralling out of control. What is she, and what is Flora, without their reputations? Vaughan details, chillingly, the steps Emma takes to keep herself safe. The bottle of water on the desk in her constituency in case of an acid attack. The chair placed just so to deflect potential attackers. The bag-checks for knives; the abusive tweets; the anonymous texts; the terror of cycling home at night alone. The germ of the novel was an article Vaughan read about Labour MP Jess Phillips, who’d said she had multiple extra locks on her front door and a panic room in her constituency office. At around the same time, Anna Soubry was also being abused over her anti-Brexit stance, and Luciana Berger was receiving a stream of antisemitic attacks. “I just remember thinking, ‘God, what must it be like to live like that?’ The level of threat that you’re being exposed to is so extreme: how would that alter your thinking, how would you react, under that level of pressure?” says Vaughan. “At the same time, my daughter would have been 13 and I was aware that children are exposed to social media bullying as well; that the abuse you see on Twitter happens in a different form on Snapchat or Instagram Stories. So I thought there was something to be written about that.” Just after she finished her novel, the MP David Amess was killed while holding a constituents’ surgery at a church hall in Leigh-on-Sea, Essex. “The whole issue of MPs’ security in their constituencies then became really heightened,” she says. “There have been lots of DMs I’ve received from other authors saying, ‘Have you got a crystal ball?’ I think it’s just spending too long on Twitter every day, reading the news, listening avidly to Radio 4 when I’m cooking.” It’s also down to her years as a journalist. Having studied English at Oxford – where she met boys who, like James in Anatomy, “behaved as if, of course, they were going to get firsts, and that the world was theirs for the taking” – she spent a year waiting tables in Devon and trying to gain work experience on newspapers, ending up with a Press Association traineeship in 1996. “It was a real baptism of fire,” she says, with stories ranging from the Aldwych bus bomb to doorstepping Julia Carling over her husband Will’s supposed affair with Princess Diana. She started at the Guardian in 1997 (using her real name, Sarah Hall), spending 11 years there as a news reporter, then political correspondent. She covered the Soham murders and the arraignment of Ian Huntley – she interviewed him when he was the school caretaker and got into an argument with him; the abduction and murder of Sarah Payne and Roy Whiting’s trial; the opening of the inquest into Stephen Lawrence’s murder. Later, there was the resignation of Peter Mandelson, the “sexed-up” dossier during the Iraq war, Tony Blair under pressure – and of course Johnson’s sacking. Vaughan left the Guardian in 2008, taking voluntary redundancy after having her second baby. She freelanced for various places, and began writing her first novel the week she turned 40, when her youngest started primary school. The Art of Baking Blind, about five amateur bakers in a competition, was published in 2014, and The Farm at the Edge of the World followed two years later. Darkness and difficult situations feature in both those books too – but Anatomy was definitely a venture into deeper waters. “My first book is about the impossibility of perfection, and why we bake, and motherhood really. I came up with the idea for Anatomy as my second book, but I was told that it was too big a jump to write a book about baking and then a book about consent, so I came up with The Farm,” Vaughan says. “But The Art of Baking Blind is also about coercive control, and sexual assault, and The Farm has depression, suicide, the near death of a baby – I threw a lot of dark things into my first two books, so I was probably always going to go in a darker direction.” Simon &amp; Schuster paid a seven-figure sum for Reputation and another novel, and the former was recently optioned for screen by the same team who have made Anatomy of a Scandal. Vaughan is adamant she wouldn’t have been able to write either without having worked as a journalist, learning how a court case works, seeing “privilege work in Westminster, observing power imbalances and entitlement and how that all plays.” “Having worked in that environment, and listened to the news avidly for the past quarter of a century, I’m attuned to the doublespeak, the slipperiness and the moral ambiguity – or vacuum – of such characters,” she says. “I wanted Emma to be hugely sympathetic but James, in Anatomy, isn’t. Working in the lobby, and also reporting on trials, has meant I’ve seen characters with big egos continue to assert their power, and I’ve questioned why they would put themselves in this position when they have so far to fall.” Reputation is a key theme for Vaughan. Her fourth novel, Little Disasters, in which a paediatrician is forced to confront the truth when her friend brings her baby into A&amp;E with injuries that don’t make sense, looks at it on a more domestic stage. “They’re all about judgment and control and power,” Vaughan says. “I do think there are huge double standards still in the way that women are perceived compared to men. You only have to look at Meghan and Harry. Or even Carrie Johnson – she’s clearly getting it in the neck and is going to be the scapegoat for Boris’s behaviour for some people.” Prescient again, Vaughan tells me this in early February – shortly before Tory peer Michael Ashcroft’s new biography ladles more blame on to Carrie. Fodder for a future novel? “Well I’ve started my new book; all I can say is I’m finding the news agenda as inspiring as ever,” she says. • Reputation by Sarah Vaughan will be published by Simon &amp; Schuster on 3 March. Anatomy of a Scandal will be available on Netflix on 15 April. This piece was corrected on 16 February. Sarah Vaughan had completed, though not published, Reputation when David Amess was murdered.America’s vast coastline is being assailed by rapidly encroaching oceans, with up to 1ft of sea level rise expected in the next 30 years – an increase that equals the total rise seen over the past century, a major US federal government report has found. The seas are rising significantly faster around the US than the global average, a situation that will cause a “dramatic increase” in the number of Americans, already numbering tens of millions, vulnerable to disastrous flooding, the analysis warns. The trend, driven by the human-caused climate change, is stark – instances of “moderate” flooding at high tide, capable of damaging homes and businesses, have already increased by 50% across the US since the 1990s. This flooding is expected to become 10 times more common by 2050, on average, while major, potentially catastrophic floods are set to happen five times more often by this time. This “profound shift” in coastal inundation means that the sort of flooding an area could expect once every two to five years is set to hit multiple times in a single year in some places, even in the absence of storms or heavy rainfall, according to the study, which was jointly authored by Nasa, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) and six other US government agencies. “Sea levels are continuing to rise at an alarming rate, endangering communities around the world,” said Bill Nelson, administrator of Nasa. “Science is indisputable and urgent action is required to mitigate a climate crisis that is well under way.” Rick Spinrad, administrator of Noaa, said the report should act as a “wake-up call” to the perils of the climate crisis. The seawater lapping at the edges of the contiguous US has already risen by about a foot since 1920, a faster increase than the 6-8in (15-20cm) experienced, on average, around the world over the same period. This sea level rise is on track to double within just 30 years around the US, although the rates of change will vary significantly across different regions. While the US west coast is expected to get 4-8in of extra sea level by 2050, the east coast will get up to 14in of raised seas and the communities ringing the Gulf of Mexico will be hit by a severe increase of up to 18in. The uneven rate of sea level rise will influence flood risk – the western part of the Gulf coast will see 10 times as many moderate flooding events a year compared with now, for example, while the risk of such flooding will edge up only slightly in Alaska and Hawaii. Certain communities will feel the brunt of this increasing flooding, with risks exacerbated by substandard housing, poor flood defenses and a shift in population that is seeing more people move into low-lying areas, such as Florida, that are vulnerable to the rising seas. There will be a 40% increase in flood risk in areas where at least 20% of the population is black, according to a recent study. The seas are rising globally due to the burning of fossil fuels, which releases greenhouse gases that help heat the atmosphere and oceans. As glaciers melt away under soaring temperatures – the huge ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica have lost more than 6tn tons of ice since the 1990s – the meltwater causes the oceans to creep upwards. The seawater itself is expanding, too, as it heats up. The US government scientists said an improved understanding of ocean dynamics means there is confidence that the US should expect around 1ft of sea level rise over the next 30 years, with a total of 2ft expected by 2100, due to emissions already released. But much will depend on how quickly the US, and the world, is able to slash emissions and avoid disastrous climate change, with the risk of sea level rising by up to 4ft becoming far more likely if global temperatures are allowed to escalate to 3C, or more, beyond the pre-industrial era. The world has already heated up by about 1.2C since the advent of heavy industry. Joe Biden’s administration said the report underlined the need to slash planet-heating emissions, although the president has seen his climate agenda stall in Congress, his green reputation damaged by the continued issuing of oil and gas drilling permits, and he is now facing a looming supreme court case that may severely limit his ability to use his powers to curb pollution. “This new data on sea rise is the latest reconfirmation that our climate crisis – as the president has said – is blinking ‘code red’,” said Gina McCarthy, Biden’s top climate adviser. “We must redouble our efforts to cut the greenhouse gases that cause climate change while, at the same time, help our coastal communities become more resilient in the face of rising seas.”This week British bankers will start collecting the biggest bonuses since before the 2008 global financial crisis as their employers fight an “increasingly intense war for talent”. As most Britons face the biggest squeeze on their incomes since at least 1990, already very highly paid bankers are celebrating “particularly obscene” bonuses in the City’s pubs and wine bars. “We have had quite the run on champagne – the poshest champagne we stock,” says James, a bartender at the New Moon on the streets of Leadenhall Market near the headquarters of many of the City of London’s banks. “They come here to celebrate when they get told their ‘number’ – the numbers seem to have been particularly obscene this year.” London’s mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A) bankers earned total fees of $3.5bn (£2.6bn) in 2021, according to research by financial data provider Refinitiv for the Guardian. It is the highest annual total for M&amp;A banker fees paid since Refinitiv’s records began in 2000, fuelled by a frenzy of corporate takeovers sparked by a flood of private equity cash and acquisitive American buyers preying on undervalued British targets. That money is now set to be returned to bankers in their bonuses. London’s big four banks – HSBC, Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and NatWest – are expected to pay out bonuses totalling more than £4bn when they report their annual results in the next fortnight. Combined, the banks’ annual profits are expected to exceed £34bn – the most since 2007 in the boom before the financial crisis. The bankers’ huge paydays come days after the governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, who was paid £575,538 last year, called on workers across the country not to ask their bosses for pay rises to help control inflation, which has soared to a 30-year high of 5.4%. Gary Smith, general secretary of the GMB union, which represents 600,000 mostly frontline workers, said: “These sky-high banker bonuses are a kick in the teeth for everyone suffering with the cost of living crisis. I hope Andrew Bailey tells his banking mates to show the same ‘restraint’ he so readily demands from underpaid workers in the rest of the economy. “Essential workers, like our nation’s carers, often earn pennies above the minimum wage,” Smith said. “Mr Bailey should step out of his banking bubble and shadow these workers to see the people who actually deserve a proper pay rise.” The bumper bonuses will tip several hundred more UK bankers into the EU’s “high earners” warning report which details every banker earning more than €1m (£835,000) a year. The European Banking Authority (EBA) found that 3,519 bankers working in the UK earned more than €1m-a-year last year – more than seven times as many as those working in Germany which has the second highest number of €1m-a-year bankers. The EBA figures show 27 UK bankers earned more than €10m in 2019 (the latest year available). Two UK-based asset managers were paid between €38m and €39m, and one merchant banker was paid €64.8m. That banker received fixed pay of €242,000, topped up with a bonus of €64.6m. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of trade union body the TUC, said the huge increase in bankers’ pay was “an insult to working families across Britain”. “While millions struggle with the cost of living, executive bankers are set to receive yet another cash windfall,” she said. “At a time when workers are being told not to ask for a decent pay rise, no such restraint is being asked of the City. We should be holding down bonuses, not ordinary people’s wages.” Luke Hildyard, the director of the High Pay Centre, which campaigns for executive pay restraint, said: “Decades of economic deference to the super rich have brought us to a point where bankers are raking in historic pay awards while the rest of the country is crippled by rising prices and wage stagnation. “This wealth isn’t ever going to trickle down without action from policymakers. It’s in the interests of everybody, not least the banks’ shareholders, customers and lower-paid workers who ultimately bear the cost of these awards, that we strengthen employment rights, corporate governance and progressive taxation to build an economy that works for everyone.” Figures released on Tuesday by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) showed that average pay in the public sector rose by 2.6% between October and December 2021, while those working in business and finance saw their pay grow by 8.1% due to “an increase in bonus payments”. NatWest, the first of the banks to report its results, is expected on Friday to post a £4bn profit for 2021 compared with a £351m loss in 2020. The bank, which is still more than 50% owned by the taxpayer following its bailout during the financial crisis, is expected by analysts to pay bonuses of almost £300m up from just over £200m last year. Barclays is expected by City analysts to report profits of just over £8bn next Wednesday, which would lead to bonus payouts of more than £1.9bn – up £300m on the previous year. A big chunk of the bonus pool will be paid to Jes Staley, Barclays’ former chief executive who quit in November amid an inquiry into his links to convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Staley is still in line for bonus payments of up to £22m over the next six years if the bank hits its profit and share price targets. Lloyds, which paid no bonuses for 2020, is expected to pay out hundreds of millions in bonuses for 2021 as profits exceed analysts’ expectations. HSBC, which cut its bonuses by 15% last year but still paid out almost £2bn, is expected to significantly increase its pool this year and double bonuses paid to junior investment bankers. Greg Guyett, HSBC’s co-head of the global banking and markets division, last month said that HSBC was feeling the industrywide “upward pressure” on pay. “We’ve got to keep pay across the board competitive,” he said. It is not just in the UK that banks are raising bonuses in a global war for talent in the highly competitive M&amp;A world. French bank Société Générale last week said it would “massively” increase its bonuses in order to attract and retain talent. In Germany, Christian Sewing, chief executive of Deutsche Bank, the nation’s largest bank, said last month: “We are very concerned about the increasingly intense war for talent and the wage developments in our industry. But it is also clear that we cannot and do not want to avoid this competition, because we too want to have and keep the best talent in our bank.”Downton Abbey co-stars Michelle Dockery and Michael Fox are to release a debut EP later this year after signing to Decca Records. The pair, known musically as Michael and Michelle, first met on the hit period drama, in which Fox plays footman Andrew Parker and Dockery plays Lady Mary Crawley. They soon discovered their shared passion for music, and a casual jam led to regular practices and time in a recording studio in Los Angeles. “There was something about that time after the series had ended,” Dockery said, “about looking at something with fresh eyes and feeling nervous about what’s ahead. Then suddenly we were just writing music.” Six years later, they have made their partnership official with the release of The Watching Silence on 6 May. Produced by Ian Grimble (Catfish And The Bottlemen), the EP consists of four original songs with Fox and Dockery singing and on dual guitars – recalling alt country partnerships Civil Wars and Angus and Julia Stone. The EP also features Mumford and Sons’ Chris Maas on percussion and Willy Mason’s Tommy Heap on piano and drums. “It’s a whole different set of skills and vulnerability,” Dockery said of the difference between music and acting. “Acting tends to start with what’s already written on the page. Music can begin anywhere. It’s different and very freeing.” Fox added: “I will always love acting but there is something about us, some part of our characters that we haven’t fully realised – and that’s happening now.” Growing up, Fox was in a number of bands ranging in styles from indie to folktronica and wrote his own songs. Dockery sang on various London stages, and was inspired by the music of Joni Mitchell, Alison Krauss and Indigo Girls. They will continue to juggle their music and acting commitments. According to the label, Michael and Michelle’s music is “both classic and utterly timeless: though more Nashville Americana than UK folk in melody and structure, their impressionistic songs are modern and immediate, free of pastiche, and are shot through with their own London realism.”. Laura Monks and Tom Lewis, co-presidents of Decca, said in a statement: “We are thrilled to have these two multi-talented artists join the Decca family. They are a perfect match and we fell in love with their sound and chemistry as soon as we heard them. We know their global fanbase will be as excited to finally hear them on record as we are.” Michael and Michelle’s first public show will be at Omeara London on 6 June. Downton Abbey, the British historical drama set in the early 20th century, premiered in 2010 and ran for six seasons. A film of the same name released in 2019, with the sequel, A New Era, due for release this spring. Dockery, who recently starred in Apple TV’s Defending Jacob, will also be seen on screen in the long-awaited Netflix adaptation of the bestselling novel Anatomy of a Scandal alongside Sienna Miller and Rupert Friend. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022 because an earlier version misspelled the surname of Chris Maas as “Mass”.A promotion by the fast-fashion retailer Boohoo that used “sexually suggestive” images of a model in an oversized T-shirt and thong-style bikini bottoms has been banned by the UK advertising watchdog for objectifying and sexualising women. The online retailer used several images of the model, including a shot taken from the rear of her kneeling and another of her sitting with her legs apart, which prompted a complaint to the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) that the promotion was offensive, harmful and irresponsible. Boohoo, which has previously been censured by the ASA for an email promotion headed “Send nudes”, said that the way it presented garments “reflected the diversity of women in society and their customer base”. The watchdog said that while the advert was presented as part of the swimwear category, the actual advertised product was the T-shirt and the listing on the website appeared as a result of searches for T-shirts or tops. The ASA said that in each case the staging of the shots was “sexually suggestive”, with the model shown with the T-shirt folded in ways to expose her body, instead of focusing on the product. “We noted that neither the partial nudity nor the bikini bottoms were relevant to the product and that the images did not show the product as it would usually be worn,” the ASA said in its ruling. “For those reasons, we concluded that the ad objectified and sexualised women. It was therefore irresponsible and likely to cause serious offence.” Boohoo said that it understood the importance of the issues raised by the ASA and removed the images from its website before the publication of the ruling. “We told Boohoo to ensure that future ads were prepared with a sense of responsibility to consumers and society,” the ASA said. In 2019, the ASA banned a Boohoo email promotion that used the phrase “Send nudes” in a message to customers marketing a range of clothes coloured to resemble skin. It pictured a female model wearing a short, white dress and beige jacket with the words “Send nudes. Set the tone with new season hues” written across the image. The ASA said the phrase “send nudes” was likely to be understood as referring to requests for sexual photos and said it was irresponsible to make light of a “potentially harmful social trend”.A serving SAS soldier has told a court that at least two men were pulled from a tunnel inside a compound being raided by Australian SAS troops during a 2009 clearance operation in Afghanistan, a mission that has since become a key element of the defamation trial brought by Ben Roberts-Smith. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. Anonymised before the federal court as Person 42, the Warrant Officer Class 2 and veteran of more than two decades’ military service appeared in court as a witness for the Nine newspapers’ defence. Person 42 told the court he and other soldiers discovered the hidden tunnel during the raid on a compound called Whiskey 108. The soldiers called out in Pashto for anyone hiding inside to come out. “They came out unarmed, they came out freely, they came out relatively quickly once we gave them the commands,” he said. Person 42 said he took custody of one of the men and patted him down to ensure he was unarmed before passing him to the control of another soldier. He did not see the man again. The events at Whiskey 108 on 12 April 2009 – and the presence or otherwise of men in the tunnel – have emerged as central to the allegations made against Roberts-Smith in the newspapers’ defence of the defamation claim. Roberts-Smith is a Victoria Cross winner and one of Australia’s most decorated soldiers. Roberts-Smith has been accused in the course of the newspapers’ defence of ordering the execution an elderly Afghan man and murdering another man who had a prosthetic leg, both of whom had been taken from the tunnel in the compound. Roberts-Smith denies the allegations and says there was no one discovered in the tunnel. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Two other soldiers have previously given evidence in the trial on behalf of the newspapers about the alleged executions of the two men at Whiskey 108. One soldier, Person 41, told the court Roberts-Smith and another soldier borrowed his suppressor which was then used in the execution of the elderly man. Person 41 also said he later saw Roberts-Smith “frogmarch” the man with a prosthetic leg outside a village compound, throw him to the ground and machine-gun him to death. Another soldier, Person 14, said he saw an Australian soldier carrying a distinctive weapon, a Minimi machine gun, throw a human-shaped object to the ground and fire a burst of bullets into it. He said he later saw Roberts-Smith carrying a Minimi during that mission. Roberts-Smith has consistently denied those versions of events, describing them as “completely false”. In his evidence last year, he said he never ordered an elderly man shot, and says he killed the man with a prosthetic leg outside Whiskey 108 because the man was a legitimate target, armed and running away, and was killed in accordance with troops’ rules of engagement. He said no people were taken out of the tunnel in the compound. “There were no people in the tunnel at Whiskey 108,” he told the court. Whiskey 108 was a compound in the village of Kakarak, known as an insurgent stronghold, on the western side of the Dorafshan River in Uruzgan province and near an allied forward operating base. In court on Wednesday, Person 42 said Whiskey 108 had been bombed by allied aircraft ahead of the Australian troops’ mission to ‘clear’ the compound on 12 April 2009, checking for insurgents, weapons, and bomb-making materials. They found some weapons, ammunition and grenades, but “there were no enemy combatants found as part of the assault”, he said. Shown pictures of the bodies of the men allegedly killed during the raid on Whiskey 108, Person 42 said he was unable to positively identify them. Under cross-examination, he said Australian troops discovered the tunnel after being alerted to it by women, and possibly children, who were in the compound. Arthur Moses SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, put it to Person 42 that his evidence was not true “because you weren’t there”. “That is not true,” the soldier replied. The trial before Justice Anthony Besanko continues.It took courage for Ayodeji Bella to raise the subject of female genital mutilation in her rural community in southern Nigeria. She knew local chiefs were key to challenging beliefs around the practice but when Bella, who was cut at five, broached the issue with an elder from her village, she was rebuked. “I was young and unmarried and they wouldn’t take me seriously.” Four years on, the tribal chiefs are contacting Bella directly for advice on how to stamp out FGM. One of a thousand grassroots activists in 10 African countries backed by the Global Media Campaign (GMC), Bella now hosts discussions on television stations. “After I started appearing on TV, they couldn’t shut me up,” she says. “They had to listen and now the tribal leaders contact me and say ‘let’s talk about FGM’.” FGM has been practically eliminated over three years in one community where she works. Engaging with local media is the most efficient way of changing minds, according to Maggie O’Kane, former Guardian journalist and co-founder of GMC. “We pioneered this new activist model and now because we have the data to prove it works, we have big organisations like UNFPA and Plan [International] supporting it.” Since 2016, GMC has raised $6.4m (£4.8m) – channelling it directly to small, local groups. “I really think if we give these frontline women more money, we can end FGM by 2030. They don’t waste a penny,” says O’Kane. Eleven independent impact surveys in countries including Sierra Leone and Nigeria have shown the success of the small grants – typically between $300 and $500. Three years of surveys in Kenya’s Tana River region showed support for the most severe type three FGM dropped from 89% to 5%. In Mali funding has delivered 193 local and national media campaigns, accumulating 468 hours of airtime reaching 86 million people. Afterwards, an independent study by 60 Decibels in 2021 recorded an 8% drop in support for FGM in the previous six months. O’Kane says: “Mali’s TV chief would not even allow FGM to be mentioned on-air 18 months ago, but now the negative impact of cutting girls is being shown during primetime TV ads reaching 5 million people a night – and the rates of cutting are falling.” The World Bank has now given $50,000 to build on the progress. “There used to be this idea that you could have a pan-African, one size fits all policy to tackle FGM,” says O’Kane. “But the factors driving the cutting of girls vary. In Sierra Leone, you have the Bondo secret societies run by women, whereas in Somalia it is all linked to religion, and in Nigeria, it is the tribal chiefs who hold the power.” O’Kane says: “Our activists use little radio stations and cheap TV, they barter with their contacts. We have this whole unofficial network skilled at bargaining for air time.” Messaging platform WhatsApp is at the heart of activist networks, linking campaigners, who offer mutual support and ensure money is accounted for. “For this model to work, the accounts have to be impeccable,” says O’Kane. Bella is from Wanikin village in Osun, a state which has the highest rates of FGM in Nigeria. She says: “Often we see funds from big NGOs stopping in Abuja or Lagos.” Smaller grants have been supporting work to challenge deep-rooted beliefs in harder-to-reach communities. “For some people where I live cutting is a profession that has been handed down through generations. They want to protect their father’s legacy by continuing the practice so our work is to challenge that belief system.” Ifrah Ahmed has been using grants for radio projects in Somalia. The founder of the Ifrah Foundation has been working in camps for people displaced by hunger and war after hearing about women who had died in childbirth due to complications related to FGM. Ahmed distributes $10 radios and says she has already noticed a shift in attitudes. “Pregnant women who have had type three FGM are dying because of the way they have been cut. In some cases, we are hearing of both the mother and baby dying because the mother will be pushing for several days, but the baby is stuck. “Now we are using the airwaves to spread the word – often through interviews with doctors and midwives – to convince women who are having difficulties in labour to go to hospital.” The speed and effectiveness of local responses has convinced big funders that they can give money safely at grassroots level. In January 2020, it was estimated that it would cost $2.4bn to end FGM by 2030 in 31 countries. Mireille Tushiminina, coordinator of a joint programme by the UN Population Fund and the UN Children’s Fund on the elimination of FGM, says direct funding of activists is now key to reaching the UN goal to end FGM by 2030. “We have just completed phase three of our programme and the priority of our fourth phase will be working with the grassroots feminist movement and bringing more youth on board,” she says. “We don’t want to limit ourselves to funding country and regional offices. We are also looking at innovative funding streams that will reach those at local level.” This month the joint programme held an international youth summit . “Young people are bringing a lot of innovation. More important are those who are not afraid of disrupting the system – I personally see conflict as an opportunity for social change,” Tushiminina says. “Our roundtable events give us the opportunity to think differently about the approach. Anti-FGM campaigning has taken a considerable hit from the poverty brought by the pandemic. It is estimated that 2 million more girls over the next decade will be subjected to the practice than before Covid. In Kenya, for example, many families supplement their incomes with cash earned by relatives working in hotels or as cleaners. When tourism shut down and poverty closed in, families were left with few options. O’Kane says: “One activist told me: ‘Everyone is poor and desperate – all they have is their girls.’ You can get eight cows for a girl. But if you are going to get a dowry, then the girls need to be cut.” But Covid did bring opportunities. “During lockdown in Guinea we saw the motorbike taxi drivers become the eyes and ears of the community,” says Tushiminina. “Due to the increase in gender-based violence, groups of men mobilised themselves to report harmful practices, including FGM. “The campaign expanded to 500 taxi drivers engaging in the spread of anti-FGM messaging. According to our Guinea country office, the initiative has the potential to reach 700,000 people. It has been so inspiring to see these young men join the fight.” But those who know the communities where cutting is prevalent say ending FGM by 2030 is a tall order. “We need to double up on our systems. We need more funds and we need more people working on the ground,” says Bella. Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:There is a case from Dr Morissanda Kouyaté’s career that stays with him. In 1983, Kouyaté, then 32, was working at a village hospital in Guinea when 12-year-old twins, Hassantou and Housseynatou, were brought in. Through wails, their relatives told Kouyaté that earlier that day, the girls had been taken into the bush to be submitted to genital mutilation. Now, they were barely conscious and bleeding heavily. For the next 48 hours, Kouyaté and his colleagues worked to try to save them; his own wife came and donated blood. But the girls died. “We did everything,” he says. “I was very sad because at that time, I had my two daughters who were very young. I thought about the people who had lost their twins.” Kouyaté wrote a letter to the Guinean ministry of health, recounting what had happened and that this practice must be controlled. His letter ended up at the headquarters of the World Health Organization and Kouyaté was invited to Geneva to learn more about female genital mutilation (FGM). Since then, Kouyaté has dedicated much of his life to fighting FGM and was instrumental in founding the Inter-African Committee (IAC), which brought 16 countries together to focus on practices affecting the health of women and children. In 2003, the IAC organised a conference where several first ladies declared 6 February as a day to mark zero tolerance of FGM, something adopted by the UN in 2012. In 2020, Kouyaté, received the Mandela prize for his work. Kouyaté, who last year became minister of foreign affairs for the Republic of Guinea, was one of the few male campaigners in the early 1980s. Now, he says many more men are involved, something he believes is essential if FGM is to be eradicated by the UN’s target date of 2030. “If you consider FGM a female issue, that is minimising the effect of this practice,” he says. “It is a violation of human rights; men must be involved in the fight against that. Of course women and girls are direct physical victims but men are indirect victims – the consequences of the practice affect men.” In Somalia, where an estimated 99% of women have been mutilated – the highest level anywhere in the world, activist Hassan Istiila, 30, is often asked why he, as a man, is so involved in the anti-FGM campaign. “People say to me, ‘You are male, why are you talking about a women’s issue?’” says Istiila. “In Somalia, culturally, men dominate the house. They are the decision makers. If they don’t agree, women can’t refuse.” Istiila became aware of FGM and the resulting dangers to life and risks around childbirth while he was at university. As a campaigner he received training in 2017 from the anti-FGM Global Media Campaign and now works to change the narrative in a country where anti-FGM legislation does not exist. But there is a great deal of stigma around speaking about it. Over the past five years, he has noticed a change in attitudes. “There is an increasing number of people, especially women, who are talking about the issue on the radio or on social media. It’s not a big number but it’s good when you look back to five or six years ago,” he says. Istiila worked as a journalist, including on the story of Fartun Hassan Ahmed, 13, a girl who bled to death last year after being cut and whose loss was keenly felt by her blind father. “That story touched me. The girl was the right hand of her father,” he says. “I asked him why he submitted her to FGM and he told me his wife had decided and he accepted it. He said if he had refused, his daughter would still be alive.” A few months later, Fartun’s father joined the anti-FGM movement. In Kenya, Jeremiah Kipainoi, 29, an award-winning journalist, thinks the time for raising awareness is over. “There’s no need to keep sensitising people,” he says. “I don’t think there’s anyone who doesn’t know FGM is wrong.” He points to Kenya’s Female Genital Mutilation Act of 2011, which made FGM punishable by imprisonment or a hefty fine. President Uhuru Kenyatta has pledged to end FGM by 2022. In Kenya, 21% of girls and women aged 15 to 49 have had their genitals mutilated. Kipainoi is now doing what he calls accountability activism. “FGM is happening,” he says. “I have to task those people who are supposed to prevent it from happening to do their job.” When the pandemic hit, he started End FGM live, which broadcast over the internet, interviewing officials whose mandate it is to end the practice, and enabling people to directly address their questions and concerns to those in power. In December, when he heard that hundreds of girls in south-west Kenya had been cut, he called the county commissioner, who was on holiday at the time. “It was a little bit confrontational,” he says, “but from that we were able to get them to act and arrest people.” Prof Wilberforce Oti, a lecturer and pastor, is similarly determined to end FGM in his native Nigeria. The UN Population Fund estimates 25% of female Nigerians aged 15 to 49 have undergone FGM. The 2015 Violence against Persons (Prohibition) Act makes it a federal offence but it has not been passed in all 36 states and, according to Oti, implementation is low. Oti’s resolve was sparked by a training session in 2016 for religious leaders. “That was the first time I got deep information about the adverse effects of FGM,” he says. “I began to imagine what my own mother must have gone through. She told me every time she gave birth they had to cut her open. She shared this with me and I found I was going to do everything in my power to not let anybody I know go through this and to stop it happening to as many people as possible.” He uses his position to talk to traditional rulers, the “custodians of culture and tradition”, and hosts a radio programme, Brand New Me. He says he has seen a drop in support for FGM and in his own state of Ebonyi – statistics suggest prevalence has fallen from 74% in 2013 to 53.2% in 2018; nationwide, prevalence has dropped from 25% to 20%. Oti is encouraged but doubtful over the UN’s 2030 goal. “If we are going at the pace we are going right now, we will minimise FGM, but this is not the same as eradicating it completely,” he says. “We are doing our best, but I wish we could do more.” Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:The Morrison government has argued it needs to pass its strengthening character test bill to prevent “overseas criminals” staying in Australia. Labor has said the government already has that power, saying if it can deport a tennis player (Novak Djokovic) it can deport someone with a criminal conviction. So what is the bill – and what is the truth of the power the immigration minister already has, or might gain? What is the bill? The bill amends migration law to create a new category of “designated offences” involving violence against a person, weapons, breaching of an apprehended violence order and nonconsensual sexual acts, punishable by a maximum of at least two years in prison. If a non-citizen is convicted of one of these designated offences they are automatically deemed to fail the existing “character test” and their visa can be considered for cancellation. Can’t visas already be cancelled? Yes. Section 501(2) of the Migration Act states that the minister “may cancel a visa … if the minister reasonably suspects that the person does not pass the character test”. So, there is no minimum standard of criminal conduct for visa cancellation or refusal. The Australian government can already cancel visas even without criminal conduct. In December, the human rights committee, chaired by Nationals MP Anne Webster, concluded: The minister may already cancel or refuse a person’s visa where a person has committed an offence that would fall within the new definition of ‘designated offence’, including having regard to the broad notion of the person’s past or present criminal or general conduct. Why does the government want it then? The explanatory memorandum says the bill creates a “new specific and objective ground” for failing the character test. This “aligns directly with community expectations that non-citizens who are convicted of offences such as murder, sexual assault or aggravated burglary will not be permitted to enter or remain in the Australian community”, according to the memorandum. However, it also notes that failing the character test due to a designated offence “would enliven the discretion whether to … cancel a visa but would not dictate the outcome of the exercise of the discretion”. On Wednesday the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, said the bill gives “more discretionary power” to cancel visas, including allowing crimes committed offshore or in the past to be triggers to refuse or cancel visas. What are the concerns? The biggest concern is that by increasing the number of people who fail the character test the bill makes it much more likely they will be deported, with one estimate suggesting visa cancellations could increase fivefold. Permanent residents, even those who have lived in Australia for many years with no substantial links to their country of citizenship, are already deported, and this would probably increase. Visa cancellations disproportionately affect citizens of New Zealand, and have been a substantial sticking point in Australia’s relations with the country. On 10 February, Labor’s shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, wrote to her counterpart Hawke setting out three concerns: The changes should not be retrospective; The risk that low-level offending could result in visa cancellation should be reduced by using the existing definition of a “substantial” criminal record; The impact on New Zealanders should be softened by a new ministerial declaration. Why are we debating this now? The government has had many goes at getting this through. The first bill, introduced in 2018, lapsed at the 2019 election. The second, introduced in July 2019, was defeated in the Senate in October 2021. The government reintroduced the bill in November. On Wednesday, Hawke said the bill would be put for a vote as a “test for Labor”. This follows Scott Morrison telling Coalition MPs and senators they should look to ramp up examples of “sharp contrast” with Labor in the lead-up to the 2022 election. Are the parties still negotiating? The government has made one change. The third version of the bill states that a violent offence will only be “designated” if it “substantially contributes to bodily harm to another person” or their mental health, or involves family violence. This was added to exclude extremely low-grade common assaults. Keneally has claimed further negotiations are still possible – but on Wednesday Hawke ruled out further amendments. What is Labor’s position? Labor, despite opposing the bill in October, has resolved not to oppose the bill in the House of Representatives. On Wednesday Hawke suggested it would go to the Senate before the election, but later in question time complained Labor had shifted its support “when [they] know we have run out of time to pass the bill”. The Greens have warned Labor will fold there and wave it through – but no final decision has been taken. The assistant shadow immigration minister, Andrew Giles, has confirmed in the Senate Labor will attempt amendments on retrospectivity and New Zealand. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning What has this got to do with Djokovic? Labor used Novak Djokovic’s deportation as an example of the godlike powers in the Migration Act, after the world number one tennis player was deported in January due to Hawke’s concerns his presence in Australia would embolden the anti-vaccination movement. The government countered that section 116, which was used to deport Djokovic, cannot be used against permanent residents in Australia. Labor suggested this could be fixed by an amendment – but it is largely a red herring as there are powers to cancel visas for failure of the character test elsewhere in the act.Gemma Collins: Self-Harm and Me Channel 4, 9pm For anyone who has doubted that “The GC” is just a diva facade donned for entertainment purposes, this documentary shows that the real Gemma Collins is a nice, normal person. In the hour-long film, the reality TV star recalls her 20-year struggle since she self-harmed as a teenager, and talks to a therapist, her family and fiance, as well as other people who self-harm. She talks to people with genuine empathy, and the candid conversations she has with her mum about the past highlight the difficulty many people have in speaking about mental health, especially across the generational divide. Hollie Richardson The Bay 9pm, ITV It’s the finale, and Jenn (Marsha Thomason) learns what happened on the night of Saif’s murder – including who his killer is. But it’s not that straightforward, with arrests left, right and centre, and even a (very short-lived) car chase. That’s only the half of it for the overstretched detective: at home, she and the kids contemplate their future in Morecambe, with the decision also affecting the direction of a potential fourth season. HR Kirstie and Phil’s Love It Or List It 8pm, Channel 4 Three years ago, Amber and Martin were torn between redoing their three-bed semi, complete with 70s styling, and finding somewhere sleeker. Phil returns to Cambridgeshire to see what they did next (without property peer Kirstie, who is currently under fire for claiming that any young person can buy a house, if only they would just give up their Netflix subscription). Henry Wong Gassed Up 8pm, BBC Three Birmingham rapper Mist takes on various celebrity challengers in this enjoyably silly car racing show that channels the style and verve of OTT arcade driving games. First up is comedian and Porsche owner Joel Dommett, who gets a crash course in beach buggies before tackling a customised night-time circuit laden with obstacles. Graeme Virtue Zen Motoring 9.45pm, BBC Three The surprise YouTube series turned iPlayer hit comes to TV. We meet former rapper Ogmios as he talks us through the things he sees while driving. It’s as simple as that – and yet it’s a transfixing, almost therapeutic watch. Tonight, he’s collecting raw data for the roundabouts chapter in his Zen Highway Code. HR Mega Mansion Hunters 10pm, Channel 4 More grim reality from the sharp end of the UK property market: Tyron Ash’s luxury estate agency offers beautifully appointed houses but a brutal working environment. Tonight, we see the company’s quarterly awards ceremony, in which the best agents are celebrated and, less edifyingly, the worst are roasted. Stath Charalambos wouldn’t last five minutes … Phil Harrison Storyville: Try Harder! 10pm, BBC Four Lowell High is the No 1 public school in San Francisco. Or, as one of its stressed students puts it, “the ultimate self-confidence crusher”. This surprisingly upbeat documentary explores the highly competitive Ivy League college application process the students desperately undergo. HRSimon Holmes à Court, the convener of Climate 200, says his organisation has not extracted specific undertakings from candidates running in Liberal party heartland, because “if we start dictating specifics then we can hardly say these independents are independent”. Holmes à Court on Wednesday declared Australian politics was “broken” and blasted the Morrison government’s record on climate policy, transparency and gender equality. But he told the National Press Club he would not be dictating policy or determining the next government of Australia if there was a hung parliament after the election. He said his personal opinions didn’t matter “because I won’t be in parliament and I won’t be in any negotiation room – this is a decision for the independents”. Climate 200 is a company not a political party or a charity. It is a fundraising vehicle to bankroll campaigns by independents prioritising climate action and stronger accountability measures. Controversy erupted this week after it was revealed the independent Zali Steggall – who promotes climate action and greater transparency – received a $100,000 donation from the family trust of former coal company director John Kinghorn which the Australian Electoral Commission found was not properly declared. At the time, the financial controller of the Warringah campaign was Damien Hodgkinson, who is now a director of Climate 200. Liberals rounded on Steggall, accusing her of hypocrisy. Holmes à Court insisted his organisation complied with disclosure rules and Hodgkinson retained his full confidence. He characterised political fundraising in Australia as a “David and Goliath” battle, where the major parties enjoyed significant structural advantages, including taxpayer-funded office and communication budgets “often used for campaigning”. Holmes à Court said that in 2019 the Coalition raised $65m in undisclosed donations. The Kooyong fundraising vehicle supporting the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, had also received “$2.8m in the past five years without disclosing a single donor”. Holmes à Court argued on Wednesday it was not hypocritical for Climate 200 to call for better transparency in Australia’s disclosure laws while not identifying all of its donors. He said some donors resisted voluntary disclosure beyond the current legal requirements because they feared retribution from the Morrison government. He said Climate 200’s objective was to try to level the playing field between independents and the major parties. In that context, there couldn’t be one rule for the major parties and another rule for political independents. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Holmes à Court acknowledged there was “noise around electoral disclosure at the moment” but he said Climate 200 went “above and beyond the legal disclosure requirements, encouraging all of our donors, large and small, to disclose their names on our website” – a practice that “neither major party comes close to doing”. He said if the major parties agreed to reduce the current donation disclosure threshold to $1,000 and mandate real-time disclosure, Climate 200 would comply with that policy, having already “taken the first step with our voluntary disclosure”. Later in parliament, the shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, asked Frydenberg – who had blasted the Steggall donation – whether he could confirm the Kooyong 200 club raised $1.1m in donations last financial year but named no individual donors in paperwork lodged with the electoral commission. “We adhere to the relevant rules,” Frydenberg said. Holmes à Court said Climate 200’s values were “simple”: a “science-based response to climate change”, ending corruption in politics, and achieving real progress on gender equity and women’s safety. Asked to explain how those values might translate to policy undertakings extracted from the major parties in a minority government negotiation, he said independents had made it clear to Climate 200 that any donations would have to come with “no strings attached”. “We don’t have any agreement at all with the candidates, they are strictly independent and that is of critical importance to them,” the Climate 200 convener said. He ventured that Steggall “got it right” with a private member’s bill requiring the government to set a rolling emissions budget and introduce risk assessment and adaptation plans, establish an independent climate change commission and incorporate the Morrison government’s technology investment roadmap. Holmes à Court said he supported proper resourcing for the Climate Change Authority. But he declined to elaborate further.Top story: Prince states regret over Epstein association Hello and welcome. I’m Warren Murray and this is the right place for you to be. News of Prince Andrew’s settlement of the sex assault case filed against him by Virginia Giuffre has been met with silence by Buckingham Palace. The out-of-court settlement in the US civil case means the Duke of York makes no admission of guilt over claims by Giuffre that he sexually assaulted her on three occasions when she was 17 – allegations he has repeatedly denied. There has been no official comment from the Queen, who last month sought to distance the monarchy from the fallout when she stripped Prince Andrew of his royal patronages, honorary military titles and any official use of his HRH title. US attorneys representing victims of Jeffrey Epstein hailed the settlement. Giuffre’s lawyer had previously insisted she wanted the case heard in court and that she would be unlikely to accept a “purely financial settlement”. Andrew has now agreed to make a “substantial donation” to a charity supporting victims’ rights. He makes no admission of liability. In settlement documents submitted to a civil court in New York, Andrew commends Giuffre’s bravery and accepts that she “suffered as an established victim of abuse”. He said he regrets his association with Jeffrey Epstein, who killed himself in a jail cell after he was arrested for sex trafficking girls. The document states that Andrew will demonstrate this “by supporting the fight against the evils of sex trafficking, and by supporting its victims”. The text further outlines how Giuffre will dismiss the case once she receives the settlement. * * * Starmer hits the road – Workers are entitled to ask for a pay rise considering the pandemic and cost-of-living crisis, Keir Starmer has said. The Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, called this month for wage “restraint”, warning that rises would fuel inflation. Starmer has hit back: “It’s very difficult to universally say to people – you are not entitled to even ask for a pay rise,” he said. Official figures are expected to confirm on Wednesday an inflation rate of close to 5.4% in January – the highest level in three decades. In an interview with the Guardian, Starmer has said dozens of Conservative MPs contacted him expressing dismay at Boris Johnson’s false claim he had failed to prosecute the child abuser Jimmy Savile. Starmer said the public’s verdict on Johnson and “partygate” was likely to be the same whatever the Met’s conclusion. “There aren’t many members of the public that don’t think that Boris Johnson was involved in parties,” he said, accusing Johnson of wanting to “degrade the rules and drag everybody down with it”. It is recess in parliament and Starmer is spending most of it in the north of England and the Midlands: Sunderland, Burnley, Erdington. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; It is likely that fewer than 10% of patients are intolerant to statins, far lower than previous estimates, according to the world’s largest study of the issue. An estimated 7-8 million adults in the UK take statins to reduce the risk of heart attack and strokes. &gt; The vast majority of train services in Scotland will end at 4pm today as it braces itself for the first of two storms. The Met Office has issued an amber weather warning for the north of England and the central belt and south of Scotland ahead of Storm Dudley, which will be immediately followed by Storm Eunice later this week. &gt; Disabled children and young people should get 20 minutes of exercise each day and strength and balance activity three times a week, say the first ever physical activity guidelines released for them by the four chief medical officers in the UK. &gt; Downton Abbey co-stars Michelle Dockery and Michael Fox are to release a debut EP later this year. The pair, known musically as Michael and Michelle, first met on the hit period drama. The Watching Silence comes out on 6 May and features four original songs with Fox and Dockery singing and on dual guitars. &gt; An ad by the fashion retailer Boohoo has been banned for using “sexually suggestive” images of a model in thong-style bikini bottoms – in a promotion that was actually for T-shirts. The ASA ruled it “objectified and sexualised women”. * * * ‘Won’t be painless’ – Members of Russia’s parliament have passed a direct appeal to Vladimir Putin to recognise the Ukrainian separatist states of Donetsk and Luhansk. The stage-managed manoeuvre unfolded on Tuesday as Putin claimed a “partial” withdrawal of Russian forces from the Ukrainian border – a claim that is being met with some expert scepticism. Putin has said he will not immediately recognise the two Russian-controlled so-called republics in Ukraine, but he is likely to wield that option as a bargaining chip as he continues to demand security guarantees from the west. Joe Biden has warned the American people he cannot “pretend this will be painless” for them if Russia invades Ukraine and they would feel it at the petrol pump. He said the US would pursue talks “as long as there is hope” for diplomacy. More at our live blog. * * * Reweaving history – A monumental but fragile masterpiece depicting a 17th-century naval battle in silk and wool is the subject of an urgent crowdfunding appeal to complete its conservation. Royal Museums Greenwich needs to raise an extra £15,000 from the public in the next 28 days to save The Burning of the Royal James at the Battle of Solebay, 28 May 1672. The tapestry was commissioned by Charles II and designed by the father and son team Willem van de Velde the Elder and Younger. It depicts the Royal James engulfed in flames with tiny figures pitching themselves into the waves to escape the blazing ship. Cherubim battling with sea monsters decorate its borders. The first phase of conservation was completed last year in Belgium. It is now with specialist conservators in the UK. The appeal is being made through Art Happens with Art Fund, a crowdfunding platform for museums and galleries. Today in Focus podcast: Chagos challenge Over 50 years after they were forcibly removed from their homes, the former residents of Britain’s last colony in Africa are challenging the UK’s claim to the archipelago. Lawyer Philippe Sands is advising the Mauritian government in the legal battle. Lunchtime read: ‘The sober fairy gave me one more chance!’ The 61-year-old scene-stealer and gay icon is back! Glee’s Jane Lynch talks alcoholism, ambition and the return of Mrs Maisel. Sport Pep Guardiola declared Manchester City’s 5-0 demolition of Sporting the “dream result” but insisted his team can play even better after they emphatically put one foot into the Champions League quarter-finals. It was not so positive for the Portuguese champions, who were outclassed in their first Champions League knockout match since 2009. Suddenly there was Kylian Mbappé once again. With 45 seconds left, just when it looked as if victory had evaded a Paris Saint-Germain side that could have won this match against Real Madrid a lot earlier and three times over, he delivered the solution that they had sought all night. After 588 minutes of football and 47 days, the great drought is over. Cristiano Ronaldo, the scorer of more goals than anyone in the history of football, scored a goal, his first of 2022 and his first as a 37‑year‑old. It came against Brighton, and in the process a serial Champions League winner put Manchester United in the position to return to the European elite. In Beijing, at the halfway stage of the women’s Winter Olympics single skating competition, Kamila Valieva leads and goes into Thursday’s free skating programme as a huge favourite for gold. The tragedy for her is that her positive test for a banned substance means the chances of an Olympic medal around her neck hang increasingly by a sequin’s thread. Follow the action on the piste and the rinks at our live blog. Business It seems that no one told City firms that the Bank of England governor thinks workers should resist more pay as part of the fight against inflation. In his own back courtyard, bankers and traders will this week start collecting the biggest bonuses since before the 2008 global financial crisis. One bar worker says the bonuses seem “particularly obscene” this year amid a run on posh champagne. City folk will also be cheering a settling of market nerves with the FTSE100 set to tick up again on better news from Ukraine. The pound is on $1.354 and €1.193. The papers Prince Andrew’s decision to settle his sex assault case takes precedence on most of the front pages. The Mirror says Andrew was under “intense pressure from the very top” to come to an agreement to avoid marring the Queen’s 70th Jubilee celebrations. “Andrew does £12m deal to halt sex claim”, its main headline says, in a deal done “under Queen and Charles’s orders”. The Guardian’s headline is “Prince settles Giuffre sex assault case out of court”. The Sun’s splash headline is “His final disgrace” and it claims the deal is worth up to £12m. “Lifetime exile from royal duties”, a subhead notes. The Mail’s front page has the headline “Duke’s final ‘£10 million’ humiliation”, and above that it says that “Andrew settles with accuser in grovelling climbdown – slamming the door on a royal return for ever”. The Express has “Andrew cuts sex case deal … but there’s no way back” and puts the deal at £12m. The Telegraph’s main story is headlined “Queen to help pay for £12m settlement”. The i has “Prince pays to settle sex assault claims” and the Metro says “Duke pays up at last”. The Times leads with “Biden doubts Russian withdrawal” but it also has the Andrew story and picture on the front: “Duke agrees payout to settle sex assault case”. The Daily Record’s splash is “Andrew’s £12m deal to stop sex claim” while the Yorkshire Post has “Duke settles case on sex assault claim”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendA masterplan for a UK-wide traffic and barrier-free national cycling and walking network (NCN) suitable for “a sensible 12-year-old travelling alone” is to be launched on Wednesday. The ambitious plan would link most settlements of 10,000 people or more, and would make travel easier for wheelchair users, who can face multiple hurdles, while growing and improving the existing 12,786-mile network to reach all corners of the UK. However, there are concerns that at the current rate of progress – Sustrans, the charity that manages the network, will complete 416 miles of improvements by 2023, and has removed just 315 of 16,000 barriers – the goal of a barrier-free network could take another 150 years. The charity owns only 2% of the network, much of which is on public roads, and its latest report into the state of the current NCN shows how far there is still to go. Only a third of the NCN is currently traffic-free. A third (33%) is classed by Sustrans as very poor, 61% good and only 2% very good. Xavier Brice, Sustrans’ CEO, told the Guardian: “The idea of the National Cycle Network isn’t to, for example, replace the need for fully segregated high-volume cycle lanes in cities and towns, or to replace the need for neighbourhoods that are pleasant and easy to move around without a car. This is a strategic arterial core network. “It’s about more than cycling. It’s about mobility scooters, wheelchairs, pushchairs, and in some places, horse riding as well.” Brice said the recent founding of Active Travel England, a non-executive body to deliver on the government’s walking and cycling goals, will mean more consistent funding, as well as enforcement of standards that don’t discriminate against disabled cyclists or wheelchair users. On average, 800 fences and chicanes need to be removed per year to meet a barrierless target of 2040. Brice said that while “in an ideal world, we’d just get the angle grinders and remove them all … people will often believe that they’re there for good reason”, such as to prevent off-road motorbikers illegally using the paths. “The fundamental point that we mustn’t lose sight of is: these barriers are discriminatory; they discriminate against wheelchairs, and mobility scooters and adapted trikes, people out with buggies, and therefore they need to go,” he said. The charity argues that by providing safe, accessible cycling, walking and horse-riding links the NCN can help the UK meet its physical activity, climate change and active travel targets. Usage grew by 19%, or 121m trips, in 2020 as people used green spaces for their daily exercise during the pandemic, with 6% of users in 2020 new or returning to cycling. This despite the fact Sustrans removed 3,733 miles, or a quarter of the network, in 2020 that no longer met the charity’s goals of “paths for everyone”. The masterplan map draws straight lines between settlements of 10,000 or more people, including reconnecting and improving missing sections. The next step, by June 2023, will be to set out a strategy for every mile of the network – including identifying new traffic-free sections and creating “quiet ways” on existing roads, with speed limits of 20mph in urban areas, 40mph in rural areas. This is using a process similar to one produced in identifying new London cycling routes. Kay Inckle, of disabled cycling charity, Wheels for Wellbeing, says: “We welcome the commitments to make the network fully inclusive, accessible and safe for everyone. Of course we would like to see all barriers removed yesterday (and from everywhere, not just the NCN), but the necessary resources and engagement with landowners and local communities make this process slower than is ideal. In the meantime, we are happy to note the other accessibility features which are being rolled out, including improved surface quality, signage and information and an increase in low-traffic routes and we will continue to support Sustrans in achieving their goals.” A department for transport spokesperson said: “There is already excellent progress being made to upgrade the National Cycle Network, which receives significant annual funding from the Department. We will continue to support this wonderful national asset as we build on our commitments to make walking and cycling easier, safer and more accessible for all.” Sustrans calls the NCN a “national asset … on the doorstep of millions of people”, and wants it to be accessible to everyone.Lego is launching a £100m competition to find solutions that will make a positive impact on the lives of children in response to what the toymaker said was a “global early childhood emergency”. The Lego Foundation – the non-profit arm that owns 25% of the Danish company – is offering the 900m Danish kroner (£100m or $140m) prize fund to help children “in crisis” and address the loss of access to services and support, accelerated by the pandemic. Between March 2020 and February 2021, 167 million children in 196 countries lost access to early childhood care and education services, according to the World Bank. The pandemic closed childcare and early education facilities, meaning caregivers took on the sole responsibility for meeting all their child’s developmental needs. “Parents struggling to keep a roof over their heads, stressed, working from home, perhaps managing more than one child, have understandably had less time,” said Prof Paul Ramchandani, a child psychiatrist and the leader of the University of Cambridge’s research into the role of play in child development. “But the most important thing for children’s healthy brain development is engagement with an adult,” says Ramchandani, “so we’re seeing that children’s social and emotional learning has stalled.” Two recent studies found that cognitive development in early childhood was declining, with babies born during the pandemic down 22 points in IQ, and the loss more pronounced for children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. “We’re living in a world where early childhood development is at crisis point,” said Anne-Birgitte Albrectsen, the CEO of the Lego Foundation. “It hasn’t had the investment or the political attention that it deserves. So to mark the Lego brand’s 90th anniversary, we’re making a statement.” Albrectsen hopes that the “Build a World of Play Challenge” fund will attract proposals addressing emergency issues as well as forward-looking projects. “It could be a tech innovation that will improve the health of families with young children, or a plan to make cities safer, greener, more sustainable, more playful; or ideas for reducing stress amongst caregivers; or help with equal access to education for girls, or for children with disabilities, or for neurodiverse children.” The Lego Foundation will assess each entry for impact, feasibility, sustainability and bearing on the community and plan to work closely with successful grantees. Five entries with ideas for the biggest impact will receive grants, with three receiving 200m DKK each (£22.6m) and two awarded 100m DKK each. In addition, the 10 finalists will receive 6.5m DKK each to strengthen their plans and build a team to implement their innovation. Less than 3% of all humanitarian aid is invested in education, with just a fraction of this in early education, said Sherrie Rollins Westin, the president of Sesame Workshop, the non-profit educational organisation behind Sesame Street. “We thought at first that children weren’t as vulnerable to Covid 19, at least in terms of the disease. But as time’s gone on, we’ve seen just how much the pandemic impacts children,” she said. “For a large proportion of the under-fives, it’s all they’ve ever known.” The Lego Foundation is already a significant investor in early childhood philanthropy, according to OECD reports, reaching 62 countries. So why not quietly continue? “Because this is a crisis,” said Albrectsen, “if we give money to the usual suspects, we won’t make such an impact.” Westin said the foundation’s new prize was “audacious philanthropy”. She added: “In the humanitarian space, the attention of Lego’s investment will attract other investment – highlighting the void, and creating an opportunity to make a real difference.” Editor’s note on 18 February 2022: The author of this article is married to an employee at Lego.I am chair of a voluntary organisation, Bromsgrove and Redditch Welcome Refugees. One of our Syrian refugees, brought here under the government’s “vulnerable persons relocation scheme” three years ago, has been let down by Ryanair. Last May he was accepted on a cabin crew training course with the airline, with support from Worcestershire county council. He had previously submitted his Home Office travel document and the council was assured when it checked it that it was valid. Eight months later, the day before the in-class training began, he was told in a two-line email that he was being “removed” from the course as he did not have a full UK passport. By then he had spent more than £1,000 on course requirements, completed the online training, and terminated his contract with his employer. The passport issue should have been obvious when he submitted it in March 2021. Working as cabin crew had been his dream job as he builds a new life. This has been a severe setback and left him in debt. Ryanair has refused to refund him or the council any money, or even apologise. YR, Bromsgrove This is a painful case that could so easily have been avoided. The young Syrian and the council appear to have been confused about the legal status of a Home Office travel document, which looks similar to a UK passport, while the recruitment agency that signed him up has been woefully remiss. Ryanair cabin crew candidates are processed and trained by Crewlink, whose website states that applicants for UK jobs must have an “unrestricted right to live and work in the UK” and be in possession either of a UK passport or settled status. Your refugee has been granted leave to remain, which allows him to live and work in the UK for five years before becoming eligible to apply for indefinite leave to remain. Settled status is only granted to EU nationals. It’s worrying, for all sorts of reasons, that Crewlink didn’t notice the permit he’d submitted wasn’t valid before signing him up. It appears the problem was spotted by a Ryanair employee at the end of October. Ryanair tells me he had confirmed he held a valid EU/UK passport in a virtual assessment in February 2021, but stated that his travel document was invalid for the job requirements. “Regrettably this anomaly was not identified until he started the first day of his training,” it says. “Crewlink should have clarified this issue much earlier.” Crewlink did not respond to requests for a comment. However, within four days of my contact, and three months after ejecting him, it has apologised and offered £240 in “goodwill”. The sum covers less than a quarter of his expenses, let alone the income lost from the supermarket job he gave up and the emotional fallout of the rejection. Worcestershire county council says it has been “liaising with the airline company to understand the reasons behind their decision”. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions‘The Souq El Blat is the heartbeat of the medina,” proclaims Mourad Boughanmi, a medicinal herb seller in this historic quarter of Tunis. Indeed, for centuries, its herbs have sustained the bodies of people living here. Bundles of wild thyme, sage, poppy, garlic and eucalyptus have lined the walls of this shadowy souq for at least 700 years. When Covid-19 entered Tunisia in early 2020, some herbalists say demand for plant medicine grew , with greater numbers wanting to strengthen their immune systems naturally. But customs are changing, and without any state support this trade has become endangered. Five thousand years ago the Sumerians of Mesopotamia documented the health-enhancing properties of wild plants. These early texts articulated the ancient practice of herbalism, where ecology, biology and chemistry meet. In the ensuing millennia, medicinal herbs have been picked and prepared to help with a number of ailments. In the cavernous shops of Souq El Blat, this trade lives on. Chowki El Fout in his herb shop in Souq El Blat Down Rue Bacha Hamba, Tawfiq Ben Yacoub, a herb dealer with a passion for art, history and music, has a shop with the chaotic feel of an artist’s studio: it is filled with flasks, bottles, paintings, bags of old herbs and the sweet smell of incense. He tells his story over the quiet fuzz of a radio as bleating mopeds pass by. As a boy, he would hike with his Libyan father in the green mountains near Benghazi, where he learned about medicinal herbs. He tells how 10th-century Tunisian physician Ibn al-Jazzar advanced herbal medicine in Tunisia and across north Africa. After the Islamic golden age, Ben Yacoub says, medicine stagnated across the Muslim world compared with Europe, because of weaker institutionalised scholarship. “We lost knowledge of this science when we lost the scripts,” he says. “Today our children learn about Ibn al-Jazzar, but as history rather than for scientific training.” Clockwise from top: wild thyme, fresh green almonds, dried esfand, also known as harmal, and garlic. Many of the herbalists apply a holistic, intuitive approach to healing Nearby, in his shop next to the Khilwiya Bilhassan mosque, Chowki El Fout is another herb dealer who sees his vocation as a strand in Tunisia’s rich and complex history. El Fout says it was the Ottoman Turks who really established herbal medicine here, from the 16th to the 18th centuries. He views his practice as part of Tunisia’s heritage. “Just as we have heritage in clothes and language, so we have herbal medicine. It is something we need to keep.” Yet with the rise of pharmaceutical medicine, these herbalists can appear artisanal. They also lack outside support. Being marginalised in this way is frustrating for herbal doctor Samir Ben Youssef, who inherited his father’s business and has treated patients in Souq El Blat for 20 years. Herbalist Samir Ben Youssef, who fears the trade will soon disappear “A hundred years ago, this whole road as far as the mosque [Al-Zaytuna] was lined with herboristes,” he says. “There was a whole chain of people who went to gather the herbs. But young people today don’t want to work in this trade any more. And the elders don’t want to pass on their knowledge. So it will disappear.” There are some younger herbalists, such as Yacine Ben Moussa, who is in his 30s and believes that modernity offers advantages. “Before I only worked with herbs that grow in Tunisia,” he says. “Now, with the internet, I can Google things and order foreign herbs online.” Among the shelves of plant medicines, which include cloves, anise and chia seeds, he shows me a framed certificate of phytotherapy from an academy of complementary medicine. Left: a stall crammed with traditional remedies; right: peacock feathers, hair colour and turtle carcasses for sale As Samir Ben Youssef intimated, however, the reputation of herb dealers may present a problem. They are associated with black magic. Many of the shops sell turtle carcasses as lucky charms. Some allegedly sell crushed iguana and hedgehog carcasses. One gave me a bag of cowrie shells and black nigella seeds to ward off the evil eye. Despite its secularism, spiritual belief still heavily influences Tunisian society. In medicine, while Tunisia has largely adopted western practices, the relationship between spirituality and healing lives on. This broader view of medicine – which herbalists span – has arguably helped to sustain a more holistic, intuitive approach to healing. Left: scents and beauty products on sale near the seventh-century Zaytuna mosque; right: a man outside the mosque As I leave the medina, taking in the smells of leather and jasmine perfume from a succession of shops, I pass the porticoed entrance of the seventh-century Zaytuna mosque. My head is alive with thoughts of the people once employed in gathering the plants and seeds from around the country to heal the sick. They would find wormwood, for diabetic ailments, among the craggy rocks of the southern Jebel Oust mountains. This is important: it reminds people that most medicine is essentially drawn from the living or organic world, a basic fact that may be lost to many consumers of western medication. This is not to discredit western medicine – its importance, for billions of people, is undeniable. But it is to remember that humbling, even sacred aspect of medicine: that much of what heals us can be found in nature.“These prosecutors are rummaging in my closets, hoping to find skeletons. But all they will find are my beautiful clothes.” So says the fictional Marija Popa, adapting an infamous phrase from Imelda Marcos, the former first lady of the Philippines, as she prepares to stand trial for her late husband’s crimes. Popa is the anti-heroine of The Dictator’s Wife, a debut novel by a young British Indian writer, Freya Berry, that explores how tyrants deploy glamorous spouses to soften their image: velvet gloves to their iron fists. The book poses an important question: to what extent should such women be judged as complicit in their husbands’ regimes? They are often survivors of brutal patriarchy and lack genuine political power. But do they, too, have blood on their hands? When we encounter Popa in the novel, she has endured the murder of her husband Constantin, a keen student of Hitler’s charisma who enriched himself at the expense of impoverished Yanussia, a fictional eastern European country. Now the former actor and businesswoman is defiant as she faces a possible conviction and death sentence. The story is narrated by Laura Lăzărescu, a young London lawyer working on the case and starstruck by this enigmatic “black widow”. “It was true: you could not take your eyes off her,” Lăzărescu says. “It allowed her husband to get on with what he enjoyed, namely recruiting foreign ministers as spies, stealing US military secrets and extracting his country’s wealth, while she was everything and nothing. You could not measure her influence on any known scale, but it was there, like dark matter.” The mesmerised narrator wonders aloud about the impact of these women, raising issues not too detached from ones we might ask about our own, real-life dictators’ wives. Why does the media fawn over their closets and philanthropic habits? And does the fixation on the glamour help disguise the darkness of their husbands’ deeds? In a Zoom interview from a bedroom at her parents’ home in Bristol, Berry lists sources of inspiration for the fictional Popa, including Asma al-Assad of Syria, Elena Ceaușescu of Romania and Eva Perón of Argentina among a few. Popa’s trial is partly based on that of Marcos who, after the death of President Ferdinand Marcos, sat in a black mourning dress and collapsed from grief. More counterintuitively during our 50-minute conversation, the author also name-checks US first ladies Jill Biden, Michelle Obama and Melania Trump as inspirations – a cast that implies the dynamics of power, performance and sexism at issue in The Dictator’s Wife are not as unique to autocracies as the west would like to tell itself. “It’s a man’s world but these women are married to the men who make this world. I wanted to explore that duality because they’re at the eye of power but it’s slightly off to the left. They’re not paid. Their role often isn’t clear,” Berry says. “I read a line about Evita [Perón’s nickname]. Was she ‘the standard bearer of the poor’ or was she ‘the woman with the whip’? Probably neither. There are these emblematic names, ‘first lady’ or ‘steel butterfly’ or ‘mother of the nation’,” says Berry – intimating that the very institution of the first lady’s office is made to sugar the image of the “man in charge”. “No one knows what goes on behind closed doors. These are private people in public roles, a personal relationship writ into statesmanship,” Berry clarifies. “I just felt like the last time I really read about a fictional dictator’s wife was probably Lady Macbeth and I thought maybe it could do with a second look.” Now 30 and based in London, Berry worked as a financial and political journalist at Reuters before becoming an author. She reported on the US presidential election in 2016 after joining the Mail Online, where her observations of the rise of Donald Trump with Melania Trump at his side planted the seed of the novel. She recalls: “We’re run by more basic impulses than we like to admit and a beautiful woman standing to one side apparently agreeing with everything you say is usually an asset, whether we like it or not. It does soften someone and whitewash them at the same time.” That seed was watered by a Saturday Night Live sketch, not about Melania Trump but Donald Trump’s daughter Ivanka. It was a parody perfume advert for “Complicit: the fragrance for the woman who could stop all this – but won’t”. Reportedly stung by the bit, which starred Scarlett Johansson, Ivanka Trump told CBS News: “If being complicit is wanting to be a force for good and to make a positive impact then I’m complicit.” Berry quit the newsroom and travelled to eastern Europe for three months of research. She began in Romania and immediately found herself in the midst of a street protest with hundreds of thousands of people calling for the government’s resignation. A visit to the grand Ceausescu Palace in Bucharest conjured ghosts of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu and what was known as a “conjugal dictatorship” before their unceremoniously swift trial and execution. “It’s the personality cults versus the quite brutish figures that they actually were,” Berry remarks. “Elena liked to present herself as a scientist but couldn’t recognise basic chemistry formulas. That didn’t stop her getting an honorary doctorate from the Royal Society of Chemistry; there’s a campaign at the moment to get her stripped of them.” Berry read about another striking example in the Middle East: Asma al-Assad, wife of Syrian strongman Bashar al-Assad, now widely considered a war criminal. In 2011 she was featured on the cover of Vogue magazine with the headline “A Rose in the Desert”, and a fawning profile that began: “Asma al-Assad is glamorous, young and very chic – the freshest and most magnetic of first ladies.” It continued: “She’s a rare combination: a thin, long-limbed beauty with a trained analytic mind who dresses with cunning understatement. Paris Match calls her ‘the element of light in a country full of shadow zones’. She is the first lady of Syria.” Assad appears to have almost a cast a spell on the profile writer, Berry observes. “Personal magnetism and charm is very hard to fight against. You look over here and you don’t look at the extrajudicial killings over there.” It is an intriguing prism through which to consider Melania Knauss, a Slovenian model who came to America married Donald Trump in 2005. With his election a decade later, she became only the second foreign-born first lady in American history – and one of the most divisive. To some, she was a bird trapped in a gilded cage, initially refusing to move to the White House, defiantly pushing Trump’s hand away and deserving of pity, hence the social media hashtag “#FreeMelania”. To others, she was a sphinx-like enabler whose silence was violence: every time she appeared at Trump’s side, she was normalising his assault on democracy. Then there were her strange gestures such as wearing a Zara jacket with “I Really Don’t Care. Do U?” written across the back or unveiling a creepy “forest” of cone-shaped crimson trees for the White House’s Christmas decorations. Both were the stuff of social media meme dreams. Mary Jordan, a biographer of Melania Trump, found her more ambitious and knowing – more like Donald Trump – than is often assumed. Berry comments: “She’s very good at disappearing, even when she’s right there, behind her sunglasses.” She points to an analysis of Melania Trump’s Instagram feed, which found that the only animal picture she posted was of a hermit crab, “which is just metaphorically excellent”, says Berry. Berry adds: “The thing about Melania is she only speaks when she wants to. She says nothing most of the time but it doesn’t mean she doesn’t say anything. She has the pussy-bow blouse and Zara jacket. She does say things when she wants to.” First ladies’ fashion choices are scrutinised in ways that would be unthinkable for their besuited husbands beyond their choice of tie colour. Conversely, not much ink has been spilled on the wardrobe choices of Doug Emhoff, second gentleman and spouse of Vice-President Kamala Harris. At one point in The Dictator’s Wife, Popa insists: “My clothes, my jewellery, they are my amulets. My protection.” The narrator adds: “Protection. Survival. She spoke the language of the hunted, yet who was her hunter?” So can fashion be an armour of sorts? Berry thinks so: “The way that these women can speak is with fashion. It’s patronised and belittled and often rightly dismissed as sexist but it is a language and it is something that is recognised and weaponised by these by these women.” She cites the recent news of Melania Trump launching a non-fungible token (NFT) – a watercolour depicting her eyes. “She called it ‘an amulet to inspire’ and I thought that was actually a perfect representation of Melania’s time in power because it’s a thing, but it’s not a thing. It’s not something you can touch. It’s a representation, an empty emblem, a hollow image, and that felt like a microcosm of her time as first lady,” explains Berry. If you want to look at the influence of a first lady’s style, look no further than Vogue, says Berry, , pointing to the image-making moment of Jill Biden’s first cover on the high fashion magazine. The 70-year-old is seen smiling, wearing a floral-patterned blue dress, leaning against a White House balcony – a wholesome contrast to Melania Trump’s opulent couture. “Same with Michelle Obama on the cover of [her memoir] Becoming,” adds Berry. “She’s in white and she’s got her shoulder bare and she’s leaning in – it’s all this feminine flowing hair, a seductive but maternal, nurturing image, whereas Barack’s obviously in a suit and looking impressive in black and white. So it goes.” In her heyday Popa, we are told, introduced an all-female staff to her factory long before “girl power” became a rallying cry. She palled around with Ronald Reagan, Paul Newman and Saddam Hussein, and was a particular favourite of the British queen. She is described as “a hypnotic blend of Joan of Arc and Imelda Marcos; both goddess and she-devil, princess and tyrant, martyr and uber-bitch”. Did Berry develop sympathy for dictators’ wives in writing Popa’s character? “How do you make your way in a man’s world? If you can’t have power yourself, you have to go adjacent to it. These women are playing for the highest stakes. If they lose power, sometimes they’re executed. It’s this bitter tooth-and-nail fight for survival while also maintaining serene perfection and femininity,” she says. “Imelda’s quite hard not to like, no matter what you think of her pretty dubious politics. So I did feel an unnerving amount of sympathy, which you have to as a novelist: you can’t just go in with that hardheaded, judgmental approach. I wanted my character, Marija, to be ambiguous, this enchanting spider at the novel’s heart. I wanted you to be a bit seduced by Marija at the same time as being probably a bit repelled or afraid of her.” The Dictator’s Wife is published by Headline Review, and is available on Book Depository from 17 February. • This article was amended on 17 February 2022 because the character Marija was misnamed “Maria” in two instances.I discovered I was pregnant unexpectedly, in November 2019. My body quickly began to make it clear that my experience was not going to match society’s dominant image of a glowing, happy and relaxed pregnancy. After almost five months of constant nausea – which felt as if I was trying to hide my worst hangover every single day – I hit what I thought was rock bottom. I turned to Google for an answer to my question: “Is it normal to feel miserable when you’re pregnant?” and realised that I ticked all the boxes for antenatal depression. There was a slight sense of relief that I wasn’t the first person to feel like this. But the problem felt too big for me to deal with, and too jarring with what was expected – happiness and smiles – for me to seek any help. In March, the nausea finally began to subside, and that was enough for me to shrug off my suspicions of depression. I returned to my weekly dance class and was hopeful I could finally get back to being me. Then, on 23 March, we entered lockdown. I spent the next three months seeing virtually no one apart from my partner. I wandered around Tottenham Marshes and managed two garden meet-ups with my mum. In the summer, when I was 35 weeks pregnant, I went to a routine checkup, and was told that my baby’s heart rate was too high. The appointment was at the Tottenham Hotspur stadium – they had moved the antenatal unit out of North Middlesex university hospital to try to limit the spread of Covid infections. The midwives told me they were sending me to the hospital for further checks and there was a small chance the baby would have to be born that day. I offered to walk. They exchanged looks and insisted I go in an ambulance. I always assume I’ll be fine, in all situations. I have been conditioned to believe I am a robust person who can shake off illness, pain and discomfort. I am mixed-race and grew up in a small, predominantly white seaside town and I am 6ft tall; the delicate female narrative was not applied to me. I am strong. I was raised by a strong woman to be a strong woman. So, in the ambulance, while the paramedics were taking my details, I was on the phone to my partner reassuring him: “It’ll be fine and I’ll be home shortly.” I’m sure the paramedics knew I wouldn’t be home shortly. The baby’s heart rate was checked again. A consultant told me the baby was ill, they didn’t know what was wrong and they needed him out as soon as possible. I phoned my partner back and as soon as he said hello, my “strong woman” facade fell to the floor. I couldn’t speak. Tears stuck in my throat. The midwife explained to him that I needed an emergency caesarean section and he should come as quickly as he could. My baby was born within the hour. I saw him for about 30 seconds, and marvelled at the beautifully long eyelashes escaping from his closed eyes, then he was taken to the neonatal ward. Because of Covid, only one parent at a time was allowed to visit the baby. We did shifts; mine were the longest for many reasons that didn’t need to be vocalised. There was no chance our family could come to the hospital, or our home. So I was strong again. We were fortunate: our gorgeous boy came home 10 days later. My health visitor came round two days after, and that was the last I heard from her. No one ever answered when I rang – the number I’d been given for the community midwife always rang out. Covid meant that my personal support network was taken away, but I hadn’t been prepared for the professional support network to disappear too. Then came the third lockdown of Christmas 2020. The limited connection I had with my family and friends was torn away, again. And with it went my ability to cope. By the time February 2021 came around, I felt as if I had nothing left to give. One day, I sat on my bed knowing I had to get up and make the baby some lunch; he was about seven months old, but I couldn’t move. My whole body felt so heavy, I was a dead weight. I knew I had to go to the baby in the living room but I couldn’t get up. I just couldn’t face it any more. The obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) that I had silently lived with since I was a teenager had become unmanageable. I knew I hadn’t been OK for a long time. I hadn’t managed to shrug off my depression because that’s not how it works. I glossed over it, but for the first time in my life it wasn’t working. The feeling was getting worse and it was interfering with my ability to be a mother; it was destroying my relationship with my partner; it was eating away at me. I phoned my GP and explained that I thought I had postnatal depression. I was referred for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). The sessions gave me the space to talk about my OCD for the first time, and opened my eyes to the fact that I have always struggled with anxiety, and that I don’t have to try to gloss over it. They taught me that I had to undo my way of thinking about stressful situations. I had to realise it wasn’t healthy, but harmful. Like any journey of self-learning, it’s a process. Having a baby in a pandemic nearly broke me. I had to learn not only how to be a mother, but how to rebuild myself. But, on reflection, it’s not just me who could benefit from some rethinking. If we as a society are more open to the nuances and realities of pregnancy, women will put less pressure on themselves to live up to unrealistic expectations. They may then seek the help they need sooner. Marshall’s GP referred her to IAPT for talking therapy and CBT. IAPT is a free NHS psychological therapy service offering support for common mental health difficulties such as depression and anxiety, OCD and post-traumatic stress disorder. A GP can refer you or you can refer yourself directly. Help is also available from the Association for Post Natal Illness. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can contact the mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.ukLateral flow tests (LFTs) are an increasing part of our everyday lives. But for some individuals, a persistent clash with their PCR test results is undermining their confidence in the system. The Guardian has been contacted by hundreds of people who have repeatedly tested positive on lateral flow devices (LFDs), but whose confirmatory PCR tests have been relentlessly negative. Amy Lewis’s son Josh, nine, has tested positive on LFTs six times in the past eight months. “The biggest implication was that we were supposed to go to Guernsey to see my family for Christmas, but we decided not to go, because [of the testing requirements]. We couldn’t put Josh through the emotional upheaval of that,” said Lewis, from Bristol. “What has been frustrating is the lack of recognition that this is an issue, or that it might be possible.” Anna Brading of Reading received a warning from her son’s headteacher, because he had missed so much school as a result of having to self-isolate. “We have no way of telling when he actually gets Covid and I have vulnerable family members that we want to see,” she said. Barbara Mann, 35, of Monmouth, believes her LFTs may be detecting some other virus. “There are always two lines, sometimes the second is faint, sometimes strong,” she said. “It seems to depend if I’m feeling under the weather or not.” Scientists stressed that, because no test is 100% accurate, some contradictory results should be expected – but for those with multiple conflicting results, something else could be going on. “It is important that we get to the bottom of this to resolve the uncertainty for the people whose lives are being thrown into confusion by these seemingly erroneous results,” said Dr Kit Yates, a mathematical biologist at the University of Bath. So, what are the possible explanations? Statistical anomaly With so many LFTs and PCR tests being done at the moment, some people will get a run of false positives and false negatives, even though the statistical probability of this is low. “The main reason people may get a mismatch between a LFT and PCR is likely to do with the sensitivity and specificity of the tests,” said Irene Petersen, a professor of epidemiology and health informatics at UCL. “In short, when we have a high prevalence of Covid, as we do right now, it is much more likely that a positive LFT is correct than a negative PCR test is correct.” Nevertheless, the chances of people randomly testing positive on multiple lateral flow tests over long periods of time and without symptoms is extremely low, said Yates. “Consistent false negatives – perhaps due to poor swabbing technique – would be easier to explain away, but not false positives.” Testing errors In October, UKHSA suspended PCR testing at a laboratory in Wolverhampton after an investigation into reports of people receiving negative PCR results after a positive LFT. “Hopefully that isn’t happening again,” said Alexander Edwards, associate professor in biomedical technology, at the University of Reading. Another possibility is that the swab collected for the PCR test was inadequate, or that by the time the PCR test was taken, the infection had gone away. Test cross-reactivity The simplest technical explanation would be some kind of interference in the assay – similar to reports of schoolchildren pouring orange juice or cola on their LFTs to fake a positive Covid test. “It’s thought that acid or acidic solutions can cause the antibodies in the test which detect Covid to clump together, which may appear to give a positive result,” Yates said. “One potential hypothesis, therefore, is that these false positive could be related to people’s diets. This is why the tests suggest you don’t take them until at least 30 minutes after eating.” Cross-reactivity with other circulating coronaviruses could also be a possibility, Yates said. “These are all just hypotheses though. In reality we will need to undertake a more detailed study to understand why some people consistently light up lateral flow tests.” Because different manufacturers use different reagents in their test kits, some kits may be more susceptible to this problem than others, Edwards suggested. Indeed, many Guardian readers claim to only test positive on certain brands of LFT – particularly FlowFlex kits. A UKHSA spokesperson said: “All lateral flow devices used by NHS test and trace have gone through rigorous validation and are proven to be highly effective at detecting Covid-19 in those that are infectious.” Even so, Edwards pointed out that such studies involve testing a certain number of samples under a defined set of conditions: “It does not really reflect the accuracy of the product in real life, and it is not designed to do that.” For any diagnostic test, there are likely to be outliers who produce unusual results: “It could be something as simple as maybe some people have acidic saliva or something like that,” Edwards said. What to do about it Petersen stressed that from a public health perspective, such cases are likely to be so rare as to be inconsequential for the overall validity of the tests. “We should remember that millions of people are testing, and on the whole these tests are working, and people should trust the results,” she said. A UKHSA spokesperson said: “[We] constantly monitor performance of LFDs in use and investigate any issues where appropriate.” They advised people to report any problems with tests via the “give feedback or report harm” section of the gov.uk website.As a student doctor, there are a few well-loved texts that are a little different from our required reading. Sometimes, it’s these books, TV shows or films that inspired us to consider medicine as a career in the first place. Grey’s Anatomy and Call the Midwife, medical dramas with their fingers firmly on the pulse, are common reference points. Call the Midwife has brought complex health and social issues to life, from vaccination programmes to illegal abortions. Grey’s Anatomy depicts the drama of the operating theatre (not least when a patient is brought in with a bomb inside them). And my copy of Your Life in My Hands by Dr Rachel Clarke is dogeared from being passed around so many times. But Adam Kay’s grim, darkly funny memoir about life as a junior doctor, This is Going to Hurt, stands out. I read it when I applied to study medicine, then again in my first year, and then again in November 2021 after my first placement. It was recommended by a friend as a way to get a feel for working in the NHS, and I was left shocked but intrigued. It felt like a friend trying to tell you how horrible and hard their job is, all the while doing their best not to put you off. So when the TV adaptation was released, I knew I’d be hooked. It wasn’t my first time seeing harrowing cases of placental abruptions and cord prolapses play out in a drama – I’ve had my fair share from religiously watching 11 seasons of Call the Midwife. However, seeing it depicted in a time period closer to mine was extremely vivid and, at times, horrifying. It reminded me of the reality of what was to come, and made me wonder if I was ready for it. Being covered in body fluids, faced with staff shortages, working day and night shifts back to back on little sleep – I felt as if I was watching my future, courtesy of the BBC. A future that, to be honest, I was beginning to question. For me, the storyline of the junior doctor Shruti showed the very best and very worst of working in medicine. We see her start off on the back foot as a nervous junior doctor, eager to impress as she builds a friendship with Dr Kay. She faces racism from patients because of the colour of her skin. Yet while her abilities as a doctor grow, she also begins to burn out. The breaking point is a night shift, where we see her turn into a confident doctor in unimaginable circumstances, yet struggle to cope with the intensity of the situation. The picture Kay painted was of a chronically underfunded and understaffed NHS in the mid-2000s. Since then, Covid-19 has added a whole new set of pressures and challenges – from staff giving more to the job then they get back, to watching the government let the NHS down while clapping for them at the same time. So if working in the NHS is full of doom and gloom even without a pandemic, as Kay suggests, why do we dedicate five (or six) years at university, followed by years of training until we reach a senior position? Why do we opt for a career where one day, someone’s life will, very literally, be in our hands – and often under difficult circumstances? It’s difficult to pinpoint what keeps me going, but I know it includes wanting to make my parents proud, and the small moments that make the slog worthwhile. I remember helping out with taking bloods and doing examinations while on my placement at a GP’s surgery earlier this year. I didn’t do anything very groundbreaking as I’m still a second-year student, but the deep sense of satisfaction I felt as I left to get the train home stayed with me for a long time. In This is Going to Hurt, it was the small moments that showed how much NHS staff can make a difference – like the relationship between Dr Kay and an older patient. She has uterine prolapse, which is normally treated in a clinic – but after sensing her discomfort, Dr Kay decided to treat her at the bedside while chatting with her, giving her the privacy and comfort that she wanted. Sometimes, going an extra mile can make a huge difference. I see the same thing when I’m on placement on the ward. Doctors and nurses go out of their way to make patients feel comfortable, from making them a cup of tea to just listening to their worries. I also try not to lose sight of the fact that it’s a huge honour to be studying medicine. At the same time, it’s important to be realistic about what’s to come. Otherwise, it really is going to hurt. Zesha Saleem is a freelance journalist and second-year student doctorThere are three things that make me unreasonably irritated while watching TV. The first is when the person on screen hangs up the phone without any acknowledgment that the conversation is over. Nobody does that in real life. It’s sociopathic! The second is when people put their suitcase on their bed to pack or unpack (this is extremely common on reality TV). “Do you know where that suitcase has been?” I yell at the telly whenever my eyeballs are confronted with such smut. “There’s a 99.99% chance you now have faecal matter and rat urine on your sheets, you filthy animal!” Continuing that theme, my third pet peeve is when TV characters lounge on their beds with shoes on. I’m not a hygiene freak – I’ll happily eat food that has fallen on the floor even after the five-second rule has passed: I’ve always believed that a little bit of dirt a day keeps the doctor away. But I have my limits, and the idea of street shoes on a bed makes me gag. This obviously also applies to real life: I don’t care who you are, you are not setting foot in my house with shoes on. (And before you bring pets into this, let me state for the record that I wash my dog’s paws after a walk: he’s a good clean boy). Anyway, I’m not going to bother going into all the statistics about how there are apparently 421,000 units of bacteria on the outside of an average shoe, or how 93% of shoes will have poo on them after a month of normal use. I am not going to bother trying to argue this topic because, unlike most issues in life, there is no room for debate here: only a barbarian wears outdoor shoes indoors. Clearly, I’m not alone in thinking this. Every week the internet chooses something to get collectively apocalyptical about and last week’s theme, as my fellow Twitter addicts will know, was shoes. You can blame the Wall Street Journal for starting the fuss. They published a piece they clearly hoped would go viral titled Here’s Why I’ll Be Keeping My Shoes on in Your Shoeless Home. To be clear: the article was supposed to be lighthearted. But a key tenet of modern life is that 98% of people do not read beyond the headline (congratulations to you for making it this far), nor do they read between the lines. And, to be fair, the piece was lighthearted in a deliberately irritating way. It was the semantic equivalent of someone jabbing you repeatedly with their index finger while going “jokejokejokejokejoke” and hoping for a reaction. And it certainly achieved that. Someone called it “imperialist” (not me, although that is definitely something I would say). Someone else called it a “hate crime”. And an overwhelming number of people suggested that only a white-presenting person could have written such a piece. Dear white people reading this, I’m going to say this as delicately as possible but I’m afraid you have something of a reputation when it comes to cleanliness. Last year, for example, there was a heated online debate about white people not washing their legs in the shower. This followed on from a debate, instigated by a white person, about whether swimming counts as bathing. Then there are all the rich white celebrities who love boasting about how they don’t like washing themselves (Jake Gyllenhaal), their kids (Ashton Kutcher), or their clothes (Stella McCartney). When you are a non-white person who has to deal with stereotypes about “dirty foreigners” it can be grating, to say the least, to see privileged white people revel in being disgusting. But, you know what? I’m not going into the racialised aspects of hygiene discourse here. Instead, I would like to ask a member of the white community to come forward and condemn the grotesque actions of some of your wearing-boots-inside brethren. If white people want to be good allies, it’s time to take a stand! But not in your dirty shoes, obviously. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistIn his day, the 19th-century fugitive from slavery Moses Roper was a well-known public figure who toured Britain and Ireland telling gripped and shocked audiences about his horrific experiences in Florida. Today he is largely overlooked but, two Newcastle University academics argue, the important story of this fascinating man represents a “lost opportunity” for the British abolition movement to have helped end slavery in the US earlier. Bruce Baker, a reader in American history, said it was surprising how little attention had been paid to Roper, given he was a pioneer. “Historians haven’t really paid a lot of attention to Roper, even though he was the first fugitive slave to lecture in the cause of abolition in Britain and Ireland.” Baker and his colleague Fionnghuala Sweeney, a reader in American and Black Atlantic Literatures, have now published a paper in an academic journal and are working on a full biography of Roper. They aim to rescue him from obscurity, painting a picture of a radical, driven man ruined by the British abolition movement that turned against him. Roper fled enslavement in Florida in 1834 and, fearing for his safety, made his way to Britain, where he was supported by churchmen and abolitionists. They helped fund his education and in 1837 he published the first edition of his Narrative of the Adventures and Escape of Moses Roper from American Slavery. He gave his first solo public lecture at Howard Street Chapel in Sheffield in April 1838. Later that year in Leicester, he told his audience: “You have heard the slave-holders’ story 250 years ago. Now, I think, it is time for the slaves to speak.” He lectured in villages, towns and cities across Britain and Ireland and was generally well received. But not always. The Hampshire Advertiser accused him of exaggerating the violence he suffered for effect saying no one could have inflicted as many lashes as Roper said he received. Roper, bristling, “offered to prove, on the person of the editor … that he could inflict 500 lashes … without resting”. Baker and Sweeney say: “There is no evidence that Roper’s offer was taken up.” By 1839 Roper had updated his Narrative three times, had married a British woman, and appeared to be in a good place. Baker said: “This should have been a prime moment for the British abolitionist movement to refocus its attention on ending slavery in America, with the testimony of someone who had actually experienced slavery to help push this forward, but for various reasons this does not happen.” The main reason was a falling out with a London pastor called Thomas Price, who had expected Roper to become a missionary and teach children in Africa. Price was not impressed by Roper’s career as an author and lecturer, condemning it in one published letter as a “permanent system of genteel begging”. The row had ruinous consequences for Roper, who was pushed to the margins at a critical time. It represented, said Baker, a lost opportunity for the abolition movement. “It does seem that had Roper been supported by the abolition movement in an organised way, there might have been more political pressure to do something about slavery, especially with the power of the British empire behind it. “The few years that are lost are an important time, because events are under way in North America that then, in some ways, overtake the abolition movement.” There could have been “different political opportunities had there been more of a welcome, more of a platform for black abolitionists”. Until Price’s letter, Roper had been earning a sizeable amount from book sales. Suddenly he began to lose money and feared going to prison. The Roper family moved from London to Wales and later emigrated to Canada, before returning to Wales. He died, back in the US, in 1891. ‘I Am Not a Beggar’: Moses Roper, Black Witness and the Lost Opportunity of British Abolitionism is published in the journal Slavery and Abolition.The International Olympic Committee has dismissed claims that a double standard was applied to the US sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson compared with the Russian skater Kamila Valieva after both tested positive for a banned drug. Richardson missed last year’s summer Games in Tokyo after receiving a 30-day ban for smoking cannabis, a drug few believe is performance enhancing, saying she had done so to relieve the pain she felt over the recent death of her mother. Meanwhile on Monday the court of arbitration for sport had allowed Valieva to continue to compete at the Winter Games in Beijing despite it emerging that the 15-year-old had tested positive for the angina drug trimetazidine, a more serious offence. Earlier this week Richardson had suggested that the colour of her skin was behind the discrepancy, saying: “Can we get a solid answer on the difference of her situation and mine? The only difference I see is I’m a black young lady.” Others have suggested that the IOC has been soft on Russia compared with the US. However, IOC spokesman Mark Adams insisted that that was not the case. “You can’t talk about double standards in relation to Russian and American athletes, each case is individual,” he said. “Richardson’s positive doping test was discovered on 19 June, and the result was received before the start of the Olympics. She was suspended for a month. There is nothing in common between these two cases.” In its ruling, Cas said banning Valieva “would cause her irreparable harm” and she took her place in the women’s skating competition, where she leads at the halfway stage. However, Cas’s ruling was solely on whether the teenager can compete again in Beijing and she could still be banned from competition over the failed test in the coming weeks. Adams also confirmed that an asterisk would be placed against the women’s figure skating competition until the conclusion of Valieva’s doping case. “This Games, which has not concluded, concerns an issue in December,” he said. “She is in the centre of a lot of speculation. It must be very tough for her. We, of course, are in touch with the team, her welfare is the team’s first priority, and obviously we are very careful of that but there’s only so much that we can do.” Meanwhile, it has been revealed that Valieva listed two legal substances used to improve heart function on an anti-doping control form she filled out before her drug case at the Olympics emerged. According to the World Anti-Doping Agency, the existence of L-carnitine and Hypoxen, though both legal, undercuts the argument that a banned substance, trimetazidine, might have entered the skater’s system accidentally. Travis Tygart, the chief executive of US Anti-Doping Agency, also warned that such medication was “an indication that something more serious is going on,” adding that “it totally undermines the credibility” of the Russian’s defence. Elsewhere the Ukrainian cross-country skier Valentyna Kaminska has tested positive for an anabolic androgenic steroid and two stimulants, the International Testing Agency said on Wednesday. The 34-year-old, who finished well down the field in her three events, is the second athlete to test positive in Beijing after the Iranian Alpine skier Hossein Saveh-Shemshaki, who was provisionally suspended last week.Marko Štambuk arrived at Belgrade district prison on a Monday morning in late January, only to be told his client was no longer inside. “Immediately I knew something had happened,” he said. Štambuk, a lawyer, had spent the previous Friday frantically obtaining an injunction from the European court of human rights (ECHR) demanding Serbian authorities halt the extradition of his client, Ahmed Jaafar Mohamed Ali, a Bahraini dissident. This banned the Serbian authorities from extraditing Ali until late February, and warned them that doing so would constitute a rare breach of the European convention on human rights. After a frantic search, Štambuk discovered that two Serbian police officers had taken Ali from the prison to Belgrade airport that morning at 4am, and handed him to Bahraini officials on the tarmac. Just after 5am, Ali was flown directly to Manama on a charter flight operated by Royal Jet, a luxury airline headed by a member of the Abu Dhabi ruling family and part-owned by Presidential Flight, the company responsible for transporting members of the Abu Dhabi government. “The shock was intense,” said Štambuk, taken aback by Serbia’s decision to go ahead with the extradition. “He was sent back to Bahrain, I don’t know what will happen to him. If he’s sentenced to life in prison again, I don’t assume he will survive for much longer,” he said. Bahrain considered Ali a high-value suspect, convicting him in absentia on three separate counts of terrorism in 2013 and 2015. Ali, a labour activist, insisted he was innocent in a letter to a Serbian court, writing that he could prove that he was not in Bahrain at the time the alleged offences occurred. “I don’t have any relation [sic] with the case,” he pleaded. Ali’s case shows how anti-democratic regimes are increasingly able to target exiled dissidents, exporting their domestic crackdown on dissent. His extradition also provoked questions about the role of Interpol, amid mounting concerns about abuse of the policing organisation’s “red notice” system intended to flag criminals overseas. The high-profile extradition also represents the first case of its kind under the Interpol presidency of Emirati security official Ahmed Naser Al-Raisi, accused of involvement in torture by former detainees. Interpol is a supranational police force that provides investigational support to member countries, notably through information sharing within its red notice system. Bahrain’s interior ministry described Ali’s capture from Serbia as a “joint operation”, with Interpol, while its public prosecution later said that Ali was “extradited from Serbia with the help of Interpol”. A spokesperson for Interpol emphasised that its general secretariat, based in Lyon, was not informed of Ali’s extradition, and that responsibility for the operation fell to Interpol’s National Central Bureaus, or NCBs, the domestic point of contact for Interpol in each member country. “The return of fugitives and wanted persons is a bilateral matter between member countries and the Interpol general secretariat is not involved in this process,” the spokesperson said. “Interpol’s general secretariat cannot instruct NCBs on whether to arrest an individual or refrain from doing so, whether to engage in extradition proceedings, etc. Such decisions are exclusively within the discretion of the competent national authorities of member countries.” Interpol’s role in Ali’s extradition remains uncertain. “In a clear effort to legitimise this illegal extradition, Bahrain has portrayed this as a cooperative operation with Interpol. This is a serious manipulation and abuse of international policing, which has destroyed the life of a dissident. This case is indicative of the inherently flawed nature of Interpol’s broken red notice system which has for too long been left vulnerable and open to abuse,” said Sayed Alwadaei of the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy. Whatever role Interpol ultimately played in Ali’s extradition, his arrest in Belgrade last November was a direct result of an Interpol red notice against him issued in 2015. Ali soon found himself on a journey through the Serbian court system towards extradition to Bahrain, with few opportunities to convince the Serbian authorities of the risks he faced. “The red notice was the starting point for him, for this entire story,” said Štambuk. “In all cases that I’ve worked on, whether asylum or extradition, the red notice is always the starting point.” Interpol issues an estimated 10,000 red notices each year, according to criminal justice watchdog Fair Trials, who wrote to Interpol’s general secretariat in 2017 to warn that Bahrain’s use of the red notice system to target dissidents “could amount to a violation of Interpol’s constitutional rules on political neutrality and human rights”. Ali’s red notice, issued in 2015, likely occurred up to a year before Interpol established what a spokesperson described as a specialised taskforce to screen requests from member countries before publication. The taskforce comprises a team of up to 40 people, but little else is known about the screening process. When Ali’s lawyers contacted the Commission for the Control of Interpol’s Files (CCF) in 2019, a separate body which reviews data contained in red notices, the CCF told them to “contact the relevant national authorities” in Bahrain concerning accusations against him. “We don’t doubt that the abuses of the red notice system are a minority of the total,” said Bruno Min of Fair Trials. “But if for example Interpol were able to say that they reject a certain number of red notices per year, you could be satisfied that the screening process actually works. At the moment they’re not giving us that kind of information.” The Bahraini authorities accuse Ali of multiple terrorism-related charges, including bomb-making and complicity in the murder of three policemen, including one from the UAE. Rights groups say that similar charges are often levelled at protesters who took part in anti-government protests in 2011, and many such as Ali fled in the intervening years. Three other men also accused of murdering police officials in the same case were executed in 2017, after a trial where UN observers accused Bahraini officials of extracting false confessions using torture. One later labelled the executions “extrajudicial killings” based on an “unfair trial and flimsy evidence”. As Ali’s case moved through the Serbian justice system, he wrote three letters to the courts in an attempt to convince them of the risks he faced if extradited. “I fear for my life and the wellbeing of my family,” he wrote last December, telling them that he had come to Serbia to seek asylum hoping that they would be safe. He was intimately aware of the risks, having described the torture he had endured almost a decade earlier in Bahrain to Human Rights Watch. But the red notice left him unable to shake the accusation that he was a wanted criminal. On 18 January, Serbia’s justice ministry approved Ali’s extradition order to the Gulf state. This came after a year of increasingly warm relations between the two countries, including the first state visit by a Serbian president when Aleksandar Vučić flew to the Bahraini capital Manama in March last year and “committed to further deepening political and economic ties between Serbia and the Kingdom of Bahrain”. “I absolutely believe that the [Serbian] government resolves extradition cases in different ways depending on which countries they’re working with, and not thinking about the life of the person involved,” said Sonja Tošković of the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights, who pointed to multiple international conventions banning extradition to countries where detainees risk abuse. “You’re playing with human life. It’s devastating,” she said. The Guardian understands that the judge overseeing Ali’s case received a call from the Serbian interior ministry the day before his extradition. An interior ministry official told the judge that Interpol understood a temporary injunction had been issued by the European Court of Human Rights, intended to stall Ali’s extradition until late February. The interior ministry official wanted to know how to proceed with the case, and whether they had permission to remove Ali from prison in Belgrade. The judge penned a memo to transfer the decision about whether to extradite Ali to the justice ministry, in line with procedure. Time was of the essence: the private jet to collect Ali had landed at Belgrade seven minutes before the judge received the call, having left Abu Dhabi for Manama and flown to Belgrade the same day. Serbian authorities were later forced to explain to the ECHR why they chose to ignore the interim measure, and violate the convention on human rights. In a statement, they said the extradition went ahead as “a consequence of a short time between the issuance of the interim measure to the time of the extradition of the applicant”. “Serbia and Interpol have effectively destroyed Ahmed’s life with this illegal extradition,” said Alwadaei. “They acted in clear violation of international laws. Serbia breached its international obligations. Once more, Interpol has allowed itself to be abused by an authoritarian regime.” A coalition of rights groups also wrote to Royal Jet to demand answers about why it had allowed airline to be used to extradite a dissident. “We fear that by using your company’s aircrafts to carry out Mr Ali’s wrongful extradition, you may have played an active role in violating the ECHR’s interim measures and article 3 of the UN Convention against Torture,” they said. The Serbian justice ministry, the UAE foreign ministry and Royal Jet did not respond to requests for comment. Bahraini authorities previously told the Guardian that Ali faced no risk of mistreatment on return home, and referred further questions to a recent statement by public prosecutors. This states that “the Public Prosecution sought the death penalty for the accused,” but the court upheld Ali’s three life sentences and added a fourth. Alwadaei and Min are among those calling for Interpol to examine its handling of Ali’s case in order to prevent similar problems in future. An Interpol spokesperson said the general secretariat “is constantly reviewing, assessing and updating its procedures to ensure the greatest level of integrity in the system, and trust in its work”, when asked if the case could provoke any internal review.Stalin was a voracious reader, who set himself a daily quota of between 300 and 500 pages. When he died of a stroke in his library in 1953, the desk and tables that surrounded him were piled high with books, many of them heavily marked with his handwriting in the margins. As he read, he made notes in red, blue and green pencils, underlining sections that interested him or numbering points that he felt were important. Sometimes he was effusive, noting: “yes-yes”, “agreed”, ‘“good”, “spot on”, “that’s right”. Sometimes he expressed disdain, scribbling: “ha ha”, “gibberish”, ‘“nonsense”, “rubbish”, “scumbag”, “scoundrels” and “piss off”. He became extremely irritated whenever he came across grammatical or spelling mistakes, and would correct errors with his red pencil. During his life he amassed a personal library estimated at about 20,000 books, but he also read widely from the collections of friends. The Soviet poet Demyan Bedny complained that Stalin left greasy fingermarks on the books he borrowed. After Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin in 1956, plans to preserve the library in his dacha were abandoned and his books (which included volumes on child psychology, sport, religion, syphilis and hypnosis as well as works by Turgenev and Dostoevsky) were dispersed, so it has become challenging to make an exhaustive study of what he enjoyed reading. Geoffrey Roberts acknowledges that many academics before him have scoured the remnants of his collection, hoping to glimpse Stalin’s true nature or find the “key to the character that made his rule so monstrous”. Roberts finds no smoking guns, but suggests: “By following the way Stalin read books, we can glimpse the world through his eyes. We may not get to peer into his soul, but we do get to wear his spectacles.” In the abstract, Stalin admired writers, telling the Soviet writers’ congress in 1934 that while civil engineers were needed to build socialism, the country also required “engineers of the human soul, writer engineers, building the human spirit”. He insisted that his family and colleagues should be equally well read. He gave his adopted son a copy of Robinson Crusoe, inscribing it with “the wish that he grows up to be a conscious, steadfast and fearless Bolshevik”. He gave his daughter a Short Course History of the Communist Party, commanding her to read it. Svetlana said she never bothered because “It bored me so.” (She later defected to the west). Sergo Beria, the son of Stalin’s security commissar Lavrenty Beria, claimed that when Stalin visited someone from his inner circle he would go into their library and start opening the books, to check for signs that they had actually been read. But he wrote frustratingly little about his views on literature. His huge collection of Russian and international classics – Pushkin, Gogol, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Hugo, Shakespeare – was lost after his death. So his thoughts on Dostoevsky, for example, can only be surmised from casual comments to friends who remember Stalin concluding he was a bad influence on Soviet youth rather than from incisive notes made during his reading. From the works that remain, we discover that he was very interested in history, preoccupied with the lessons of tsarist rule in Russia, ominously obsessed by the reigns of Ivan the Terrible and Peter and Catherine the Great. Most of the surviving annotated works relate to Marxist thought. Perhaps the biggest insight his book collection offers is that he was a diligent, reverential and genuinely enthusiastic reader of works by Lenin. Failing that, he settled for books written by his rivals. When Trotsky’s conclusions annoyed him, he wrote “Fool!” in the margins. Stalin kept no diary and wrote no memoirs, so these scribblings in the margins become invested with greater significance than perhaps they deserve. Roberts warns against reading too much into Stalin’s decision to underline a line attributed to Genghis Khan, “The death of the defeated is necessary for the peace of mind of the victors”, or assuming that the doodled word “Teacher” on the cover of a play about Ivan the Terrible means that Stalin viewed this tyrant as a role model. Roberts is startlingly forgiving towards Stalin, noting: “Given the scale of his misdeeds as Soviet ruler, it is natural to imagine him as a monster, to see him in the mind’s eye furiously denouncing opponents.” Instead he concludes that Stalin was “a dedicated idealist”, “no psychopath but an emotionally intelligent and feeling intellectual”. According to Vitaly Shentalinsky, in his book The KGB’s Literary Archive, approximately 1,500 writers perished during Stalin’s Terror. There is surprisingly little focus on their struggle in this book. Fascinating in parts, its promised insight into Stalin’s true feelings remains elusive. • Stalin’s Library: A Dictator and His Books is published by Yale (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA swimmer has died from “catastrophic injuries” after being attacked by a shark off a beach in Sydney’s south-east. Emergency services were called to Buchan Point in Malabar, off Little Bay Beach, about 4.35pm on Wednesday after reports a swimmer had been attacked by a shark. Marine police crews and surf lifesavers scoured the scene, according to a New South Wales police statement, and “located human remains in the water”. The death is the first fatal unprovoked shark attack in Sydney since 1963. A NSW ambulance spokesperson said by the time crews arrived they were unable to help the swimmer. “Unfortunately this person had suffered catastrophic injuries and there was nothing paramedics could do,” they said. A witness told Guardian Australia the swimmer had been “mauled” by the shark and their blood had coloured the surrounding water red. Another witness, who had been fishing off nearby rocks at the time, told the ABC the swimmer was wearing a wetsuit and was dragged under the surf by a large shark with the attack lasting several seconds. “When he went down there were so many splashes,” the man told the ABC. “It was terrible, I am shaking. I keep vomiting, it’s very upsetting.” Waterloo resident James, 27, arrived at the beach shortly before 5.30pm. Helicopters were circling above the cliffs but people were still swimming. “Everyone was looking around, trying to work out what was going on,” he said. “There were still people in the water. I’m never getting in again – no way.” Little Bay Beach was closed as officers continued to search the area. NSW police said they were investigating the death and liaising with the Department of Primary Industries (DPI). A report will be prepared for the coroner. The mayor of Randwick council, Dylan Parker, said he was “absolutely shocked” by the attack. “Our community adores our coast. To lose someone like this is chilling to the core,” Parker said. The MP for the state electorate of Maroubra, Michael Daley, was at Little Bay on Wednesday evening. He said he was shocked and saddened by the swimmer’s death. He had travelled to the beach from parliament when the news broke. “The community is just shocked by this horrific incident,” he said. “Our thoughts go out to the family involved. This is a beautiful community. The coast is our life around here.” Swimmers were turned away from the beach on Wednesday evening as police and the DPI continued searching the water. Two helicopters, three jet skis and a boat were used to search the bay until dusk. “DPI extends sincere condolences to the family and friends and first responders at this tragic time,” a department spokesperson said. “DPI will continue to work with NSW police and SLS NSW to monitor the area and provide any technical advice and resources if required, including deploying Smart drumlines in the area.” Police will resume the search with divers at sunrise on Thursday. All beaches in the Randwick council area – including nearby Maroubra Beach – will be closed for 24 hours. The decision was made by the council and Surf Life Saving NSW. Beaches farther south could also be closed with a decision to be made overnight. The last fatality from a shark bite in Sydney was in 1963 with the person recorded as “standing in the water”, according to Taronga’s Australian Shark Incident Database. The last fatality of a person swimming was in Sydney harbour in 1955, a spokesperson for the database said. Both attacks involved bull sharks. The most recent fatality nationally was in Western Australia in November 2021. Last year there were three unprovoked shark fatalities across the country down from seven in 2020. Also on Wednesday, a tagged bull shark was detected at Bondi Beach north of Little Bay. There are 51 shark nets running from Newcastle north of Sydney to Wollongong south of the NSW capital. The nets do not stretch from one end of a beach to the other and are not designed to create a total barrier – rather they are meant to deter sharks from establishing territories, the DPI states on its website. Critics say the nets are old technology that catch too many non-target animals. The latest annual report on the NSW nets found 40 of the 375 animals found dead or alive in the mesh were target species: white, bull and tiger sharks. It was more common to find southern eagle rays (95), smooth hammerheads (60) and bronze whalers (38). While most rays were released alive the vast majority of other animals caught were dead by the time they were found. NSW also has 35 smart drumlines fixed with monitors that alert fisheries contractors when a shark is hooked – in theory allowing them to arrive and release the sharks.The man wrongly identified as Cleo Smith’s alleged kidnapper by the Seven Network has had a victory in the Western Australia supreme court, after suing the network for defamation. On Wednesday the WA supreme court chief justice, Peter Quinlan, read out consent orders in favour of Terrance Flowers, a 27-year-old Nyamal man from the town of Karratha. Flowers sued the network in November after his photograph was mistakenly used in Seven’s broadcasts, an online article, a tweet and a Facebook post about the arrest of a different man. The man arrested has a similar name to that used by Flowers on Facebook where he used his mother’s maiden name, Kelly. The social media posts contained the heading “PICTURED: the man accused of abducting Cleo Smith”. After it became aware of the mistake, Channel Seven issued an apology stating the images had been removed “promptly”. But Flowers launched legal action against the network with lawyers saying he had been “gravely injured in his character and reputation” after the error. In a statement at the time his lawyers said the network’s error had made him “the subject of hate around the nation and the world and resulted in him being hospitalised with a severe panic attack”. Flowers was represented by the high-profile defamation barrister Sue Chrysanthou. But the case was settled on Wednesday, with Quinlan reading out consent orders in court in Flowers’ favour. The judge made no orders on costs, and in a statement Kelly’s lawyers said the case had “otherwise settled on confidential terms”. Flowers, who appeared in court on Wednesday via video link told WA Today he was “glad that it’s all over and it was settled”. Flowers, who also goes by his mother’s maiden name Kelly, had the judgment read out in court after the consent order was agreed to between his lawyers and the network. In a statement Flowers’ legal team, O’Brien Criminal and Civil Solicitors, said he was “looking forward to getting on with his life and enjoying time with his wife and baby son”. “The judgment was entered pursuant to consent orders agreed to by the parties,” his lawyer’s statement read. “The judge noted that the proceedings had otherwise settled on confidential terms. The judge congratulated the parties on reaching a resolution.”“The other day, the Wordle answer was MOUNT, which got me thinking – is Mason Mount the only footballer (present or former) whose first and second name are recognised five-letter words in the dictionary and therefore legitimate potential answers in Wordle?” asks Joe Hutton. Far be it from us wanting to publicise a rival’s game, but never let it be said we are not here to serve you, readers. To the best of our knowledge, Wordle works from a list of [spoiler alert] these 2,315 words, which scuppers a number of your suggestions – many of which are wholly valid dictionary suggestions (although it now also seems likely the NYT’s list is swiftly changing). Therefore, and deep breath … “There’s the former England goalkeeper Frank Swift,” writes Chris Page, kicking us off with a strong one. “The former SFA chief executive Gordon Smith’s son Grant Smith at the likes of Swindon, Sheffield United and HJK Helsinki. The former Cambridge and Sheffield Wednesday stalwart Robin Hardy also qualifies. In the women’s game, I also came across the brilliantly named Northern Ireland Under-19 international Holly Otter.” Chai from Atlanta reports that, “despite common five-letter words like james, smith, green and brown being Wordle-approved, searching for footballers whose first and last names fit the bill wasn’t as easy as it seemed”. That hasn’t stopped Chai from pointing out multiple offerings of James Smith, James Brown (there are again a number of instances), James Hicks (and another), and the Arsenal and England legend Kelly Smith. Richard Hirst reveals the lengths that readers are having to go to: “Fulham’s Roger (yes, I sacrificed a go to make sure it qualified) Brown scored 12 goals, the most in a season by a Fulham defender, in 1981-82, including the goal in our final game against Lincoln which got us promotion to the then Division Two. Captain, leader, legend.” Tim Hoult weighs in with Harry Baker and Rocky Plaza, while Nigel Stubbs has a Harry Smith or two for us. Throw Sheffield United’s Billy Sharp in the mix too, along with Huddersfield Town’s record appearance-maker Billy Smith, courtesy of Richard Askham. And now for some extras that we managed to dig out: Billy Askew, James Askew, Frank Baker, James Baker, James Beech, Harry Beech, James Birch, Grant Black, James Bloom, Frank Booth, James Brace, James Broad, Harry Broad, James Budge, Harry Budge, James Crane, Harry Crook, Roger Cross, Billy Drake … … James Ferry, James Frost, Harry Frost, Frank Frost, James Glass, Frank Green, Harry Green, James Green, James Hatch, Billy James, Frank Large, James Leach, James Lodge, Frank Lynch, Frank Marsh, James Marsh, James Mason, Harry Moody, Frank Noble, Grant Noble, Harry Noble, James Parry, James Perch … … James Price, Billy Price, Frank Sharp, James Sharp, Frank Shell, James Smart, Billy Smart, Harry Smart, Billy Stack, James Stark, Billy Stark, Billy Steel, Harry Stone, James Sweet, James Young, Billy Young and Grant Young. And doubtless more. I’ll be your long-distance loanee from … “Aaron Connolly has gone on loan from Brighton to Middlesbrough (314 miles away),” notes Chris Sloley on Twitter. “What is the greatest distance someone has gone for a temporary switch within the same country?” Offrande Zanzala gets us started, with his current loan spell at Exeter City, 326.8 miles away from parent club Barrow. Note, we’re using the AA route planner. “Carlisle United have had a couple players on loan from Brighton, most recently Jeffrey Monakana in 2015,” adds Andrew Ferguson. “That’s 366.3 miles.” Plymouth Argyle are also a safe bet to feature somewhere in this answer and Tom Aldous is right on cue. “Last season Argyle loaned Kell Watts from Newcastle, some 408.6 miles if you were to drive it,” he mails. However, this is all small beer compared to elsewhere around the world. “Nicholas Sorras is currently on loan from Sydney Olympic to Perth Glory,” flags Tim Filippi. That’s the good stuff, just the 2,431.4 miles. Still, Gianfranco Facchineri’s 2020 loan from Vancouver Whitecaps to Atlético Ottawa was worth 2,708.1 miles (thanks, Noah Wheelock). But Russia trumps this, especially when SKA-Khabarovsk come to the table. “They currently play in Russia’s second tier and are on the far east side of the country,” notes Chris Page. “They’re around 2,500 miles from their nearest divisional rival, yet barely 600 or so miles away from North Korea. And they currently have a goalkeeper, Sergey Samok, on loan from PFC Sochi. A drive along the most direct roads would work out at 5,695.5 miles.” Latest comebacks to win (2) Last week, we looked at the teams who had come from behind to win later than the 95th minute. Here’s a splendid addition … “Sixth-tier Clydebank (from the West of Scotland League) featured in the Scottish Cup this year for the first time since reforming, having obtained their SFA licence,” writes Stephen Farrell. “A great run ensued, knocking out SPFL teams Elgin City (League Two) and Clyde (League One). In the fourth round they faced Annan Athletic (League Two). The game went to extra-time and Clydebank were 3-2 up in the 119th minute. Sadly, too much for the legs and Annan came back with 119th- and 123rd-minute goals to turn it around. Great run though. Highlights here (Clydebank’s second well worth watching).” Knowledge archive “Recently on Fifa, I managed to guide Real Zaragoza to a 2-1 home win against Barcelona with just nine men,” boasted Kevin Leonard back in 2016. “This got me wondering, what is the most red cards a team has ever had in a single game and still gone on to win?” In 2005 Grêmio, under the future Brazil coach Mano Menezes, won an astonishing promotion play-off against Nautico despite being reduced to seven [SEVEN – Knowledge vidiprinter] men when four of their players were sent off. The only goal was scored by future Manchester United midfielder Anderson, while Nautico missed two penalties. You can read more about it here. Can you help? “Back in the 2016-17 season, Reading defeated Ipswich 2-1 at home,” writes John Smith. “I only remember this because all three goals arose from penalties. So, excluding the obvious example of goalless games that go to penalty shoot-outs, what’s the highest scoring match where every goal scored came from the penalty spot?” “In Newcastle’s recent win over Everton, Newcastle’s Jamaal Lascelles got the assist for an own goal by Mason Holgate, only to find his own net moments later from Holgate’s assist. Has this happened before?” wonders Jussi Kanner. “In a recent Serie A match, Juventus beat Verona 2-0 with both goals being scored by new signings and debutants, Dusan Vlahovic and Denis Zakaria,” notes Bogdan Kotarlic. “I suppose that there have been cases when more than two new signings have scored in their same first match for the new club?” “Chelsea’s Club World Cup final win over Palmeiras started a run of five games in five different competitions,” mails Barry Kitchin. “The next four fixtures are in the Premier League (Crystal Palace), Champions League (Lille), Carabao Cup (Liverpool) and FA Cup (Luton). Can any beat team this?” • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.In 2013, Joan Martin’s heart stopped. She was having major surgery due to a life-threatening aneurysm. After hours in the operating theatre, and seven and a half units of blood, doctors managed to save her life. She believes that she was meant to survive because she had important work to do: to protect and advocate for her son, Osime Brown, 23, who is autistic and has the learning age of a child of six or seven. After she recovered, Martin, 55, continued to pour all her energy into looking after him in the family home in Dudley, West Midlands, as she had always done. “I’m a Christian, I have faith and I’m a fighter,” says Martin. But she had no idea of the scale of the battles that lay ahead. Her world collapsed on 3 August 2018, when Brown was convicted at Wolverhampton crown court of robbery, attempted robbery and perverting the course of justice in relation to the theft of a mobile phone. Brown and a witness, who were friends of the victim of the theft, insisted he was innocent. To his mother’s further horror, he was also told he would face deportation to Jamaica – a country he left at the age of four – at the conclusion of his prison sentence. Martin says she did her best to support Brown while he was behind bars, but his vulnerabilities meant the harshness of prison life was particularly challenging. “I said to Osime: ‘I will fight with every breath in my body to keep you safe.’ But, in prison, he experienced racist abuse, restraint and violence. He suffered from anxiety and depression and began to self-harm,” says Martin. “Yet Osime was graceful throughout, even though he could not fight back because he did not know how.” A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said the department was unable to comment on individual cases. Martin was certain that being exiled alone to a place Brown had no memory of, with no family there to support him, would kill him. He was unable to grasp the implications of the move across continents that was about to be imposed on him, asking her: “What number bus will I need to catch, Mum, to come and visit you in Dudley after they’ve sent me to Jamaica?” It wasn’t until he was assessed prior to his threatened deportation that the extent of his learning disabilities was fully realised. Along with autism he was diagnosed with anxiety disorder, depressive illness, post-traumatic stress disorder and unstable personality disorder. “My overall impression of Osime is that he is a deeply sad and depressed young man who feels that he has been treated unjustly,” the psychologist wrote. Although Martin was desperate to halt Brown’s deportation, at first she did not campaign publicly, apart from posting updates on Facebook about her son’s case for family and friends. But then Emma Dalmayne, herself autistic and CEO of the charity Autistic Inclusive Meets, heard about the case. She shared Martin’s concerns about what was likely to happen to Brown if he was forcibly removed from the country and launched a petition in the summer of 2020 calling for the deportation to be halted. Within a year it had attracted 429,000 signatures. Fifty-five MPs supported the campaign to allow Brown to remain in the UK with his family. In the autumn of 2020, Free Osime Brown rallies were held. Martin rose to the challenge of spearheading the fight against Osime’s deportation and was thrilled to see so much public support for her son. She took every opportunity to speak out about the case in the media. As the campaign continued to snowball, more than 100 public figures, including the former archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams, the Labour peer Alf Dubs and the poet Benjamin Zephaniah wrote to the home secretary calling on her to stop the deportation of the vulnerable young man. How did Martin make the leap from a quiet behind-the-scenes advocate for her son to a vocal public campaigner? “I hate injustice,” she says simply. “I have some deep scars myself. I fled domestic violence and I know what it’s like to feel you have nobody on your side. I know how it feels to be pushed from pillar to post and to be bullied.” Martin came to the UK from Jamaica in 2001 and trained as a nurse. In her early life on the Caribbean island, she tended pumpkins and bananas and helped to rear goats. Her grandparents had arrived in the UK in the 1960s as part of the Windrush generation. Her grandfather worked in a coalmine and for a bus company. “I feel that the racism and hostile environment experienced by the Windrush generation is being repeated for Osime, a Windrush descendant,” she says. Brown, the youngest of Martin’s five children, spent the first years of his life with his father in Jamaica. But he moved to join his mother and siblings in Dudley before he started nursery and then primary school. The expert reports written prior to his planned deportation found that both his schools and the local education authority had failed to carry out statutory assessments that could have identified his difficulties and put appropriate support in place. Martin says that, despite the challenges he faced, her son has many talents and is very empathic. “He is very artistic and won medals for basketball at school. He doesn’t like to see anyone cry. I remember he saw me crying once and picked up some paper to wipe my tears away.” At the age of 16, to Martin’s horror, social services agreed to take Brown into care after he said he thought that his mother was too strict with him. He wasn’t happy with the way she put her foot down when he wanted to hang out on the streets with friends until 11pm. “Osime was failed by the system, which did not give him the right support,” says Martin. “Being in care removed him from the structure I had given him, destabilised him and led to him ending up in destructive company. My son is vulnerable. I think he was maliciously manipulated.” His time in care was a bleak period for Brown and his family. “When Osime went into care, the light in him went out. He became emaciated. He’s very tall but sometimes he would come and sleep in my lap all day like a baby,” says Martin. Of social services’ decision to place him in care, the psychologist who wrote an expert report to provide evidence about why he should not be deported said: “Social services were not aware of the severity of Osime’s difficulties and appear to have worked on the assumption that he was capable of making his own decisions in a rational way. There is a strong prima facie case that Osime has been failed by the statutory services in the UK.” Brown was moved from one care placement to another – Martin believes there were at least a dozen arrangements made for her son by social services. “Everything was against Osime from the start,” she says. “Kids can be very mean and he was forced to take the blame for things he hadn’t done.” When asked for a comment on the case, councillor Nicolas Barlow, cabinet member for health and adult social care at Dudley council, said: “Osime Brown has an allocated social worker and work is ongoing to determine an appropriate package of support. The council cannot comment further on individual cases.” The whole family were overjoyed when the case was reviewed and the Home Office decided to drop the deportation order. But the struggle continues. Martin, her husband and Brown’s older siblings are now campaigning to get his conviction overturned, to right the perceived wrongs meted out to him by education officials and social services over the years, and to get appropriate support in place for him so that he can try to move forward with his life. “My focus is to clear Osime’s name,” says Martin. “We are committed to making a difference for autistic people, particularly those who are neglected, misunderstood and punished by the system. Someone has to be there to speak on their behalf and be an advocate where their rights are concerned. We are setting up Fobwell Spectrum, an organisation to help autistic people, their families and guardians to fight back and overcome difficulties that the system presents.” Despite the many battles Martin has endured in her life, she is a woman who exudes love and positivity. “Osime is surrounded by love,” she beams. One of the first remarks she made after receiving the news that Home Office officials were abandoning the deportation was an expression of love for those working in the department, something officials are unlikely to be used to: “Our fight shows you should never give up. The Home Office has made the right decision to allow Osime to stay with his loving, caring family. I will respond with love because we know no other way. Thank you for allowing my son to stay in his home and in the only country he has ever truly known. We are grateful. This goes to show that you can respond in a dynamic and just way. God bless you.” Martin was equally emotional when addressing her son’s many supporters. “Because of you, Osime will remain in his home,” she said. “I have a restored trust in humanity. You have demonstrated what love looks like.” Sadly, Brown’s story is not unique. There have been many cases, especially those involving young black men, where learning disabilities or mental health problems have been misinterpreted as bad behaviour. Failure to provide appropriate support early on can lead to the disastrous spiral he experienced. Despite the victory, daily life continues to be challenging for Martin and her son. “Osime hardly ever leaves his bedroom and he doesn’t speak. He’s still struggling to cope. He’s afraid of the world,” says Martin. But the continuing public support for her campaign to overturn her son’s conviction keeps her going. “I’m fighting for Osime but I’m also fighting for others. I don’t want to see anyone else go through what we have been through. My child was punished by the same system that failed him. They did him wrong. Now is the time to let him live in peace.”Simone Inzaghi made no pretences after his team were paired with Liverpool in December’s redraw for the Champions League last 16. “They were top of the list of teams I would have preferred to avoid,” said the Internazionale manager. “But we’ll try to arrive at that match in the best way possible.” It was striking to hear such a frank acknowledgement from a man whose ability to look on the bright side has been a defining characteristic of his tenure. Even to accept the Inter job last summer required optimism where his predecessor could find none. Antonio Conte left after steering the club to a first league title in 11 years, convinced that such success would be unsustainable. Inter were embarking on a drastic cost-cutting exercise, after posting losses of more than €245m in their accounts for 2020-21. Inzaghi knew before accepting the job that Achraf Hakimi would be sold, but not that Romelu Lukaku would follow. The Belgian led the team in goals and assists last season. Hakimi scored seven times in Serie A and set up eight more from right wing-back. Supporters who had cheered the club president, Steven Zhang, during title celebrations hung banners outside the club’s headquarters demanding that he “take responsibility or leave our city”. Bookmakers installed Juventus, with Massimiliano Allegri back on the bench, as favourites to win Serie A. Inzaghi got on with making the most of what he had. Edin Dzeko was signed at his request, a 35-year-old free transfer from Roma to replace a striker sold for €115m. An inspired choice. Inzaghi shared Conte’s preference for a 3-5-2 – the system he had used at Lazio – but had ideas on how to use the shape differently, encouraging his team to hold the ball more and rely less on quick transitions. Where Lukaku had often been a bulldozer for Inter, clearing his way through opposing defences to score or apply the final pass, Dzeko plays more with his back to goal, bringing others into play. He found instant understanding with another free signing, Hakan Calhanoglu, only too happy to run on from midfield and receive the striker’s lay-offs. Others, too, have thrived. Ivan Perisic, whose adaptation to left wing-back was a key component in Inter’s title win under Conte, has found his way more often into scoring positions under Inzaghi. The Italy midfielder Nicolò Barella has matched his seven league assists from last season with three months to spare and is shooting twice as often. Whenever any player is asked about the difference between the managers, the same word recurs: “libertà” – freedom. Where Conte drilled specific movements and passing patterns repeatedly, Inzaghi has encouraged them to make more of their own judgments within a tactical framework. For some players, that shift has been transformational. Alessandro Bastoni, who typically starts on the left of Inter’s back three, was already on the way to emerging as one of Italy’s most promising talents but under Inzaghi has found the confidence to roam higher up the pitch, allowing Perisic to push on and to support the attack himself. Against Lazio in January, Bastoni opened the scoring with a side-footed finish from 25 yards. He then set up his defensive partner Milan Skriniar for the winning goal with as good a cross as any winger could provide. Despite some growing pains, Inter made it to Christmas in first place, four points clear of Milan and seven ahead of Napoli in third. Crucially, Inzaghi also got Inter through to the Champions League knockout phase, something Conte never managed. Inter have not reached this stage of Europe’s top competition in a decade. Can they go further? Inzaghi’s hope that they might arrive for the Liverpool tie in ideal shape has not come to pass. Inter fell off the top of the Serie A table on Sunday for the first time since early December. Their title defence is hardly blown – they have a game in hand that could vault them back into first – but the failure to win any of three matches against Atalanta, Napoli or Milan in the past month is troubling. The two-game European suspension issued to Barella for lashing out at Real Madrid’s Éder Militão is a heavy blow, likely obliging Inzaghi to draft Arturo Vidal – who has started one league game all season – into midfield against Liverpool. Up front, Lautaro Martínez is going through a dry run, with one goal in his past nine appearances. Bastoni will be playing his first game back from an ankle injury, as he lines up opposite Mohamed Salah. Inzaghi knows the scale of the challenge but took the opportunity in his pre-game press conference on Tuesday to remind reporters that: “We don’t start the game already beaten. We have a top club in front of us but every match starts at 0-0.” This was not the last-16 tie Inzaghi wanted. An underpinning success of his tenure at Inter so far, though, has been to find reasons to believe in his team’s possibilities, even where others could not.That is where we will leave the live blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: Simon Holmes à Court, energy investor and Climate 200 director, told the National Press Club that ‘politics is broken.’ The government and the opposition clashed over aged care again today, with both parties contending the number of deaths at the facilities. Senior Dfat official Justin Hayhurst said China ‘seeks to exploit’ social divisions. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, took a swing at whoever seems to be leaking embarrassing details to the media. All elective surgery across public and private hospitals can resume by the end of the month in Victoria, the state government said. NSW recorded 10,463 new cases and 27 deaths, Victoria recorded 8,149 new cases and 18 deaths, Queensland recorded 6,596 new cases and 12 deaths, WA reported 128 new cases, SA recorded 1,624 new cases and four deaths, NT recorded 1,050 new cases and 3 deaths, the ACT recorded 594 new cases and Tasmania recorded 625 new cases. Updated vote counting in the blue-ribbon Liberal party seat of Willoughby has put the seat on shaky ground for the government, with the count still under way. The Victorian government has entered exclusive negotiations to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie is channelling his inner Jacqui Lambie in the visa cancellation bill debate, shouting that he’s had a “gutful” of both major parties. Wilkie noted the government already has the power to cancel visas, describing the bill as a “blatant attempt by the government to pander to racism and xenophobia”. Wilkie said it was “completely and utterly unprincipled” to vote for the bill, attacking Labor as “weaklings in the opposition who will go along for the ride”. Greens leader, Adam Bandt, also blasted Labor for not voting against the bill in the House. Liberal Melissa McIntosh obviously didn’t get the memo that Labor is supporting it, and has brought an old speech in about the “Labor-Greens alliance” voting against deporting “foreign criminals”. Just on the shark attack, a witness has spoken to the ABC, saying they were fishing just off the rocks of Buchan Point, and witnessed a shark drag a swimmer underwater: When he went down there were so many splashes. It was terrible, I am shaking, I keep vomiting, it’s very upsetting. Parliamentary debate has returned to the strengthening character test bill, which Labor has indicated it will not oppose in the lower house. Labor’s assistant shadow immigration minister, Andrew Giles, said: This need not be another example of Morrison government seeking to divide Australians. We have shared concerns on domestic violence ... if we can speak as one, this is important. This bill fails to recognise the complex nature of family violence … and may increase reluctance of reporting family violence offences, if their visa can be cancelled as a consequence. Giles suggested the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, “doesn’t look like he’s serious when it comes to these issues”. Giles revealed Labor will move amendments in the Senate to deal with the bill’s retrospectivity and soften its impact on New Zealand. He insisted Labor’s position shouldn’t be “misrepresented” – it remains willing to improve the bill. Liberal MP Julian Simmonds says the bill is needed because “activist judges” are taking into account the fact someone should be deported when sentencing offenders. He said Labor had told “a bit of a fib” by pretending to support the bill when it plans on amending it in the Senate. New South Wales police are investigating a fatal shark attack that occurred at a beach in Sydney’s east on Wednesday afternoon. Officers were called to Buchan Point in Malabar about 4.35pm on Wednesday following reports a swimmer had been attacked by a shark. Marine officers who arrived at the scene later “located human remains in the water”, a police statement said. Little Bay Beach has been closed as officers continue to search the area. Police are liaising with the Department of Primary Industry to investigate the death of the swimmer with a report to be prepared by the coroner. Earlier on Wednesday, a tagged bull shark was detected in Bondi. Labor has called on the Morrison government to explain whether a pilot program for regional conservation planning is an attempt to bypass the parliament and reduce the government’s role in environmental decisions. It follows this Guardian Australia story today, which revealed the government is considering whether a little-known section of national environmental laws could be used to to allow developments in some parts of the country to proceed without the need for federal approval. Under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act, the environment minister may create a regional plan, and a section of the Act – known as 37A – allows the minister to declare certain developments are exempt from the need to gain federal approval if covered by a regional plan. Documents released under freedom of information laws to Guardian Australia reveal a key objective of a pilot regional plan announced in last year’s budget is to establish that actions taken in accordance with a section 37A declaration – such as mining or property development or infrastructure construction – would not require separate federal environmental approval. The move could give the government an alternative pathway for reducing its role in environmental decision-making while legislation to hand powers to the states and territories remains blocked in the senate. Labor’s environment spokesperson, Terri Butler, says the environment minister, Sussan Ley, should explain whether the pilot is a genuine program or an attempted shortcut. The Morrison-Joyce government has had nearly a decade to come up with environmental reform, but rather than coming to the table with a serious response to the Samuel review [of national environmental laws], there are reports the government is resorting to shortcuts. The Greens environment spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young, accused the government of looking for a loophole because its legislation had stalled in the senate. Everyday Australians will be disgusted to discover that rather than protecting our environment, the Liberal National party is spending public money finding sneaky ways so big corporations can destroy our native bushland and clear more koala habitat without question. Ley’s spokesperson has said the $2.7m announced in the budget for a pilot regional plan is to “improve environmental protection, address the challenge of cumulative impacts and build greater certainty for all parties”. The religious discrimination bill was dropped after five Liberal moderates crossed the floor on LGBTQ+ student protects, but the recriminations have continued. The Australian Christian Lobby national director, Wendy Francis, told Guardian Australia: Labor and the moderate Liberals are the reason it didn’t go through, but it should’ve come on much earlier ... it should’ve been a bipartisan discussion the whole time, then it wouldn’t have got to the point of untenable amendments being made. The ACL is opposed to the amendment that passed because it thinks removing section 38(3) from the Sex Discrimination Act would prevent schools setting codes of conduct about their religious beliefs of gender and sexuality. But Francis also has criticisms of the Morrison government’s handling: It was not a top priority. Covid interrupted this term of parliament, but it didn’t stop other bills. If you have a will, there is a way ... At the beginning I didn’t see it as a political manoeuvre. But by now – it has to be. It’s inevitable that it will be. The biggest problem is that it was out of time. If you introduce and vote on it at the 11th hour with an election weeks or months away – of course it’s political. Guardian Australia understands Christian Schools Australia has been lobbying for a last-ditch bid to revive the bill in budget week – but the government insists it’s not happening. CSA’s director of public policy, Mark Spencer, said it was still “theoretically possible” and he is “hoping for a miracle”. Spencer said: We’re hopeful it’s not game over. It would be and incredible shame if we drop it now when we came so close. The notion that Equality Australia described it as a win – I’m not sure it’s a win for anyone. It’s not a win for people of faith, with no religious discrimination bill passed. And not for kids in faith-based schools after public debate saying they’re liable to be expelled, with all the fear that creates. There’s no way to resolve that without a religious discrimination bill. The industrial relations minister, Michaelia Cash, has told a parliamentary hearing this afternoon that a move to regulate the gig economy would have the effect of “wiping it out.” Cash said the government had allocated funding to the Bureau of Statistics to investigate the extent of the impact various platforms are having on the Australian workforce. But she also added that moving too quickly to regulate the industry would have a negative impact. To just go in and regulate something like you [want to] do could possibly have the effect of wiping it out. What you want to do is step in and regulate a part of the economy that presents, in particular, significant opportunities in relation to flexibility for people … and actually close that part of the economy down. South Australia has recorded 1,624 new cases overnight, and sadly reported 4 deaths in that time. That is a jump of 486 cases compared to yesterday, attributed to an increase in the number of PCR tests conducted. The deaths include two women and a man in their 80s and a man in his 60s. There are now 227 people in hospital, including 19 in intensive care. An interesting conversation right on ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, with Labor Senator Murray Watt asked if he could see the migration amendment (strengthening the character test) bill passing into law: I suppose that’s up to the Government ... we have said that we will support the legislation in the house so that it can get to the Senate and we can consider amendments that the Government is now making, or talking about making. We have said consistently for years that we’re happy to sit down with the Government and work this out on a bipartisan basis, once they can identify the problem that we need to fix. The reality is the only reason this is coming out of the woodwork now is because government is desperate to find wedges. They did this last week with the religious discrimination bill before it blew up in their face. Western Australia has recorded over 100 new cases for the first time since the pandemic began, reporting 128 new cases overnight. 115 of the cases were locally recorded cases, with 13 being travel-related. It’s over double the number of cases reported yesterday, with the state now dealing with 444 active Covid cases. Good afternoon, and a quick thanks to Tory Shepherd, for another epic shift this morning. Mostafa Rachwani with you today, to take you through the rest of the day’s news. I am done and dusty. Dusted. Whatever. It’s been another wild ride, and my sane(r) colleague Mostafa Rachwani is here to take you through to its conclusion. Thanks, as always, for being here! Mike Bowers looking down the barrel at question time: We’ve had a few different numbers of aged care deaths bandied about in parliament today. Considering the scrutiny rightly being applied to the Covid situation affecting some of the most vulnerable Australians, it’d be good to get some clarity – here’s what we know. In Senate estimates earlier, department officials said there had been 691 deaths in aged care in 2022. That’s compared with 282 in the entirety of 2021, and 685 in 2020, showing just how the Omicron wave has ripped through the sector. But Labor claims the number is actually 743 deaths in 2022. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese and Labor’s shadow minister for aged care services Clare O’Neil both pointed to this figure in Question Time. But then health and aged care minister Greg Hunt told question time a completely different number - he claimed there were 711 aged care deaths in 2022. Prime minister Scott Morrison also used this number. Labor claims the 743 number comes from comparing health department statistics from 31 December, 2021 and 15 February, 2022. On 31 December, the statistics showed 915 deaths in aged care - compared to 1658 deaths reported on 15 February. That’s a difference of 743, which is where Labor got their number from. We’ve contacted the health department for an official number to confirm. The New Zealand government has said it would be concerned at any moves to ramp up Australia’s deportations policy. It comes amid moves by the Morrison government to pass the migration amendment (strengthening the character test) bill. The proposed bill would lower the bar for the failure of the test so a person convicted of a “designated offence”, such as violence or breaching a court order, is deemed to be of bad character, making visa cancellation more likely, although a discretion not to do so remains. When contacted for a response, New Zealand’s foreign affairs minister, Nanaia Mahuta, said: New Zealand has raised the issue of deportations a number of times with Australia. We don’t agree with the policy and would be concerned at any moves to strengthen it. New Zealand accepts that Australia has the right to deport people. However, we are concerned that Australia continues to send people to New Zealand who have never lived here and have no family or support networks at all. Liberal MP James Paterson has posted that speech on his website. In it, Marles mostly talks about China’s economic growth, about China and Australia helping their Pacific neighbours, about some scientific collaboration. Then he talks about building the relationship with China “not just in economic terms, but also through exploring political cooperation and even defence cooperation”. There you go. And that’s question time done for another day. Meanwhile, the Guardian recently revisited the Manchurian Candidate: The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has had to withdraw a comment. He called Labor’s Richard Marles a “Manchurian candidate”, after referring to a 2019 speech he gave in Beijing where he reportedly said Australia should embrace closer military cooperation with China. Another federal MP has tested positive for Covid while in parliament, with the Nationals MP Kevin Hogan announcing he has contracted the virus. It comes after the Labor MP Anika Wells said she tested positive on Wednesday. Hogan, the assistant minister to the deputy prime minister, said he returned a rapid test result on Tuesday, and had been isolating. He said he had “very mild” symptoms so far. Following Wells’ Covid diagnosis, Labor is also asking all their MPs who were in the party’s caucus meeting on Tuesday to get a PCR test by the end of the day. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is asking the prime minister, Scott Morrison, if he agrees with Paul Kelly, who wrote in The Australian today that bipartisanship on China was a national asset. He’s trying to put a stop to the “mistruths” from the government about Labor’s position on China. Labor’s Mark Dreyfus is asking why legislation for a federal anti-corruption commission will not be introduced before the election. Scott Morrison says he has tabled legislation but will not proceed with it because Labor doesn’t support it. (Critics say the government’s existing proposal is just an “exposure draft”.) Labor’s Terri Butler brings up Alan Tudge again and asks the prime minister, Scott Morrison, if “his government is falling down around him with cabinet leaks, and even the sacking of ministers being leaked to undermine the prime minister”. Morrison says he can’t talk about the Tudge matter but can talk about jobs (not Tudge’s though). See post below about reports Alan Tudge’s name has been scratched off his door. Labor is asking about it, but the question is declared out of order. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is denied leave to table a piece written by the Liberal MP Dave Sharma in 2020 called Reach out to Russia to manage the rise of China. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: “Does the prime minister have confidence in his education minister?” (There has been a report that Alan Tudge will lose his gig.) Morrison says: The matters relating to the minister for education I have been taking extremely seriously and members will be aware of the independent process established with Dr [Vivienne] Thom. The matter is in process and has not concluded and in fairness to all involved in this matter, it would not be appropriate to make further comment at this time. Labor’s treasury spokesman, Jim Chalmers, asks the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, to confirm “his Kooyong 200 club raised $1.1m in donations last financial year, but named no individual donors in its AEC return”. (A point of order is raised by the government about that being before Frydenberg was minister, and there are guffaws of laughter, but I didn’t hear the joke.) Labor’s Tony Burke says there’s a precedent if the member has previously discussed the relevant issue. The Speaker, Andrew Wallace, looks lost for a few seconds, then allows the question. Frydenberg says his initial comments were about the independent MP Zali Steggall’s donations. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, is asking about Beetaloo Basin gas developments. “Why are you continuing to push ahead with this giant climate bomb,” he asks, adding that coal and gas mines proposed by the major parties would “blow any chance” of meeting climate targets. “Will you back the Greens’ call for a moratorium on new coal and gas mines?” The resources minister, Keith Pitt, unsurprisingly, will not. He says: We are not closing coal, oil, and gas projects in this country. We need to look at what happened in the recent pandemic. This country maintained its reputation as a reliable supplier. It exceeded all expectations. It exceeded expectations by delivering on its contracts, meeting its commitments, providing resources and energy to its trading partners, which has kept the lights on ... not just here, but right around the world. Bandt says he thought the government might like to talk about climate. Hunt goes on to say that the government offered ADF help to the Victorian government, but that offer “was not taken up”. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor is bringing up the Australian Defence Force personnel that are meant to be in aged care (see Josh Butler’s post below). The health minister, Greg Hunt, says there are 133 defence personnel helping in aged care. (There are meant to be 1,700 available). Hunt says: At this stage there have been 25 aged care facilities being directly supported on the basis of the very terms in which the prime minister set out of those which were facing a significant and present threat to their capacity to carry out operations for that. Nineteen are currently being staffed with six having had their duties completed. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, appears to be backing down on plans to mandate a third Covid-19 vaccine dose. While the government is still considering Atagi’s latest advice, which states a third dose is required for someone to be considered “up to date” with their vaccinations, Andrews said a mandate would be hard to impose once international borders open next week: The commonwealth is going to open the borders and allow hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people, who may not be third-dosed, into our state and every state. Now, they perhaps may have done differently, there is Atagi advice there. They don’t necessarily seem to be following that, but that’s a matter for them. I can’t change that, but there comes a point where things become kind of impractical and you’ve got so many different systems operating at once that it doesn’t really work. So the notion of third doses, and saying to someone you can’t go to the pub unless you’ve got three jabs ... but the person sitting there having a steak and chips from another country has only got two, it kind of gets hard to justify. Last week Andrews said if Atagi changes its definition of fully vaccinated, the Victorian government would also extend its vaccinated economy and that it would apply to international travellers. The third dose has already been mandated in Victoria for workers in health and aged care, disability, emergency services, corrections, quarantine accommodation, food distribution and education. Labor’s Clare O’Neil says Australia’s aged care system is “on the point of collapse”, blasting the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, after he said that deaths in the sector should not be “an indicator” of his job performance. O’Neil, the shadow aged care services minister, accused Colbeck of making “extraordinary” comments about his work in supporting the system. She said the government’s provision of Australian Defence Force support to aged care had been “manifestly inadequate”, after department officials told Senate estimates that just over 100 army staff had been deployed to help fill staff shortages due to Covid. Last week, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said up to 1,700 ADF staff would be made available. “This is too little, too late,” O’Neil said: Aged care has been in its worst crisis ever, since Christmas, and now in mid-February, after the very worst of the staff shortages have passed, we now get the ADF trickling into facilities. Labor’s Clare O’Neil says 743 people have died in aged care (that’s the same figure the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, used earlier). The health minister, Greg Hunt, says it’s 711 (which is what the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said earlier). O’Neil says “tens of thousands are not getting the care they need ... the aged care system is in crisis: Aren’t all of these things indicators that the minister for aged care services should be sacked today? Labor has the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, in its sights. Hunt is repeating the overseas statistics that the government used yesterday to argue that Australia isn’t worse than others. Lives have been saved etc. Australian consular officials in China continue to meet with the detained writer Dr Yang Hengjun and journalist Cheng Lei – they met most recently late last month. At a committee hearing in Canberra, senators asked for an update on the cases of Australians detained in China amid security-related accusations. Greg Wilcock, an assistant secretary at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, said Yang and Cheng were both last visited on 28 January. That was consistent with the pattern of monthly consular visits. While these consular meetings were at the detention centre, they were done via video link. Wilcock said the notional deadline for a verdict in the case of Yang was 9 April – but the verdict hearing could be held any time between now and that date, or could be extended by another 3 months. He said Australian officials would expect to be given a couple of days’ notice. The notional deadline for a trial for Cheng is 19 April, although the same caveats about the timing applied, Wilcock said. On human rights more generally, the Dfat deputy secretary, Justin Hayhurst, said: We have maintained a steady drumbeat of representations on those serious human rights issues. We continue to do that both in China through our embassies and consulates general and here in Canberra [to the Chinese embassy]. The committee is told that Australia most recently made such representations in Beijing on 7 January. It’s cute that the Speaker asks: “Are there any questions?” There are, dear reader. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, starts with the aged care deaths: In Senate estimates today, the minister for aged care services said, and I quote, I don’t accept the deaths in the community or deaths in aged care is an indication of his performance as a minister. Does the prime minister agree with his minister that he is performing well? The prime minister, Scott Morrison, gives his standard answer, that “while we mourn the loss of those who have passed away in aged care, who have had Covid-19 when they have passed away”, many lives have been saved. (There are a number of different figures being bandied about on those deaths, I’ll try to clarify.) The prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, are talking about the Bangka Island massacre in 1945. Vivian Bullwinkel was the only survivor of the second world war Japanese massacre. The Sydney Morning Herald has republished its initial account – it is truly harrowing. Another question time is nearly upon us. Will there be multiple points of order (no acronym, please)? Will there be sneaky dorothy dixers asking for alternative policies? Will the government call Labor “soft”, and will Labor MPs get punted for jeering? Anything could happen. Simon Holmes à Court is asked about the Zali Steggall donation and says he “completely reject[s] the accusation” there was a failure of management. He says Climate 200 has excellent internal processes and is “scrupulous” in its compliance. Katharine Murphy asks about his claim that Climate 200 is about values: “Surely, if you have agreed to find candidates to run in various electorates, knowing that there is possibly a minority government situation at the end of the election, surely Climate 200 has had discussions with these candidates about what those values mean in practice?” Holmes à Court emphasises the independence of the candidates. He says: Multiple independents came to us and said even that one string is too many, it must be no strings attached. Our relationship with the candidates – we make a donation if they ask us, if they are looking for advice on who they can talk to we will pass that on, but we don’t have any agreement at all with the candidates, they are strictly independent and that is of critical importance to them ... because otherwise, it wouldn’t be independence. The South Australian independent senator Rex Patrick has tried, unsuccessfully, to get Dfat officials to say whether they have any material to support Peter Dutton’s assertion the Chinese Communist party has decided to back Anthony Albanese. During the Senate estimates committee hearing, Patrick notes that Dutton said his assertions were based, in part, on “open source” (ie public) material. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, says the defence minister seeks advice from the defence department, not Dfat. Payne points to Monday’s piece published in China’s Global Times by the former Australian diplomat Bruce Haigh (a longstanding critic of Australia’s China policy and its closeness to the US). The Liberal senator Eric Abetz reads a portion of the op-ed into the Senate record, including that Albanese “will not be a charismatic leader” but “in comparison to Morrison, he positively shines, such is the abysmal state of Australian politics”. Abetz adds in the committee hearing that the Global Times is the “mouthpiece of a brutal dictatorship”. Asked who has editorial control of the Global Times, Payne replies: Not the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, senator. Holmes à Court is asked a pretty interesting question to begin with, on whether or not the loose structure of the Climate 200 group was a way to avoid some of the obligations that come with establishing an actual political party. Here’s what he had to say: Firstly let me say there are no differences in disclosure obligations on Climate 200 as there are for the major parties. I don’t see any advantage in us registering. But, basically, in no way are we a party. As I said before, we don’t start campaigns, we don’t select candidates, we wait for these campaigns to come up through the grassroots and demonstrate strong community support, demonstrate capable campaign teams and demonstrate the ability to fundraise within the community. We don’t have a policy platform, we have values and we will only fund those who also have those values. We don’t specify in any degree of specificity how those are to be achieved, just we have the confidence that member will enter parliament and deliver on the things they have told their communities they would deliver on. ... We no longer need parties to run viable campaigns – as Cathie McGowan has shown and Zali Steggall has shown and many others ... but you do need providers and compliance is a very tough thing in Australia, with laws regularly changing, and it makes complete sense that campaigns will go to service providers to help them with their compliance, and frankly there aren’t that many of them. Just as people might use the same accountant, you wouldn’t be surprised that most of these campaigns are swapping notes on where do you buy your T-shirts, your corflute signs. I, we would be pretending to be something we are not to register as a party. We don’t have any candidates. We don’t have any candidates, so what kind of party can operate without a single candidate? So Simon Holmes à Court has been making his case for independents at this coming federal election, and bemoaning the state of major parties and their donors: This election, voters in over 20 electorates are being offered a new political choice. A viable option for breaking the political deadlock on vital issues. These communities have the opportunity of a community-backed independent candidate. These candidates are genuine community leaders, not career politicians ... The incumbent independents act as a backbone for our parliament. They introduce legislation that is too hot to handle for either conflicted majors, and they provide a check on government overreach. So often they are the conscience of parliament. Many people are having a hard time getting their heads around this community independence movement. They cannot see it through anything other than a party lens. The movement is nothing like a party. There is no hierarchy, no leader, no head office, no coordinated policy platforms. Some have come up through the voices of groups in more than 70 electorates. Cathy McGowan said recently that nobody really knows the true depth and breadth of the movement. It is growing quickly, bubbling both above and below the surface. Viable campaigns are popping up in many of these communities and it is estimated there are currently 10,000 actively engaged volunteers. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 57 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 594 In hospital: 48 (with three people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 27 Cases: 10,463 In hospital: 1,478 (with 92 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 12 Cases: 6,596 In hospital: 432 (with 34 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 18 Cases: 8,149 In hospital: 397 (with 68 people in ICU) The Australian Capital Territory has reported 594 new cases, with 48 people still in hospital. Simon Holmes à Court is addressing the National Press Club. The energy investor and Climate 200 director says “politics is broken”. Climate 200 is supporting candidates in the upcoming election. Holmes à Court says Australians are frustrated about climate inaction, corruption in politics, and the treatment and safety of women. The Labor MP Anika Wells says she tested positive for Covid this morning while in Canberra for parliament. The member for Lilley has been in parliament this week, giving speeches and participating in the chamber. Parliament House is currently under strict Covid protocols, including requiring face masks inside, temperature checks at the entry, and restrictions on retail services. On Tuesday, the parliament’s presiding officers said there were three cases of Covid inside Parliament House, and that potential exposure contacts were being tested. An application by Glencore to expand its MacArthur River mine by building an enormous rock dump on the edge of the Barramundi Dreaming sacred site has been rejected by the Northern Territory government. Under the application to double one of the company’s largest zinc and lead mines, the proposal would build a 140-metre-high “mountain” of toxic and flammable waste rock within 35 metres of the sacred site. Glencore’s expansion plans also threaten a significant archaeological site, an ancient stone quarry where local Indigenous people manufactured materials into spear tips on a large scale, though this was not covered by the decision. The company originally claimed it had consulted with traditional owners, but the Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority (AAPA) found the agreement was invalid as it had only been signed by six people and none of the site’s 180 custodians. The AAPA CEO, Dr Benedict Scambary, said in a statement the decision showed “lipservice to consultation is not good enough”. He said: Protecting sacred sites is not a box to be ticked, or an obstacle to be sidestepped. Aboriginal custodians must give free, prior and informed consent to development. More to come … “It just shows how completely alone Australia is in the world, in terms of how absolutely horrific indefinite detention is, that there’s no end date.”: Senior Dfat official Justin Hayhurst, when asked about whether Beijing is seeking to sow division, says: I think, senator, it’s fair to say that the Chinese system seeks to exploit social and other divisions in countries to pursue its interests – that’s very apparent. Hayhurst underlines that social cohesion “is very important”: I think the government and ministers including the minister for foreign affairs have been at great pains to emphasise that in relation to members of the Australian community who are of Chinese descent. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, says she won’t go into discussions with colleagues, when asked what advice she is giving them about the importance of supporting bipartisanship on foreign policy and national security. The Liberal senator Eric Abetz chimes in to remind the hearing he was active in opposing the government’s extradition treaty with China a few years back. He suggests that sometimes backbenchers need to speak up. Payne underlines the importance of discussion and debate, saying those are things that “cannot be cancelled by some of the assertions that have been made in this discussion, in my view”. Labor’s Kristina Keneally notes that Labor also opposed that extradition treaty, and asks Payne to confirm she was a member of the cabinet that approved the China extradition treaty. The minister replies: I believe that was the case, senator. Keneally ends this bracket of questions with some praise for Payne: What I take from your answers today … is that you do retain a commitment to bipartisanship on national security and foreign policy matters, something I do welcome, and it seems to me you take that seriously … I am heartened by the answers you have given today. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, is asked whether she has sought to reassure any of Australia’s allies of the level of bipartisanship in Australia’s national security and foreign policy. Payne says she has had “a significant range of discussions” with counterparts in the past week, and there will be more conversations in the coming days. She says that in conversations with Quad partners (the US, India and Japan) and in recent talks with her Lithuanian and Timor-Leste counterparts: I always assure them of Australia’s strength and resilience and of the basic positions and values that we hold. Kristina Keneally: “Did you assure them of the level of bipartisanship that exists in Australia, such as as exemplified by the consistency of policy positions between the government and the opposition on matters like China or indeed the good work that is done by the intelligence and security committee?” Payne: “I was pleased that the leader of the opposition [Anthony Albanese] and the shadow minister for foreign affairs [Penny Wong] … had the opportunity to meet themselves with a number of our visitors in that context in those events last week and I’m sure that that message was strongly delivered.” Keneally: “It is clear that some of your colleagues are pushing such a narrative [about a lack of bipartisan unity]. How is that consistent with need to assure allies that on such long-term objectives there is bipartisanship on these issues?” Payne: “So, senator, there is a point upon which we agree and that is the importance of consistency. And one of the issues which has been raised in recent political debate is that question of consistency and that is an observation which I think the government is entitled to make.” Keneally asks whether national security should be outside the “rough and tumble” of politics. Isn’t that in the national interest? Payne replies: Yes, senator, and I could point you to a range of examples … where that consistency has not been delivered. I would hope to see that it is the case, particularly as you say, in a very difficult strategic environment, that Australia is able to continue to take the very strong approach that we have taken, for example, and I absolutely acknowledge this is an approach on Ukraine and Russia where the entire parliament, frankly, to the best of my knowledge, is united on respecting, acknowledging and emphasising the importance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Ukraine [sic]. That has not been an issue that has been raised with me as causing any of the issues that you have pointed to. Labor MP Warren Snowdon has used his valedictory speech to call for the federal government to adopt the recommendations of the Uluru Statement from the Heart. The long-serving member for Lingiari, in the Northern Territory, said there “is no excuse now, in 2022, for any government to walk away from a need for constitutional recognition and voice to parliament, truth telling and a process of treaty”, according to AAP. Snowdon said: To advocate for First Australians was my most significant responsibility. [But] so many remain marginalised and in poverty … with scandalous levels of preventable disease, in my view largely driven by the institutionalised racism that has been so much a part of government since Federation. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, is being grilled at Senate estimates over the government’s increasingly heightened rhetoric about Labor and China. Readers may recall that yesterday Payne declined to repeat Scott Morrison’s assertion that an Albanese Labor government would “appease” China. Labor’s Kristina Keneally cites a number of comments, including Paul Kelly’s piece in today’s Australian newspaper that says bipartisanship from Labor has been “pivotal to Australia’s success in its pushback against China” and that this bipartisanship is “a national asset”. Asks if she agrees with Kelly that bipartisanship from Labor is a national asset, Payne says: I’ve seen broadly Mr Kelly’s piece this morning and there’s much of it with which I would agree and broadly speaking that is a reasonable observation to make, senator, but there are a number of examples, a number of instances where this has not always been the case. Whilst I would seek to prosecute the case for Australia’s national interests in an open and transparent and consistent way … I have found in my time in this role that that has not always been the case from across the parliament. Payne says engagement by politicians “in the rough and tumble of the political discourse comes with a record usually”. Payne tells Keneally bipartisanship on foreign policy is “overwhelmingly preferable” but argues Payne had “been on the receiving end frankly from time to time as a member of this government of statements which I don’t agree reflect bipartisanship by your side of politics” - and that was not helpful, either. Payne agrees that perceptions on bipartisanship are important to our Australia’s international allies, “but I don’t think they necessarily give a leave pass to people’s records, and if people’s records don’t withstand scrutiny on this issue then that is essentially a fact”. Economics is under scrutiny in Senate estimates on Wednesday, with Treasury secretary Steven Kennedy facing questions this morning. He’s very coy, as you might imagine, on interest rates and whether the government’s policy settings increase the risk that the Reserve Bank will soon lift its cash rate from the record low. (Senator Simon Birmingham’s riposte is that not all of Labor’s policies have been costed, such as for TAFE training.) Anyway, Stevens stated the obvious: They are at unusually low levels and I expect over time they will normalise. Investors, meanwhile, continue to predict the RBA will move this half year, with futures markets tipping the first rise to come in June. There were some half-explored answers about rising inequality during the pandemic period, particularly as the tsunami of government spending and RBA “accommodative” monetary policy stoked asset prices. (As happened almost everywhere.) There were prods by Labor about why, if productivity is so important, the government hasn’t responded to the last big Productivity Commission Report on this subject, and yet another five-year review is soon to begin. “Shifting the dial”, as the report was entitled, turned out to be optimistic. Labor also asked about when or if Treasury would release the “unpublished” statistics on improving outcomes for women during the pandemic that the government got a bit of publicity from earlier in this week. No answer, so we’ll have to assume benefit of the doubt. Senator Rex Patrick from SA, meanwhile, sought to tease out whether Treasury had been asked to explore the effects of a cut on the fuel excise. “Not that I’m aware of,” Kennedy responded. Kennedy did, though, note the “potential shock” that might come from higher energy prices if Russia did step up its aggression towards Ukraine. He added, however, that so far - petrol prices excluded - Australia has not had the same inflationary pressure from higher energy costs as other nations, such as the US. More on petrol prices, including the prospect of $2 per litre costs, can be found here: Thirteen people are in hospital with Covid in Tasmania, two of them in intensive care, while another 625 cases have been reported. The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is talking about that character test legislation. He says the government will reintroduce the bill as a “test” for Labor and that the government will not amend it (see below, it’s as clear as mud what will happen in the Senate). Hawke says: The government is not proposing to amend our own bill. It is Labor [that] has opposed the bill, it is Labor that are seeking amendments. He says the government will not negotiate because the bill is about community safety, and the safety of women and children and he wants more discretionary power to block or boot criminals. Almost 700 people have died of Covid in aged care this year, AAP reports, which is more than died in all of last year. The aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, says deaths in aged care from the virus are not a performance indicator. He says he has not offered to resign. He told Senate estimates: We are in the middle of a global pandemic, and the completely tragic result of that is people will catch the virus across all parts of the community, and tragically, some will die.. The performance in managing Covid-19 has improved. Twelve people have died in Queensland, where another 6,596 Covid cases have been recorded. A total of 432 people are in hospital, and another 34 in intensive care. AAP reports that thousands of Queensland children are testing positive since schools returned, but that child hospitalisations are not rising. Shadow home affairs minister Kristina Keneally has just finished talking on Sky News about Labor’s position on the character test legislation. I would say “clarifying” Labor’s position, but I’m not sure that’s true. Keneally confirms Labor will wave the legislation through in the House of Representatives, but it’s still not clear what will happen in the Senate. She says the opposition is talking to the government about amendments: We are in negotiations with the government no matter what they say because [immigration] minister Hawke actually wrote to me ... inviting that negotiation. Host Laura Jayes interrupts to say that she is being told there will be no amendments, and that the Senate will vote on the bill as it is. Keneally says: Let’s call a spade a shovel ... this is a desperate government desperate to distract from its own incompetence. They need to decide do they want to have a fight or do they want to have a fix. This is sure to develop further today, stay tuned. Morning all. As I flagged in a news story yesterday, Labor looked like it was limbering up to let the character test bill go through in the House of Representatives. That’s where the opposition has landed. The bill won’t be opposed in the House. The Senate position is not yet definitive. I gather the plan is to continue to work on amendments to deal with concerns about retrospectivity, and with the disproportionate impact of the change on New Zealand. It is unclear at this point whether Labor will enable passage in the Senate in the event the government refuses to negotiate. If you’ve been following the news this week, you’ll know the government has been limbering up for a national security wedge, using the character test as a case study for why Labor is weak on these issues. The government tried another wedge last week on its religious discrimination bill. Labor was saved when five Liberals crossed the floor. Nicolle Flint has given her valedictory speech in parliament, and has called on the leader of the opposition, Anthony Albanese, to take action against “men on the left” who have subjected her to sexist and misogynistic behaviour. Flint says that she had never been “reduced” to a woman before coming to federal parliament, but says that since the 2019 election she had been forced to “put up with ... repetitive, sickening, sexist and misogynistic abuse, and dangerous behaviour that started in the lead-up to the 2019 election and has not stopped since”. “This is a hard place to be a woman,” Flint said. She said there had been a “series of events” that had happened while she was in parliament which “you could not dream up”, and said she had written to Albanese to take action, but did not specify the details of her complaint. She said: The left of politics as a whole need to act and that action needs to start right here with the leader of the opposition. She referenced abuse that she had received after giving an emotional speech in parliament last year, calling for Albanese to show leadership. She said: Men on the left, some of whom are public figures of influence, have done the following – they have stalked me, suggested I should be strangled, criticised the clothes I wear and the way I look, call me a whiny little bitch repeatedly, repeatedly called me weak, a slut ... and much, much worse over email, online on YouTube on Facebook and Twitter. They’ve commented that I should be raped, grudge-fucked, that I’m doing sexual favours for all male colleagues, that I should be killed, that I should kill myself, and many many more things that I will not repeat. Flint said Labor had the “power” to stop the behaviour, saying this would be a mark of leadership. She also has taken a swipe at big tech, describing the online world as a “festering toxic sewer” that needed to be reined in: Clean up the online sewer right now and force big tech to finally behave in the same way that we demand of every corporate citizen ... in Australia. Flint suggested the root cause of the problem was the breakdown in western civilisation, saying that institutions such as the church had been replaced with “causes with no moral compass”. “The outcome is disrespect, abuse and hatred,” she said. Flint also called for changes to the Sex Discrimination Act, saying there needed to be “all encompassing protection from sexism and mysogyny” for women. We’re on to the leaking of the Scott Morrison–Emmanuel Macron text message at Dfat estimates. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne’s recollection is she first became aware of the leaking of the text through the media: I don’t recall where I was at the time. I think I was travelling or in quarantine. Labor senator Kimberley Kitching asks the Dfat secretary, Kathryn Campbell, when she too became aware of the leaked text message. Campbell: “Via the media, senator … when the media reported it.” Kitching: “No one phoned you the night before?” Campbell: “No, senator.” Asked if anyone in the prime minister’s office discussed the leaking of the text message with her, Campbell said: “No, senator.” There is discussion of the prime minister’s office’s decision to block Guardian Australia’s freedom of information application for the other text messages between the pair in the fateful Aukus week. Payne says the category of harming international relations “is a category of standard use, if you like, across multiple FOIs”. Campbell is asked whether she agrees with French officials that the leaking of a personal communication in this manner is a crude and unconventional tactic in international relations. Liberal chair Eric Abetz chimes in to point the finger at Macron for name-calling: “Calling someone a liar is a pretty crude and unconventional tactic.” Asked whether the leaking of the text has weakened relations with France, Campbell says officials are working very closely with France to ensure the bilateral relationship remains strong. The Victorian government has entered exclusive negotiations to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games. The premier, Daniel Andrews, on Wednesday announced the state government would spend the next couple months working with the Commonwealth Games Federation to assess the viability of hosting the event. He said: We are the sporting capital of our nation. We have all that is needed to make an event like this fantastic success for us and for everybody, right across the commonwealth. While the 2006 games were held in Melbourne, Andrews wants the 2026 event to be held across regional Victoria: It’s not just about rerunning what was done back in 2006, our vision is for this to be predominantly a regional Victorian space. It’s about taking this amazing competition across many different sports into regional cities and towns. At Dfat estimates, there’s a brief diversion into an op-ed written in 2020 by Liberal backbencher Dave Sharma headlined “Reach out to Russia to manage the rise of China”. This is being cited by Labor, given the government has been talking tough on China and Russia. Sharma argued that to manage the rise of China it was time to “reshuffle the deck” and bring Russia “in from the cold”. Sharma, a former Australian ambassador to Israel, wrote in the SMH piece: Russia has undoubtedly been a force for global disorder in recent years. But in the long term it is an ambitious and revanchist China, not a nostalgic Russia, which poses the larger threat to the global order. Marise Payne says she isn’t specifically aware of it, but notes “the creative juices flow strong and fast amongst members of the government in terms of the publication of opinion pieces”. She says she doesn’t have them all to hand and government backbenchers don’t need ministerial approval to submit them. Payne says the current situation regarding Ukraine is an “extremely serious matter”. The Dfat secretary, Kathryn Campbell, has asked to see a copy of the op-ed, but points out it was written in 2020. She suggests a lot has changed in that time. Outgoing Boothy MP Nicolle Flint is giving her valedictory speech. Boothby will be one of the most contested battlegrounds at the election. Flint has fired up about her treatment during the last election campaign – we’ll bring you more of that shortly. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, has denied any “passivity” about Australia’s offer of cybersecurity assistance to Ukraine. Australia’s ambassador for cyber affairs and critical technology, Tobias Feakin, is pressed on evidence from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet that no additional assistance has been provided since the onset of the crisis. Feakin says talks are well advanced and progressing: It is correct, yes, because at the moment we are in that live discussion with the government about cyber security assistance. Payne says she discussed the matter with the Ukrainian foreign minister on 19 January: Over the past year Defence has also been providing capacity building training to officials … This has been an ongoing engagement. Our offer [is] as to whether we could add to that activity with the Ukraine. We have had engagements … to discuss further cyber assistance but ultimately identifying what would be useful and valuable to the Ukrainian government. This is a very challenging time for the Ukrainian government across multiple fronts. That’s why the United States in particular has taken a coordinating role, so it is in no way shape or form an issue of passivity or anything else, it is a case of working with a partner to determine what might be helpful at a critical time. There are questions about Ukraine being hit with new cyber-attacks. Payne says the Ukrainian defence ministry has confirmed experience of a cyber-attack overnight. Kristina Keneally notes Scott Morrison has not yet had a call with his Ukrainian counterpart and suggests “some level of passivity”. “I completely disagree,” Payne replies. The Dfat estimates session begins with an update on the situation in Ukraine. Labor senator Kristina Keneally asks about the partial withdrawal of Russian troops. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, is cautious: I think it is very important that verification is obtained of those reports. Payne notes the US secretary of state has called for verifiable, credible, meaningful de-escalation. Katrina Cooper, a Dfat official, says Australia has received initial information from its embassy in Moscow. Cooper says there are grounds for only “cautious” optimism: It is an encouraging sign that we are hearing those reports. But Cooper cautions that the latest assessment is that the number of Russian troops in the region is 150,000. She notes that is a large number and provides the capability “for a full-scale invasion of Ukraine”. Cooper says a diplomatic offramp is still possible. Officials reinforce Australia’s support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Officials say the number of Australian citizens, permanent residents and family members registered as being in Ukraine is 186. They say the Australians are spread across the country. The operations of Australia’s embassy in Kyiv – which is co-located with Canada’s embassy – have moved to Lviv. The remaining three officers – Australia’s ambassador, deputy ambassador and one other officer – are again working alongside their Canadian counterparts. A cyber security official, Tobias Feakin, says officials are progressing discussions with Ukraine on cyber security assistance: At the moment it’s a live in confidence discussion. From Peter “Number Cruncher” Hannam: Wrap your gums around this delightful piece from Donna Lu: The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is up at estimates today. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne says the foreign affairs questions are being asked today, instead of tomorrow as originally scheduled, so that she can leave Australia tonight, bound for a Munich security conference. She says she also has a broader series of international visits (including a French/EU Indo-Pacific forum in Paris). Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has taken another swing at the Liberal MP (or MPs?) who seem to be leaking embarrassing details to the media, in the wake of reports that Alan Tudge’s days as education minister may be limited. Channel 10 reported on Tuesday that Tudge could be on his way out. It was also reported that Tudge’s name had been scratched off a nameplate at his office door, but prime minister Scott Morrison’s office said the matter was still in progress and no decision had been made. Senate estimates heard on Monday that a report on allegations made against Tudge by former staffer Rachelle Miller had been provided to Morrison weeks ago, but that people participating in the report were still being given the opportunity to review its contents. The latest leak from the ministry follows several other damaging leaks to Channel 10, including texts reportedly between former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and a Liberal minister which were strongly critical of Morrison, and a cabinet leak last week which claimed Morrison had been “rolled” by colleagues over a strategy to allow debate on a federal integrity commission in hopes of gathering more support for his religious discrimination bill. Joyce, speaking on Sky News, criticised whoever was sharing such explosive information with media. He said: If you’re deliberately handing over information that’s supposed to remain private ... then you’re deliberately trying to make that task in the next election more difficult. Joyce had his own embarrassing moment recently when a text he sent to former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, which was also very critical of Morrison, was published in the media. Morrison has asked his party for more unity in recent weeks. On Tuesday he told his members that they had jobs to do: I’m going to do mine, I need you to do yours. In NSW, 27 people have died. A total of 10,463 new Covid cases have been detected and there were 1,478 hospitalisations, with 92 people in intensive care. Another 18 people have died in Victoria, where 8,149 new Covid cases have been detected. A total of 397 people have been hospitalised, 68 are in intensive care, and 13 are on ventilators. All elective surgery across public and private hospitals can resume by the end of the month in Victoria, the state government has said, adding that the impact of the Omicron wave continues to subside and stabilise. From Monday 21 February, public hospitals in metropolitan Melbourne will be able to perform category 2 surgery. The minister will also consider further changes to allow all surgery to resume from 28 February. Each hospital will individually assess their own capacity based on staff availability and Covid-19 demands, with 44 hospitals still operating as Covid- streaming hospitals. Private hospitals will also be able to increase their elective surgery activity as long as they can continue to provide support for public hospitals to respond to Covid-19 demands. From 21 February, private hospitals in metropolitan Melbourne can undertake up to 75% of any elective surgery activity, increasing from 50%. The government will then consider increasing this on 28 February to up to 100%. In regional Victoria, the cap for private hospitals will increase from the current 75% to up to 100% on 21 February – while regional public hospitals continue to deliver any elective surgery based on their individual capacity. The rolling seven-day average of Covid-19 hospitalisations is 457 patients, decreasing from a peak of more than 1,200 patients in mid-January 2022. The number of staff unavailable due to Covid has dropped by around two-thirds, currently at around 1,400 people. Sydney’s public transport services will return to normal at the end of the month when Covid restrictions ease, state transport minister David Elliot says: From Monday 28 February, the Monday to Friday weekday timetable on the Sydney Trains network will be reinstated. This is a great sign, it shows customers have confidence to jump on public transport as more people get back to major centres like Sydney’s CBD and Parramatta. A New South Wales government proposal for a renewable energy zone in the heart of the state’s largest coalmining region received more than $100b worth of investment proposals. The state’s energy minister, Matt Kean, said the government’s latest renewable energy zone in the Hunter and Central Coast had received 80 expressions of interest for solar, pumped hydro, wind and large-scale battery projects. The renewable energy zone is one of five created by the government under legislation passed with multiparty support in 2020 to build 12 gigawatts of clean energy – roughly equivalent to the country’s entire existing large-scale renewable capacity – and 2GW of energy storage in the state over the next decade. At the time the bill set off tension with the federal energy minister, Angus Taylor, who said the legislation could prompt the closure of coal-fired power stations. Announcing the funding proposals, Kean said the projects would have the potential to deliver more than 100,000 gigawatt hours of renewable energy a year – equivalent to the annual output of up to 10 coal-fired power stations. He said: These results show that energy investors see the Hunter and Central Coast as some of the best investment destinations anywhere in the country, which will translate into jobs and prosperity for the region. Renewable energy zones are vital to ensuring the future reliability and affordability of electricity in NSW as traditional coal-fired power stations close down over the coming decades. Filipa Payne advocates for New Zealanders in Australia who have their visas cancelled because they have broken the law. She tells ABC radio that thousands of Kiwis are deported or are sitting in immigration detention, and that many of them are guilty of low-level crimes such as drink driving. Many have also grown up in Australia, she says, so it’s Australia’s “moral responsibility” to deal with them instead of sending them across the ditch. Something to remember when the federal government says Labor is stopping it deporting abusers of women and children. Public school funding has effectively been cut, while private school funding has increased. Is Gonksi goneski? Adeshola Ore has the numbers: Western Australia premier Mark McGowan will make an announcement about when the state’s hard border will lift by the end of the month, AAP reports. It’s not really a timeline, but it’s something. A “legal workaround” to skip federal environment approvals has been revealed in freedom of information documents. This is a great story on complicated issue from Lisa Cox: Worth a read if you missed it yesterday, in the context of the character test legislation – Australia tried to deport an otherwise “model” New Zealand citizen who had lived here for 40 years. It would have broken up his family, Christopher Knaus reports: Updated vote counting in the blue-ribbon Liberal party seat of Willoughby has put the seat on shaky ground for the government, with the party’s candidate, Tim James, ahead by fewer than 600 votes. Preference flows in the seat of former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian on Wednesday have put the seat within reach of unheralded independent candidate Larissa Penn, with about 32% of the vote counted. Going into Saturday’s byelection the Liberal party held Willoughby on an ultra-safe margin of 21%, a buffer built up by the ultra-popular Berejiklian since her election in 2003. After her resignation the party had been bracing for a backlash in the seat, and had already suffered a swing of about 18% based on polling day results. But with the increase in postal ballots, byelection vote counting is still under way, and an update on preference flows on Tuesday further eroded the Liberal party’s buffer. About 42% of preferences were going to Penn compared with about 10% for James. It means that the swing against the government in the seat is now at 19.2%, with Penn, who only had four weeks to prepare her campaign, within 600 votes of victory. While there is still a significant number of votes still to be counted, the fact Willoughby is even being discussed as a precarious seat for the government will be a concern for premier Dominic Perrottet. The government lost the previously safe seat of Bega at the byelections, after suffering a 12% swing. Already in minority, losing another seat would put the state government on dangerous ground, relying on the support of a handful of crossbenchers and minor parties to maintain confidence and supply. Helen Haines, the member for Indi, is also calling for more transparency in political donations. She’d like to see any donations over $1,000 declared. The ABC’s Patricia Karvelas asks her about the Zali Steggall situation. Haines says the system needs reform and has “too many holes”. Improving the laws would do that, she says. Independent MP Helen Haines – who proposed her own national integrity legislation – is talking about the government’s admission it won’t introduce its own legislation before the election. She says it’s emblematic of a fear of transparency: We have a Coalition government who are dead scared of having an integrity commission and they’re doing everything they can to make sure we don’t have one. The bill has never been introduced ... what they’ve put out is an exposure draft. People have come to this in good faith trying to improve what was a very flimsy proposition. The government didn’t engage. Richard Marles also talks about reports that China’s Global Times newspaper has endorsed Labor leader Anthony Albanese. The Australian reports that the government’s “propaganda outlet” is promoting Albanese as “safe”, while Scott Morrison is a “clown”. Labor can’t control what the state-affiliated paper does, Marles says. On the character test, Marles says it’s not clear what the problem is that the government is trying to solve, and that Labor is happy to sit down with the Coalition to discuss it. National security has been a big theme this week, as prime minister Scott Morrison tries to find chinks of daylight between the government’s position and that of the opposition. Deputy Labor leader Richard Marles is on ABC radio talking about Morrison’s claims his party is “soft”, particularly on China. (Remember, Morrison is attacking Labor for not attacking China for not attacking Russia.) Marles says that’s a “desperate” claim and that the prime minister is “clearly trying to create a political issue in the context of the upcoming election”. And he’s happy to call out China, saying “the world stands together” in supporting Ukraine: China should speak out in opposition to what Russia is doing. It should join the rest of the world in adding its voice to supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty. He says there’s no difference between Labor’s position and the government’s. This parliamentary week is either half finished or only halfway through, depending on your perspective. The federal government will have another crack at its character test legislation today. It wants more leeway to boot convicted criminals from the country and is trying to make the extraordinary argument that if it doesn’t get its way, that means Labor is taking the side of men who abuse women and children. (Labor says the immigration minister already has “God-like” powers and this is just a power grab.) Attorney general Michaelia Cash has conceded that no federal integrity commission legislation will be put up before the election but that’s unlikely to make the issue go away. And the government smells blood in the water over independent Warringah MP Zali Steggall’s “rookie error” in not properly declaring a $100,000 donation, so expect to hear more there. Some big international news from the UK – Prince Andrew has settled the sexual assault claim filed by Virginia Giuffre. He will make a “substantial donation” to her charity (but doesn’t admit guilt). And still overseas, but sparked by Australian happenings – tennis superstar Novak Djokovic has told the BBC he’s not anti-vaccination but he’s also not vaccinated, and won’t get vaccinated even if it means he misses grand slam tournaments. But definitely not anti-vaccination. Senate estimates continues – you never know what will come up but you know something wild will. The Russia/Ukraine situation is still unstable, and there’s speculation Russia is planning a “false flag” attack (it will attack its own people or property inside Ukraine, pretend it was Ukraine, then use that as a pretext for an attack). Prime minister Scott Morrison tried very hard yesterday to link the situation to cost of living issues here in Australia, and was attacking China for not condemning Russia, and Labor for not attacking China. Some fancy footwork there. Katharine Murphy will cut through the bluster for you, along with the crack Canberra team of Paul Karp, Sarah Martin, Josh Butler, Daniel Hurst and Mike Bowers. Here we go ...A police officer has denied trying to help constable Zachary Rolfe, who is charged with murder, by answering “I don’t recall” multiple times during his evidence at trial. Constable James Kirstenfeldt continued his evidence on Wednesday in Rolfe’s murder trial. Rolfe, 30, is charged with murdering Kumanjayi Walker while trying to arrest him in the remote community of Yuendumu, 300km north-west of Alice Springs, on 9 November 2019. The court has previously heard Rolfe shot Walker three times during a struggle after Walker stabbed him with a pair of scissors. Rolfe has pleaded not guilty to murder and two alternate charges. Kirstenfeldt and Rolfe were in a team of four officers from the Immediate Response Team (IRT) who deployed from Alice Springs to Yuendumu on the day of the shooting. During his evidence on Tuesday, Kirstenfeldt said he had not seen an email from Sgt Julie Frost, the officer in charge of Yuendumu station, which was sent after they deployed and outlined an operational plan for the officers from Alice Springs. But on Wednesday Kirstenfeldt was asked by the crown prosecutor, Philip Strickland SC, about evidence he provided during an earlier court hearing and in interviews with police which Strickland suggested appeared to contradict that claim. During an interview with police on 21 November 2019, which Strickland played to the court, Kirstenfeldt said he did not see an email until he had got to Yuendumu. He then referred in the interview to Frost sending the plan and said it contained information similar to what the IRT, who were trained to conduct high-risk arrests, would normally do: “just intel gather and then snatch him up in the morning”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Strickland also took him to the transcript of an earlier court hearing on 2 September 2020, where Kirstenfeldt said Frost showed him an email when he went to Yuendumu, but that it was not the same email as the operational plan. Kirstenfeldt told Strickland he accepted that he was shown an email at Yuendumu, but that he could not recall being shown it, or its contents. Strickland then asked Kirstenfeldt if his evidence that he didn’t recall being given the email or what its contents were was “given to try and help Mr Rolfe?” “No, it’s because I don’t recall the exact content of that email,” Kirstenfeldt responded. “I know it wasn’t this email, because this one has photos of him on it, and that would have been handy to have.” Strickland has previously told the court that the case against Rolfe relied not only on his actions during the shooting, but the “context” and the “steps leading up” to it, including the plan. The court was also shown body-worn camera footage of Rolfe and Kirstenfeldt attending a house in Yuendumu shortly after being briefed by Frost. Kirstenfeldt is heard on the footage questioning a boy at house about where Walker could be, where he could be staying that night, who he had left the house with, and when he had left. Speaking to the boy through a window, he is told Walker left only minutes earlier with his partner, Rickisha Robertson, and would be staying at the house that night. “If you see him before that, man, don’t tell him we were here, OK?” Kirstenfeldt says to the boy. “Otherwise he’s going to end up in too much trouble, we don’t want that, OK?” He is then overheard telling Rolfe he believed the kid was “genuine”, but when asked by Strickland if this meant he thought the boy was telling the truth, Kirstenfeldt responded “maybe”. He said he meant it more as a reference to the boy as “a good bloke”. Strickland asked why they had not used the information provided by the boy to plan an arrest of Walker at the house, given it seemed he would spend the night there. Instead, the court has heard, the officers acted on other information gathered at the property to attend other houses in Yuendumu, where Walker was located and killed during an attempted arrest only minutes later. “Single-source information from a child is probably not the most reliable to plan an operation on,” Kirstenfeldt responded. Later on Wednesday, the court heard from members of Walker’s family and the Robertson family, including Rickisha’s grandfather Eddie Robertson. Robertson, who the court heard had helped found Yuendumu and has worked with territory and federal governments and the police force as a representative of the community, said he understood Walker had planned to surrender after a funeral being held for a relative of Walker’s in the town. Robertson said that after an incident on 6 November 2019, when Walker threatened two Yuendumu police officers with an axe, he told him that he had to hand himself in after the funeral, and Walker – who the court has heard was quietly spoken – nodded in response. The funeral was held on the same day Walker was killed. The trial continues.Ejaculated is a tough word to place in a novel, these days. Nobody uses it to describe dialogue any more and in a sexual context it seems a little functional. Also, for technical reasons, it is tricky to employ from a female point of view. So the reader really does notice when Sheila Heti’s narrator says that something has been ejaculated into her “by the universe” and that something, which is now “spreading all the way through her, the way cum feels”, is the spirit of her much-loved, just‑dead father. But each to her own – you have to admire the leap. I was pulled into Pure Colour, Heti’s follow-up to 2018’s Motherhood, by a description of life before the internet that held a nostalgia I needed to name. Mira begins the novel in a world now lost to us: it was a time when choice was limited and things stayed particular. This was before seasons became “postmodern”, before we knew that “there were so many ways of being hated, and one could be hated by so many people”. In those days you could see a certain lamp in a shop and know it was your favourite lamp of all time, and “your friends were simply who was around”. This was how it was for Mira going to a college that is, in this emblematic universe, called “the American Academy of American Critics”. With a group of these random, particular friends, Mira visits a woman’s apartment. It is evening and the windows “just reflected back their sorry faces, while on the outside was the watery night”. The apartment belongs to Annie, who is an orphan, and Mira falls in love with her for reasons she cannot explain: “A person can waste their whole life, without even meaning to, all because another person has a really great face.” The friends disperse, Mira goes home to her ailing father, and when he dies, the book becomes fully strange. As his spirit departs his body, it enters Mira and it is as though all her deficiencies have been filled up – “all her sorry spaces, all her spiritual empties”. Despite this, Mira feels his absence keenly. Death has turned the world inside out. It is not as though the dead go into a different room; her life has been transformed into a different room, where she is now trapped without him. One day Mira returns to a tree they both liked and she enters a leaf. She then stays in the leaf for another 40 pages or so – which is a long time in a book, but perhaps a short time to be in a leaf, beyond all desiring, and in the company of your dead father, who is also entirely contented. During this sojourn, Mira considers art, God, love and the transmigration of souls. We are living, she says, in the first draft of the world, which will be rewritten by God any day soon. Not many people will make it into the next draft, which will have fewer mistakes and be less exciting. Meanwhile, “Here we are, just living in the credits at the end of the movie. Everyone wants to see their name up on the screen.” Pure Colour is the apocalypse written as trance, a sleepwalker’s song about the end of all things. And although the book is full of regret for all that will be lost, there is solace in the idea that we will, mostly, die together. The problem with death was never mortality, but timing. If I were not a reviewer but a friend, I would press this book into your hand, and say, “It’s a bit mad, but I think you will like it.” Then I might change the subject for a while, because the truth is that Pure Colour will not be for everyone. It spends a lot of time in a leaf. It is relentlessly abstract. And it’s not actually mad, it is a mystical text with its own (not entirely rigorous, but who cares about that) system or cosmology. The mysticism runs close to poetry and owes, I suspect, more to Kabbalism than to the Christian tradition. Mira is more uplifted than ecstatic: her visions are lightly ironic, fully human and endearing. Apart from the ejaculation thing (itself oddly unsexual), love in the book is desexualised. You might even call it “post-sexual”, if you wanted to talk about female writers, in these anxious days, moving beyond the body to ideas of universal love, or even of God. Mira finds her way out of the leaf and back into the pursuit of love. Her conclusions are about the importance of family and tradition – a surprisingly conventional answer, which feels like a return. Like a lot of mystics, she prefers vegetable to animal life and is wary of human reproduction. Of mothers (there is no mother in Mira’s life), she says: “Until they pushed a person out of their dirtiest parts, they had no one they could truly love, and no one who could truly love them.” This is, in many ways, the opposite of what I think about reproduction, but this is a novel that is happy to compass contradictions. It is a system, not an opinion. It is a philosophical tale. There is also Heti’s lovely prose to enjoy, her beautifully sustained tone, the way she is, as a writer, earnest, funny and sweet. Pure Colour is an original, a book that says something new for our difficult times. It’s a bit mad, but I think you will like it. • Actress by Anne Enright is published by Vintage. Pure Colour by Sheila Heti is published by Harvill Secker (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The spectre of war loomed over Europe this week as western allies began evacuating diplomats and citizens from Ukraine in the face of the massed Russian troops on its borders. Andrew Roth, Simon Tisdall and Julian Borger report for our big story this week, as the world waited anxiously to find out how far Vladimir Putin is prepared to go to achieve his goals. When the Taliban took over Afghanistan last year, many feared the worst for the educational prospects of girls and women under an ultra-hardline Islamist regime. Yet remarkably, as Emma Graham-Harrison and Jordan Bryon report, some brave women have fought successfully for their right to continue to study. In Opinion, the Observer’s Will Hutton argues against the decision to lift all Covid restrictions in England (and find out what scientists around the world think in Spotlight). Guardian Australia columnist Van Badham exposes the fakery of the global “freedom movement”, while Arthur Turrell celebrates what could be a breakthrough moment for nuclear fusion and energy production. Cryptocurrency mining is one of the world’s most energy-intensive sectors, consuming more power than countries such as Argentina, Pakistan and Poland. Daniel Boffey visits a bitcoin mine in Norway where excess heat is recycled, to find out if the industry can ever become sustainable. Elsewhere, don’t miss Luisa Dörr’s stunning photographic essay about the female skateboarding collective from Cochabamba who wear traditional Bolivian clothing as a symbol of resistance. There’s also a revealing piece about the addictive tricks deployed by gambling firms from Guardian business reporter Rob Davies, who has spent six years investigating and reporting on the betting industry. Get the magazine delivered to your home address.With its colourful beach huts and quaint high street, Whitstable is a tourist mecca in the school holidays. But the pile of shopping bags in the Canterbury and District food bank tells a different story about real life in the picturesque Kent seaside town. The nearly 200 bags, with extra treats such as leftover chocolate advent calendars poking out, are ready to hand out at 22 local schools before half-term as, amid a worsening cost of living crisis, they know some children might go hungry without school dinners. But soaring inflation is not just hurting the finances of local residents, it is having a dramatic impact on those of the food bank. Demand for its food parcels is at a record high and it has gone from spending nothing on groceries to £3,000 a month to cover the shortfall in donations. But not only is the charity having to dig into its own pockets, each pound is not going as far as it used to, as the price of everyday foods – from fruit juice to pasta, biscuits, breakfast cereal and long-life milk – climbs up. The cost of the groceries in one of its standard parcels (enough to feed one person for three days) has increased by 71p – nearly 6% – to £12.64 since December, as a wave of new year price rises arrived on supermarket shelves. Some of the increases look small – 3p on a packet of bourbon biscuits or 5p on a box of cornflakes – but are big hikes relative to the price tag of what are the cheapest staples the charity can find the high street. This is one of the reasons anti-poverty campaigner Jack Monroe says the cost of living crisis for the country’s poorest households is underestimated in official data. The food bank’s shopping basket provides a proxy for that experience. Peter Taylor-Gooby, professor of social policy at the University of Kent, who is also one of the charity’s trustees, estimates that the cost of its standard food parcel rose by 6.5% in 2020 and more than 7% in 2021. The consumer prices index – the official measure of inflation targeted by the Bank of England – rose in comparison by 0.9% and 2.6%. The price increases for other products in its parcels don’t even look small. The price of a 340g tin of corned beef has risen 32p to £1.79, an increase of more than a fifth. Orange juice is up 16p to 75p, or more than 25%. A bag of fusilli pasta is up 10p to 49p. “We rely on public donations and they have dropped as the price of food has gone up,” explains Angela Gardiner, the food bank’s operations director. “So at a time when people are struggling because the cost of food is rising, our supporters are struggling to buy food to give us.” In the cramped office on the second floor of the food bank’s small business unit, hidden away on an industrial estate on the edge of Whitstable, the number of calls fielded by Jennie Connolly, who works part-time as a “signposter”, continues to rise. In the runup to Christmas the increase was “exponential” and has “not gone down”, she says. The callers, drawn from Whitstable, Canterbury and Herne Bay, as well as the surrounding villages, have little in common, she says – apart from the need for food, of course. The charity estimates three-quarters are either in work or short-term unemployed. “They may have lost their job and are waiting for the first universal credit claim, which can take five to eight weeks in some cases,” explains Connolly. Some of the calls are, she says, very distressing. “People are desperate.” Her job is to give callers “signposting” information, directing them to other agencies who might be able to offer additional support. It is difficult with pensioners, she confesses, because “there are not many places you can signpost them to”. The pandemic has resulted in a dramatic increase in the number of Britons claiming universal credit, up from 3 million in March 2020 to 5.8 million today (having fallen back from last year’s peak of 6 million). In Kent and Medway, 13.5% of the working age population are on universal credit, which is roughly the same as for the country as a whole. “The numbers of people on universal credit went up by about two times in the first couple of weeks of the pandemic and they have stayed high, so the background here is real need,” says Taylor-Gooby. “I think we’ve kept pace but what has happened is that poverty has gone up.” The charity noticed a spike in demand last autumn when the government withdrew the £20-a-week universal credit uplift, a move described as the largest ever overnight cut in benefits. This was a “double whammy” for households, suggests Connolly, because people “lost £20 plus the cost of living was going up”. The charity has 100 bins dotted in local supermarkets, church halls and schools and these donation points used to deliver enough groceries to keep the shelves in its warehouse full. These days though, like on your supermarket shelves, there are gaps. “It didn’t used to look like this, it used to be absolutely crammed full,” says Gardiner, pointing to areas of bare shelf. She estimates donations are half pre-pandemic levels. “There is a constant worry about whether we are going to have enough food to put in the parcels.” “Everyone is feeling the pinch,” offers one of the volunteers busily organising its new stock deliveries. The food bank’s need to source large quantities of groceries from retailers and wholesalers brings with it new logistical challenges. Indeed Aldi is the only local supermarket willing to accept bulk orders. We spent “virtually zilch” on food before the pandemic, explains Martin Ward, the charity’s chair of trustees. “There was this balance between what came in through the donation bins and what was going out.” But those days are long gone and the numbers involved make uncomfortable reading for the charity. In the year to July 2019, it was spending about £500 a year on food, plugging shortages of milk and fruit juice, but by the following summer the upheaval caused by Covid helped that figure swell to £12,800. This year it has forecast that its food bill will come to about £35,000. “We spent 10 times more in the first six weeks of the pandemic than we had done in the previous four years,” says Ward. “There has been a steady month-on-month increase … and now it is about £3,000.” But can a small food bank, run by a handful of staff and nearly 200 volunteers, keep papering over widening social cracks? Last week Morgan Wild, head of policy at Citizens Advice, told MPs that demand for crisis support, including referrals for food banks, are at a record high, and that is before higher energy bill tariffs kick in. In Whitstable, the charity’s finances have held up thanks to local generosity and other fundraising work, and to date it has been able to expand its service to meet the growing need on its doorstep. As Ward puts it: “We march forward in faith.”Keir Starmer once claimed Boris Johnson was “not a bad man”, just “unserious”. He is close to reappraising that now after a fortnight of rows and threats over the prime minister’s false accusation that Starmer failed to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile during his time at the Crown Prosecution Service. That accusation – which the prime minister has “clarified” but never withdrawn – was a moment for many Conservative MPs. Though only a handful have spoken publicly, Starmer told the Guardian that dozens had been in touch with him privately to express distaste. “You can see the disquiet because as he drags people down by this way of acting.” Starmer said it was clear the public were taking a new look at Johnson’s character since his repeated obfuscations over Downing Street lockdown breaches. Has he changed his mind since saying in his Labour conference speech that Johnson was not bad? “I don’t know how people judge whether someone’s a bad person or not. What I do know is he’s not fit to run the country,” he said. “And it’s not surprising that more people think he should now resign than don’t. So that’s a marked change, obviously, in four or five months.” Labour has held a robust lead in the polls since mid-November though party chiefs remain cautious over how much Johnson’s “partygate” troubles have inflated the lead, with voters still repeating that they do not know what Starmer’s Labour really stands for. Methodology changes from some pollsters have recently shrunk Labour’s lead, taking more into account how voters are switching to “don’t know”. Lisa Nandy, the shadow levelling-up secretary, has driven home in recent weeks that the party needs to be far more visible presenting its own agenda. It is recess in parliament and Starmer is spending most of it in the north of England and the Midlands: Sunderland, Burnley, Erdington. On Tuesday, he was on the factory floor of the plastics manufacturer What More UK, giving an amused Nandy a detailed tour of the toolmaking machines two decades after his toolmaker father used similar ones. Labour has made big promises to kickstart a renewal of British manufacturing and Burnley is a stark illustration of the north-south divide in industry. Census data shows that for each high-skilled manufacturing job, there are five low-skilled ones. In Cambridge or Crawley, it’s one for one. A major local employer, Studio Retail, called in administrators last week, putting 1,000 jobs at risk. One of the factory bosses who showed Starmer around estimated it was about one in 30 jobs in the local area. “If this were another part of the country, there’d be a government taskforce,” he said. Burnley has been a hostile environment for Labour politicians recently – it fell to the Tories for the first time in 100 years in 2019 – but for much of his visit, Starmer was in a comfort zone of sorts. He told his family history at length to any worker who would listen as he roamed the factory. His second stop was meeting law students at Burnley college, where he was questioned on practical routes to the bar, and about his first legal case defending careless driving: “I lost.” At one point, he relaxed enough to declare to the ambitious students “the next leader of the Labour party could be in this room” and then realised Nandy was grinning beside him and laughed. About 60 wavering voters met Starmer on Tuesday evening in the college to talk about Labour’s “contract” – security, prosperity and respect – which they were tasked with analysing. The mood was generally bleak. Just two raised their hands when asked if the town would be better off in five years. On a table of 10 younger voters, none said they planned to stay in Burnley. “It’s not a viable option,” said one. Another said: “If you want to do well, you can’t do it Burnley. I’m never proud to say I’m from here.” Older voters describe the housing stock as “decimated” and express fears for a generation held back by Covid. There was anger, too, at politicians, but not overtly at Johnson. “We keep hearing lies, all the time, from politicians,” one woman said. Starmer said he acknowledged Labour had to transform more voters turning against Johnson into making a positive choice to vote for his party. His first reply has been a radical overhaul of his party, including divisive policies at party conference, a reshuffle that reinstated many Labour heavyweights sidelined in the Corbyn years, tough stances on antisemitism and unequivocal backing of Nato, with a sideswipe at Stop the War coalition where his predecessor holds a leading role. Activists and MPs on the party’s left have spoken of feeling betrayed at this uncompromising attitude. But Starmer said his main focus was winning back trust from seats like Burnley. “When you lose former Labour voters, then you have to look at the Labour party and say – what do we need to change in the Labour party? – and we’ve made those changes,” he said. “We’ve got more to do and every vote has to be earned. And that’s why we’re here.” Nandy, the MP for nearby Wigan, is cautious about how far Labour has advanced in this part of England. “We’ve got more work to do,” she said. “We have to show them we can be trusted with a very scarce amount of money people have.” But still too few voters had heard their policies, she said. “When I talk to people in Wigan, in Leigh, they have been positive about our offer but they didn’t know about it. That’s why you have to be here, on their territory. “Voters talk about energy bills but they don’t know our policy of a windfall tax on North Sea oil and gas producers. We’re doing something wrong when we’ve been saying nothing but that for the last three months and people haven’t heard it.”I’m going to let you into a little secret here. Whenever I’m feeling blue, one thing that will cheer me up without fail is looking at Tara Reid’s IMDb page. Not necessarily for the films that she’s made, but for the films that she’s about to make. Like Eric Roberts before her, Reid’s IMDb page contains a long, long list of movies in pre-production. And while Roberts might have her purely on numbers (he currently has some 70 films that are either filming or in pre- or post-production), Reid arguably has him on choices. She has a comparably piffling 18 titles in pre-production, almost all of them seem precision-designed to stretch the limits of plausibility to their very limits. There isn’t room to go through a blow-by-blow of Reid’s upcoming work, but the ones I’m most looking forward to seeing are Bloodthirst (where she plays a vampire queen), Mayday 2 (where she plays an air marshal on a flight that becomes overrun with zombies), Aquatic Siege (“In the future, laws skyrocket. Without room, the government deports convicts into the ocean”), and Air Force Z (where there are also zombies, and also Tara Reid is the president). There is also a film called Ghostkiller, which has a plot far too convoluted to get into now, but needless to say the lead character is called Kyle Ghostkiller. However, the newest addition to Reid’s slate of forthcoming films is arguably the best. As revealed by Variety, Tara Reid has just signed on to play a British MI6 agent in a film called Cold Sun. Billed as “Cagney and Lacey with a difference”, Cold Sun will see Reid playing an inexperienced spy called Marsha Ravencourt, who teams up with an equally inexperienced Interpol agent to take down an international gang of murderous criminals. It’s obviously too early to say who this gang of murderous criminals will be, but the cast does include Vicki Michelle from ’Allo ’Allo and three different former EastEnders actors, one of whom is Shaun Williamson. Call it wishful thinking if you like, but this does make it sound as if Cold Sun will contain a scene where Tara Reid will fistfight Barry from EastEnders, and if that isn’t going to get bums on seats then I don’t know what will. And, while Cold Sun does have the potential to be utterly preposterous, I do genuinely hope it succeeds. Tara Reid will never be an A-list star, but you cannot for a moment question her work ethic. Her movies might not be classics, but the woman is knuckling down and making a living. Will I ever watch Baby Bulldog, the film she made in 2020 with Dean Cain? No. Will I ever watch Party Bus to Hell, the 2017 horror film about a coach that becomes overrun with satanic worshippers? No. Will I ever watch Andy the Talking Hedgehog, where she plays a fairy that befriends a talking hedgehog? Actually, I might, because I need to know that it really exists. The point is, Tara Reid isn’t afraid to do the work. And while she might currently find herself caught in a spiral of endless zero-budget zombie films and things that contain characters called Kyle Ghostkiller, it will only take one movie to break her out. And, who knows, that movie may well be Cold Sun. Especially if she gets to punch Barry from EastEnders in the face in it.Australia’s domestic spy chief, Mike Burgess, has declared the weaponisation of national security is “not helpful to us” after extraordinary scenes in federal parliament where Scott Morrison labelled a senior Labor frontbencher a “Manchurian candidate”. With Morrison ramping up the partisan rhetoric about risks to Australia’s sovereignty, the Asio director general told the ABC on Wednesday night the risk of foreign interference was “equal opportunity”. These risks affected all members of parliament, he told the 7.30 program, “so it doesn’t go after one particular party or the other”. Asked whether the current politicisation of national security was helpful to Asio’s work, Burgess said: “I’ll leave the politics to the politicians. But I’m very clear with everyone that I need to be that that’s not helpful for us.” The second forthright public intervention by Burgess in three days followed an ugly partisan confrontation in question time, with the prime minister branding the deputy Labor leader, Richard Marles, a “Manchurian candidate” before withdrawing the slur, and declaring the Chinese government had “picked their horse” in the coming election. The phrase “Manchurian candidate” refers to a politician being used as a puppet by an enemy power. Before using the insult, Morrison cited a speech by Marles in Beijing in 2019 calling for Australia and China to seek to build their relationship “not just in economic terms, but also through exploring political cooperation and even defence cooperation”. While Morrison and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, are attempting to use the penultimate sitting week of the current parliament to paint Labor as weak on national security and at risk of capture by the authoritarian regime in Beijing, the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, has struck a noticeably different tone over the past 48 hours. As the partisan rhetoric escalated in the House of Representatives, Payne used an appearance before a Senate estimates committee to deliver a nuanced message. She noted bipartisanship on foreign policy was “overwhelmingly preferable” and noted the parliament is united in support of Ukraine. The government has this week attempted to wedge Labor by reviving legislation to strengthen the character test – a proposal that gives the immigration minister more power to cancel visas. Labor on Wednesday attempted to defuse the fight by signalling it would pass the bill in the House of Representatives despite its concerns about the proposal. There are only a handful of Senate sitting days left before the federal election. The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, said the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, was attempting to move the bill to the Senate “when you know we have run out of time to pass the bill” – an observation begging the question why the Coalition had revived a measure it didn’t have time to legislate. Morrison said candidly in Tuesday’s regular Coalition party room meeting the character test bill presented the best point of contrast with Labor in the government’s legislative arsenal. It highlighted the “risks” associated with any change of government. Morrison told parliament on Wednesday he would “never be the preferred partner” of a foreign government that had sought to intimidate and threaten Australia. The escalating attacks on Labor came hours after a senior foreign affairs official warned that Beijing would seek to sow divisions among Australians. Morrison said there was only one side of politics that had demonstrated its resolve to deal strongly with China. “And I can tell you the arbiter of that is the Chinese government themselves who has picked their horse and he’s sitting right there,” he said, pointing to Albanese. Albanese sought to suspend standing orders to trigger an immediate debate on “the national security of Australia” in which the prime minister would make a 10-minute statement followed by a reply from the opposition leader. The government blocked the idea, with the leader of the house, Peter Dutton, saying he would not indulge “stunts”. Dutton had also used a question time appearance to cast doubt over Labor’s stated support for the Aukus partnership, in which the US and the UK have pledged to help Australia acquire nuclear-propelled submarines and to cooperate on security more broadly. The prime minister and other Coalition MPs seized on op-ed published by the Chinese Communist party-controlled Global Times newspaper, in which a retired Australian diplomat said Albanese would be a “safe” but not “charismatic” leader who “positively shines” in comparison with Morrison. Morrison said the Australian government had “earned the respect of nations around the world” for its “resolve” and “resistance”. He said China would “not find a fellow traveller when it comes to threats and coercion against Australia in my government”. “I will never be their candidate.” The febrile tone of the political attacks contrasted with evidence given in a Senate estimates committee hearing on Wednesday. Justin Hayhurst, a senior official at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, said: “I think, senator, it’s fair to say that the Chinese system seeks to exploit social and other divisions in countries to pursue its interests – that’s very apparent.” Payne – who has not repeated Morrison’s claims that a Labor government would “appease” China – said she always assured Australia’s allies and partners “of Australia’s strength and resilience and of the basic positions and values that we hold”. Asked if she assured those partners about bipartisan foreign policy settings, Payne said she was “pleased” that Albanese and the shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong, had met with the US secretary of state and the foreign ministers of Japan and India in Melbourne last week. “I’m sure that that message was strongly delivered,” Payne said. Under questioning from the Labor senator Kristina Keneally, Payne agreed that national security should normally be outside the “rough and tumble” of politics, but she said the government was entitled to raise questions about Labor’s lack of consistency on policy issues over the past few years. Payne said “the entire parliament, frankly, to the best of my knowledge, is united on respecting, acknowledging and emphasising the importance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity” of Ukraine amid threats from Russia. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Keneally said she was “heartened” by Payne’s answers because they indicated the minister retained “a commitment to bipartisanship on national security and foreign policy matters”. The government frontbencher Stuart Robert declined two opportunities on Wednesday to repeat Morrison’s claim that Labor would “appease” China. Robert said he thought the prime minister “has made it very clear that if you look at Labor’s track record, it is appalling”.Rental prices across America have soared over the past year, with some cities experiencing average price hikes of up to 40%, leaving many renters stunned and grappling with either having to move to be able to afford rent or pay significantly more of their income to remain in their homes. Joshua Beadle of Sarasota, Florida, lived in a 950 sq ft loft apartment for four years for about $900 a month until about one year ago when the owner sold the building and he was forced to move. He found a smaller, more expensive 700 sq ft apartment for $1,500 a month. After living there for one year, he recently received a lease renewal letter stating his monthly rent would be increased to $1,947. “Over the course of one year my rent has increased 116%. How does someone who works gigs and is making the same amount of money afford a price increase of $1,050 a month?” said Beadle. “Every month that I pay my rent I breathe a sigh of relief knowing I can live one more month, but I know that I am one emergency away from not being able to afford living expenses.” According to an analysis conducted by RedFin, rents in the US jumped 14% in December 2021 to $1,877 a month, the largest rise in more than two years. Some of the most affected cities included Austin, Texas, with a 40% increase in rental prices compared with a year previous, New York City at a 35% increase, and several metro areas in Florida exceeding over 30% increases in rental prices. There is less housing available for rent or sale now than anytime in the past 30 years, with supply shortages worsening, contributing to rising rental costs, inflation, and making home ownership more unattainable. For Beadle, his situation is now untenable. His $1,500-a-month rent was already a struggle for him to pay, and if late on rent payments he incurs a $100 fee. With the latest rental increase of nearly $450, he worries about his future in Sarasota, a community he’s lived in and helped build as a promoter and organizer for LGBTQ events over the years. “Now, I can’t even afford to live in the community that I helped to create,” added Beadle. “This is not OK, There needs to be an answer for the young, single people who are trying to survive and thrive. We can’t just be happy with being able to pay rent one more month not knowing if we will have a place to live next month.” Though rental prices in the US initially dropped due to the Covid-19 pandemic, prices rebounded in 2021 and increases quickly began to outpace pre-pandemic growth trends. These soaring costs – coupled with a broader surge in inflation – have wiped out any wage gains experienced by low-income Americans, as rental prices were already far outpacing wage increases in the US. Between 2001 to 2018, renter incomes grew by 0.5% while rental prices increased by 13%, leaving 20.4 million households, nearly half of all renters in the US, burdened by the cost of rent with more than one-third of their income going toward rent and utility bills. A report published by the Roosevelt Institute in November 2021 emphasized solutions for these soaring rent prices, including increasing the supply of affordable housing and expanding rights for tenants who are currently at the mercy of landlords and real estate developers without rent control and rent stabilization policies in place. “If we think that rent is a really core part of our inflation problem right now, which it is, then we really do need a more comprehensive approach,” said Dr Lindsay Owens, co-author of the report and a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute. Owens argued against solutions put forth by some economists seeking to rely on contractionary monetary policies such as raising interest rates through the Federal Reserve. “We advocate for an aggressive increase in supply and for the federal funding required to get that done,” said Owens. “But because we’re not going to see that happen quickly, and because when you have a supply shortage, landowners and landlords really have quite a bit of power because you don’t have a lot of options, we think rent control should be on the table to really take the edge off of those annual increases.” Without these comprehensive actions, the report notes, landlords, especially in markets where affordable housing supply shortages yield them significant power, will continue to hike rental prices, further burdening the incomes of renters and expanding their profits without any capital improvements to housing One week before his wedding in January 2022, Joey Texeira and his partner received a lease renewal from their landlord in New York City, with a 30% increase to rent of $750 a month for a one-year lease renewal or a 41% rent increase of $1,050 a month for a two-year lease renewal for an apartment they have lived in since December 2020. The lease renewal would start on 1 May. “We’re very stressed and don’t know exactly what we plan to do yet,” said Texeira. His husband was also unexpectedly laid off recently and their neighbors downstairs were recently priced out of the apartment building with a rental increase of $250 to $500 added to their monthly rent. “It’s criminal,” said Texeira. “Renters are completely unprotected. The only thing a landlord has to do is give proper notice in proportion to the percentage increase. Technically my landlord could have increased my rent 100% and there would have been nothing I could do. Renters need help and better protections.” Sabrina Marie DeAngelis, a tutor in Austin, Texas, recently experienced her rent increase from $920 to $1,440 a month for an apartment she has been living in since 2014, which she first rented for $675 a month. She was forced to accept the renewal with a monthly rental increase of $520, as she suffers from a disability that makes moving difficult and doesn’t have any family living nearby to help. DeAngelis tried applying for rental assistance benefits, but she didn’t qualify for assistance and Covid-19 rental relief funds in her area were already depleted by the time she applied. During the pandemic, DeAngelis decided to return to school to complete her master’s degree in hopes of increasing her income in the long term, taking a short-term cut in her income to attend school. “Now I’m forced to increase my work hours while going to school,” said DeAngelis. “My productivity at work and school has been terrible because I’m stretched thin on time. On top of that, almost all my income is going toward rent and bills.”“The visitors had played some shots unworthy of a Test side. In the tabloid versions, England’s performance was ‘shocking … inexcusable, almost beyond belief’ and ‘miserable … appalling … pathetic … awful.” Not a summary of England’s recent Ashes disaster, nor even a throwback to the not-so-nicey-90s: for this particular instance of English collapsibility you have to cast back to 1953-54 when an all-star MCC team was facing West Indies in what was supposed to be cricket’s unofficial world championship. It turned into a series as controversial and downright unpleasant as cricket has seen. Some who played in it – including Tom Graveney and Clyde Walcott – have argued it was more acrimonious than Bodyline. Curious, then, that so little has ever been written about it. Its legend was passed down by the increasingly unreliable memories of its leading players – by the club-circuit anecdotes of Fred Trueman or the scrupulously diplomatic memoirs of Sir Everton Weekes. It deserves to be more widely known and far better understood – not least because some of its most discordant notes still resonate in our current sporting and political climates. Today, players taking the knee before a game can cause conniptions; in 1954, a Guyanese cinema audience refusing to stand for the national anthem would have had the same effect. David Woodhouse, who has just published an authoritative history of the tour, became hooked by the story from reading Len Hutton’s autobiography. “It was a typically dry telling, but something happened at every turn,” he says. Hutton got the tour off to a bad start when he announced there would be no fraternising with the opposition – after their pioneering series victory of 1950, the West Indies players considered this a mortal insult – “and ill will just built up from there. Charles Palmer, MCC’s player-manager, told me that there was an arrow coming every five minutes. He never knew where it was coming from, but he knew it was coming.” On the field there were bouncer wars, bowlers no-balled for chucking and batting collapses as thick and slick as mudslides. There was such animus towards the umpires (on the part of players and locals) that one was physically attacked, and two were summarily replaced – in one case, by the groundsman. Off the field, MCC’s players were accused of bad language and poor behaviour and chafed under their captain’s restrictive policies; while the West Indies’ selection policies set island against island and turned their own captain, Jeff Stollmeyer, into such a hate figure that at one point he requested a helicopter stand by to get him safely away from the ground. While the English-centric record of events has always concentrated primarily on the “who said what to whom” and who was most to blame, Woodhouse aims for a far more balanced and expansive view, foregrounding Caribbean voices and revisiting complex and even contradictory characters, like Stollmeyer. Seven years of research and writing allowed him to place the full gamut of detail within a rich social, racial and political history. “When you read in Wisden about the crowd rioting at the third Test in Guyana you wouldn’t know that the constitution had been suspended, that’s never alluded to,” says Woodhouse. Nor that on the first day of the Test Guyana’s elected nationalist leader, Cheddi Jagan, had returned home for the first time since British troops had removed him from office. As for the cricket, while it wasn’t pretty, the five-Test series was fought to the last gasp even after England went two-nil down. Within the canon of West Indies cricket, it has become something of a lost tour, says Santokie Nagulendran, host of the Caribbean Cricket Podcast. “There are two reasons why it’s not remembered vividly,” he says. “First, West Indies blew a 2-0 lead, which led to a decline in results after the euphoria of 1950. “But there’s also the issue that communication between the islands was so sparse that providing an overall narrative of tours that took place across numerous locations was difficult back then. And West Indies cricketing history is often fragmented into different viewpoints depending on what island or nation or race the storyteller is from.” Nagulendran is impressed with Woodhouse’s effort, particularly the number of sources he has drawn from. For Vaneisa Baksh, the Trinidadian cricket writer currently working on a biography of Frank Worrell, the book brings a welcome opportunity for a more “nuanced understanding” of what went on on the tour. “In the section where he details each day’s play, I found myself hanging on to the events as if I were a live spectator,” she says, laughing. She hopes to see more retelling of Caribbean cricketing narratives like this. “In the past histories have often been excavated by only one kind of shovel,” says Baksh. “Even when West Indians attempted to tell their stories, they did it through mainly English ghost writers and I have seen some narratives that used language and observations that seemed alien to the people supposedly expressing them.” Baksh and Nagulendran extol the multi-volume history From Ranji to Rohan in which Prof Clem Seecharan chronicles the game in Guyana. The work of Hilary Beckles should also be on the reading list of anyone searching for a decentred view of Caribbean cricket. Woodhouse admits he feels very conscious of the observation of Gordon Lewis, the great neo-Marxist historian, that it has been “part of the colonial burden” for West Indians to read about themselves in books written by outsiders. As he points out, one of the messages of the 1953-54 tour is that we all have a bias. “Sometimes we don’t see it,” he says, “and sometimes it’s one we’re very proud of.” • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, visit this page and follow the instructions.No one is especially shy about the anger they feel about the partygate shambles in Downing Street, nor should they be. We are all a bit more discreet, though, about how enjoyable it is to watch the prime minister’s downfall. It hits every base of funny, from the slapstick to the surreal; a comedy home run. But there is something delicious here that is richer than humour. To see a chancer unmasked is a very particular pleasure. Likewise, I would happily give you my thoughts on the international tennis elite and their stance on vaccination. But why it was so droll to see Novak Djokovic detained in and then deported from Australia I would struggle to say; I never had anything against the man. Such is schadenfreude, the piquant German compound at once so broad and so precise. It is usually defined as the taking of pleasure in another’s misfortune. You don’t have to know them personally; indeed, sometimes it is better not to. The unfortunate object doesn’t have to deserve their lot, although it is so much more enjoyable when they do that we will often reverse-engineer our perceptions to make them deserve it. The most similar words in English are probably “gloating” and “crowing”, but those convey a vocalised delight. Schadenfreude is more of a private pleasure, which we would prefer not to admit. Presently, of course, we don’t have to say it out loud, since we are all feeling the same thing at the same time. Welcome to the age of collective schadenfreude – the global in-joke. On the one hand, this is a wonderful thing, the first green shoots of social harmony. On the other, “it is a kind of sadistic joy”, says Dr Aaron Balick, a psychoanalyst and the author of The Psychodynamics of Social Networking. “If you allow yourself enough empathy and compassion, you’re not going to be able to enjoy it.” So, can anything positive come out of our basest instincts? The most recent thinking about schadenfreude is distilled in a 2019 paper by the academic psychologists Shensheng Wang, Scott Lilienfeld and Philippe Rochat. They argue that there is not one force at play here, but three. The first element is social comparison, rooted in what Balick describes as “the way people manage their own egos, how they wish to perceive themselves as good enough or sometimes better than others … it is a reward experience, that feeling of superiority when someone else fails”. This is the schadenfreude that is rooted in envy or resentment, the kind you would be likely to feel towards a friend who was also a rival. It is more intense than the kind you might feel towards someone you don’t know. Using Boris Johnson as an example, his tribulations excite no satisfaction of envy in me, since I don’t use him as a benchmark, either morally or in terms of achievement. This pleasure is an individual one – it would be hard to build any collectivity around resentment, driven as it is by ego. Plus, we wouldn’t readily admit it – even to ourselves. Second, schadenfreude is motivated by the establishment of intergroup dynamics. This is broadly characterised as aggression – enjoying someone’s failure as a way of placing them outside your group, thereby strengthening the bonds within your group. Again, this sounds like one of the uglier faces of human nature, but it depends on what values you are clustering around. If you are uniting on the side of integrity and humanity, then there is a lot of galvanising joy to be had from collectively identifying people who are dishonest and inhumane and placing them outside your group. Alex Andreou, the co-host of the podcast Oh God, What Now? (formerly Remainiacs), draws a lot of optimism from this moment. “Just as Brexit went beyond traditional tribes, I think partygate is doing the same thing: it redefines the alignment. My only concern is that I don’t know that Labour is responding in a way that meets the mood and captures the feeling.” If that is true, it may be because you need a heightened sense of the absurd, and of self-parody, to fully enjoy the aggressive element of schadenfreude. Basically, you need to be able to say: “I, too, am a bit of an arsehole, but, come on, isn’t this intoxicating?” That kind of bubble-bursting self-criticism isn’t the Labour leader’s forte, but few politicians can claim that it is theirs, either. You have to go deep into Ken Clarke or Jess Phillips territory. It is also volatile, since the pleasure is extinguished immediately if there is a trace of compassion for the person at the centre. Take Allegra Stratton’s tearful resignation over the video in which she joked about a Downing Street party. “That didn’t make me happy in any way,” says Andreou. “I thought she was genuinely distressed. I can’t bring myself to celebrate that.” If you want to enjoy seeing someone in pain, they must come to represent something larger than themself. Stratton, having been the prime minister’s spokesperson (although not at the time of her resignation), worked as a symbol of the whole, but you had to determinedly avert your eyes from the fact that she was also a breathing, feeling human. Similarly, when news of the nth Downing Street party broke – the prime minister’s birthdaygate, when he was “ambushed” by cake – I experienced the totally unwanted emotion of sympathy. Not for him, obviously, but for Lulu Lytle, who has been immortalised as the purveyor of the most vulgar, post-imperialist fantasia, whose wallpaper will never again be considered except as a joke, who now has cake attached for the full Marie Antoinette (even though she had nothing to do with the baked goods). The scale of her public disaster is out of whack with her “crime”, which was merely to bod about being posh, meeting the strange demands of other posh people. This brings us to the third element of schadenfreude, the delicious twist that makes it disclosable to others, so that we can cluster around it like a log fire: cosmic justice. “When you get a homophobic preacher found in bed with a rent boy, or a religious moralist caught having an affair, it becomes: ‘See, everyone? We were right about those people,’” says Balick. “And then it elevates the in-group into something more righteous, more justice-oriented.” The external politics provide the requisite symmetry: if you want to believe the universe is steadily, invisibly working towards righting wrongs, then it has to look neat. The Johnsonian context was, as Andreou describes, “this strong feeling that the referendum was won with lies, and so we instinctively rejoice at lies becoming the instrument of his destruction. Exactly the same nexus of behaviour that was rewarded in 2016, and then rewarded again in 2019, has brought him down.” It is irrational in the sense that the universe doesn’t really do justice; there is no such thing as karma. Yet it is rational on a more basic level, what Andreou calls “legitimate gratification at the bad guy not winning all the time”. The punishment has to fit the crime not just in scale, but also thematically. There was no great buzz when Matt Hancock was busted for having an affair with an adviser; infinitely preferable would have been an affair with one of the PPE providers he had fast-tracked into multimillion-pound government contracts. We were cheated of our dramatic arc. The thirst for justice or fairness is a human trait, visible in babies of six months old. So, it is unsurprising to be satisfied by it, but what makes it so funny? The standup comedian Kate Smurthwaite explains: “Comedy, generally, is when something happens that we didn’t expect, but which does make sense. The great joy of schadenfreude is that we didn’t expect it, but it makes sense because they deserved it. It’s almost like a moment when we wonder if we actually can control things with our mind.” So, there is an element of self-mockery buried within – we are enjoying a sense of power that we know we don’t have in a well-ordered universe that we know doesn’t exist. But comedy can tip easily into cruelty – and the line between them can be blurred by your mood. “As a general rule, we can laugh if someone’s pride or ego is hurt,” says Smurthwaite. “If it’s their head, then either don’t laugh or wait till the ambulance has left.” It is a burning necessity, for the full schadenfreude experience, that the person starts out with very high status. There is no joy in watching the punctured pride of a no-mark. They need to be punished for something about which you are passionate, too, or at least something you can claim to believe in. “You get all your elements in one with Djokovic,” Balick says. “The collective witnessing of a person who is high status, getting their just deserts in the service of the vaccination argument that you care about.” But how productive is it, politically speaking? The political sociologist Paula Surridge counsels that we shouldn’t get too excited. “There is a body of literature, especially in the US, about ‘negative partisanship’. Voters aren’t motivated so much by love of their own side as dislike of the other. However, in our voting system, that doesn’t lead to a positive expression for another party. A strong anti-Conservative feeling will quite often lead that vote to segment.” Surridge argues that we are not all enjoying this moment for the same reasons – and many aren’t enjoying it at all. “People who voted Conservative in 2019 did so because they thought their areas were going to get better. I imagine some of them feel like they’ve been taken for fools and they won’t be delighting in the present moment. I don’t think it’s a good place for democracy, for them to feel like that.” For this moment to exist, we needed social media. In the first instance, to evidence our case. Then, Balick says, “there’s this added element of creativity – you can always find the perfect quote, or an old picture that’s directly related to the downfall. Once you have your meme behind you, you can really nail it.” There is much focus on the negative aspects of Twitter or Facebook, their echo chambers and rabbit holes, the brittle, raging impulses they seem to unleash in previously civilised people. While that is true, our (mistaken) sense that these communications are ephemeral unleashes a playful self‑disclosure, a readiness to admit ignoble feelings. That combination of openness, humour and self-deprecation on one side, and a shared quest for justice and fairness on the other, creates a sense of unity that is almost explosive. The only risk is that we enjoy it so much, and it is so ludic, that it goes the way of satire: the negative consequences we were enjoying so much evaporate as we sink, giggling, into the sea.Victor Hurtado, a staff member for the secretary of the army, was waiting for a connecting flight in the San Francisco airport when he was suddenly attacked by an aggressive brown poodle. The dog, teeth bared, lunged in his direction, ready to bite. A bloody outcome was only avoided because Hurtado’s mobility dog, a black labrador named Holly, had been trained to avoid escalation when confronted with violent behavior. Holly was paired with Hurtado nearly three years ago to assist him in living with a cognitive disability and trauma associated with his time in the army. She has undergone years of training to not only address his specific needs, but to behave appropriately and safely in public spaces. Yet, despite the vast difference in the two dogs’ behavior, they did have one characteristic in common: both wore service dog vests. The incident left Holly shaken and unable to perform her life-saving duties even after boarding the airplane, momentarily leaving Hurtado without his disability assistance support – all because someone felt the need to pretend their pet dog was a service animal. “It breaks my heart, really,” says Hurtado. “I feel like they think our animals are a joke.” An epidemic in the sky Hurtado’s story is not uncommon. In the past two decades, the number of passengers taking their dogs on planes has surged due to growing awareness of the Americans with Disabilities Act, which states businesses are restricted from asking for proof that a service dog is indeed a service dog. This legal protection was designed to safeguard the most basic dignities of disabled people – imagine a wheelchair user being questioned about the legitimacy of their chair – but led to widespread exploitation of this loophole. These days, unscrupulous pet owners obtain emotional support animal (ESA) certificates, which allow them to travel with their pets, who help ease symptoms of depression, anxiety and phobia. The number of delivered certificates has risen by 1,000% between 2002 and 2015, and a further 200% between 2015 and 2019. While pets inarguably provide emotional support simply by being themselves, they are not trained to help someone with a disability navigate life, or taught how to behave appropriately in public. And since anyone can get an ESA certificate – all it requires is a note from a doctor, though buying them online is easily done – good dogs and bad dogs, sweet dogs and aggressive dogs all qualify for the title. The problem became so severe that in December 2020, the Department of Transportation (DoT) stiffened their rules to allow only trained service dogs on planes, stating that it no longer considered an emotional support animal to be a service animal. Dishonest pet owners were not deterred. Instead of declaring their animal to be an emotional support animal, they now fully lie and call it a service dog. Theresa Stern, vice-president of interdisciplinary client services and engagement for Guide Dogs for the Blind, is seething. She navigates life with her eight-year-old yellow labrador, Wills, and can’t digest the fact that people are impersonating disabled people to get their pet dogs to fly for free. “I think of them as checking [their] integrity at the gate. Airlines are requiring you to fill out federal attestations that you are a person with a disability, and that your dog has been specifically trained to mitigate your disability. That’s what makes it a service animal.” The DoT’s language is clear: a service animal is a dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability, including those trained for psychiatric support. This means no cats, iguanas, peacocks, llamas – all of which have been taken on planes before – or any other non-dog animal. As for what tasks service dogs do perform, the answer is much more varied. Many mistakenly believe all service dogs are seeing-eye dogs, but today they can be trained to assist a range of disabilities. Organizations often breed and train dogs to take on specific programs generally at no cost to the client. The cost to these organizations to train one dog ranges from $20,000 to $30,000 and takes an average of two to two and a half years. Service Dogs of Virginia, where Holly was trained, has five programs. “We train autism dogs for young children and young adults on the spectrum; we train physical assistance dogs – the majority of them are trained for individuals who use powerchairs,” explains Sally Day, the director of development. They also train PTSD dogs for veterans and first responders, medical alert dogs and facility dogs working in schools or in counseling settings. As part of their training, service dogs are taken to airports and on airplanes to acclimatize. “Airports are incredibly complex environments in which you’re going to have to use an escalator or an elevator,” says Day. Planes are a whole other level of complex, with their compact space, strange noises and smells, and so many strangers packed together. A fake service dog would be immediately overwhelmed. Day sounds frustrated as we talk on the phone: “That someone would take their dog that they say means so much to them into an environment like that without any training – what does that tell you?” Fake service dogs muddy the waters Travel writer Becca Blond was traveling in the bulkhead seat with her medical alert dog, a pit bull named Bobbi, when an untrained dog across the aisle began barking, snarling and lunging at them. Bobbi remained quiet, but the flight attendant said she couldn’t have a dog fight on her plane. After the other dog’s owner admitted she had purchased an illegal service dog license weeks prior, Blond assumed they would be relocated. Instead, it was her who was moved to the back of the plane due to Bobbi’s breed, even though she never made a noise. Disabled travelers with service dogs are also affected indirectly by the proliferation of fake service dogs. Hurtado says Holly is regularly approached by children and adults alike reaching out to pet her. “They completely ignore the fact that [her vest] says do not touch, do not disturb, do not distract.” But because fake service dogs can’t be interrupted – since they aren’t working – people have become accustomed to being allowed to pet dogs with vests on. The service dog community at large is fearful that increasing bad behavior from fake service dogs will force lawmakers to create restrictive legislation targeting service dogs. “At the end of the day what happens is the airlines get frustrated, the public is frustrated, and then laws can change,” Stern explains. “And it could change to be: no dogs [allowed]. And then that makes it so that I can’t go where I need to go to live my life.” Are more liberal pet policies the answer? Despite what some may believe, faking service dog status isn’t always about getting dogs to fly for free. Stephanie Brown lives abroad but travels back to the US with her pomeranian, Penny, finding limited options for her to safely bring her dog along. (Both owner and dog are using a pseudonym.) Brown had Penny registered as an ESA before the DoT removed them from the service dog definition. “At one point last May in 2021, [American Airlines] even paused pets in the hold because of the constant flight changes due to Covid,” she says. With no options for bringing the well-behaved Penny in the plane – cabin or hold – Brown registered her on the federal service dog website. American Airlines maintains their restriction against checking dogs in cargo for regular travelers, as do Delta Air Lines and Southwest. There’s clear evidence that more liberal pet policies on planes would reduce loophole exploitation. “With a zero-tolerance policy, of course owners are going to find a way for their pet to safely travel in the cabin,” Brown argues. “Even charging more for a pet, but making the experience a more comfortable one for the owner and pet would reduce the need to claim a pet as a service or emotional support animal.” Similarly, large-breed dogs have limited options to fly until cargo shipping of pets resumes – and that’s only if they don’t exceed weight, size and breed constraints – so a solution is needed to ensure they too can travel. If a global service dog accreditation system was implemented and enforced, it would not only guarantee a dog’s service status, but perhaps it could also include a way for companion dogs to be verified as safe to fly in the cabin. In the meantime, both Blond and Hurtado have had their service dog’s legitimacy questioned, which is exhausting for them. They feel they shouldn’t have to defend themselves just for having a disability. “I don’t think the world owes me anything because I’m disabled,” Hurtado says, “but I do feel like it’s a right that we have that needs to be taken seriously. People who buy the fake jackets and have the fake service dogs, it’s just really disheartening. I see that as no different from somebody parking in a handicapped spot, [who’s] not handicapped.”Mama’s War Mama’s gone viral Mama’s screen shuffles faster Than hashtags invented by Black women Who turn tech into culture daily Boardrooms and bedrooms are battlefields What’s today’s share price for Mama Mama’s the only profitable stock Mama’s baby is five years old, mining coltan in Congo Mama’s foster children’s root chakras never healed Mama’s who George Floyd called out to When home is a dangerous place How does Mama lockdown? They pushed Mama into government for the numbers Mama’s a brand ambassador with diplomatic impunity Mama’s on the evening news talking like a man now Mama calls it power moves Mama’s war is the ocean The refuse in Mama’s belly The money in Mama’s mouth The melting ice caps releasing variants Mama’s heating up Mama’s a pissed off hellscape Mama’s asking what do you do when a child star explodes? Mama’s last born is on YouTube suckling data To feed the family Mama wonders why bell hooks never saw 70 and how Winnie couldn’t live at least as long as Nelson Mama is Shailja Patel, Assata Shakur, Stella Nyanzi, and Mona Eltahawy writing on the edge of the blade Mama plays hopscotch on national borders Mama is ungovernable terrain Mama is death’s favourite lover Mama is Henrietta Lacks’s blood in vaccines they won’t share Mama’s comorbidities are 4C hair, commodified fertility, and soil so rich Mama can’t own it Mama’s working extra shifts to buy herself back Mama’s in her overdraft paying antiBlack tax Mama’s talking to the therapist in her mind About Auschwitz, Amazon and Palestine Mama’s work keeps everyone alive But they won’t call Mama a genius They made Mama famous And acted like it was a substitute For being free Atlas, what do you know About carrying the world Mama’s war makes Myths out of men Life from man’s rib Lies from men’s pens So that we would never gaze Into Mama And call her God Lebogang Mashile is an actor, writer and poetOne day in 1958, Brion Gysin had a transcendental experience on the way to Marseille. The flickering of sunlight through avenues of trees along the roadside and the speed of the bus he was riding proved optimal, or so he thought, to put him in a hallucinatory dreamlike state. “An overwhelming flood of intensely bright patterns in supernatural colours exploded behind my eyelids: a multidimensional kaleidoscope whirling out through space,” Gysin recalled. “I was swept out of time. I was out in a world of infinite number. The vision stopped abruptly as we left the trees.” Gysin, an avant-garde artist and poet perhaps best known for the textual cut-up method that inspired David Bowie to creatively randomise his lyrics, was determined to create a gizmo that could induce others to experience what he had during his bus trip – namely vivid illusions of moving patterns when flickering lights shone through closed eyelids. After conversations with the novelist William Burroughs and Cambridge maths student Ian Sommerville, Gysin devised a cylindrical device he named the Dreamachine, which he described as the “the first art object to be seen with the eyes closed”. The Dreamachine would awaken humanity, Gysin hoped, from cultural stupefaction and liberate us from being passive consumers of mass-produced imagery. Gysin hoped it would replace every TV in every home in the US and make us creators of our own cinematic experiences. You may have noticed that didn’t happen. Sixty-four years later, Jennifer Crook, an art producer and director of Collective Act, which specialises in delivering challenging events in public spaces (she built – and burned – a 72ft (22 metre) community-built temple in a zone between Protestant and Catholic communities in Northern Ireland, and catalysed a re-enactment of the largest rebellion of enslaved people in US history) has updated the Dreamachine for a our age. Thanks to Netflix and social media timelines, we risk becoming more screen-fixated and experientially passive than Gysin imagined in his worst nightmares. Collaborating with neuroscientists, philosophers, Turner prize-winning artists and trance musicians, among others, Crook has created a 21st-century Dreamachine that, later this year, will be offering visitors free transcendental experiences without the need for illegal hallucinogenic drugs. Visitors to the machine will enter a room and sit in a circle before closing their eyes. Crook invited architecture collective Assemble to create an environment optimal for inducing transcendental experiences, but one where the technology was hidden and the potential for inducing mind-bending hallucinatory states optimal. Serendipitously, Anthony Engi Meacock from Assemble did his master’s thesis on Gysin’s Dreamachine, so knew where Crook was coming from. Moreover, Assemble specialises in discreet interventions, winning the Turner prize in 2015 for their project in Liverpool’s Four Streets community, refurbishing and beautifying run-down houses. The success of that project in Toxteth was marked by the very near invisibility of their signature contribution. Meacock estimates he has spent 40 hours inside various iterations of Dreamachine and that the nature and intensity of the experiences he has had are altered by the environment. “Levels of comfort, whether you were lying or sitting, how visitors were located to the light source, all of these completely changed the nature of the experience generated by the strobing effects.” While Gysin’s Dreamachine, rather like Wilhelm Reich’s near-contemporaneous “orgone accumulator”, was designed to stimulate intense, subjective experiences, Crook’s Dreamachine is a collective version. “Gysin created an object, I wanted to create an experience,” says Crook. “Both an intensely subjective one, rather like the transcendental one he had on the bus, but also a collective one.” In this, she was inspired by going to a 2014 Royal Festival Hall gig by Jon Hopkins, an electronic musician who has collaborated with Brian Eno and Coldplay, and who has supplied a musical soundscape for the new Dreamachine. “It’s hard to describe what happened,” she recalls, “but one guy in our row started dancing, and then everybody seemed to be dancing in the aisles. It just felt like this transcendental moment.” Hopkins, whose latest album, Music for Psychedelic Therapy, gives a sense of his lifelong interest in accessing alternative states through music, yoga and meditation, stresses the value of undergoing such transcendental experiences in group settings. “It’s like the difference between singing solo and in a choir. There’s an exponential improvement to the experience in the collective.” But what is the value of achieving these alternative states? “The important thing about these practices is the loss of ego and the beginning of shared experience,” says Hopkins. “These are alternatives to our problem-solving, scientific consciousness of reality. I think we evolved to have other forms of consciousness. For indigenous tribes in the Amazon, those alternative consciousness states become part of the shared experience of everyday life. We live in a society that doesn’t believe in that.” Hopkins believes that, after the past two years, we yearn for collective experiences and deeper personal ones: the Dreamachine may provide both. “There has been a decline in general mental health and a yearning to live differently. In my opinion, looking inside ourselves is where we find the answer.” Anil Seth, professor of computational neuroscience at the University of Sussex, hopes the Dreamachine project will highlight for the British public the hard problem of consciousness and the rich inner diversity of human mental lives. “We’re used to, as it were, external diversity – skin colour, different belief systems. When people report what they have experienced in the Dreamachine, it shows us something that has obsessed me for years: internal diversity. Your experience of blue may be different from mine, but language suggests they are the same. In fact, maybe language works because it papers over these differences.” Seth has become involved to stimulate public interest in what consciousness is and how perception works, and to invite an audience to take part in one of Britain’s biggest scientific research projects. A “perception census” compiled from visitor questionnaire responses is aimed at shining a light on our inner perceptual inner worlds. “It will be citizen science on an unprecedented scale,” says Seth. He hopes that 100,000 or more visitors will be involved when Dreamachine tours to London, Cardiff, Belfast and Edinburgh this year as part of Unboxed – the £120m festival commissioned by Theresa May’s government to celebrate British ingenuity. Dreamachine will also be involved in A New Direction, the schools project that resulted in Steve McQueen’s Year 3, an exhibition of photographic portraits of every year-three London schoolchild, which resulted in more primary school pupils than ever before thronging Tate Britain. Pupils will be invited to reflect on the issues the Dreamachine raises. “Seven year olds naturally ask profound questions about consciousness and perception, so I anticipate they will find Dreamachine really engaging,” says Seth. But what is going on when flickering lights induce the hallucinatory, even psychedelic, experiences that Gysin described? “Normally we see with the visual cortex,” says Seth. “The geometric and kaleidoscopic images that people see might be the visual cortex revealing its structure to us. These flickering light effects may be inducing us to see the cortex. It’s not by any means certain, but computational models suggest as much.” Like Gysin, Crook hopes her Dreamachine can revolutionise humanity. Eyes wide shut, we might open the portals of perception wider than ever. “We have this big organ that’s capable of so much and we’re using so little of it. My dream is that Dreamachine could be a new kind of secular temple. I really want it to change the world.” Dreamachine will tour to Belfast, Cardiff, Edinburgh and London as part of the Unboxed festival. Free tickets can be booked from late March.On the Night of Power, the holiest night of Ramadan, the grandiose solemnity of al-Aqsa compound in Jerusalem acquires an atmosphere of spiritual fervour, as hundreds of thousands of Muslim worshippers congregate at this revered site. The sound of prayers hums among the gorgeous walls of the multiple mosques within the complex, all richly decorated with mosaics and marble. Shot on this special occasion, Abrar Hussain’s documentary interweaves awe-inspiring aerial footage of al-Aqsa with intimate shots of the faithful. Many of them are Palestinians from the West Bank who endure numerous Israeli security checkpoints, adding excruciatingly long hours to their journey. Indeed, the omnipresence of the Israeli occupation looms large over the convivial and moving scenes of worshippers praying or breaking bread at the end of their fast. Efforts to construct more washroom facilities around the site have been thwarted by Israeli authorities, creating health risks for those in attendance. Nevertheless, a touching sense of solidarity arises from the sections dedicated to the countless volunteers who work tirelessly to ensure the safety of the evening. Considering the dynamism of their testimonials, Hussain’s documentary could perhaps have taken a more observational approach; instead, it relies on a booming, old-fashioned voiceover that describes everything that happens on-screen. Given how the landscape of contemporary film-making has changed, it feels especially outdated to use the narration to force feed viewers instead of letting the images speak for themselves. However, in spite of its pedestrian style, this documentary is a valuable window into the lengths that Palestinians have to go to simply to celebrate their faith. • One Night in al-Aqsa is released on 18 February, and tours.The settlement agreed between Virginia Giuffre and Prince Andrew over alleged sexual assault will leave the public to decide who they believe, according to a top US lawyer working with several victims of the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. The settlement draws to a close the civil lawsuit filed in the US in August last year by Giuffre against the Queen’s second son, in which she accused the prince of sexually abusing her after she was trafficked by his friend Epstein when she was 17. Andrew has consistently denied the allegations. Although the move is seen as a remarkable turnaround, Gloria Allred said the statement outlining the settlement did not constitute an admission of guilt and would have been “carefully negotiated by both sides”. Andrew acknowledged only that Giuffre was “a victim of abuse”, but did not state who perpetrated the abuse, what it entailed or when it took place, she said. She told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “This case will be dismissed and each will go their own way and he’ll never end up testifying under oath and the public will just have to decide who they believe. “Lawsuits are war, but a settlement means both sides are seeking peace. There will be peace now but this case will be remembered for many years to come.” Allred, who is representing 20 of Epstein’s victims, said settling meant that the only way Giuffre would be able to talk about what happened in future would be by filing a police report, or if criminal charges were brought she could publicly testify in a court of law. “Short of that we won’t hear Virginia being able to make statements about her allegations with Prince Andrew; that ship has sailed,” she said. She added that the terms of the settlement remained unclear, since although Andrew pledges to make a “substantial donation” to Giuffre’s charity, he doesn’t say how much or how it will be funded, or whether she will personally receive compensation. She speculated that Andrew may have had to pay more in order to avoid apologising. Giuffre and her legal team were likely to see a substantial settlement as vindication and sending a signal that her claim was legitimate, as is customary in such cases, but it also left the defendant with the opportunity to deny culpability, Allred said. “A defendant could say: ‘It’s not a vindication at all, I just wanted to get rid of the case, I don’t need this in my life, but I’m not admitting anything.’” She also claimed that the fact Andrew’s lawyers had echoed Giuffre’s demand for a jury trial last month had been to secure “better PR” rather than a sign of confidence in his case, since “he didn’t have a choice” in the matter: in the US, if one side requests a jury trial this is usually accepted. Other US attorneys representing victims of Jeffrey Epstein have hailed the settlement as a “victory” for survivors, with one claiming the royal’s “arrogance” stood in the way of settling sooner. Robert Lewis, a New York-based lawyer for Sarah Ransome, who was abused at the age of 22 and settled a lawsuit with Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell in 2018, told the Guardian he felt the victims were empowered by the settlement, which showed they had “been heard, and were no longer silenced”. He said that defendants such as Andrew “think the law on some level applies only to everybody else”, and was surprised that the prince and his legal team hadn’t settled earlier. Lisa Bloom, an attorney for several of Epstein’s victims, said the settlement was likely to amount to millions of dollars and represented a “monumental victory” for Giuffre.The intimate auditorium of the Seven Dials Playhouse becomes the Manhattan branch of the theatre-crowd hangout Joe Allen, complete with audience members seated at tables on stage, for Mark Gerrard’s ode to the lives and loves of Broadway fanatics. Steve will be catnip for anyone who ever used show tunes to cope with – or distract from – a crisis. “What sort of God could allow the movie version of Mame?” demands Steven (David Ames), over-the-hill at 47 as he downs vodka stingers à la The Ladies Who Lunch. Namesakes abound, from his possibly unfaithful partner, Stephen (Joe Aaron Reid), with whom he has a child, to the waiter Esteban (Nico Conde), who materialises to dispense wisdom and twinkle charmingly. A framed picture of another Stephen – the late Sondheim – watches over them like a guardian angel; this production is dedicated to him, and his lyrics are the lingua franca of a group that extends to Carrie (Jenna Russell), who is delighted to find that her cancer blog has been optioned by Hollywood. The six-strong ensemble hit convincing notes of strain and struggle as the friends doing what they can to pretend they are still young: sleeping around, sexting, conducting an experiment in throuple-dom. Aside from one clunky scene showing Stephen juggling multiple texts and phone calls, the staging and writing zing nicely. It’s just a pity that Gerrard never quite breaches his characters’ defences as, say, Terrence McNally might have done. Andrew Keates’s production is smooth: a rotating disc within the stage provides views of the action from every angle during Steven’s fraught birthday dinner. Like the play, it goes around in circles entertainingly even if it never quite arrives anywhere new. • At Seven Dials Playhouse, London, until 19 March.Ministers’ plans to scale back free PCR Covid tests could weaken the UK’s defences if a new variant of the virus emerges that results in “significant new waves” of cases, a group representing local public health chiefs has warned. Before a meeting of cabinet ministers and the prime minister later this week to discuss the “learning to live with Covid” strategy, the Association of Directors of Public Health (ADPH) said that forcing people to pay for lateral flow tests would also have a “detrimental impact” on take-up, particularly among disadvantaged communities. The group said that despite the government being expected to roll back the last remaining Covid laws from next week, coronavirus was “yet to become endemic”, and added it was “difficult to predict when this state may be attained”. “Significant levels of cases, hospitalisations and deaths continue to disrupt and devastate individuals, public services and the economy,” a briefing note said. “There remains a degree of unpredictability about the course ahead.” Whitehall sources told the Guardian on Monday that ministers were pressing ahead with plans to start winding down Covid testing and payments for isolation from next week to save more than £10bn. In a veiled criticism of Boris Johnson, given his investigation by the Metropolitan police for allegedly attending a series of lockdown-breaking parties, the ADPH said political leaders had “a responsibility to model good behaviour and foster an environment of trust and collective spirit”. While the group said it wanted to “avoid strict measures and lockdowns”, it called on Johnson to “chart a sensible path between the extremes of lockdowns and letting the virus rip”. The ADPH said: “Oscillating harms businesses and disrupts public services more than a course of action to keep infection rates more stable.” Concern was also raised about the ability of councils and other community organisations to continue running local contact-tracing operations, if the national test and trace service is pared back significantly. “Unless additional resources is available, capacity to do any contact-tracing at a local authority level will be extremely limited and in many areas nonexistent,” the ADPH said. It also said that even when the legal requirement for someone to isolate if they have Covid is dropped, “it will still be the case that this is sensible public health advice”. Employers were urged to help “by creating a culture in which coming to work when ill, whether with Covid-19 or the flu, is discouraged and considered not in the interests of the individual concerned, their colleagues or customers”. Where outbreaks happen in schools and care homes, the ADPH recommended that infection prevention “will continue to be appropriate for these settings, though the thresholds for intervention are likely to be higher”. In care homes, the ADPH said mask wearing should increase when an outbreak occurs and more antiviral treatment be made available. It advised that, where it is found that Covid is being transmitted in schools, there should be a “short-term return to mask wearing at least in secondary settings”. After reports that the ONS’ infection survey could be scrapped, the ADPH argued it “should be retained”. The Department of Health and Social Care was contacted for comment. A government spokesperson said this week that free testing was kept “under review” but insisted “no decisions have been made on the provision of free testing”. The spokesperson added: “Everyone can continue to get free tests and we are continuing to encourage people to use rapid tests when they need them. “Testing continues to play an important role in helping people live their day-to-day lives, keep businesses running and keep young people in school.”My brother John Sawyer, who has died aged 86, was a linguist and Old Testament scholar with an incisive and imaginative mind. He was one of the first to apply what is now referred to as “reception history” to a study of the Bible – looking at how it has been interpreted by different readers over the centuries. John was born in Inchinnan, Renfrewshire, to Beatrice (nee Fergusson), a writer, and the Rev Alek Sawyer, a Church of Scotland minister. Our family moved to Dunbar in 1938, and then, with our father in the services, spent much of the second world war years with my grandmother in Edinburgh, where John attended George Watson’s boys’ college, and found that languages were his forte. He went to Edinburgh University to study classics, graduating with first-class honours in 1957. His national service with the Royal Scots saw him working as an interpreter in Cyprus, where he also became fluent in Turkish and started studying Hebrew. He then decided to enter the ministry. John graduated with a BD from Edinburgh in 1962, having been excused the Hebrew class in favour of one in Arabic. After an 18-month fellowship in Jerusalem, he returned to a lectureship at the University of Glasgow, where he was ordained in 1964 as a chaplain. He moved to the University of Newcastle in 1965, where over the next 29 years, eventually promoted to professor and head of the department of religious studies, he wrote a Hebrew grammar, a two-volume commentary on Isaiah, two editions of Prophecy and the Biblical Prophets (1987), and 50 research papers on language and religion. A move to Lancaster University in 1994 coincided with the publication of perhaps his best-known book, The Fifth Gospel – Isaiah in the History of Christianity (1996). In 2002 he moved to Perugia University in Italy and became editor in chief of the Blackwell Bible Commentary, also singing in the university choir. His research during these years at Perugia also produced A Concise Dictionary of the Bible and its Reception (2009). He returned to Northumberland in 2012 and wrote The Bible in Music (2015), also taking part in choral singing in Alnwick. His published legacy includes nine books, eight edited books or series and more than 100 papers, reviews and notes. John’s involvement with inter-faith groups in Glasgow, Perugia and especially in Newcastle led him, uniquely, into honorary membership of the Newcastle Reformed Synagogue. John married three times: his first two marriages, to Rosemary Larmuth in 1965 and Deborah Lilburn in 1990, ended in divorce. He is survived by his third wife, Jean (nee Aaron-Walker), whom he married in 2012, four children – Alexander, Hannah and Sarah from his first marriage and Joseph from his second – and five grandchildren.The United States’ improbable, unbeaten run through the Olympic men’s ice hockey tournament came to a devastating halt at the quarter-final stage on Wednesday with a 3-2 penalty shootout defeat to Slovakia. The youngest US men’s Olympic team in decades appeared bound for the semi-finals after coming from behind for a third straight contest to lead 2-1 with under a minute remaining. But Slovakian captain Marek Hrivic scored a game-tying goal with 43.7 seconds left and Peter Cehlarik broke a stalemate in the decisive shootout that followed a scoreless overtime period. Slovakian goaltender Patrik Rybar, who made 33 saves in the match, was mobbed by his teammates in front of the goal after turning away Andy Miele’s final attempt in the shootout as the US team looked on in stunned silence. “It’s the medal round and you’re going to get every team’s best,” said Miele, the USA captain who fought through tears while fielding questions in the mixed zone. “They put up a lot of shots and he made a lot of big saves. We didn’t find a way to score more goals. It just comes down to that.” The Americans arrived in Beijing with the youngest roster in the 12-team tournament, a group including 15 college students and five teenagers hastily assembled after the NHL withdrew from Olympic participation in December due to the spread of the Omicron variant, and a team who didn’t skate together until a few weeks ago. But the US team upended expectations by winning all three of their preliminary-round games to earn top seeding in the quarter-finals, stirring up the echoes of the ragtag group of fuzzy-faced amateurs who stormed through the Olympic tournament in 1980, upsetting the heavily favoured Soviet Union along the way in the storied Miracle on Ice. Team USA’s top seeding earned them an extra day of rest over Slovakia, who took the ice for Wednesday’s quarter-final less than 24 hours after Tuesday’s qualification play-off win over Germany. It appeared to show in the early stages as the Americans got off to a flying start, forechecking with high intensity and rattling off the first five shots on goal. But it was Slovakia’s Juraj Slafkovsky who drew first blood midway through the opening frame, drifting into the slot and firing a left-handed missile into the back of the net for his fifth goal of the tournament. Undeterred after having conceded the opening goal in their previous two wins against Canada and Germany, the US equalized with less than a minute to go in the opening period when Harvard junior Nick Abruzzese made a slick move in front of the goal before poking it through Rybar’s legs. The Americans then nosed ahead midway through the second period when the St Cloud State University senior Sam Hentges opened his Olympic account. “They played outstanding this entire tournament,” USA defenseman and alternate captain Steven Kampfer said of the college players who made up more than half of the team’s roster. “These young guys have a great future ahead of them and I think they know that. They’ve just got to continue to work hard but the sky is the limit for these kids and that was evident in this tournament as it went on.” The American lead stood until the final minute when Hrivic, formerly of the NHL’s New York Rangers and Calgary Flames, knocked a loose puck past USA goalie Strauss Mann with Slovakia staring down elimination and their goaltender off the ice, leaving Team USA to rue to their failure to cash in on three power-play opportunities in the third period, one of them a five-on-three advantage. “That was really tough,” Kampfer said. “I thought we did a good job until that point, we did a good job defending. We knew that they were finding a lot of pucks to the net at the end and there’s one that gets free and they get a stick on it. They tie the game and got a little momentum.” The US were forced to regroup quickly for the 10–minute sudden-death overtime period where both sides exchanged scoring chances but neither could break through. Only Cehlarik managed to find the back of the net in the best-of-five shootout as Rybar turned away all five American attempts. “We couldn’t find a way to get it by him,” Miele said. “He’s an aggressive goalie and he did well tonight.” University of Minnesota forward Ben Meyers added: “We played really well in our first three games and this is our first bad game. Now we are done. I have no complaints at all about anything. I’m just disappointed that we lost this time.” Mann, the 23-year-old University of Michigan product who finished with 34 saves in the losing effort, was among several US players both overcome by emotion after the shock defeat but grateful for the unexpected journey. “It was amazing,” Mann said. “It is probably the biggest honour of my life to represent our country, play on the Olympic stage and just be a part of something bigger than hockey. To get to know a lot of great guys, fill those relationships that will last a lifetime and help unite the country a little bit.” Sweden, who knocked out a Canada side also shorn of its NHL players, Finland and the Russian Olympic Commitee join Slovakia in the semi-finals.My friend Geoff Roberts, who has died aged 92, made his living as a teacher but had a large hinterland beyond his work in the classroom, including as a part-time illustrator and writer. Much of Geoff’s creative output came after his early retirement from teaching in the early 1980s – a long and fruitful period in which he became a writer of short stories and poems, some of which were published in Reach Poetry magazine. When I was working as a freelance editor for Camra, the Campaign for Real Ale, in 1998, tasked with producing Room at the Inn, a guide to pubs offering bed and breakfast, and with no budget for a photographer, all I had to work with was poor quality photos sent in by the pubs themselves. Almost in despair I called upon Geoff, who worked his magic by providing wonderful line drawings, based on some of the photos, that really made the book. Just a few months before his death, Geoff’s talent as a novelist was recognised with the publication in 2021 of his Arthurian romance novel Swordsman of the Sun. Born in Ilford, Essex, to Hilda (nee Gilpin), a housewife, and Douglas, a partner in a London paper firm, Geoff, who was an only child, went to Watford grammar school and after national service studied English at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he met Helen Eames, who was studying at nearby Homerton College and whom he married in 1954. They both became English teachers, and Geoff taught at Sandbach school in Cheshire, Northampton grammar school and Cedars upper school in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire (where he was head of English), before becoming a teacher trainer at Weymouth College in Dorset. After Geoff took early retirement, he and Helen moved to the village of Saint-Orens-Pouy-Petit in south-west France, where I and my husband, Stephen, had a holiday home. They were freezing in their poorly insulated house, but their “lives were saved”, as Geoff often recalled, by the villagers, who kept them supplied with stumps from old vines to burn in their stove. Thus they established friendships with local families, in particular the Plantés, that endured until the end of his life. Geoff delighted friends and families each Christmas with cards featuring his drawings of a local château or other landmark, and I will always treasure the final one from Christmas 2020 that depicted my own house. He was a keen tennis player, and appeared regularly on court well into his 80s. He was also a huge rugby fan, and friends learned not to drop in when a big match was on television. Watching sport helped sustain him through increasingly regular spells in hospital in his final years. He is survived by Helen, their son, Steve, and two grandchildren Sophie and Aidan. Another son, Andy, died following a hit and run accident in London in 2005; a circumstance to which Geoff was never truly reconciled.Created by Hephaestus and released into the world of men to bring both misery and hope, Pandora is a figure whose name conjures an expectation of mythic drama; but Susan Stokes-Chapman’s bestselling debut novel only hints gently at those possibilities. Her Pandora is a young woman living in an attic above her uncle’s shop of fake antiquities in 18th-century London, training herself to become a designer of fine jewellery. One day, her crooked uncle illegally salvages from a shipwreck a Greek vase so old it cannot be dated, carved with images from the Pandora myth, and wreathed in horrifying bad luck. The narrative ranges between young antiquarian Edward, Pandora herself, and her uncle Hezekiah to chart the disasters and mysteries that follow. It dances between painstaking realism and the softest chance of the supernatural, courting both but marrying neither in an elegant negotiation that admits very different readings. Pandora is a narrator rather than a hero, observing with a cruel eye for detail that seeps into other characters’ narration, too – one London lane “teems like maggots in an open sore”, and the book is filled with people described as “fleshy” or with “too many chins”, or followed by the smell of rotting meat. Most of the time, it’s this vivid witnessing that defines Pandora. Her namesake opens the box, and bears the consequences; but this Pandora doesn’t take that kind of decisive action. Even the actions of her magpie, Hermes, have more of a plot impact than her own. There’s a sense that Pandora holds the moral high ground in this novel, not because she does good things but because she is suffering under her uncle’s tyranny. Virtue via suffering is apt for this time period, but it’s also a device that sometimes makes her bland. Meanwhile, her uncle is purely despicable – he too tends to be flat. Those clearcut, simple main players are plainly a creative decision, though, because Stokes-Chapman can write fascinating, three-dimensional characters; sharp, sad Cornelius Ashmole and the angrily tragic Lottie, Hezekiah’s housekeeper, haunt the periphery of the novel. Meanwhile, extensive research brings the period so much to life you can taste it. With a convoluted plot full of buried family histories and fantastical archaeological theories, Pandora is a readable, solid debut. • Pandora by Susan Stokes-Chapman is published by Harvill Secker (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Did something change this month? Having proclaimed the Brexit referendum triumph of 2016 as the unique achievement of Boris Johnson and praised his historic success in the election three years later with the slogan “get Brexit done”, did the wreckers of the European dream slowly begin to realise that if Johnson goes, it shifts the sands from beneath their feet? I’m the president of European Movement – Andrew Adonis is chair – and between us we agreed that this link needed a public airing. Learning from the direct and simple messaging of the anti-European newspapers, we felt the phrase: “If Boris goes, Brexit goes” said it clearly enough. Adonis duly tweeted it, to the horror of the pro-Brexit press. The past few weeks have been a torrid time for the prime minister. He designed a set of restrictions he said were of critical importance for our safety and for the ability of the NHS to cope with the pandemic. He was right to do so. But disclosures since give the clearest impression that he not only broke the rules, but that he also misled parliament. Johnson said he would accept the findings of Sue Gray’s inquiry, in stark contrast to his treatment of Sir Alex Allan’s report into the home secretary’s behaviour in 2020. I believe he is entitled to insist that matters are not prejudged prior to the release of the full findings of the Gray inquiry, and the completion of the Metropolitan police investigation. I do not believe in the rule of the mob. But a great deal hangs on this. If the prime minister is found to have lied to parliament and to the people, what defence is there to the allegation that the Brexit cause – mired in similar controversy over lies and dissembling – was conducted with the same disregard for the truth? We all have a clear memory of the Brexit campaign and what was said. That we were being run by Brussels. That European restrictions were holding back our economy and lowering our living standards. That we could keep all the benefits of the single market and customs union, while negotiating trade deals with faster-growing countries in a world that was shifting east. That we had to regain control over our borders. That there would be no new border between Northern Ireland and mainland Great Britain, and that the Good Friday agreement, having ended years of strife, would be fully honoured. Theresa May became prime minister and immediately handed important offices of state to the three leading Brexiters. Boris Johnson went to the Foreign Office. David Davis went to the Department for Exiting the European Union, and Liam Fox to the Department for International Trade. They had their hands on the levers of power for two years before Johnson and Davis resigned, claiming their jobs were impossible. Having ousted May, they claimed that a bare-bones trade deal – without most of the benefits of the customs union and the single market – was “oven ready” and would “get Brexit done”. In a straight contest with the unelectable Jeremy Corbyn, Johnson secured his mandate. Except their deal didn’t “get Brexit done”. Within months it had seriously frustrated trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain, and the government threatened to tear up the very deal it had itself negotiated to safeguard the position of Northern Ireland. Lord Frost resigned from the cabinet as Brexit minister last December after less than a year, complaining of the Covid strategy but also bemoaning that, regarding Brexit, the correct agenda was not being pursued. Characteristically, he gave no detail as to what that agenda should have been or who was holding it up, but the villains were familiar: the metropolitan elite, the civil service, the BBC, Brussels, the remoaners – more or less anybody, and now including myself and Andrew Adonis. Everyone except the actual people in positions of power. That is why February 2022 feels so significant. The cry has been growing louder. The right wing has been circling. Letters have been landing on the chairman of the 1922 committee’s desk. Something must be done. Reshuffle the pack, create a new government department and put yet another Brexiter in charge to pluck all those low-hanging plums that proved beyond the reach of predecessors. Anyone with experience of Whitehall knows what happens next. The nameplates will change and the same civil servants will have new titles without actually moving their offices. But they will face exactly the same questions that have now been unanswered for five years. What is Brexit all about? Jacob Rees-Mogg, Lord Frost’s spiritual successor in his new role as minister for Brexit opportunities, has a novel approach. He told the Sun last week that he is bypassing the civil service to ask if anyone else in the country has any ideas about Brexit benefits. Sun readers are invited to write to him with suggestions and he will see what can be done. But that too is revealing. One of the first tests officials apply to new ministers is to ask if they know what they want and to assess whether they have the ability to communicate that to them. I am afraid that Rees-Mogg has not passed this test, which is all the more surprising as he had plenty of time lounging on the government frontbench, listening to suggestions from Brexit-supporting Tory MPs. So did something happen in February 2022? Maybe it’s just a feeling, a cloud no bigger than a man’s fist, the first breath of wind before the storm when the Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph employ two of their most renowned columnists to attack Andrew Adonis and myself, merely for making the point that their hero may have feet of clay and take the Brexit house down with him. Perhaps they have smelled the wind, just as I have. Lord Heseltine was the deputy prime minister under John Major and a member of Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet from 1979 until 1986When the United States’ Department of Homeland Security announced in early February it was training quadruped “robot dogs” to help secure the US-Mexico border, the department’s spokesperson described the nearly 2,000-mile region as “an inhospitable place for man and beast, and that is exactly why a machine may excel there”. But, of course, people do live, work, and try to eke out a living in this “inhospitable” desert space – leaving one to question what, exactly, the robot dog is meant to excel at? The border has long been a testing ground for a range of emerging surveillance and policing technologies, which activists have argued make the space even more dangerous to migrants, all in the name of protection, law and order. Nicknamed the “smart wall”, the tools used at the border include semi-autonomous surveillance drones and surveillance towers equipped with cameras and night vision, and radar. Former US congressman William Hurd, who represented the only Republican-held congressional district on the US-Mexico border for six years, endorsed a plan to bury fiber optic sensors capable of detecting underground movement. The robot dogs would be one of many technologies deployed as part of the “smart wall”, but they aren’t limited to the border. US police departments started trying out the devices in recent years. Massachusetts state police tested the robot dogs in 2019. Police in Honolulu used the same model to remotely screen its unhoused citizens for Covid and scan their temperatures. Police have used robots for decades, usually for remote monitoring or to respond to bomb threats. But reports of robot dogs draw fierce criticism, for several reasons. First, they’re debuting in public amid a nationwide discussion on police power. Also, they’re expensive, ranging anywhere between $90,000 and $150,000, when many are discussing police budgeting. They’re equipped with a host of AI-enabled surveillance devices, alarming privacy activists, and do terribly on social media because they bear an uncanny resemblance to the world-ending machines featured in Netflix’s dystopian satire Black Mirror. This played out last year, when the New York police department (NYPD) announced it would suspend its contract with Boston Dynamics, one of the main manufacturers of robot dogs, and return its Digidog after footage of the dog went viral on social media. John Miller, the police department’s deputy commissioner for intelligence and counter-terrorism, blamed “politics, bad information, and cheap soundbites”. In the Bronx neighborhood where NYPD deployed the robot, however, criticism of their use was based on their own experiences with police, rather than social media outrage. Councilmember Kevin Riley, who represented the neighborhood where NYPD deployed the robot, said residents had long complained that police were slow to respond to calls for service in the neighborhood and many felt ignored. When the robot dog appeared, people in the neighborhood were concerned this meant less human investment. They were afraid the robots were a substitute for sustained investment. Police and public service robots rarely replace their human counterparts, but removing the human element is always a fraught design decision, especially for the vulnerable groups interacting with them. The robots used by police and potentially on the border are semi-autonomous, meaning while they’re capable of maneuvering on their own, they are usually remotely controlled by a human. That distance can be useful. Consider the prototypes of police robots that would take over during traffic stops, potentially making them safer for police and motorists, or other early versions that saw robot dogs as functional canaries used to investigate potential gas leaks or downed power lines on oil rigs, construction sites and power plants. But it also makes people deeply uncomfortable. Crossing multiple terrains Each of these concerns came to the fore when DHS made its announcement, with some advocating for destroying the robot dogs outright. The version of the robot dog potentially coming to the south-western border is particularly dystopian, recalibrating the devices to be essentially roving sentries. Each is embedded with different types of cameras (thermal, night vision, long-range) and sensors (chemical, weapons detection). DHS praised the device’s ability to cross multiple terrains – including sand, rocks and hills – and its durability in high heat and cramped spaces. DHS’ choice of vendor sparked additional concern. While most police departments leased their pups from Boston Dynamics, which forbids customers weaponizing any of their tech, DHS chose Philadelphia-based Ghost Robotics. Late last year, the company debuted a version of its robot dogs equipped with long-range guns capable of hitting targets at a reported 1,200 meters. DHS’s oddly cheery blogpost also implied the robots would be used beyond the border itself, including “towns, cities, or ports’’ where DHS agents might encounter dangerous conditions. Federal officials have increased authority to stop and search civilians within 100 miles of the border, despite fourth amendment protections against arbitrary or excessive stops and seizures. A 2019 report from the Electronic Frontiers Foundation tracked the surveillance devices used in border towns across the US, including facial recognition, military drones, cell-site simulators, license plate readers, body cameras and facial recognition. Human rights groups were, unsurprisingly, horrified. “We create the conditions forcing people into taking the journey here, and now we plan to meet them with robot dogs?” said Jacinta Gonzalez, senior campaign director at Mijente, a Latino advocacy and migrant rights group, told TRT World. Technology ethicists speak often of “mission creep”, wherein a specific technology or tactic is introduced for a single, specific purpose, then becomes normalized and introduced in new settings. Often this refers to the rise in military-grade equipment being funneled into US police departments, including the robot that Dallas police used to remote deliver and detonate a bomb in 2016, killing a sniper. Going from gas-leak detection to migrant-hunting tools, robot dogs appear to fit the mission creep definition, bringing us back to the original question: what exactly are border robot dogs built to accomplish? Perhaps maintaining and automating the US border’s inhospitable character rather than subverting it, is the answer.Brittany Dawn Davis, a fitness and Christianity influencer from Fort Worth, is being sued by the state of Texas for promising her followers personalized exercise and nutrition plans that never materialized. Davis’s website promised unsuspecting clients that her Brittany Dawn Fitness (BDF) crew would be with them “every step of the way”, but instead her followers received a generic diet and workout plan not unique to them. The state believes this amounts to “deceptive trade practices” and is seeking damages from $250,000 up to $1m. Davis, who has almost 1 million TikTok followers, became a lifestyle influencer after competing in “bikini competitions”, bodybuilding events where the contestants stay in swimsuits. She launched her business, bdawnfit.com, in March 2014 claiming it promoted a holistic approach to health, including “flexible dieting, effective training, balanced living, and community support”. Davis sold custom fitness and diet plans, priced between $92 and $300, as well as her own personal time to each client, but after speaking with one another, clients realized they were given similar or identical plans, and never had face-time with the fitness coach. When they complained on Instagram, some said Davis deleted their comments. A Brittany Dawn sample meal plan found on Dawn’s Pinterest includes instructions for what to eat Monday through Wednesday. Breakfast on this plan is some variety of “1 scoop isolate protein, 1/2 cup of oats, and 1 whole egg.” Lunch and dinner is a protein like chicken or fish and “green veggies”. Cori Reali, one of Davis’s clients in Wisconsin, who suffered from an eating disorder, told Dallas’s WFAA that she paid $115 for one of Davis’s customized plans but said she never received specific guidance. “The red flags started to go up. I was not individualized. I was not part of this ‘Team Brittany Dawn’. It set me back. It actually pushed me back into my eating disorder.” By 2019, those who claimed they had been scammed by Davis began contacting each other on Facebook. A petition to “Stop Brittany Dawn [Davis] Fitness Scams” was created, which has now amassed over 15,000 signatures. It claimed that Davis “falsely promotes women empowerment on her social media platforms, while continually scamming and lying to her followers, clients, and fans”. In a now-deleted apology video posted to YouTube, Davis said: “I apologize to anyone who feels like they got scammed from me … I now realize that I should have had more help and that this is a lesson that I am having to learn the hard way, and for that, I am sorry.” Her fitness website is still active, but the Better Business Bureau has placed it on alert. It’s not currently possible to purchase any fitness plans. However, despite her apologies, Davis’s customer service team did not offer her customers full refunds. Davis said she would offer partial-to-full refunds to some customers, but first asked them to sign non-disclosure agreements. Davis did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. Davis has since pivoted to lifestyle and religious content. She now hosts Christian retreats in different cities across Texas and charges $125 for admission. These retreats promise a “gospel centered day with other God-fearing women”, according to her website. Davis says it will be a space where attendees “will be sharing our hearts on preparing for difficult seasons, staying faithful on your walk with the Lord, and how our seasons of difficulty often lead to our Kingdom calling”. She continues to post on Instagram most days and two weeks ago she announced to her about 466,000 followers, “the long hair went away yesterday, short-haired Britt is BACK”.Good morning. A video of a handful of screeching tanks and lumbering armoured vehicles mounting a transport train in Crimea accompanied the Russian defence ministry’s trumpeted announcement that some of the forces that have been encircling Ukraine will “head for their garrisons”, writes Dan Sabbagh. Such evidence is clearly far too tentative to amount to anything definitive, however, and many are sceptical about the pledge to withdraw. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said this morning the alliance had not seen any evidence of a Russian withdrawal. Meanwhile, Joe Biden has claimed that 150,000 Russian troops remain in a “threatening position” around Ukraine, despite Russian claims of a withdrawal, and warned that an invasion “remains distinctly possible”. On Wednesday morning, Stoltenberg said Russia was building up its military forces on Ukraine’s border with more troops on their way, contradicting Moscow’s claims of a drawdown. What else did Biden say in his speech on Ukraine? Biden addressed the American people directly, telling them he was not going to “pretend this will be painless” and that they would feel it at the petrol pump. What’s happening today? Nato defence ministers are meeting in Brussels today. The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, will join Stoltenberg and others to consider next steps amid tensions in eastern Europe. Prince Andrew’s ‘arrogance’ prevented earlier settlement, lawyers say US attorneys representing victims of Jeffrey Epstein have hailed Tuesday’s settlement between Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre as a “victory” for survivors, with one claiming the royal’s “arrogance” stood in the way of settling sooner. Giuffre filed a civil lawsuit against the Duke of York in New York last year, accusing the prince of sexually abusing her when she was 17. The move represents a remarkable turnaround for the duke, who has always denied having a sexual relationship with Giuffre and had vowed to clear his name in court. “It’s another banner day for the survivors,” Robert Lewis, a New York-based lawyer for Sarah Ransome, who was abused at the age of 22 and settled a lawsuit with Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell in 2018, told the Guardian. Meanwhile, Prince Andrew is facing fresh calls to be stripped of his Duke of York title. The Queen last month stripped Andrew of his military affiliations and royal patronages in an attempt to distance the royal family from the allegations. However, he has kept his Duke of York title. Here’s how the British press reacted to the news of the settlement, which gives an indication of how people in the UK feel. Capitol attack investigators target Trump circle over fake elector ploy The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack issued subpoenas yesterday to top Trump campaign and Republican officials involved in the scheme to send false electors for Donald Trump in states won by Joe Biden, as it examines the coordination behind the effort. The panel sent subpoenas to six individuals who were involved in a brazen attempt to meet and submit fake electoral college certificates that formed the backbone of a Trump-connected scheme to have Congress return the former president to office. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, suggested in a statement that the subpoenas aimed to compel cooperation from the key actors about whether the Trump White House oversaw the effort to have “alternate electors” participate in the scheme. What did Thompson say? He said: “We’re seeking records and testimony from former campaign officials and other individuals in various states who we believe have relevant information about the planning and implementation of those plans.” In other news … Former Alaska governor Sarah Palin lost her libel lawsuit against the New York Times when a jury rejected her claim that the newspaper had maliciously damaged her reputation by erroneously linking her campaign rhetoric to a mass shooting. Rental prices across the US have soared over the past year, with some cities experiencing average price rises of up to 40%, leaving many renters stunned and grappling with either having to move to be able to afford rent or pay significantly more. New Zealand has banned conversion practices after all but eight National party members voted in favour of the law. Conversion “therapy” refers to the practice, often by religious groups, of trying to “cure” people of their sexuality or gender expression. The International Olympic Committee has dismissed claims that a double standard was applied to US sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson compared with the Russian skater Kamila Valieva after both tested positive for a banned drug. Stat of the day: US sea level to rise as much in next 30 years as in past century – study The vast US coastline is being assailed by rapidly encroaching oceans, with up to 1ft of sea level rise expected in the next 30 years – an increase that equals the total rise seen over the past century, a major US federal government report has found. The seas are rising significantly faster around the US than the global average, a situation that will cause a “dramatic increase” in disastrous flooding. Don’t miss this: how complicit are the wives of dictators? The Dictator’s Wife is a debut novel by Freya Berry which explores how tyrants deploy glamorous spouses to soften their image: velvet gloves to their iron fists. The book poses an important question: to what extent should such women be judged as complicit in their husbands’ regimes? They are often survivors of brutal patriarchy and lack genuine political power. But do they, too, have blood on their hands? Climate check: US west ‘megadrought’ is worst in at least 1,200 years, study says The American west has spent the last two decades in what scientists are now saying is the most extreme megadrought in at least 1,200 years. In a new study, published on Monday, researchers also noted that human-caused climate change is a significant driver of the destructive conditions and offered a grim prognosis: even drier decades lie ahead. Turning up the temperature – the result of human-caused heating – has played a big part. Last Thing: Scientists build robotic fish powered by human heart cells Scientists at Harvard University have engineered an artificial fish whose flapping tail is powered by cells from a human heart, a groundbreaking project that has ignited hopes for the future of cardiac research. The scientists, in collaboration with Emory University, built the “biohybrid fish” using paper, plastic, gelatin and two strips of living heart muscle cells, the contractions of which pulled the fish’s tail from side to side and allowed it to swim. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comMy friend Hanef Bhamjee, who has died aged 74, devoted most of his life to trying to bring down apartheid, first as an activist in South Africa and later from Wales, his adopted home. Hanef was born in Marikana, in the North West Province of South Africa, one of four sons of Suleman Bhamjee and Anisa (nee Varachia). He grew up in Pietermaritzburg, where his family ran a shoe shop, and attended Woodlands Indian high school. In his teens Hanef was part of a politics study group and went on to found the Indian Youth Congress of Natal. As a young activist with the African National Congress he was arrested and interrogated a number of times. When the security services began to take a close interest in him, he left South Africa in 1965, aged 19, and spent some time in London supporting ANC leaders in exile and running political study groups. He studied social science at the University of Birmingham, graduating in 1971, and moved to Cardiff, where he had South African friends. He was then a lecturer in sociology at the University of Cardiff from the mid-1970s until the mid-80s, during which time his main focus was to strengthen anti-apartheid activity in Wales. In 1981 Hanef founded the Welsh Anti-Apartheid Movement, becoming its secretary. A fearsome campaigner who created alliances across religious and Welsh language groups, political parties and trade unions , he inspired thousands to join the movement. Hanef’s house was WAAM’s office for years, and anyone visiting had to tread over mountains of papers. WAAM battled for years to persuade the Welsh Rugby Union to sever links with the South African game, which it eventually did in 1989. In the 80s Hanef decided to switch careers and began working as a paralegal for law firms. He studied law at the University of Cardiff and qualified as a solicitor in 1996, aged 50, afterwards working for Crowley and Co solicitors as an immigration specialist. In 1992, in the dying months of the apartheid era, a colleague and I made a film for HTV Wales about Hanef’s return to South Africa after 27 years in exile. On arrival in Pietermaritzburg, he went straight to the cemetery to visit the grave of his father, who died in 1974, and that of a close friend who had died under police torture. Standing in the graveyard, this tough campaigner was overcome by the suppressed emotions of a lifetime’s sacrifice. Once back in Wales, Hanef devoted his efforts to Action for Southern Africa Cymru, the successor to WAAM, which fundraises for anti-poverty projects. He was made OBE in 2012, the year he retired from legal work. Hanef loved watching cricket, collecting coins and medals, cooking vast meals for parties at his home, and doing the Guardian crossword. He was a warm and loyal friend to many and a devoted stepfather to Robyn and Luke, the children of his former partner, Annie Griffiths. He is survived by his brothers, Shabier and Yusuf.A patient in the UK who has died from Lassa fever, an acute viral infection endemic in parts of Africa, was a newborn baby, according to reports. The Guardian reported last week that a patient had died in Bedfordshire after being found to have Lassa fever. The confirmed case brought the total number of people diagnosed with the disease in England to three. It has now emerged that the patient who died at the Luton and Dunstable hospital was a child, the BBC has reported. All three confirmed cases come from within the same family, the UK Health and Security Agency has said. But where did the virus originate from, what are the symptoms and how transmissible is it? What is Lassa fever? Lassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic illness, belonging to the virus family Arenaviridae, that lasts between two and 21 days, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The virus, for which there is no approved vaccine, is known to be endemic in Benin, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria. But it also probably exists in other West African countries as well. What are the symptoms? Symptoms are usually gradual, starting with fever, general weakness and malaise. After a few days there may be headaches, sore throat, muscle pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, a cough and abdominal pain, according to the WHO. In severe cases there may be facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, bleeding from the mouth, nose, vagina or gastrointestinal tract and low blood pressure. Deafness occurs in 25% of recovered patients. In half of these cases, hearing returns partially after one to three months. How is it transmitted and is it easy to catch? Humans can contract Lassa fever from eating food that has been tainted by the urine or faeces of rodents. The virus can also be spread through contact with the body fluids of a sick person, but it does not spread easily between humans. According to the WHO, there is no epidemiological evidence supporting airborne spread from person to person. Imported cases rarely occur elsewhere in the world. Such cases are almost exclusively in people who work in endemic areas in high-risk occupations such as medicine. How deadly is Lassa fever? Most people with Lassa fever will make a full recovery although severe illness can occur. The overall case-fatality rate is 1%, according to the WHO. But the observed case-fatality rate among patients who are admitted to hospital with severe cases of Lassa fever is 15%. Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment improves survival chances. How many cases have there been in the UK? The virus was first formally identified in Nigeria in 1969 and no cases were reported in the UK until the 1980s. Since then, there have been 11 confirmed cases in total, including the three cases identified in the last few days. These cases are the first to have been confirmed in the UK since 2009. How many deaths have there been in the UK? Four people have now died from the virus in the UK since 2000, the UK Health Security Agency said. One died in 2000, two died in 2009 and the fourth death was confirmed on Friday. Where are the current cases in the UK? Two cases of the virus were discovered in the east of England on Wednesday. A third was confirmed on Friday in a Bedfordshire hospital but the patient, reported to be a newborn baby, died. What is the risk to the public? The UKHSA said the risk to the public “remains very low”.Marks &amp; Spencer is to increase minimum pay by more than 5% to £10 an hour and offer free health checks to workers as labour shortages force up wages across the retail and hospitality industries. The rise puts M&amp;S workers just ahead of the new legal minimum wage of £9.50 an hour for those 23 and over that comes into force in April, and is on par with supermarkets including Sainsbury’s and Morrisons. M&amp;S, which experienced a turnaround in fortunes at Christmas, said that from the beginning of April more than 40,000 staff in the UK would see their base rate of pay increase by 50p an hour to £10, with rates in London rising to £11.25 from £10.75. New benefits will also include access to an online GP service, health check screening and advice on financial management. Steve Rowe, the chief executive of M&amp;S, said: “The contribution our teams have made to support our customers and each other every day through some really challenging times has been remarkable. By once again increasing our investment into one of the best all-round reward offers for store colleagues across retail, we’re making sure that every colleague, whatever they do and wherever they work, is properly rewarded and supported at M&amp;S.” The pay rise is the latest in a wave of increases across retail and hospitality. In January, Sainsbury’s said it would increase hourly pay by more than 5% to £10 an hour for its lowest-paid shop workers. Aldi increased minimum hourly rates for shop workers to £10.57 an hour from £9.55 nationally this month, a near 11% rise, and £11.32 in Greater London from £11.07. Next has said it will have to put up the price of its clothing by as much as 6% this autumn as the fashion and homewares retailer expects average wages to rise by more than 5% this year. Hospitality businesses are also upping wages. Pret a Manger last month raised hourly pay for the second time in four months from a minimum of £9.40 to £9.80, with more than 6,900 of its 8,500 staff earning at least £10 an hour. That came after pay was put up 5% to £9.40 an hour in September. Workers at the coffee shops chain are also able to earn an additional £1.25 an hour, based on a weekly mystery shopper assessment, up from £1.“How do you ignore the context?” Kylian Mbappé asked. “Easy: play football.” And better than anyone else. Everybody knew he was special, a World Cup winner at 19, his goal in the final against Croatia one of more than 200 he has scored already aged 23, the man for whom Paris Saint-Germain turned down €200m even as they knew that would probably mean losing him for free, but this was still a moment that hit you in the face. It hit Mauricio Pochettino, at least. Asked what he felt when Mbappé scored the 94th-minute winner here against Real Madrid, the PSG coach replied: “Two things. First, happiness. Then, pain. Leandro Paredes leapt into me so hard that I thought I had broken my nose.” Along the touchline, Mbappé was going wild, teammates piling in. There was no choreography, and no apology either, no sign of mixed emotions, just release. Maybe a touch of vindication too. There, told you. He told everyone, on all sides. The Parc des Princes erupted, except in the corner where they had cheered Mbappé before the game, applauding as his name was read out. Madrid’s fans had serenaded him then and were quiet now, but there was admiration and anticipation too. From many Madrid supporters, not so much here as elsewhere, there was soon something that looked like celebration. Mbappé had received the ball below them, pushing Madrid back into their area one last time, then gone between Lucas Vázquez and Éder Militão and put the ball between Thibaut Courtois’ legs and into the net. “To concede a silly goal at the end is hard to take,” the goalkeeper said, but that’s not how you spell bloody brilliant. “It was really stupid to lose the ball, he goes away from two people too easily and then I have the bad luck that it goes through my legs,” Courtois reasoned, but this was about the fusion of grace and power, the speed and smoothness with which he leant one way then the next. The way he went through the middle of two men, gone before those doors could slide shut on him, like Ronaldo: the original one, not the one whose posters decorated Mbappé’s bedroom wall. “In the end he showed his quality and class; that’s why he’s the best player in the world,” Courtois concluded. “Unstoppable,” Carlo Ancelotti called him. For an hour and a half Madrid had managed to stop him, just about. He had turned away from Casemiro in the first minute and decided it in the very last. Between times, he had torn into them, looking like the only athlete in the company of elite athletes, pulling away with apparent ease, elegance in every stride. As if it is just the athleticism. Seventy touches, seven shots, four dribbles, a penalty won, and now a match too. Not just any match either, and not in any way. “We tried to control him, to double up on him, and Militão did well, but he can always invent something,” Ancelotti said. “And in the last minute he invented something.” Madrid’s manager called him the best in Europe. PSG’s manager claimed that he didn’t have the words to say how good Mbappé is. “I can’t describe him,” he said. Pochettino is a man who over the past few days has looked as if he doesn’t enjoy Paris much, all the things – and, yes, all the people too – that come with coaching this club. But Mbappé comes with them too, and he appears different, not so blinded by the lights. “Mbappé isn’t like the rest,” Danilo said. He was ostensibly talking about the talent, but it could be the temperament too. “He is incredibly mature,” Pochettino said. “I am lucky to have been able to work with him every day over the last year.” There may not be long left, but these are months that might not have happened at all, and they are to be enjoyed. It was mostly pride that meant PSG refused to let Mbappé leave, Madrid’s president, Florentino Pérez, complaining that it is not normal for a club to turn down a bid that big for a player in the last year of his contract and Nasser al-Khelaifi, PSG’s president, admitting that the relationship between the clubs is broken. It felt like financial folly too, however rich they are, but in that moment on Tuesday night it felt worth it even at €200m for a single season. If Mbappé does deliver the European Cup that obsesses them, it certainly will. And then he can go, if he goes, as a hero. Their first will always be the best and it would always be his. After this game, he again insisted that a decision on his future had not been made. Asked whether this might change that, he replied “no, no, no, no, no”, the fact that he said so in almost flawless Spanish feeling as significant as the fact that he said it all. The fact that he was asked underlining that there was no escaping the context to this game, even if Mbappé said doing so was easy, which football often seems to be to him. After the way he played here, there can be no reproach – from either side. From Madrid – from fans and media, probably from the directors up in the palco too – there was something celebratory in defeat. Only those who seek no consolation find no consolation the phrase runs and it came in losing to Mbappé, his performance reinforcing that they were right to go for him and that with him the future is theirs, deepening the excitement over what is still assumed to be the imminent arrival of the player who will mark a generation. “How good is Mbappé!” the cover of Marca ran. “Mbappé is the bomb,” cheered AS. And soon they trust he will be theirs, and for free. Madrid may not win this year’s Champions League thanks to this goal but that very moment helped further convince them that if he does come it won’t be long before they do. That he had beaten them like this was welcome in a way, another dimension added: this was an exhibition of ethics as well as excellence. Mbappé had previously said that he would not talk to other clubs when they were opponents, any decision having to wait until after this tie or even the summer. There was work to do first, matches to win, staring with the one where the spotlight shone on him brighter than ever. “I said I was going to give everything, and I did,” he noted. “We ask so many questions, we say too many things.” He had just wanted to play football, which he does like no one else.When world war three comes, the nuclear bombs drop out of the sky and humanity is wiped from the Earth, two things will remain: cockroaches and NFTs. NFTs have become one of those unavoidable things that you really, really, shouldn’t have to think about, yet here we are. I’m writing about them, and you, inexplicably, are reading it. Most people still don’t really understand what non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are, to go by the constantly upward trajectory of Google search trends, and even those that do sometimes struggle to come up with meaningful use cases for them. NFTs are unique digital items stored on the Ethereum blockchain. They’re most commonly associated with and connected to pieces of individual “artwork” (your mileage may vary, depending on how strongly you wrap inverted commas around that word), which are exchanged for eye-wateringly large sums of money. It’s that last bit that makes them so interesting. Paris Hilton, Jimmy Fallon and Gwyneth Paltrow all own NFTs, which they bought using a middleman company called MoonPay, and have begun talking about them on national TV. (If you want to know what the people who previously owned those specific NFTs thought of their new owners, then I have a story for you). Generally, if the penpushers at Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (HMRC) begin sniffing around something, you can assume that it is hurtling into the mainstream. And those eye-wateringly large sums of money have also made NFTs interesting to the taxman. We learned this week that HMRC has made its first NFT seizures as part of an investigation into a suspected attempt to defraud the taxman of more than £1m. “Our first seizure of a Non-Fungible Token serves as a warning to anyone who thinks they can use cryptoassets to hide money from HMRC,” said Nick Sharp, the deputy director for economic crime at HMRC. Monkey business I have done my fair share of reporting on NFTs, and a depressingly large proportion of stories have been about how someone has been conned – whether that be having money stolen directly, or investing in a project that wasn’t what it claimed to be. While not every NFT project is a scam – far from it – the sector is experiencing a wild west gold rush that is attracting plenty of people willing to sacrifice the long-term reputation of an entire technology in order to make a quick buck for themselves. And it is a gold rush. In 2020, blockchain market research company Chainalysis recorded $106m of NFT trades in 2020. A year later, that was $44.2bn. Individuals like Damian Augustyniak, a 30-year-old Polish artist who makes more than £40,000 a month designing the artwork for NFT projects – and who told me he was able to tell me exactly how many people he employed because he’d just meticulously filled out his tax return – are few and far between. It makes sense that people don’t always declare their income from NFTs. The whole premise of Web3, of which NFTs are one part, is that it’s free from the shackles of The Man. The decentralised future of the internet is designed to be a kind of ‘make your own rules’ space, where as a group you decide what to do. It’s a bit like Lord of the Flies – with all the potential issues that could ensue. The fact that all the transactions take place outside the realm of fiat currency, with NFTs bought and traded using cryptocurrencies, compounds that. Yet it’s also one of the biggest things that is likely to be a stumbling block to more widespread adoption of NFTs. It’s also why tax authorities like HMRC are likely to spend more time scrutinising the flow of cash in exchange for jpg images. Money for nothing? Chainalysis believes a significant proportion of the NFT market is wash trading – people selling NFTs to themselves in order to hike up the price. The company has pinpointed 262 users who have sold an NFT to another user account they also own more than 25 times. “While we can’t be 100% sure that all instances of NFT sales to self-financed wallets are intended for wash trading, the 25-transaction threshold gives us a higher degree of confidence that these users are habitual wash traders,” they write. Hilariously, most of them have lost money. But those who won, won big – counteracting the bumbling traders’ losses. More than $8.5m in profit was made by wash traders in 2021: a lot of cash that tax authorities would probably want to take their share of. Same for the money laundering, nearly $1.5m of which Chainalysis alleges was used in the last three months of 2021 to buy NFTs. It makes for sobering reading for both sides: tax authorities are missing out on huge amounts of questionable money flowing through massive marketplaces. And those trying to launder ill-gotten gains are starting to see the enemy coming over the hill, keeping an eye out on what they’re doing. HMRC’s seizures are just the tip of the iceberg: earlier this month the US Department of the Treasury also gave a warning to the NFT world that it was watching them – and expected them to add the value of their art to their annual tax returns. So, feel free to “ape in” (crypto speak for getting very excited and rushing into buy in) to NFTs, if you want. But let’s be honest: filling out your tax return is difficult enough without trying to quantify the value of a pixelated monkey. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter, please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.This new musical is about love – of woman and of country. It’s adapted from Kahlil Gibran’s biographical novel, which the Lebanese writer wrote some time before his hugely popular 1923 work, The Prophet. Set in Beirut, it’s the story of a man who, having immigrated to the US, returns home and falls madly in love; 18 years old in love; “I saw the angels of heaven through the eyes of women” in love; very young, very naive, ever so slightly silly in love. Written by and starring Nadim Naaman, Broken Wings received a semi-staged performance at the Haymarket theatre in 2018. Director Bronagh Lagan then toured the show and now it returns to London, with some of the original cast and a rotating stage. Perhaps intended to inject dynamism into a fairly static production, the rotating feature actually has a strangely stultifying effect (the cast spend a lot of time lining up in rows) and looks a little tired. Naaman’s score, co-composed with Dana Al Fardan, is best when it’s unabashedly romantic and there’s a particularly handsome swell to the young love song, Here in This Garden. But there’s not a huge amount of variety to the music and surprisingly little of the unique sounds or rhythms of the Middle East. Lagan’s directing and Naaman’s book overplay an already overstated story, which features an evil bishop, saintly mothers (when will this trope end?) and a literally angelic baby. In one scene, we’re shown the bishop describing an evil plan we’ve been told about, in detail, only minutes before. Scenes are often played out and then needlessly summarised by the older Gibran (Naaman) who hovers on the edges of his life story, repeating what does not need to be repeated. It’s a shame because there are some delicate reflections on love and striking singing. Noah Sinigaglia has a sharp purity to her voice as love interest Selma and Soophia Foroughi has an alto voice that could blow down houses. If only she had a juicier role to play than a worshipped mother figure who never quite comes down to earth. • Broken Wings is at Charing Cross theatre, London, until 26 March.Exam boards have published advance information about some of the content due to come up in summer GCSE and A-level exams, to help teachers and pupils in England focus their revision. However, school leaders have warned that the information has come too late and that deprived pupils in areas severely affected by Covid will be at an unfair disadvantage as exams return. Some teachers have also raised concerns about discrepancies in the advance information made available between different subjects and exam boards. We would like to hear from teachers, parents, and final-year A-level students in England about their views on the return of exams this summer. How prepared do you feel for the first public exams since the start of the pandemic? Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Here is a brutally violent but oddly empowering tale of trafficked women compelled to kick the hell out of each other or else get sent to an Albanian brothel. (Pity poor Albania, which gets chosen to be the film-makers’ idea of the worst possible place ever to be in a brothel.) It is part of a pulpy, under-the-radar film franchise series that revolves around illegal, or semi-legal, fight clubs and mixed martial arts (MMA) bouts that usually pit men against their friends and fellow athletes. Their USP is hardcore hand-to-hand combat, with lots of crunchy foley work providing the sounds of pounded flesh, while still celebrating athletic prowess, loyalty to friends and family and a kind of gladiatorial honour. This latest instalment serves up more of the same, but with women doing most of the punching, stabbing and roundhouse kicks to the head; there are also two women in the screenwriter and director’s chairs, Audrey Arkins and Kellie Madison respectively. The heroine is Chechen refugee Anya (Olivia Popica), who is hoping to get a nursing degree and lives in a tiny flat with her fierce but dim MMA-fighter brother Aslan (Tommy Bastow). When Aslan, the twit, fails to throw a fight like he’s told, the siblings find themselves in debt to evil posh lady Mariah (Brooke Johnston, channelling Ghislaine Maxwell). Mariah persuades Anya, a scrapper in her own right, to take part in some private bouts for the delectation of sadistic rich men who will pay even more to watch pretty ladies beat the daylights out of each other. Of course, it turns out to be a trap and the women are all locked up with each other in a jail and threatened with the aforementioned Albanian brothel option if they don’t cooperate. But plucky Anya starts planning an escape. Pulpy nonsense, to be sure, but, somehow, this is eminently watchable, and it’s a relief there’s no sexual abuse shown, even if the possibility of it exists. Moreover, it’s interesting and kind of sweet that there’s no love interest for Anya to moon over. Instead, the most significant relationships in the film are between her and her brother, and then later between the women locked up in the makeshift prison, who decide to stop fighting each other and work together to overthrow the patriarchy – sorry, overthrow their traffickers. The metaphor is baked into the story whichever way you slice it. • Never Back Down: Revolt is available on 21 February on digital platforms.Partygate has suggested that the prime minister has, shall we say, a flexible approach to the rule of law. The laws of physics, you would think, cannot be treated so carelessly – yet that is what is happening inside the Conservative party. There has been a relentless push by some MPs for the UK to abandon our climate targets and slow down, or even abandon, the transition to net zero emissions. The goal of net zero by 2050 at the latest is not some fashionable green meme or virtue signalling by the comfortable middle classes. It is the measure we must take to keep the already painful and life-threatening impacts of climate change within the bounds of the manageable. This goal is shared not just by scientists and environmental campaigners but by 192 governments, more than 90 major banks and all of the world’s major investment managers. Action on climate change is one of the few remaining areas where Britain has a credible claim to global leadership. Only three months ago, we were hosting the UN climate summit, Cop26, the most important international gathering in the UK for decades. We have set the pace in decarbonising our own economy and creating the global governance system to manage the response to the climate crisis. We have done so because it is in our national interest, as successive governments, Labour and Conservative, have recognised. We cannot ask other countries to aim for net zero if we abandon our commitment to it ourselves. Yet that is just what the tiny group of Conservative MPs in the Net Zero Scrutiny Group are trying to make us do, in the latest salvo of their eccentric opposition to sound science. Led by Steve Baker and Craig Mackinlay and some of their faithful cheerleaders in the rightwing press, they are demanding the prime minister abandons the green levies that help finance Britain’s drive to net zero, out of apparent concern over soaring energy bills. They are right to be worried about the impact of energy price rises on everyone in Britain, especially low-income households. The welfare of millions of people is at risk, potentially threatening social cohesion. But their crocodile tears about the impact on the least well-off would be more credible if their party’s action hadn’t contributed to the state we’re in, because the Conservative government’s decision to “get rid of all the green crap” a decade ago means that the UK’s energy bills are £2.5bn higher than they would otherwise have been. Meanwhile, the Cameron government’s cut to energy-efficiency subsidies has had a dramatic effect on the programme to insulate Britain’s notoriously draughty housing stock. In 2012, over 1.5m homes in Britain had their lofts insulated, cutting energy bills and providing a large number of jobs all over the country. Last year, only 32,000 lofts were insulated. Scrapping the zero carbon homes standard, as the Conservatives did in 2015, has led to more than a million new homes being built to lower energy efficiency than they would otherwise have had, resulting in higher bills for those living in them. There is something deeply confused about the Baker-Mackinlay attack on green levies as a burden on poorer people, when those levies have played a significant part in keeping energy bills down. Wind and solar generators in the last quarter of 2021, far from being a charge on bills, actually contributed £160m to lowering them. Furthermore, the MPs’ supposed concern for the least well-off in society didn’t stop them voting this month for a new “green” levy to finance nuclear power stations that will put bills up. In any case, as has frequently been pointed out by energy experts, global gas prices are overwhelmingly responsible for the spike in energy bills, not green levies. Baker and Mackinlay and their ilk are paying more attention to energy lobbyists than the markets. Why else would they be arguing for more fracking or further North Sea gas investment, supposedly to drive bills down, when they know that any gas produced would sell at today’s global gas prices and simply feed windfall profits? But there is a growing risk that in his efforts to keep his job the prime minister will be tempted to add green levies or Britain’s climate targets to the “red meat” being thrown to the Baker-Mackinlay groupuscule, to the concern of climate diplomats such as the architect of the Paris agreement, Laurence Tubiana. The government would do better to take its ideological foot out of its mouth and keep its manifesto promise to spend £9bn of public money on the energy efficiency that would actually help consumers as well as the planet. Caroline Lucas is the Green MP for Brighton PavilionNamed after the central French town of the same name (which, confusingly, also claims a much older almond cake, the pithiviers fondant, as its own), the pithivier is a free-standing puff pastry pie so magnificent that it’s as much centrepiece as dinner. The traditional example, which is not dissimilar to the frangipane-filled galette des rois made to celebrate Epiphany, has a sweet almond centre, though these days a pithivier is just as likely to be savoury. Indeed, though charcutier Nicolas Verot tells me that “what makes the big difference between a pithivier and a pie [tourte] is that a pithivier contains unchopped meat [or vegetables], unlike a tourte”, though in reality, it seems, anything goes. Pierre Koffman does a pheasant one, Rosie Birkett a version filled with cauliflower cheese, Parisian patissier and celebrity chef Cyril Lignac adds truffle to his pork and cheese number … the list goes on. In fact, the internet is full of recipes for pithiviers stuffed with fish, fruit, and even tofu and mushrooms – chopped and otherwise. Difficult as it was to narrow it down, I’ve decided to focus on a cheese-and-potato filling, for the sole reason that a pithivier is, in Bake Off parlance, a true showstopper, and in my experience nothing stops shows as well as molten cheese. The advice on the pastry and construction, however, applies whatever you put inside. The pastry I’m starting with the pastry because, really, this is what defines the pithivier – without puff pastry, it’s just a pie. It is undeniably more faff than shortcrust to make, but after following the instructions in Calum Franklin’s book The Pie Room, I’m reminded that the time-consuming aspect of the process is waiting for the pastry to chill between rolls and folds, rather than that much active work. I would therefore commend this to you as an opportunity to make your own, not least because I struggled to find butter puff pastry in my local shops, and the non-butter kind available commercially often contains palm oil. Feel free to use whatever you prefer, but do consider having a go for a special occasion (and when else would you make a pithivier?). I haven’t put a recipe below, because, frankly, I couldn’t improve on Franklin’s. Homemade or not, it’s important that the pastry and the filling are well chilled before you start construction, and I’d recommend rolling it out a bit thinner than the 2-3cm called for by Mark Hix in the Independent (though I suspect that this has to be a typo, so I don’t even try it). I do try a clever, one-sheet version by Caro Blackwell on the Taste of Savoie blog, which involves cutting out pastry like a tulip, then bringing the petals together on top to seal, but I’m too clumsy and end up with a cheese Vesuvius. If you are similarly afflicted, I’d stick with the standard two-sheet method below, instead, welded together with egg wash. Much safer. The potatoes I would not advise adding raw potatoes, however thinly sliced, to a pie, as the Waitrose website suggests; even simmered in stock for two minutes, as Hix recommends, they’re rather crunchy for my testers’ tastes. Much as I love potatoes, they are much better soft. Franklin goes as far as to make a dauphinoise, simmering the spuds in milk and cream, then baking them in a slab before putting them in his pie, which is, of course, extremely popular, but, given that you’ve probably already been busy making pastry, I’m going to keep things simpler with slices of cooked potato, as in Blackwell’s recipe. Australian food writer Phoebe Wood deserves a special mention for filling her pie with crushed potato. I love mash with a pie, especially when gravy is involved, but we agree that in a pie, we prefer something with a bit more structural integrity, especially because the cheese layer above it should, in a pithivier, be liquid. The cheese I use lactic lancashire in Hix’s recipe, the results of which remind me pleasurably of our own cheese-and-onion pies, and tangy, mature cheddar in Franklin’s; the Waitrose version demands nutty gruyere and Wood salty crumbled feta. All, of course, are very tasty – potatoes and cheese always make a handsome couple – with the feta in particular adding a refreshingly light, summery note, but I’m after a cheese that will melt almost like a gravy, which makes Blackwell’s Alpine reblochon the obvious candidate. Reblochon is not the easiest cheese to get hold of and, good as it tastes, its chief attraction is the obliging way it behaves when heated, so also bear in mind camembert, baron bigod, wigmore, vacherin mont d’or, tunworth and brie, all of which should work well, as will most other soft rinded cheeses. That said, if you prefer, substitute roughly 150g grated hard cheese, instead. The extras You could leave it at potatoes and cheese, frankly, but you may wish to add a vegetable, too, to make the filling a bit less dense – Franklin adds a layer of caramelised onions, Hix and Blackwell use raw onions, and Waitrose goes for garlic. I’ve chosen Wood’s sauteed leeks, because I like their sweetness with cheese and also because the likes of a pithivier should delight the eye as well as the tastebuds, and they add a happy flash of green to proceedings. You could also opt for a layer of butternut squash, as Waitrose suggests, if you’d like to make it really colourful, or Barney Desmazery’s celeriac – or, indeed, any vegetable you like, though, as ever with pastry, I’d strongly counsel ridding it of as much water as possible before letting it anywhere near the puff. Because of the nature of the cheese I’m using, I don’t think the potatoes need the creamy sauce that some recipes include, but I will be adding some bacon lardons, as in Blackwell’s almost tartiflette-like filling, because their savoury flavour works so well with the other ingredients. If you’d prefer to keep your pithivier meat-free, however, rest assured that you will not be missing out by omitting them. The seasoning I don’t think you need to get too clever here, so I won’t be adding fennel or caraway seeds, as Wood does, or rosemary (both Franklin and Desmazery); a pinch of thyme and a grating of nutmeg with the leeks will do. Don’t be tempted to gild the lily; this dish is magnificent enough on its own. Perfect cheese and potato pithivier Prep 10 min Chill 30 min Cook 1 hr 20 min Serves 4-6 1kg fairly large potatoes, preferably waxy ones (eg charlotte or desiree) Salt 100g unsmoked bacon lardons, or chopped thick-cut bacon (optional) 2 sprigs fresh thyme, picked 1 tbsp oil, or butter 4 large leeks, trimmed, washed and sliced Nutmeg, to taste 700g puff pastry (see introduction) Flour, for rolling 1 medium soft cheese (eg reblochon, camembert, brie, vacherin, Baron Bigod) 1 egg, beaten with a little water Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil. Meanwhile, peel and thinly slice the potatoes, add them to the pan and boil for about six to eight minutes, until tender but not falling apart. Drain well. If omitting the bacon, skip to the next step. If not, fry the lardons in a large frying pan over a medium heat until it’s lightly golden and starting to give off its oil. Stir in the thyme, then add the potatoes and toss gently to coat, being careful not to break them up. Season generously, then tip into a bowl and leave to cool completely. Heat the fat over a medium-low heat in the same frying pan, then saute the leeks until soft but not browned. Season with salt and a little nutmeg, and, if you’re not using bacon, add the thyme now as well. Leave to cool completely. Meanwhile, divide the pastry in two, wrap one half well and put it back in the fridge. Roll out the remaining pastry half on a lightly floured surface to about 5mm thick, then cut out a circle the size of a large dinner plate and put on a lined baking sheet. Chill until the filling ingredients are cold. Spread out the cooled leeks in the middle of the pastry circle, leaving a couple of centimetres free around the edges … … then arrange the potato and lardons mix on top. Push the cheese down on top of the potatoes, building the potatoes up around it to give the filling a gently rounded profile. Roll out the second half of the pastry into a circle a little larger than the first. Brush the edges of the filled piece of pastry with egg wash, then carefully drape the second sheet over the top and press down all around the edges to seal. Cut a small hole in the centre of the top, then score curved lines all over the top down from the hole to the edge, being careful not to cut all the way through. Brush with egg, then chill for 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Bake the pithivier for 35-45 minutes, until golden, and serve hot. • The pithivier: are you a frangipane traditionalist, or do you agree that this beautiful pie is too good to confine to dessert? And, if so, what do you like to put in yours? UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoRather as everybody supposedly thinks they have a book in them, I wonder if every novelist thinks their mind holds unbuilt architecture. I know I do. Not the technical stuff, obviously. The trigonometry and structural engineering. I mean the exciting freehand sketching bit at the start. The dreaming into existence of a building that didn’t exist before. Of course, conjuring fictional structures on the page is about a lot more than simply satisfying unrealised ambitions: buildings have done an awful lot of work in many a fiction, shaping and expressing characters’ lives, concretising themes, rooting narratives in time and place. My debut novel, Peterdown, involved imagining many such buildings. In the universe of the novel, a new five-runway airport has been built in the Thames estuary, and work is about to start on a Japanese-style bullet trainline that will connect the airport up to the regions. My fictional town, Peterdown has been chosen as the site of the railway’s splitter station, but to make way for the station a building in the town will have to be knocked down. On the shortlist – alongside a digital arts centre, and a dilapidated football stadium – is the Larkspur Hill, a sprawling brutalist housing estate that I was free to dream into existence without having to worry about budgets, planning restrictions, or whether or not it might blow over in the wind. Needless to say, the estate is in fine company when it comes to fictional buildings. Here are some of my favourites. 1. Howards End by EM Forster One may as well begin with Howards End, one of the most lovingly described buildings in all literature. “It is old and little, and altogether delightful – red brick… there’s a very big wych-elm … leaning a little over the house, and standing on the boundary between garden and meadow.” It is modelled consciously on Rooks Nest, the house in Hertfordshire where Forster lived as a child, and as Oliver Stallybrass says, it: “carries as great a structural load of values as any house in fiction.” Forster was unambiguous as to its significance to his vision: “In these English farms, if anywhere, one might see life steadily and see it whole.” 2. High-Rise by JG Ballard Forster was not alone in believing that buildings are places that can condition the characters of the people that live in them. Ballard’s unnamed high-rise, a 40-storey behemoth in glass and concrete, which stands near the river, a couple of miles west of the City of London, is a “gigantic vertical zoo, its hundreds of cages stacked above each other”. That these are gilded cages, owned and occupied by lawyers, doctors and academics, doesn’t stop the residents descending into a state of orgiastic dog-barbecuing savagery: “In many ways, the high-rise was a model of all that technology had done to make possible the expression of a truly free psychopathology.” 3. The Cortlandt housing project in The Fountainhead by Ayn Rand The architect behind Ballard’s high-rise is given a rough old time, but Rand is much kinder to Howard Roark. His masterpiece is the Cortlandt housing project, which he designs as “six buildings, 15 stories high, each made in the shape of an irregular star with arms extending from a central shaft … The buildings, of poured concrete, were a complex modelling of simple structural features; there was no ornament; none was needed; the shapes had the beauty of sculpture.” Unfortunately, when it is realised it has been traduced by a bunch of “second-handers”. Roark, being one of Rand’s typically ameliorative and compromising sorts, blows it up with a load of dynamite. 4. Mr Biswas’s house in A House for Mr Biswas by VS Naipaul Not all fictional buildings would require dynamite to knock them down. A single well-aimed kick would probably do the job for Mr Biswas’s house: “two of the wooden pillars supporting the staircase landing were rotten, whittle away towards the bottom and green with damp … at the lightest breeze the sloping corrugated iron sheets rose in the middle and gave snaps which were like metallic sighs.” For all its faults, Biswas’s house is evidence that he is modern man, a self-authoring, property-owning individual, and it means he won’t have lived “without even attempting to lay claim to one’s portion of the earth; to have lived and died as one had been born, unnecessary and unaccommodated.” 5. Pemberley in Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen It’s impossible, on a list such as this, to overlook Austen, with her keen eye for property and its central role in the British class system. Mansfield Park or Northanger Abbey, so “rich in gothic ornaments”, might have worked, but Darcy’s pad Pemberley gets the nod: “It was a large, handsome, stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills … Elizabeth was delighted.” And who wouldn’t be? 6. The Castle by Franz Kafka Kafka’s castle sits on a hill above a village: “It was neither a stronghold nor a new mansion, but a rambling pile consisting of innumerable small buildings closely packed together and of one or two storeys.” The protagonist K’s relationship to the castle might represent man’s alienation in the face of totalising bureaucracies, or our never-satisfied yearning for religious salvation. Either way, it’s an exemplar of what David Foster Wallace identified as the central Kafka joke: “That our endless and impossible journey toward home is in fact our home.” Which would make it an odd choice, you’d have thought, as a source of inspiration for a real building, but the Spanish architect Ricardo Bofill disagreed, using it as the template for an apartment block in 1968. 7. The Ministry of Love in Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell You get a better sense of the architecture of the Senate House-inspired Ministry of Truth – “an enormous pyramidical structure of glittering white concrete” – but it is The Ministry of Love, or Miniluv as it’s known in Newspeak, that stays with you longest. “It was a place impossible to enter except on official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze of barbed-wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-guns nests.” The building has no windows and is home to the most famous room in all literature, located “many metres underground, as deep down as it was possible to go.” It is, of course, Room 101 and “the thing that is in Room 101 is the worst thing in the world.” 8. 11 rue Simon-Crubellier in Life: A User’s Manual by Georges Perec It was hard to leave out the old tenement in Tom McCarthy’s splendid Remainder, but when it comes to buildings in experimental fiction it is difficult to look beyond the apartment block at 11 rue Simon-Crubellier. Using a staircase “of questionable cleanliness”, the reader roams around the building from the grand apartments of the lower floors with Louis XIII armchairs up to Smautf the butler’s servant’s quarters in the eaves. The effect is akin to a cutaway illustration of a building where the front wall is removed allowing you to peer in at the outsized characters within. 9. The Library of Babel by Jorge Luis Borges I have steered clear of fictional buildings in fantasy fiction as you could easily fill a Top 10 with them alone (Gormenghast, Bilbo Baggins’s hole etc), but I couldn’t not include Borges’ mind-bending Library of Babel. It is composed “of an indefinite and perhaps infinite number of hexagonal galleries, with vast air shafts between, surrounded by very low railings. From any of the hexagons one can see, interminably, the upper and lower floors.” The library is total and contains all possible books, including the autobiographies of the archangels and the treatise that Bede could have written (but did not). It “can only be the handiwork of a god”. 10. The Cathedral in The Spire by William Golding It’s a shame that Lord of the Flies swallows all the oxygen when it comes to William Golding because his other books deserve a lot more attention than they get, particularly his book about Neanderthals, The Inheritors, and, most of all, this visionary masterpiece. Almost all the action takes place in a fictional cathedral on to which a monomaniacal dean, Jocelin, is demanding that builders graft a new 400ft spire despite everyone warning him that the building’s foundations will never support such a weight. Throughout, the reader perceives the cathedral from the dean’s reverent perspective. It is, as he puts it, “the bible in stone.” Peterdown by David Annand is published in paperback by Corsair (£8.99). To help the Guardian and Observer, order your copy from guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Tigrayan soldiers killed civilians and gang-raped women and girls in Ethiopia’s northern Amhara region, a human rights organisation has claimed, in the latest accusation of atrocities made against fighters engaged in the country’s civil war. Troops with the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) shot dead at least 24 people in the town of Kobo in one day last September, according to Amnesty International. The organisation also accused Tigrayan forces of raping and sexually assaulting at least 30 women and girls as young as 14 in and around Chenna, a village north of the Amhara regional capital, Bahir Dar. Most of the alleged atrocities took place in late August and September last year, the organisation said, when the TPLF was in control of parts of Amhara as it made gains against troops loyal to the Ethiopian federal government. “Evidence is mounting of a pattern of Tigrayan forces committing war crimes and possible crimes against humanity in areas under their control in the Amhara region. This includes repeated incidents of widespread rape, summary killings and looting,” said Sarah Jackson, Amnesty International’s deputy director for east Africa. “The TPLF leadership must put an immediate end to the atrocities we have documented and remove from its forces anyone suspected of involvement in such crimes.” Amnesty said it had approached the TPLF with the allegations, but had received no reply. The TPLF has previously denied allegations of killings and rape by its troops. In phone interviews with 27 people, described by Amnesty as witnesses and survivors of the killings in Kobo, the organisation said it had been told that on 9 September, TPLF fighters summarily shot unarmed civilians, “seemingly in revenge for losses among their ranks at the hands of Amhara militias and armed farmers”. One person quoted in the report described seeing the bloody aftermath of the killings the following day. “The first dead bodies we saw were by the school fence,” he is quoted as saying. “There were 20 bodies lying in their underwear and facing the fence and three more bodies in the school compound. Most were shot at the back of their heads and some in the back. Those who were shot at the back of their heads could not be recognised because their faces were partially blown off.” The report, released on Wednesday, also contains allegations of 30 cases of rape and other sexual violence against ethnic Amhara women and girls. Fourteen of those interviewed by Amnesty in and around Chenna said they had been raped by multiple perpetrators, two in front of their children. Seven were under 18, the report noted, and 10 remained hospitalised three months later. The cases were not isolated, said the report. “Rather, they seem to be part of a pattern of similar violations repeatedly perpetrated by large numbers of Tigrayan fighters in different locations,” it said. “Moreover, such abuses are likely underreported due to stigma within the survivors’ communities, challenges in accessing the locations, and communication blackouts that restrict and delay the flow of information.” Raging since November 2020, the conflict in northern Ethiopia has been marked by possible widespread human rights abuses on all sides, according to a joint investigation by the UN and the country’s human rights commission, which released its findings late last year. According to Amnesty, the majority of violations documented to date have been committed by Ethiopian and Eritrean government forces and associated militias against Tigrayan civilians, mostly in the Tigray region. Last week, lawyers acting for Tigrayan civilians in a complaint filed to the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights said that, while reports suggested abuses had been committed by different parties, Tigrayan civilians constituted “the overwhelming majority of victims”.Today in a nutshell: The US men’s team make an unexpected ice hockey exit but American skiers claim a men’s slopestyle 1-2 as Norway continue to dominate the medals Next up: There is freestyle skiing, ice hockey, curling and short track speed skating still to come today. Tomorrow: the finale of the Kamila Valieva show A pair of Americans topped the men’s freeski slopestyle podium after Alex Hall soared to Olympic gold ahead of teammate Nick Goepper, who took the silver. Sweden’s Jesper Tjäder won the bronze ahead of Andri Ragettli, the defending world champion from Switzerland. “It definitely was the best slopestyle run I’ve ever done, mainly because it embodied everything I love about skiing and how I approach skiing and I didn’t fade away from that to try and maybe get bigger scores or something,” Hall said. Clement Noel of France came from sixth place to take men’s slalom gold with an absolutely blistering second run. Austria’s Johannes Strolz won silver to go with his gold in the combined, finishing 0.61 seconds behind Noel, while reigning world champion Sebastian Foss-Solevaag of Norway took bronze. “It’s not often that you are able to win a medal in the Olympic Games. It’s one shot – one minute and 40 seconds every four years,” Noel said. Dave Ryding’s dream of an Olympic medal of Great Britain faded away after a mistake on his opening run cost him any chance of a podium finish. “I am always realistic and while I would love to say I’ll be back, I probably won’t be. But I’ll for sure take it year by year from now,” the 35-year-old said. There was an upset in the men’s ice hockey quarter-finals. Slovakia gambled while 2-1 down to the USA by taking off their goaltender and throwing on an extra attacker, grabbed an equaliser with 43 seconds remaining, then won the dramatic shootout that followed to eliminate the tournament’s unbeaten top seeds. “This one’s going to sting for a little bit,” veteran US defenseman Steven Kampfer said. “I thought we were the better team for a majority of the game. You come up a little bit short.” The latest set of round robin matches in the women’s curling has seen Switzerland become the first country to book their semi-final berth. However a surprise defeat by China leaves Great Britain’s women with one match to go which they must win, and that still might not be enough if other results don’t go their way. It was a much happier story for Team GB’s men. Victory over ROC means they will feature in the semi-finals alongside Sweden and Canada. The final spot in the men’s last four will go to the US if they can beat Denmark in tomorrow’s morning session. Elvira Öberg anchored Sweden’s team to gold in the women’s 4 x 6km biathlon relay, skiing fast and shooting clean to win her third medal of the Games. The athletes of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) were second, Germany third. In cross-country skiing, Erik Valnes and Johannes Høsflot Klæbo took gold – Norway’s 13th gold of the Games, continuing their recent dominance of the medal table. Things you might have missed After the short program of the women’s single skating competition yesterday, Kamila Valieva leads with a score of 82.16, just under two points clear of her Russian compatriot, the world champion Anna Shcherbakova. Jarl Magnus Riiber of Norway spent two weeks in Covid isolation, was let out on Monday, jumped into the lead in the Nordic combined on Tuesday with a phenomenal 142m leap, then took a wrong turn on the cross-country leg, blowing his 44-second advantage and finishing eighth. “It’s a silly mistake,” Riiber said afterwards. “It’s not fun to show the world that I maybe wasted a gold medal”. Riiber’s compatriot Joergen Graabak took the gold in the end. Mikaela Shiffrin was fastest in a downhill training session ahead of Thursday’s Alpine combined race. It’s a welcome bit of cheer for an athlete who has had a torrid time in Beijing after arriving at these Games on a wave of expectation. Germany had the first podium sweep in Beijing with all the medals going to Germany in the two-man bobsleigh. Francesco Friedrich and Thorsten Margis were the winning pairing. You might also enjoy: Team GB’s Hall and Gleeson crash in two-man bobsleigh IOC deny Richardson’s claim of double standards over Valieva The briefing’s picture of the day It was the team sprint classic day in the cross-country skiing. Germany’s duo of Katharina Hennig and Victoria Carl won the women’s event. ROC won the men’s event. The British men failed to qualify for the final after they had equipment difficulty in the semi-final. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Wednesday 16 February 8pm Freestyle skiing – the final run in the men’s aerials 🥇 8.05pm Curling – Team GB will be anxiously watching tonight’s women’s matches 🥌 8.32pm-9.18pm Short track speed skating – the finals of the men’s 5,000m relay – should be chaos – and the women’s 1,500m 🥇 9.30pm Ice hockey – the last of the men’s quarter-finals features Sweden v Canada 🏒 Tomorrow – Thursday 17 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – after approximately 1,057 matches it is the final bits of the round robin stage, and then in the evening it is the men’s semi-finals 🥇 9.30am-3.10pm Freestyle skiing – there’s action all day but the main attraction from 2pm onwards is the women’s ski cross which goes from the quarter-finals to the final 🥇 10.30am and 2pm Alpine skiing – it is the women’s combined – they do the downhill in the morning, the slalom in the afternoon 🥇 12.10pm Ice hockey – no shocks in the women’s ice hockey the gold medal game will be Canada v US 🥇 4pm and 7pm Nordic combined – the teams do jumping first and cross-country 🥇 4.30pm Speed skating – the women’s 1,000m at the National Speed Skating Oval 🥇 6pm Figure skating – the conclusion of the women’s single skating with the free skating 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.15pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 13 🥈 7 🥉 8 total: 28 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 10 🥈 6 🥉 4 total: 20 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 8 🥈 7 🥉 4 total: 19 4 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 6 🥈 7 🥉 4 total: 17 5 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 4 total: 14 6 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 3 total: 13 7 🇨🇳 China 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 12 8 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 5 🥈 0 🥉 5 total: 10 9 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 4* 🥈 8 🥉 11 total: 23 10 🇫🇷 France 🥇 4 🥈 7 🥉 2 total: 13 Selected others 13 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 2 🥈 4 🥉 11 total: 17 17 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 18 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 [*this total includes the team figure skating gold. which the IOC has said “will probably not be sorted out during this Games”] The last word I don’t know how the Olympics recovers from this. It is shocking and it is disappointing. I don’t think ever in the history of the Olympics somebody with a positive test has been allowed to compete. All of our hearts are breaking that this is a 15-year-old girl. It feels like she was taken advantage of and given this drug that she had no business taking. What this says is that the team around her are child abusers – US coach Adam Rippon, who won Olympic bronze four years ago and now coaches Valieva’s competitor Mariah Bell.A groundbreaking attempt to make Iranian and Syrian military officials answerable for war crimes they may have committed in Syria is being launched, as part of an effort to have the cases brought before the international criminal court. The request includes evidence of Syrian victims forced to flee into Jordan due to attacks and intimidation by the Syrian government and Iran-backed militia groups. It is being brought by the US-based Iran Human Rights Documentation Center in conjunction with Haydee Dijkstal, a UK barrister. The victims, including Syrian journalists, were targeted between 2011 and 2018 for their professional journalistic activities and for their actual and perceived opposition activities. They come from predominantly Sunni towns and cities in Syria that the Alawite Assad regime and Shia Islamic Republic of Iran, which backed numerous militia groups in Syria, perceived as opposed. It marks the first time Iranian officials have been targeted in this way for their activity in Syria, and is part of a growing effort to make Syrian army officers and others legally accountable for their actions either at the ICC or in national European courts, including in Germany and France. Progress on the issue at the UN is largely impossible owing to the threat of a Russian veto. Gissou Nia, a lawyer on the legal team making the request, said: “Up until now, little public attention has been paid to the legal responsibility of the Islamic Republic of Iran in the decade-long Syrian conflict, despite the significant intervention of Iranian officials in Syria and perpetration of atrocities. “The Islamic Republic of Iran has provided a vast range of military and non-military support to achieve its objectives, chiefly to prevent the fall of disgraced Syrian president Bashar al-Assad at any cost. Unfortunately, that goal has been fought at the cost of hundreds of thousands of killed, injured and displaced Syrian civilians.” Syria is not a party to the ICC’s Rome Statute, but it is argued the ICC has jurisdiction because the victims fled into Jordan, which is a state party. Evidence has been provided anonymously because of fears of reprisals but the identities of those making complaints will be known to the ICC, which now has to make a preliminary decision prior to launching an investigation. There is no deadline by which the ICC must decide. The Syrian civilians, the claim suggests, felt forced to flee in the face of indiscriminate bombardments and shootings, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrest and detention, beatings and other abuses, search operations and violent repression of the right to free expression including civilian reporters and activists. It says Iran-backed militias, including Lebanese Hezbollah, the Liwa Fatemiyoun (an Afghan Shia militia led by Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps) and Liwa Abu Fadl Al-Abbas attacked their towns and cities alongside armed forces of the Syrian government. The evidence being submitted on Wednesday to the ICC documents how the Syrians were forced to leave their homes and their families, and have been unable to return to their country. Article 7(1)(d) of the Rome Statute grants the court jurisdiction over the crime against humanity of “deportation or forcible transfer of population”, meaning the “forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law”. In a previous case in 2018, the ICC found it had jurisdiction over the Rohingya people when they were forced to flee into Bangladesh refugee camps from Myanmar. Bangladesh, unlike Myanmar, is a party to the ICC.Children aged between five and 11 in England will be offered a Covid vaccine, the UK government has confirmed. This follows similar moves by Wales and Scotland earlier this week. The Pfizer vaccine was approved as safe and effective for children by the UK’s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency in December. But the JCVI previously only recommended the vaccine to vulnerable five to 11-year-olds. Millions of children aged between five and 11 have been vaccinated in other countries worldwide such as the US and across Europe. We’d like to hear from parents across the UK about their views on vaccinations for children aged 5-11. What is your reaction to the move in Scotland and Wales? Will you be vaccinating your children? Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.He had promised to “risk it for the biscuit” and while Dave Ryding ended up with crumbs in his fourth and final Olympics, he said he had no regrets. “It’s been a hell of a journey,” he said after his 13th-place finish in the men’s slalom, sporting a smile that could have lit up Beijing. The popular 35-year-old, who learned his trade on a dry slope in Lancashire where wandering sheep and their slippy excrement were a frequent hazard, has developed into one of the world’s best alpine skiers. But a mistake while leading on his first run cost him the best part of a second and any chance he had of finishing his career with an Olympic medal. “I started great in the first run and lost the rhythm,” he said. “My second run, I knew that I wasn’t quite flowing enough. You can feel it when you’re skiing. It felt more like a struggle than a flow. I gave it what I had which I always do, so I can’t be too disappointed. It was just what it was today.” Ryding believes he has another year at the top – and after that wants to help bring through the next wave of British skiers. “If you can make it affordable you can keep more people in the sport, keep a bigger pool of athletes going through,” he said, although he admitted he wasn’t quite sure of the finer details of his grand plan. “I’m not being selfish but I still have a career to finish. I still have to put all my energy into that, I don’t know how we will do it yet, but if they want help, I will give it.” As he spoke, the Frenchman Clement Noël was celebrating a brilliant gold medal, after a second run that was 0.99sec quicker than first round leader Johannes Strolz of Austria. Not that Strolz was complaining. He collected a silver to go with his Alpine combined gold – a staggering achievement given that last summer the 29-year-old thought his career as a top skier might be over and had started working with his local police force. “I have to talk to coaches of the Austrian ski team and we have to make a good plan for the upcoming season, and then I will see how much time is left for some police work,” he joked. With just four days left of a desperately disappointing Winter Games for Britain, Team GB’s chances of a medal appear to come down to the curling. The men’s team, led by Bruce Mouat, look the best bet and have already qualified for the semi-finals. However, Britain’s women continue to oscillate between the sublime and the below average, and a surprise 8-5 defeat to China on Wednesday means they need other results to go their way to make the final four.Struggling to adjust as pandemic restrictions end? Don’t worry, Tim Key has created a “cheeky little locky-D” in Soho theatre and we’re all invited. He paces the room in a blue velour tracksuit, as the audience files into his pseudo-flat, a shabby front door to the left of us, a magnet-covered fridge to the right. It is brave to dedicate an entire show to Covid-19 lockdowns. During them, livestreamed comedy gigs were naturally packed with Covid content – increasingly familiar stuff about video calls, social distancing and home-based hobbies. To extract an hour of solid, even surprising, laughs from such well-trodden ground requires skill. Key delivers with his trademark knowing grin. Key is probably best known for irreverent, surreal poetry (on stage, on Radio 4 and in print) and being the shambolic yet prideful auteur who delivers it. Fans will not be disappointed. “Who here did lockdown?” he bellows. In March 2020, Key had “voiceovers coming out my arse … Pointless Celebrities sniffing around”, when lockdown arrived. “My fame falling off me like slow-cooked lamb dribbling from a shin,” he laments. Mulberry is “the story of a celebrity sealed away”, charting Key’s professional crisis, through an escalating thirst for craft beer and surprise appearances on TV quizshows. His lockdown companion, a five-foot teddy bear, stars in a handful of the funniest punchlines, while mentions of his past glories become a pleasing refrain. Key’s gift, the reason his shows always have great pace, is his poetry. He balances the swift and silly (“‘Get your jabs, you useless cunts!’ No one had ever seen the Queen like this before”), with more languorous, even poignant, prose. Whenever we veer towards pandemic tropes, there’s a poem to redirect us. His onstage persona (crumpled clothing, lager, anger) is established enough that he can play with it. Lockdown has replaced his customary suit with loungewear. He’s softer than in previous shows; he bonds with an audience member. It is part of Mulberry’s unfolding narrative: lockdown may have crushed dreams of becoming “a household name”, but being back on stage, “the poet” once again, is where he belongs. Tim Key is at Soho theatre until 26 February, then 29 March to 2 April.We are living in the age of the nonagenarian: the Queen continues to gain popularity against her elected officials, and Rupert Murdoch has been given everything he’s ever asked for, just a few weeks from his 91st birthday. In between meetings in Saudi Arabia, Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, announced the removal of legal restrictions designed to prevent the media mogul from interfering in the editorial independence of the Times and the Sunday Times, hurdles put in place by Margaret Thatcher when he bought the newspapers in 1981. Murdoch has long railed against these restrictions, which he described as state interference, but which allowed him to avoid a deal-busting referral. It took until July 2019 for his complaints to gain any traction, the same month Boris Johnson became prime minister. This shows how much has changed in the past decade: I was told that when Murdoch’s directors wanted to discuss these restrictions after the phone-hacking scandal, they were rebuffed. Now he has got what he wanted all along. Having weathered scandal and breakup, Murdoch really is like the fictional character he is most often compared to; like Succession’s Logan Roy, he is not just still standing at the end of season three, but continuing to win. Murdoch’s strength stands in marked contrast to the prime minister, a former journalist once sacked by a Murdoch publication for falsifying a quote, who suddenly needs his friends in the media more than ever. The revolving door between Downing Street and Fleet Street has already seen Johnson’s director of communications become deputy editor-in-chief of the Sun, a paper which failed to break any major “partygate” stories. Some publications featured extensive stories and headlines about the partying prime minister, while others – particularly on the Sun, the Express and the Mail – have struggled to get these stories on their own front pages. When David Davis called for his leader to go, the Mail harangued Johnson’s critics by splashing with the headline “In the name of God, grow up”, while announcing that the latest Johnson baby was recovering from Covid. The Times and particularly the Sunday Times have not acted like tabloid fanboys over the latest controversies. Even the Telegraph has reported on the signs of distress in the Conservative party. But the angle papers take on the day’s news is not the only sign of how a relationship is working. In the first 14 months of his premiership, Johnson met Murdoch three times, for one “general discussion” and two social events. Johnson’s sister, Rachel, had to backtrack from a throwaway line she made about Murdoch asking the prime minister to “get rid of the BBC while dandling his baby son Wilfred on his knee at Chequers”. The problem with this joke was that the image seemed so plausible that the story still lives without a disclaimer three months on. Murdoch’s closeness to politicians of all persuasions is no surprise; he came in through the back door at Downing Street to meet prime ministers from David Cameron to Gordon Brown. But his meetings with Johnson have been surprisingly numerous, particularly given the fact that for some of the time Murdoch was of an age to be shielding. He also had dinner with Michael Gove, a favourite former Times journalist, lunch with the chancellor and a “lunch with friends” with Jacob Rees-Mogg. These encounters are not minuted, of course, which only leaves us to ponder what exactly was discussed. Murdoch has always offered assurances that his titles will remain free of his influence, like when he appointed an independent board to oversee the Wall Street Journal. Someone described these arrangements to me as “eye candy for governments”. The six similarly independent directors of Times Newspapers Ltd, paid about £15,000 each a year, meet the editors of the daily and Sunday titles every three months and write a report to parliament. The only time in recent memory they disagreed with an appointment – when John Witherow moved from the Sunday to daily title – the objections were eased with further meetings and a six-month delay. Besides, the kind of seven-day operation the two papers can now institute is already working for most newspaper groups. But fig leaf or not, this 1981 agreement is now going to end. Murdoch is on record as saying that he has “never guaranteed anyone support of my newspapers”, but that doesn’t stop politicians trying to win it. At the same time as shamefully giving status to online slurs about a child abuse scandal to attack his political opponent, Johnson also falsely claimed that Keir Starmer “used his time prosecuting journalists” – not only wrong, but a sure sign that Johnson is on the side of News Corp over the phone-hacking scandal. Johnson, who made a career out of tendentious journalism, appears to be continuing the trick while leading the country. Just write or say anything to get you out of a hole and get important people to like you. He has been found to have lied and made mistakes, and his biggest critics to date are Conservatives like John Major and Michael Heseltine, worried about the impact on all political reputations in the same way all journalists are tarred when some lie or misbehave. The lesson from Murdoch is that sitting out the bad times and waiting for the good times to return could work. The problem is that with trust in politics and media at an all-time low, most of us don’t have that luxury. Jane Martinson is a Guardian columnistImagine if, two years after resigning amid the Watergate scandal, Richard Nixon had run for president again. It’s not a perfect analogy for the current state of US soccer politics, but it’s close. Two years after resigning in the wake of a legal filing that claimed female players had less ability than their male counterparts, Carlos Cordeiro is running for his old gig as president of US Soccer. The election will take place on 5 March. And Cordeiro has a legitimate shot against incumbent Cindy Parlow Cone, the Hall of Fame player and NWSL champion coach who was elevated from vice-president after Cordeiro’s departure. It is fair to say not everyone is happy at the prospect of his return. If casual fans who aren’t well versed in US Soccer’s labyrinthine politics are surprised, they’re not alone. “I couldn’t believe it,” says Alan Rothenberg, who oversaw World Cup 1994, the launch of Major League Soccer and the early organization of the 1999 Women’s World Cup during his eight years as federation president. “I don’t know what he’s thinking. When you think about how he left in disgrace, what he failed to accomplish, how he set the federation back – how could he think he’d be welcomed back?” To answer that question, it’s important to remember that US Soccer isn’t just the overseer of the men’s and women’s national teams, writing paychecks to Christian Pulisic and Christen Press. Its mandate is to grow the game at all levels and in all its forms. Its constituents include the feuding factions in youth soccer, organizations for disability sports, and the largest group, the state associations charged with minding the sport at its grassroots in the US. The latter are Cordeiro’s biggest supporters. Cordeiro says figures within US Soccer have approached him with a laundry list of concerns, ranging from youth programs to the federation’s status within Fifa. Some state associations think Cone went overboard with budget cuts, particularly to the grassroots, in the wake of Covid and has not paid heed to their concerns. “Cindy’s cuts to youth programs and grants were extreme,” says Dave Guthrie, executive director of Indiana Soccer. “It’s as if the grassroots didn’t even matter to Cindy.” For her part, Cone says some decisions were made specifically for the Covid era, and funding will return to many areas as we emerge from the pandemic. “We all had to make really hard decisions, both on programming and personnel,” Cone says. “One of the things we did was shifting our Innovate to Grow grant program to Covid relief so members could apply for Covid relief during that time. We’ve now shifted it back, and it’s fully funded for all of our non-professional members.” Another issue that grated on the states is voting representation. Congress passed legislation requiring federations like US Soccer to give athletes one-third of the voting power, up from 20%. The US Olympic and Paralympic Committee amended its bylaws accordingly. US Soccer had little choice in how to adapt to the new rules, but some states still harbor resentment. Meanwhile, the backlash to a Cordeiro candidacy has been severe. Some major players in US soccer are outraged that Cordeiro would consider himself the best choice to fix any federation issues after his own tenure. “So much of that happened under your watch, buddy,” says Julie Foudy, a Hall of Famer who played with Cone on the national team. “She’s actually trying to clean up your mess.” NWSL Players Association executive director Meghann Burke sees a correlation between the condescending legal briefs that brought down Cordeiro and the systemic abuse of women’s players from youth level to the pros that was brought to light in 2021 and continues to unfold. “The president of the governing body of our sport needs to be as dedicated as the players are to making the game safer and better for everyone,” Burke says. “Those briefs tell us everything we need to know about whether Carlos Cordeiro shares our commitment.” Cordeiro, of course, didn’t write the legal briefs in question, and the team that came up with them were pushed out along with Cordeiro himself. But one factor in that quagmire was a lack of leadership among US Soccer staff. The president is an unpaid volunteer, not a CEO. The longtime CEO, Dan Flynn, announced his retirement early in Cordeiro’s tenure. The process to replace him, as well as the men’s national team coach, proceeded at a glacial pace “As president, I worked closely with the board to put a search process in place, including hiring an outside search firm [for CEO],” Cordeiro says. “When that initial search did not produce the results we wanted, we brought in a second firm to continue the search. We were determined to find the absolute best person to help lead the federation into the future.” That’s far from the only complaint against Cordeiro during his reign. Rothenberg points to a “needless fight” with the US Soccer Foundation charity. The charity has broken its own precedent during this presidential campaign by endorsing Cone, who moved quickly to settle the lawsuit between the two entities. Meanwhile Ricardo Fort, a consultant who led global sponsorship efforts for Visa and Coca-Cola, wrote a blistering piece saying Cordeiro damaged relationships with sponsors that were only resolved when Cone effectively assembled a new management team to repair the damage. And these are the parts of the job at which Cordeiro is supposed to excel. He’s a Goldman Sachs alumnus whose business and financial acumen added to his appeal as a candidate when he won the 2018 election. “How well did that business background serve him when he actually had that job?” Foudy says. Rothenberg also scoffs at Cordeiro’s signature accomplishment: ensuring the success of the joint USA-Mexico-Canada bid for the 2026 World Cup. “You or I could’ve gotten that awarded,” he says. In the public-facing parts of the job, Cordeiro was never at ease. At a victory parade following the USWNT’s victory at the 2019 World Cup, he exacerbated the tension around the equal pay lawsuit between the team and federation with badly timed comments about the US investing more in women’s soccer than any country in the world. It was not an outlandish statement, but neither was it the sort of thing to say when the focus should have been on the players and coaches. To top it off, he mispronounced the name of Megan Rapinoe, the team’s most prominent player. To be sure, the women’s lawsuit stokes some resentment among the rank and file. But Cone, as a distinguished women’s player and coach, is uniquely positioned to plead US Soccer’s case without coming across as an out-of-touch mansplainer. She has overseen a partial settlement in the case and deftly recast the debate to focus on what US Soccer says would be a financial catastrophe if the women win their case on appeal, saying a payout would “likely bankrupt the federation.” That claim might be slightly overstated, but anyone who has done the accounting can see that a payout of $67m, the back pay calculated by an expert witness for the women’s team, would necessitate major cuts in the development programs for future generations that the states rightly hold dear. Cone also called the men’s national team’s bluff when it comes to their statements backing the USWNT. She urged both teams to come to the table to figure out a fair deal that somehow accounts for the wild disparities in prize money that Fifa awards to the winners of the men’s and women’s World Cups. While Cordeiro has the states associations’ support, he will struggle elsewhere. The Professional Council has 20% of the vote, and it’s difficult to imagine MLS alienating sponsors, or the NWSL alienating its players with a Cordeiro vote. The Athletes Council has 33.3% of the vote and swung the election for Cordeiro in 2018. But it isn’t likely to support him again, at least not unanimously. The 23-person council has 12 women, including recent national team stalwarts Becky Sauerbrunn, Ali Krieger and Alex Morgan. Cordeiro, though, is seizing the initiative. While he agrees that the federation would struggle to pay its bills if it acceded to the USWNT’s pay demands, he pledges a capital campaign for a one-time payment to settle the suit. He also wants to push for a National Training Center and a bid to host the 2027 Women’s World Cup, which could be a difficult sell given that the US is already hosting the men’s tournament in 2026 and the 2028 Olympics. But then again, Cordeiro was underestimated in 2018. He could pull off the upset once again. And a lot of important people in soccer would be upset.Martin McKeand, who has died aged 86 of bacterial pneumonia, went from the glossy, commercial world of advertising to become producer of Auf Wiedersehen, Pet, one of the grittiest television programmes of the 1980s, reflecting the haves-and-have-nots polarised world under Margaret Thatcher’s government. He was already producing documentaries for ITV when it hired him to make the new comedy-drama, featuring seven builders finding work in Germany as unemployment soared in Britain. “It’s also about the insularity of the British abroad,” said McKeand, “blokes living in prison-hut conditions on German building sites unable to relate to anything or anybody around them.” Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais, previously known for sitcoms such as The Likely Lads and Porridge, wrote most of the scripts, from stories devised by Franc Roddam, based on the experiences of Mick Connell, a Stockton-on-Tees bricklayer. McKeand, a hands-on producer, was influenced in the casting by seeing the director Ken Loach’s 1981 film Looks and Smiles, about unemployment – set in Sheffield, with local non-professional actors in the lead roles. Seeking to recreate some of this social realism, McKeand sat in on auditions with the director, Roger Bamford, and Barry Ford, casting director of Central Independent Television, which co-produced the series with Witzend Productions. They agreed on Tim Healy and Kevin Whately to play the philosophising Dennis and the ever-homesick Neville, but were stuck on the casting for Oz, the tough character inspired by Connell. Their problem was solved when Jimmy Nail, who had a broken nose and several missing teeth, walked into the auditions. The septet was completed by Timothy Spall as the boring Brummie electrician Barry, Gary Holton as the womanising cockney carpenter Wayne, Pat Roach as the Bristolian bricklayer and ex-wrestler Bomber, and Christopher Fairbank as the Liverpudlian plasterer Moxey. It was a complicated production. While a construction site, complete with cranes, dumper trucks, portable toilets and thousands of bricks imported from Germany, was built at Elstree studios, location filming was done in Hamburg, doubling as Düsseldorf. And McKeand had to cope with the cast’s high jinks. Long drinking sessions in the hotel bar led to rowdiness and visits from the police, and the night porter once objected when one cast member brought a sex worker back. “I was called into the hotel manager’s office,” recalled McKeand in an article for the programme’s official fansite. He was told: “In our country, people who make films are artists, civilised people. This does not seem to be true of some of your group. I must ask you to leave.” McKeand’s diplomacy saved the day. He set about keeping his rabble-rousers in order for the rest of the shoot. McKeand felt that the series (1983-84) was under-publicised by Central, but when viewing figures hit almost 14 million, it commissioned a second run, set in Spain and screened in 1986. The producer’s problems this time included working around industrial action at home by the TV electricians’ union and a rainy Costa del Sol during filming in Marbella. Even more challenging was the task of completing the series following the death of Holton in October 1985 from an alcohol and morphine overdose. With all location shooting finished, a double was used and scripts were rewritten. Although he was not involved in a later Auf Wiedersehen, Pet revival for the BBC (2002-04), McKeand was proud to have launched Nail’s career and produced him again in the first two series (1991-92) of the hugely popular Spender, with Nail playing the unorthodox undercover Newcastle detective sergeant, Freddie Spender. Born in Sutton, Surrey, Martin was the son of Joan (nee ten Bruggenkate) and Jay (James) McKeand, who worked in insurance. He attended the City of London school before doing national service with the Royal Army Service Corps in Egypt. After entering the advertising industry in 1955 as a media buyer with Young &amp; Rubicam, he graduated to producer, then worked for several other companies. He joined Brooks Fulford in 1970, becoming its managing director the following year, and helped to create the Smash instant mashed potato commercials with Martian robots and the slogan: “For mash, get Smash.” Keen to break into television, he was eventually commissioned by the ITV company ATV to produce Havoc (1978), a documentary series about disasters, and the feature-length drama Dirty Money (1979), starring Ian McShane in the real-life story of French neo-fascists committing a bank robbery to finance their terrorist activities. McKeand then became embroiled in the diplomatic row that followed the screening of Death of a Princess (1980), the drama-documentary he co-produced with the director Antony Thomas, for which he had helped to raise funding from half a dozen countries. After seeing its re-enactment of the public executions of a Saudi royal and her male lover, Saudi Arabia imposed sanctions and ejected Britain’s ambassador from Riyadh. The programme-makers also had to fight off attacks from Conservative politicians in parliament – and critics who condemned the drama-documentary style. Between making Auf Wiedersehen, Pet and Spender, McKeand was Saatchi &amp; Saatchi’s deputy head of television advertising (1988-89). He returned to TV to produce another comedy-drama by Clement and La Frenais, Full Stretch (1993), starring Kevin McNally as a former footballer running a struggling limousine-hire company, and the first series of Harry (1993), with Michael Elphick as an unscrupulous news agency reporter. McKeand’s 1965 marriage to Lorna Heaton ended in divorce. He then had a long-term relationship with Jill Forbes, who died in 2001. He is survived by the two children of his marriage, Kate and Richard, his stepson, Alex, and his sister, Janet. • James Martin McKeand, television producer and advertising executive, born 16 August 1935; died 21 January 2022Heineken has said beer prices will go up as it faces “crazy increases” in the cost of ingredients, energy and transport. The brewer said inflation was “off the charts” and its costs would increase by about 15%, forcing it to charge more – which could lead to lower beer consumption. Dolf van den Brink, the brewer’s chief executive, told the Financial Times: “In my 24 years in the business I’ve never seen anything like it, not even close. Across the board we are faced with crazy increases. There’s no model that can handle this kind of inflation. It’s kind of off the charts.” He said the company’s speed of recovery from the pandemic remained uncertain as it was difficult to judge what impact the price increases would have on the amount of beer it sold, and that Covid-19 was expected to continue affecting trade. The latest warning on inflation comes as Heineken said the price of beer it sold rose an average 4.3% in Europe in 2021, partly because of a shift to more premium beers and the reopening of bars and pubs, as well as like-for-like price increases. In the UK, beer sales rose by about 5%, driven by the group’s premium Birra Moretti and Desperados brands. Low- and non-alcoholic drink sales increased by more than 30%, led by the continued success of Heineken 0.0. Overall, Heineken reported an 11.3% increase in sales to €21.9bn (£18.4bn) in 2021, while its net profit jumped by 80% to €2bn. The volume of beer sold increased by 4.6% over the year, buoyed up by a 6.2% rise over the final three months as it benefited from reduced restrictions in Europe. Van den Brink said Heineken had produced a “strong set of results” in “a challenging and fast-changing environment”. He said: “Looking ahead, although the speed of recovery remains uncertain and we face significant inflationary challenges, we are encouraged by the strong performance of our business.”The supreme court has ruled against Bloomberg News in a landmark privacy case that will make it harder for British media outlets to publish information about individuals subject to criminal investigations. In 2016 Bloomberg named an American business executive at a large public company who was facing a criminal inquiry by a British regulator. The article was based on a confidential letter Bloomberg had obtained, which revealed that the businessman was being investigated in relation to claims his company had been involved in corruption and bribery in a foreign country. The businessman – known in the legal proceedings as ZXC – decided to sue Bloomberg over the article, claiming that the media outlet had misused his private information as he had not been arrested or charged with any offence in relation to the corruption inquiry. The case hinged on how to balance the businessman’s right to privacy with Bloomberg’s right to freedom of expression. After six years of legal argument and appeals, the British court system has conclusively sided with the businessman and dismissed the media outlet’s arguments. In the judgment written by Lord Hamblen and Lord Stephens, they said: “For some time, judges have voiced concerns as to the negative effect on an innocent person’s reputation of the publication that he or she is being investigated by the police or an organ of the state.” They said there is a “uniform general practice” by bodies such as the police not to identify those under investigation before laying charges due to the risk of unfair damage to their reputation. Hamblen and Stephens continued: “Reputational and other harm will ordinarily be caused to the individual by the publication of such information. “The degree of that harm depends on the factual circumstances, but experience shows that it can be profound and irremediable.” Wednesday’s supreme court ruling is the latest – and potentially most important – in a series of judgments which have strengthened privacy law in the UK. The ruling clearly establishes that individuals suspected of criminal wrongdoing have a reasonable expectation of privacy until charged. It also makes it harder for journalists to publish stories based on confidential documents, even if the leaked material alleges serious wrongdoing. British media outlets – at the tabloid end of the market and in high-end financial news – increasingly find that privacy law, rather than the risk of libel, is one of the biggest barriers to publication of stories. In 2018 Cliff Richard successfully won substantial damages from the BBC after the broadcaster revealed that he was the subject of a police investigation into alleged historical sexual offences, even though no charge was ever brought and the claims were later dismissed as false. Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, also won a privacy case against the publisher of the Mail on Sunday after it published details of her personal letter to her father. Hanna Basha, of the law firm Payne Hicks Beach, said the British media would now be severely restricted in “how they are able to report on the early stages of the majority of criminal investigations”. “It is a welcome decision for those suspected of crimes who are subsequently not charged as they no longer have a reputational cloud hanging over their heads simply because of the investigation. If suspects are not charged then, in the majority of cases, no one will ever find out about the investigation.” The businessman in Wednesday’s ruling successfully argued that, under the European convention on human rights, he had a reasonable expectation that the details of the British regulator’s criminal investigation into him would not be made public unless he was charged with an offence. Bloomberg had argued that the general public understands that reporting the existence of a criminal investigation into an individual does not mean they are necessarily guilty of a criminal offence. However, the supreme court ruled that even revealing the existence of a criminal inquiry would affect aspects of an individual’s private life such as “the right to establish and develop relationships with other people”. Bloomberg also argued that the businessman’s work for a major company listed on the stock exchange should not be considered part of his private life and therefore should not be subject to the same legal protections. The court rejected this interpretation of the right to a private life and instead went the opposite way, concluding that an article revealing the existence of a criminal inquiry would cause “greater damage to a businessman actively involved in the affairs of a large public company” than to an ordinary member of the public. As a result the supreme court also upheld an earlier decision to award £25,000 in damages to ZXC for misuse of his private information.In my years as a journalist, I’ve had some challenging assignments: file a piece about an underground dinner for Michelin-starred chefs that ends at 3am in time for it to hit the morning pages, write an obit for an almost-dead person by calling up his nearest and dearest and asking for a few punchy quotes. But all pale in comparison with my new assignment which, like Sisyphus, I must complete nightly. “Tell me a story about a book that is broken, and then the unicorn comes for a sleepover, but she’s really big,” my preschooler barks from her bed, her face awash in the neon pink emanating from her polar bear nightlight. For years when I was a child, my father told me a serialized story featuring my stuffed animal, Bernie the Beaver, and his friend, Lou the pigeon. Brooklyn born and raised, Lou was often depicted swaggering down the middle of 59th Street squawking out, “I’m walkin’ here!” as cabs swerved to avoid him. Many of the events took place where I spent my time – Central Park, the American Museum of Natural History, the library – but Bernie and Lou’s park was full of magic places only they knew about, their museum’s dioramas came alive at night, and on and on. Dad had a real knack for storytelling, and knew just when and how to employ a cliffhanger, just how much narrative tension a young child could handle. I’d fall asleep with visions of the world outside my door coming alive, awaiting the following night’s chapter with all the anticipation of a Victorian-era Pickwick Papers reader. Why, a generation later, you might ask, am I taking narrative direction from someone who requests sprinkles on her eggs? Why not just recycle a beloved story I already know? Oh, I tried, at one point, but they all fell flat, so she smartly wrested control to ground the plot in her everyday life. I’ve made repeated attempts to focus them on a single hero – the prime candidate being her Cabbage Patch doll, so beloved that it has become her personal security detail, never leaving her side, and thus emanates an odor more appropriate to a medieval feast hall than a child’s bedroom. But no dice. A second, perhaps more pressing question: Why bother? Why not just end our bedtime ritual with a book? Any form of storytelling – be that read or heard – has been shown to have myriad benefits for children: it increases verbal exposure, is beneficial for socio-emotional development, and enhances the ability to retain information. In hospital settings, it’s been shown to increase oxytocin and lower pain. And hearing stories about one’s own family, and knowing where you fit into that family narrative, has been linked to greater resilience and happiness. All good things, none of which require that I become Spalding Gray at the end of a long day. Plus, my preschooler might be too young to latch on to aural stories. They are, according to at least one study, too “cold” – she needs the pictures to make everything come into focus. Still, I keep at it, not just because I have fond memories of my own father spinning me wonderful yarns, but also because my hunch is that once I nail the art form, something magical will happen. “We’re the only creatures who tell stories, and it’s the job of adults to tell them to children,” Len Cabral told me over Zoom recently, “But there’s a lot of oh, I’m a little busy now, or I just can’t think of one.” Cabral has been a professional storyteller since the 1970s, performing treasured folktales as well as original stories everywhere from schools to the Kennedy Center. In 2001, he received the National Storytelling Networks’ Circle of Excellence Oracle Award, and when not performing, he teaches workshops on how to perfect the craft – when to pause, when to ask questions, voices to use, and the like. I came to him through a close friend, his niece through marriage, who sat her children in front of Zoom with Cabral throughout the pandemic. In videos of his work online, you can see him quiet a rowdy room with a look, morph into a snail riding on the back of a turtle (“Wheeeee!”), and bring auditoriums of children to a sort of rapture normally exhibited by Publishers Clearing House winners. We spoke about how little movements can have huge impacts – he raised his arms, became a bear, then scrunched them in, and became a chipmunk – and the importance, and soothing nature, of repetition, both within a story and when telling it again and again. He told me how amazing it is to see the unique imagination of each of his listeners when they’re asked to draw the story after sessions with him, one reason he loves the oral tradition – your Anansi may look very different from mine. As for parents who don’t know where to begin? “I’ll tell the kids, every scar is a story,” he said. “So check your parents out. Say, Dad, how’d that happen? Here comes a story. Your mom fell off a bike? Your grandparents worked on a farm? They’ve got stitches. They’ve got scars. They’ve got a story.” There is, for writers like myself, one other reason we might want to capitalize on bedtime – at least according to George Saunders, one of the most beloved fiction writers of our time, who’s been a recipient of or finalist for almost every prestigious fiction award, including the Man Booker Prize and the National Book Award. And because the world sometimes makes sense, he’s also a good person, at least if you judge character by how long it takes someone to respond to a cold request for thoughts on bedtime storytelling. “I used to tell stories to our girls when they were little and what I loved about that was the way it forced me to take chances in front of them,” Saunders wrote to me, seven hours after I lobbed an email into the abyss and crossed my fingers. “Selfishly, I tend to be a very controlled and controlling writer – lots of revision and all of that – so the act of doing pure improv for these beloved little people, and the immediate and honest reaction I would get, was wonderful – actually gave me the courage to grow my ‘real’ work in the direction of spontaneity.” Saunders said he and his children would collaborate on plot, and together invented a “mansplainer” named Eddie, a recurring character who allowed them to explore morality before shuteye. Saunders’ children’s book The Very Persistent Gappers of Frip came out of one of these nightly story times. But even for a professional writer, that endgame wasn’t the point – the impulse to create was much more fundamental. “What a lovely thing it was, to huddle together and make something up at the end of the day,” he wrote. Indeed. The other night, at the preschooler’s direction, I told a story about a book that breaks because it is so beloved, and read so much, that it finally falls apart. The savior: a unicorn. It was no Saunders, but at least it hung together. After a beat, my daughter sat up in bed. “Tell it again, Mama,” she said. So I did. Sophie Brickman is a contributor to the New Yorker, the New York Times and other publications, and the author of Baby, Unplugged: One Mother’s Search for Balance, Reason, and Sanity in the Digital AgeThe French government has condemned the actions of a Paris police officer who was suspended after he was allegedly recorded saying a Parisian teacher who made a sexual assault complaint was a “whore”. Lawyers and rights groups reacted with outrage after a recording was released on the investigative website Mediapart of the police officer repeatedly insulting the woman and questioning her case. The police officer has not been named. The 34-year-old teacher, named in the media as Elodie, had called the police in the early hours of Saturday 5 February to report being sexually assaulted by a stranger who grabbed her on a street in central Paris. She was interviewed by officers and the suspect was arrested and questioned. Later that day, another officer called the woman’s phone from the police station. He left a message saying he needed to talk to the woman about the case. But he did not hang up his phone correctly. The woman’s answerphone recorded him for over three minutes joking with colleagues in the office suggesting that the woman was likely to be sleeping off a hangover and that the case didn’t make sense. He was recorded several times as saying that she was a “pute” – a “great big whore” – who was just trying to make life difficult for the man. The interior minister Gérald Darmanin, said it was right the officer had been suspended and his actions had sullied the whole force. The Paris police department said they have asked for an independent inquiry. “No offensive or abusive behaviour will be tolerated by a police officer against a victim,” it said in a statement, adding that it had been working to improve its policy towards victims of sexual and domestic violence. The feminist group Osez le Feminisme questioned the police officer’s work environment. It said: “How is it that a police officer feels he has the right to talk like that about a victim in front of his colleagues? What work atmosphere could allow him to think he could do that with total impunity?” The group added: “How many other times has a woman been called a great big whore by the police officer in charge of her case without it being recorded? How can one hope for impartial treatment of a complaint when you’re called a whore by the police?”They Live in the Grey is another classy effort on the Shudder streaming platform, properly scary and thoughtfully constructed, with unusual editing and framing sleights of hand, co-directed by Hmong-American brothers Abel and Burlee Vang. But Grey also serves an emotionally devastating study of grief, one anchored by a wrenching lead performance from Michelle Krusiec, who plays a social worker Claire Yang. Claire is assigned to investigate a case of possible domestic abuse involving a pre-adolescent girl named Sophie (Madelyn Grace) living in a tense home with parents Audrey (Ellen Wroe, excellent) and Arthur (Bernard Bullen); Claire starts to see the ghost (Mercedes Manning) of a woman whose poltergeisting may be the cause of Sophie’s bruises. Claire has always been able to see dead people, like the kid in The Sixth Sense, which must be a terrible stress as the dead walk up to her thinking they’re still alive even though they have, say, a massive head wound or blood draining out of their wrists. On top of all that, she’s still dealing with the pain of her own young son’s death a year earlier, for which she blames herself. The details are left troublingly vague until the end, so as to introduce a little doubt about Claire’s own mothering skills, especially since the loss seems to have opened up a rift between her and her policeman husband (Ken Kirby). The Vang brothers adeptly weave the various subplots together to both offer a sense of closure and also satisfy genre fans, with the obligatory lashings of gore and a bitter, metallic aftertaste in its troubling portrait of motherhood gone wrong. But in a way the film’s best bits are the quiet scenes where the audience is primed to expect something awful is about to happen, only to find the point is not a jump scare but a harrowing emotional insight. There’s a scene, for example, where Claire lies in bed pretending to sleep as her husband comes back from a shift and crawls in beside her, the whole sequence shot in deep focus. The point is that she’s actually more terrified of opening up about the pain inside her, examining it and letting it go, than she is of any of the ectoplasmic visions she has daily. • They Live in the Grey is available on 17 February on Shudder.Late last month, Yoichi Yatsuda slept in his own home for the first time in more than a decade. As a resident of Futaba, a town in the shadow of the wrecked Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, there was a time when simply spending the night in his family home had seemed an impossible dream. The 70-year-old was one of tens of thousands of people who were forced to flee and start a life in nuclear limbo when the plant had a triple meltdown in March 2011. As Japan reeled after the earthquake and tsunami that killed more than 18,000 people and triggered the world’s worst nuclear disaster since Chernobyl, Yatsuda and his wife, Analisa, and an estimated 160,000 other residents of Fukushima prefecture packed a few belongings and left, believing they would be back within weeks. “If you had told me at the beginning that I would have to wait this long to come home, I would have given up straight away,” said Yatsuda, a retired professional keirin cyclist who has lived in more than 10 places since the disaster. Today, the couple are attempting to rebuild their lives in Futaba, the last of dozens of towns and villages to have ended their status as no-go zones after radiation levels were deemed low enough for people to return. They made periodic visits to repair and refurbish their house, which was once overrun by wild boar, and have been allowed to stay overnight on a trial basis since late January. Local authorities hope more people will follow when the evacuation order is officially lifted in parts of the town later this year. Yatsuda’s homecoming has been bittersweet. Before the disaster, Futaba was home to about 7,000 people. Just 15 residents applied to take part in the trial, and to date only three, including Yasuda and his wife, have moved back permanently. Many of his former neighbours have found jobs and built new lives in other parts of the region and across Japan. In a poll by the reconstruction agency, just 10% of Futaba’s former residents said they would like to return, while 60% had no plans to go back. Those with young children are the most reluctant to contemplate returning to a town that has no schools, shops, restaurants, hospitals or public services. Those with homes that survived the tsunami – which killed 50 people in Futaba – have had them demolished, leaving the town dotted with empty plots of land. Yatsuda’s only neighbour – although he lives a short drive away – is Yasushi Hosozawa, who lives in a tiny room above a parking space and a shed filled with his beloved fishing rods. “I was born here, and I always felt that if I was ever given the chance to return, then I would take it,” said Hosozawa, whose wife and son run a restaurant in another Fukushima town farther inland. “I love fishing and have my own boat moored here … that was a big factor in deciding to come back.” The 78-year-old, a former plumber and cafeteria owner, returned late last month to find that his water supply had yet to be reconnected, meaning he had to drive to the railway station to use the toilet. “There used to be lots of people here,” he said, pointing at patches of grass where his neighbours’ homes once stood. “But look at it now … it’s a wasteland.” Like many Fukushima residents, Yatsuda has little positive to say about Tokyo Electric Power (Tepco), the company that operates the nuclear plant, where decommissioning work is expected to last decades. “I believed Tepco when they said that something like the 2011 disaster could never happen,” he said. “It’s all about trust. When I returned to Fukushima 40 years ago, I was assured that this was a safe place to live.” While no one expects life in Futaba to ever return to its pre-disaster normality, local officials believe more people will resettle. The town has set a target of attracting about 2,000 people, including new residents, over the next five years, and new public housing for 25 households will open in October. “Very few people want to come back, so can you really say that the town has recovered?” said Yatsuda, who will plant flowers in his garden this spring and, he hopes, reopen the gym behind his home where he trained aspiring keirin racers before the disaster. “The problem is people can’t see physical signs of recovery with their own eyes. Unless the authorities do more to create jobs and attract new residents, I can’t see things improving much in the next 10 years.” The stress of life as an evacuee has taken a toll on his mental and physical health, but he has no regrets about returning to a town that, its three current residents aside, still resembles a nuclear ghost town. “This is our house. This is where we played with our children when they were little,” he said. While the couple have no concerns about radiation, they have accepted that, for now, they must travel outside the town to spend time with their eight grandchildren. “We used to enjoy seeing friends and playing with our grandchildren here,” said Analisa. “It would be great if younger families moved here … I desperately want to see and hear children again.”The UK’s Security Service, MI5, has been forced to disclose top secret files to an investigation into historical operations in Northern Ireland for the first time, it has emerged. The revelations by the British chief of an investigation into an alleged spy at the heart of the IRA come as an influential US congressman denounced British government plans for an amnesty for those involved in crimes during the Troubles as a “cover-up”. Jon Boutcher, former chief constable of Bedfordshire police, has spent five years examining the involvement of a state agent codenamed Stakeknife in IRA kidnappings, torture and murder. He told Congress his Operation Kenova investigation had now extended to 250 murders. He also told Congress he had made successful legal challenges to MI5 and was getting fresh information on crimes that had never been seen by previous police heads, including three official government inquiries led by the former Met commissioner John Stevens. “We’ve recovered records that other investigations, previously commissioned, were not provided access to. We have access into MI5, into the military and into the PSNI, direct access. It’s something I insisted upon, having spoken to a lot of those who previously led legacy investigations,” he said. “It’s realistic to suggest that some of the access that wasn’t provided years ago was because of the proximity of those investigations to the conflict. There [were] a lot of people in those organisations leading those organisations who were affiliated to a side in the conflict and therefore they made it hard to get the material.” Boutcher was speaking for the first time since he completed his interim report into the killings, which is yet to be published. He was giving evidence to a hearing at Congress’s Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission, which also took evidence from victims’ families, including Geraldine Finucane, whose husband, Pat, a lawyer, was murdered in 1989, and a victims campaigner, Alan McBride, whose wife and father-in-law were killed in a fish shop in the Shankill Road in 1993. Co-chair of the committee, the veteran Republican congressman Chris Smith, promised to help their campaign to stop the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, going ahead with the legislation dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Smith said the UK plan was the “final nail in the cover-up they are engaging in”, adding: “This is not a done deal … this can be checkmated before it goes any further”. The laws were expected to be tabled last autumn and have been delayed twice. Boutcher said he believed the government was at “a tipping point” in relation to the legislation and urged them to think again as families deserved the truth. “If the truth is denied, the next generation will carry on the fight for answers and the past will not heal,” he said. Smith’s co-chair, the Democrat Jim McGovern, said he hoped the government would “step back” from the legacy legislation. “Now is not the time to give up on accountability for the terrible human rights abuses committed during the Troubles”. Mark Thompson, chief executive of Relatives for Justice, told the hearing that 1,700 families would be denied the truth if the UK government’s plan for a statute of limitations on investigations went ahead. Boutcher said families of security forces killed in Northern Ireland had suffered too. He had discovered many families “had not heard from the authorities or the police for many many years”. It was “fair to say they felt incredibly let down”. He said it was right that the UK state agencies were opening up files to his Operation Kenova and that investigations were viable, despite arguments of challenges presented by the fact some of the crimes happened decades ago. “Security forces are often of a view that any examination of legacy is of itself a criticism of that. And the disclosure of information represents a threat to national security. Neither is correct, is what sets us apart as a democracy. Having not been able to deal with these cases properly at the time because of the danger that existed to everyone, we should now do what we can to give families the investigation they deserve,” he said. In response to the hearing, the UK government said it was “rightly listening to the feedback it has received and considering how the proposals … might be amended to better meet the needs of those impacted by the Troubles”. A spokesperson said: “The government is absolutely committed to addressing legacy issues comprehensively and fairly”, adding the proposals would include “measures that focus on information recovery, so that families can know what happened to their loved ones, and which promote reconciliation, so all communities in Northern Ireland can move forward”.A self-styled eco-terrorist who planted a viable homemade bomb in a popular public park in central Edinburgh has been jailed for more than eight years. Nikolaos Karvounakis, originally from the Greek island of Crete, had placed the improvised device packed with 58 nails and sections of metal pipe in a shelter at Princes Street Gardens in January 2018. Written on the flap inside the box were the words “fuck you all”. The device included low grade explosive, and a primitive but disconnected fuse made from a light filament and a battery. Army explosives experts believed that had it been made operational or accidentally detonated, it would have been capable of causing significant injuries, the high court in Edinburgh heard. Karvounakis later claimed to be linked to a fringe group accused of eco-terrorism which originated in Mexico. It took nearly two years before Karvounakis, 35, a former Greek national serviceman, was arrested. In December 2020 Police Scotland counter-terrorism officers received intelligence from European counterparts linking him to the offence. DNA taken from tape used in the device was found to belong to him. Six weeks after the device was found, the Edinburgh Evening News received an email headed “International Terrorist Group in UK”. It contained a link to an extremist website where Karvounakis had anonymously claimed responsibility with a picture of the device and signed “Misanthropos Cacogen”. Speaking for the prosecution, Angela Gray, the advocate depute, said Karvounakis claimed to be a “lover of nihilist anti-political violence” and to support an anarchist terror group Individualidades Tendiendo a lo Salvaje. The group has been blamed for bombing a nano-technology lab in Mexico City in 2011 that seriously injured a robotics researcher. Gray told the court: “This is known as ITS, an abbreviation of a Spanish phrase translating to ‘individualists tending to the wild’. This Mexican terrorist organisation was formed during 2011. The group focuses on eco-terrorism, which involves acts of violence committed against people and or property in support of environmental causes.” John Scullion QC, Karvounakis’s defence counsel, said he had been struggling with anxiety and low self-esteem, and had spent increasing amounts of time online. There he had drifted into conversations with extremists, whose beliefs he now repudiated. Scullion said his client, who pleaded guilty to an offence under the Terrorism Act, had intended to cause disruption but had not planned to injure people, so had left the detonator unconnected. “It is fair to say he now bitterly regrets what he did and will bitterly regret it for the rest of his life,” Scullion told the court. Lord Braid jailed Karvounakis for eight years and four months, and said he would have been jailed for 10 years had he not admitted his guilt and had no previous convictions. “The offence involved a high degree of culpability on your part as shown by the significant degree of planning,” the judge said. “Afterwards you appeared to exult in the commission in your claim of responsibility.” Det Chief Supt Stuart Houston, Police Scotland’s head of counter-terrorism, said: “The ideological beliefs held by Karvounakis were unusual. “His reckless actions showed utter disregard for the safety of anyone within Princes Street Gardens [and] there is no doubt his presence and engagement online after the event could have easily encouraged others to carry out similar acts, with potentially catastrophic consequences. Not just in Scotland.”Joe Biden has delivered another blow to Donald Trump’s efforts to keep secret his actions around the time of the deadly January 6 Capitol insurrection by refusing to exert executive privilege over the former president’s White House visitor logs, according to a report published on Wednesday. The president has directed the National Archives to turn over the records within 15 days to the House committee investigating the attack by Trump supporters as a “in the light of the urgency” of the panel’s work, the New York Times says. Trump had insisted that details of who visited him in the White House were protected by executive privilege, a claim identical to the one Biden rejected last year over hundreds of pages of documents, including call logs, daily presidential diaries, handwritten notes and memos from aides. Trump took that case to appeal but lost in the supreme court last month. The investigation by the House select committee has become increasingly focused on Trump’s Oval Office in recent weeks as it also attempts to unravel his efforts to overturn his defeat by Biden in the 2020 presidential election. Knowledge of who visited the White House and when is seen as crucial to the panel’s inquiry, following recent revelations that a “war room” of Trump insiders, including his personal attorney Rudy Giuliani, was set up to plot ways to try to prevent Biden from taking office. Trump, meanwhile, continues to expound the big lie that his election defeat was fraudulent as he mulls his decision to run again in 2024. Biden’s decision to reject the privilege claim came on Monday in a letter to the National Archives by the White House counsel, Dana Remus, the NYT reported. The letter stated that Biden had considered Trump’s claim that because he was president at the time of the attack on the US Capitol the records should remain private, but determined that it was “not in the best interest of the United States” to do so, the Associated Press reported. Echoing arguments given in Biden’s previous rejection of executive privilege claims, Remus said that “Congress has a compelling need” to see the documents judiciously, and that “constitutional protections of executive privilege should not be used to shield, from Congress or the public, information that reflects a clear and apparent effort to subvert the Constitution itself”, the Times account states. The newspaper said it had obtained a copy of the letter sent on Tuesday to David Ferriero, the official archivist of the US, and that the White House planned to notify Trump’s lawyers on Wednesday. It was not immediately clear if Trump will appeal the decision legally given his earlier supreme court defeat. The bipartisan House panel has interviewed dozens of witnesses and reviewed thousands of documents as it tries to untangle the events following Trump’s defeat, with the waters beginning to lap at the doors of the former president’s Oval Office. Members on both sides insisted at the weekend that they expected Giuliani, who has so far resisted efforts to appear, to give what could be crucial testimony. The former New York mayor and Trump adviser has been implicated in an alleged plot to seize voting machines in several contested states. Other key Trumpworld insiders have refused to cooperate with the committee, including the former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows and former Trump adviser Steve Bannon. The House of Representatives recommended criminal contempt charges for Meadows in December, and Bannon pleaded not guilty to a contempt of Congress charge in November. Others from the Trump administration have been more talkative, with aides close to Mike Pence, the former vice-president, providing evidence. Pence has become embroiled in a public dispute with his former boss, openly rebutting Trump’s false claims that he had the power to refuse to certify Biden’s victory. According to Adam Kinzinger, one of two Republicans on the January 6 panel, public hearings could begin in the spring or summer, as the clock ticks towards November’s midterm elections and a likely shutting down of the inquiry by any new Republican House majority. Pressure is mounting on Trump, who is facing at least 19 separate legal challenges, according to a Guardian tally this month. The Washington Post reported last week that Trump took boxes of records, including top secret documents, to Mar-a-Lago, his Florida retreat, when he left office, in possible violation of government record-keeping laws. And an upcoming book from New York Times journalist Maggie Haberman claims that Trump periodically clogged White House toilets by attempting to flush away printed papers. Trump has denied the allegations.Students at five leading universities have filed legal complaints accusing their colleges of breaking a little-known law by investing in the fossil fuel companies responsible for the climate emergency. The students from Yale, MIT, Princeton, Stanford and Vanderbilt wrote to the attorneys general of their respective states on Wednesday asking authorities to investigate breaches of the Uniform Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act, which requires universities to invest in a manner consistent with their “charitable purposes”. The novel legal strategy, developed with lawyers from the Climate Defense Project, argues that the law imposes a legal duty to put the public interest first and that their universities, among the wealthiest and most prestigious colleges in the country, are failing to do so by investing in fossil fuel companies that cause damage to the environment and health. In addition, the complaints say that investments in coal, oil and gas are not financially responsible, as required by the law, because the industries have an uncertain future. The five universities together have total endowment funds of about $150bn, although only a small part is invested in fossil fuel companies. In their letter to Tennessee’s attorney general, Herbert Slatery, students, faculty and alumni at Vanderbilt University accused the college’s board of trustees of breaching its duties with investments from its $10bn endowment. “We ask that you investigate this conduct and use your enforcement powers to bring the Board of Trust’s investment practices into compliance with its fiduciary obligations,” the letter said. Hannah Reynolds, an anthropology student and co-coordinator of Divest Princeton, said the group filed the complaint after her university failed to act on earlier proposals to shed investments in fossil fuel companies. “There’s been nine years of fossil fuel divestment organising at Princeton and no commitment or action by Princeton. We’ve exercised every option, we’ve made every argument that we can, and Princeton hasn’t taken it seriously,” she said. Reynolds accused the university of stalling by having various panels and committees review divestment proposals, only to see them recommend contradictory actions that limit the scale of action. Last year, Princeton’s board of trustees announced it would divest from coal and tar sands but not oil and gas. Aaditi Lele, an organiser of the divestment campaign at Vanderbilt University, said students there faced a similar struggle. “Every time we ask them about fossil fuel divestment, they refer back to other actions that they’re taking to make the campus itself greener, such as carbon offsets, but they fail to address actual divestment. A lot of what they do is just greenwashing through mentioning those other actions and then using that as justification to pretend that that’s enough,” she said. Students at the five universities coordinated their action following similar initiatives Harvard and Cornell, which both subsequently announced they would shed fossil fuel investments. “We’ve seen other schools, specifically Harvard and Cornell, take the same approach,” said Reynolds. “Within months, both of those schools have divested. So our hope is that by taking this action, that maybe this will finally be taken seriously.” The students are also seeking to put pressure on their universities by drawing public attention to their continued financial involvement with the coal, oil and gas industries. Asked why the student groups asked state attorneys general to investigate instead of pursuing direct legal action, Reynolds said it was a question of resources. “Princeton is a university with a $39bn endowment, so they really have a lot of resources that we don’t have. I’m sure that they would be able to hire the lawyers to defend them in a way that would be much more difficult for us. We don’t have any funding or anything. It’s a bunch of volunteers in our campaign,” she said. Four of the universities are in states with Democratic attorneys general and their students expect at least a sympathetic hearing. Vanderbilt is in Tennessee, where Slatery is a Republican. But campaigners note that he declined to join 27 other states in a lawsuit against President Barack Obama’s policies to mitigate the climate crisis. Lele said the environmental crisis had not passed Tennessee by. The state was hit by catastrophic flash flooding last year that killed 20 people and damaged hundreds of homes. “Environmental degradation and its impacts have really been at the forefront of the conversation. So we’re hopeful that the political affiliations of the state don’t impede their understandings of the gravity of the situation,” she said.Last week, the White House issued an executive order announcing the theft of some $7bn. Shocking, to be sure. But more shocking still was when that same executive order also identified the thief: the White House. In a move that can only be described as brazenly immoral and utterly unconscionable, the Biden administration has begun a process to seize the more than $7bn of assets that the Central Bank of Afghanistan has on deposit at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Since the Taliban gained control of the war-ravaged country last year, that money has been frozen in place. Now, the administration has concocted its own mega-grift, planning to spend half of the money – not their money, lest we forget – for humanitarian aid in Afghanistan, while reserving the other half of the funds – not their money – for the relatives of the September 11 victims who have brought claims against the Taliban for the 2001 terrorist attacks. Did I mention that this is not their money? These funds belong to the people of Afghanistan and must remain with the people of Afghanistan. The fact that this must even be stated is mind boggling. There are ethical and practical reasons why Biden’s plan must be abandoned. First, why must ordinary Afghan citizens who had nothing to do with the September 11 attacks have their savings confiscated and their lives immiserated by bureaucrats in Washington? (Reports indicate that the Afghan assets in the Central Bank are composed of foreign exchange funds, the reserves of Afghanistan’s commercial banks, and ordinary people’s savings.) Without rehashing the story of how the Taliban came into existence in the first place, we can all agree that no one voted the Taliban into power in 1996. Why should the people of Afghanistan be held responsible for that group’s actions? Nor did any of the 19 hijackers who carried out the September 11 attacks come from Afghanistan. The truth is that the Afghan people have overwhelmingly been the victims of the Taliban and of al-Qaida, and to take Afghan money to pay grieving Americans in order to punish the Taliban is nothing less than larceny as collective punishment. And why does this kind of first-world financial hostage taking only move in one direction? After all, don’t the United States, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Russia, the UK and many other states also bear significant responsibility for the thousands upon thousands of civilian deaths in Afghanistan? The money allied forces occasionally offer in condolence payments is peanuts relative to the destruction they have caused. Once we conclude that the September 11 families deserve justice for their losses, which they do, then shouldn’t we also look for redress for the Afghan victims of allied violence? And yet, the idea that Afghans could seek legal means to abscond with the US Treasury due to the death of their people and the US role in the destruction of their country is laughable. This painful asymmetry illustrates the enduring colonial nature of international politics. Whatever legal wrangling about lawsuits and default judgments that this executive order is ostensibly meant to address, the message it sends is clear: American lives matter more than Afghan lives, and American tragedy looms larger than Afghan pain. But that pain is ongoing. From a Soviet invasion that thrust ordinary people into the middle of one of the hottest zones of the cold war, Afghanistan has endured 40 years of devastating turmoil, starting with the United States and the Soviet Union conscripting Afghans into their global conflict. (We’re approaching the 40th anniversary of Ronald Reagan proclaiming 21 March 1982 as Afghanistan Day.) Then, after 9/11, Afghans were soon subject to systematic torture at the hands of Americans at Bagram airbase, merciless American drone attacks, murderous night raids and so much more. Of course, the Taliban also bear enormous responsibility for their extraordinary violence and brutal repression, and helping them rebuild their power would be disastrous. But stealing the money of Afghanistan and distributing it as you see fit hardly furthers the interests of justice. It’s simply shocking that anyone, let alone the US government, thinks that it could. On the contrary, the people of Afghanistan are currently facing an economic collapse that is gargantuan in scope. A prolonged drought, the ravages of the pandemic, and the freezing of western aid since the Taliban seized power last year has left the country in shambles. At least 95% of households in the country are not consuming enough food to sustain themselves. One million Afghan children face acute hunger. Over three million suffer from malnutrition. Almost three-quarters of a million people were displaced from their homes from last year’s fighting, in a country where four million people had already been internally displaced. The administration argues that this executive order will free up funds that it will immediately distribute as aid. But the administration’s alchemy of transforming other people’s money into humanitarian assistance is also, practically speaking, shortsighted. The move will ultimately pauperize the nation even more, push it further into becoming a territory almost entirely dependent on foreign largesse. While there is an immediate demand for relief and assistance, what Afghanistan ultimately needs is its own functioning economy, which has now been made all the more difficult as the US essentially bankrupts the Afghan Central Bank. Biden’s executive order thus undermines a future of economic stability and growth. The national economy simply cannot function without a central bank and a reliable trading system. Even though some foreign currency is entering the country through entities such as the International Bank of Afghanistan, it’s not nearly enough and international commerce is nearly impossible in Afghanistan. As one shopkeeper in Kandahar, Haji Abdul Nafi, told the New York Times: “We cannot earn money for a living, we cannot do business with other countries, we cannot import and export goods – we are almost cut off from the world.” The idea that bankrupting the Afghan Central Bank will starve the Taliban begins to look even more ridiculous and craven when you discover that, under current US rules, non-governmental organizations operating in Afghanistan are “permitted to pay taxes, dues and import duties to the Taliban as long as the payments are related to the authorized activities”. This is probably the only way that some aid can enter the country, but it also illustrates just how hypocritical Biden’s executive order is. There have to be better solutions out there, and there are proposals being discussed that would allow the Afghan Central Bank to have its activities monitored by independent auditors to guarantee that none of the money is taken by the Taliban. Would that work? I don’t know, but what I do know is that this executive order is cruelty and theft masquerading as charity and justice, and it must be revoked before the damage it causes is beyond repair. Moustafa Bayoumi is the author of the award-winning books How Does It Feel To Be a Problem?: Being Young and Arab in America and This Muslim American Life: Dispatches from the War on Terror. He is professor of English at Brooklyn College, City University of New YorkThe programme notes for Jamaal Burkmar’s new show quote scenes from Brooklyn Nine-Nine, Scrubs and The Office, a taster of the 90s and 00s sitcoms that inspired Donuts. There is no laugh track or wordy jokes here, but there is something warm, fun and very watchable. It’s based around three friends, sitting around at home. They play and tease, riffing off one another in choreography that is thoroughly conversational. They are dancing directly to each other, as if saying: “Hey, look at this! Did you know that?” Specific gestures sometimes take the place of words. It’s very well observed, the delicate dynamics of friendship and the way interactions happen, how energy moves around a group and we mirror people as we connect with them. Like a singer performing in a register close to their own speaking voice, the dancers, certainly at first, are close to their natural bodies. Burkmar ups the intensity later on, fusing funk styles with contemporary dance in a distinctive language, finding some nifty formulations of steps. At first this dance is Seinfeldian, in that it’s about nothing much. It mostly revolves around the myriad ways you can reconfigure yourselves on the sofa (Burkmar’s got to be first choice for the next John Lewis furniture ad). But some light drama and jeopardy creep in and the stakes are mildly raised, all hinging on the great rapport between the switched-on dancers, Maya Carroll, Iolanda Portogallo and Dorna Ashory. The jazz-funk soundtrack by Dutch producer Jameszoo is fabulous, the bodies speaking in sync with its noodling melodies. With an original voice and feelgood, accessible choreography, Donuts suggests Burkmar could go far. • At Riley theatre, Leeds, on 17 February; Stephen Joseph theatre, Scarborough, on 21 March and Skipton town hall, Craven, on 25 March.I first visited and photographed Sarajevo in 1996. I had been volunteering in neighbouring Croatia and managed to hitch a ride in to Bosnia in a UN vehicle. The war and siege had ended a few months before and the city was enjoying its long-awaited peace. Sarajevans took to its scarred streets in huge numbers, meeting with friends and drinking coffee safe in the knowledge that they wouldn’t be struck down by a sniper or shell. The destruction of the city at that time was jaw-dropping, surreal and seemingly total: rows upon rows of broken, bombed-out high-rise flats; shell craters and explosion indents everywhere; hospitals, offices and factories all in ruins. This was urbicide, a late-20th-century Dresden or Stalingrad. Everyone who lived through the nearly four-year siege had a nightmare to share. I returned to the city the following year and set up a photo project for children: the Sarajevo Camera Kids. Using donated equipment from back home in Scotland, I set up a makeshift darkroom and organised photo classes in the basement of an orphanage. I developed a somewhat unhealthy obsession with Sarajevo and all things Bosnian, and volunteered with the kids’ photo project for three consecutive summers. The Sarajevo Camera Kids led to lifelong friendships and connections with the students and with the city of Sarajevo. I would return there and to the wider Balkans over the next few years to document the peace and the reconstruction – which eventually culminated in my book and exhibition A Balkan Journey. This photograph was taken in Sarajevo on 21 November 2015, 20 years to the day after the Dayton peace agreement was signed, signalling the end of nearly four years of brutal wars in Bosnia and Croatia and bringing about the end of the siege of Sarajevo – the longest city siege in modern history. Sarajevo had changed dramatically since 1996, when I took photographs of a city in black and white, destroyed but surviving. The city now put on a brave, bold, cosmopolitan face; a modern European tourist destination like any other. An abundance of new shopping centres ran the length of the former Sniper Alley – the main thoroughfare leading into the heart of the city – and the Sarajevo that the Camera Kids documented no longer existed. But the divisions were still endemic. For the 20th anniversary of peace, I wanted to document the stories of young people in their late teens and early 20s, who were born during or just after the conflict and so had no real memory of the war. I wanted to find out what, if anything, the Dayton agreement and peace in Bosnia had meant to them at a time when memories of the war were still raw and the ethnonationalist leaders were still in power and driving the divisions. The sad reality is that young people in Bosnia still have separate education systems that work to replicate the divisions, with each side enforcing its own historical perspective and political ideology. It leaves little scope for real integration. I met and photographed young people from both sides – Bosnian Muslims and young Bosnian Serb students in Sarajevo. Both groups of young people spoke of wanting to break away from the constant talk of war and mistrust of the “other” – they just wanted to have a future in their own country. Tired of the nationalism and warlike rhetoric, these young people were part of a growing number who argue that it was never their war and that they should not have to carry its weight, nor have it drag them and their country down. As the light began to fade on the anniversary day, I rushed to the famous Žuta Tabuja viewpoint looking over the city to get some last-minute landscape shots. I didn’t know who the couple were in my frame, they were just strangers blocking my view. But as they reached out and embraced each other it became a photograph worth capturing. It seemed the perfect poster image to highlight Bosnia and Sarajevo 20 years on from war: an optimistic image representing all the young people I had photographed and spoken to earlier who longed for peace and opportunities in their country – in their Sarajevo, a city that had seen and suffered so much. Chris Leslie’s CV Born: Glasgow, 1974. Trained: MA (Distinction) in documentary photography, London College of Communication. Influences: “Tom Stoddart, Alfredo Jarr, Oliver Chanarin and Adam Broomberg.” High point: “Launching my new book in Sarajevo in November 2021.” Low point: “Accidentally destroying my first four rolls of BW film from A Balkan Journey.” Top tip: “Take time to see, explore, walk, absorb without a camera.” • A Balkan Journey is at Sogo Arts, Glasgow, until 28 February. Copies of the limited edition photo book are available at balkanjourney.com/the-bookPrince Andrew is facing months of pressure to relinquish his Duke of York title after an MP vowed to pursue “a number of paths” in parliament, including amending legislation, to strip the royal of his last major honorary position. Rachael Maskell, the Labour MP for York Central, said she had met Commons officials to explore ways of forcing Prince Andrew to give up his Duke of York title after his out-of-court settlement with a woman who accused him of sexually assaulting her when she was 17. Maskell said she hoped Andrew would voluntarily let go of his association with the city – a lifelong title bestowed by the Queen in 1986 – but that she would pursue it in parliament, including by amending legislation, in the coming weeks. She said: “Trying to find the right piece of legislation is important but we clearly have got things coming back to the Commons in the next few weeks [so] there may be some manoeuvres which can be put in place.” Councillors in Northern Ireland are also set to hold a debate later this year on the renaming of Prince Andrew Way – a street in Carrickfergus, which is in the Mid and East Antrim Council area. Such a move risks extending the controversy deeper into the Queen’s platinum jubilee year – due to be celebrated with a four-day bank holiday weekend in June – as any new law would have to be passed by MPs and peers and then given royal assent by the monarch. The surprise out-of-court settlement, announced on Tuesday, means Prince Andrew makes no admission of guilt over the claims made by Virginia Giuffre, which he had repeatedly denied and only weeks ago vowed to fight in a US civil trial. However, the end of the civil claim failed to calm the unease in York about its link to the embattled prince. Darryl Smalley, a Liberal Democrat councillor and the city council’s executive member for culture, leisure and communities, said the sexual assault allegations were a “stain on the city’s reputation” and that it would step up pressure on MPs and the royal household for Andrew to relinquish the Duke of York title. Smalley said: “We really need the royal household and parliament to recognise that this is serious. We’re a world-renowned city with fantastic universities, environment and culture, but York’s image across the world is definitely being tarnished by this.” The Queen last month stripped Andrew of his military affiliations and royal patronages in an attempt to distance the royal family from the allegations. However, he has kept his Duke of York title. The Queen alone cannot remove titles of peerage. Any attempt to remove the title would have to be led by parliament, through a statute passed by both the House of Commons and the Lords. Maskell, who raised concerns about the Duke of York’s title in the Commons last month, said on Wednesday that her mailbox was “absolutely rammed” with people demanding that Andrew be stripped of the title. She said another route could be an online petition in which MPs could debate a motion put forward by York residents calling for the Duke of York to be stripped of his title. A parliamentary e-petition will be considered for debate by MPs if it gets more than 100,000 signatures, and a response from government if it tops 10,000. Maskell said: “The next step is very much having a parliamentary petition to gauge broad public opinion and also to look at the legislation. I’ve already spoken to the clerks about what those options are. Of course, as a backbencher we all know it’s difficult to bring forward legislation, so I will be looking for opportunities in other legislation that government brings forward to see if it could be amended to address this.” Prince Andrew also retains the service rank of vice-admiral of the Royal Navy, as a former member of the armed forces. The duke was due to be promoted to admiral on his 60th birthday in 2020, but asked to defer this after stepping back from public duties in 2019. Tom Sharpe, a former frigate commander and Ministry of Defence official, said the prince should be allowed to retain his naval rank but that he should not be promoted to admiral. He added: “Whether or not he choses to wear his uniform for state occasions is a different matter and one for his own personal judgment. However, I would imagine that many would consider it inappropriate.”The European court of justice has dismissed complaints from Hungary and Poland against a law that ties EU funds to democratic standards. In a milestone in the battle for the rule of law in the EU, the bloc’s highest court rejected the cases brought by Hungary and Poland “in their entirety”, confirming that countries can be deprived of EU funds when they fail to meet democratic standards. The EU’s values, such as the rule of law, “define the very identity of the European Union as a legal order”, the court said in a statement about its keenly anticipated ruling. “The court specifies … that compliance with those values cannot be reduced to an obligation which a candidate state must meet in order to accede to the European Union and which it may disregard after accession.” The ruling means the European Commission can deny Hungary and Poland EU funds in response to widely perceived democratic backsliding in both countries. The commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, who has been accused of dragging her feet on the issue, came under immediate pressure from across the political spectrum to use the law. “No more excuses for Von der Leyen. It’s time to finally act against the rule-of-law violators in our union,” the German Green MEP Daniel Freund tweeted. Petri Sarvamaa, a Finnish MEP and spokesperson on budgetary control for the centre-right European People’s party, said: “It is high time to start implementing the regulation. The clock cannot be restarted to play for time. The commission must act really fast.” In a statement welcoming the ruling, Von der Leyen said the commission would “analyse carefully the reasoning of the judgments and their possible impact on the further steps we will take under the regulation”. She promised the commission would “adopt in the following weeks guidelines providing further clarity about how we apply the mechanism in practice”, adding: “I promised that no case will be lost. And I have kept that promise.” Hungary, named as only a “partly free” country by the NGO Freedom House, has provoked concerns about the spending of EU funds by friends and family of the prime minister, Viktor Orbán. Poland’s nationalist Law and Justice party, led by Jarosław Kaczyński, has been in a long-running battle with Brussels over the independence of its courts, which raises doubts about its stewardship of public money. Reacting to the ruling, Hungary’s justice minister, Judit Varga, said the court had made “a political decision because of our upcoming referendum on child protection”, a follow-up to the Hungarian government’s anti-gay law passed in 2021, which has been condemned as the “instrumentalisation” of LGBTQ+ rights. “The ECJ’s latest ruling is an example of how Brussels is abusing its powers,” Varga said. A spokesperson for Hungary’s ruling Fidesz party said the decision was part of efforts “to help the leftist opposition win elections in Hungary”. Orbán is facing an unprecedented challenge from a centre-right former Fidesz-supporting mayor, who is backed by six main opposition parties in 3 April elections. After the ruling, Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said: “Poland believes that centralisation, bureaucratic centralisation, federalisation … is a dangerous process.” Morawiecki, who recently promised to close a disciplinary chamber that is at odds with EU law, is perceived as wishing to dial down the conflict with Brussels. But his room for manoeuvre may be restricted by hardliners in the Polish government. The deputy justice minister, Sebastian Kaleta, called the ruling “blackmail aimed to deprive us of our right to self-determination” and “an attack on our sovereignty”, according to the Polish Press Agency. The law is intended to protect from fraud against the EU budget, rather than all rule-of-law violations. The plan received strong backing from governments in western Europe, which are net payers into the EU budget. Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Spain, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Finland and Sweden went to court to argue in favour of the law. Hungary and Poland, both net recipients of EU funds, have received billions of euros since joining the EU in 2004 to improve their public infrastructure, fund universities and support farmers. The commission is refusing to release €36bn (£30bn) in coronavirus recovery funds to Poland and €7.2bn to Hungary, but the current law could affect Warsaw and Budapest’s access to the EU’s seven-year budget worth €1.8tn from 2021- 2027. Hungary and Poland brought the cases after the EU agreed its “rule-of-law conditionality mechanism” in 2020, a regulation that links EU funds to respect for the rule of law. In an unusual move, EU leaders agreed in December 2020 to wait for the outcome of the legal challenge before the law could be used. That decision was also criticised by MEPs. The Dutch MEP Sophie in ’t Veld called the decision to delay “another charade”, adding: “We write hundreds of laws every year. Since when does the application of EU law depend on a court ruling?”My friend Francisco Perez Navarro, who has died aged 96, was a writer and teacher who loved lively conversation, especially when he could share his passion for art and culture over a glass of beer or wine. He wrote the first introduction to Samuel Beckett’s novels and plays for a Spanish audience, and translated the Irish writer’s challenging narrative How It Is into Castilian. Francisco was born in Madrid, to Saturnino Pérez González, a doctor, and Dolores Navarro de la Torre, who ran a dry cleaning shop. When Spain’s civil war broke out, he was sent, aged 11, to stay with his grandparents in Valsain, near Segovia. Unfortunately the area quickly became the scene of fierce fighting, and it would remain a frontline until the end of the war. Foreshadowing his future career, Francisco became a teacher to younger children in the village. In quieter spells he would also earn a few pesetas by writing letters for illiterate soldiers. After the war he attended the Instituto de Cervantes school in Madrid, and then studied philosophy and literature at Complutense University of Madrid, graduating in 1949. In common with many of his young compatriots, he felt stifled in Franco’s Spain. In 1949 he met a British woman, Jean Atkinson; they married in 1950 and moved to Newcastle upon Tyne, where Francisco picked up work as a teacher of Spanish in various private schools. After the couple divorced, he taught for eight years from 1955 at St James’s school in Malvern, Worcestershire, and then at Clarendon college, Nottingham, from 1963 until his retirement in 1990. Meanwhile, in 1976, he published Galeria de Moribundos, introducing the work of Samuel Beckett to Spanish readers. His translation of How It Is in Castilian was published in 1978. Travel was life-enhancing for Francisco. Together with his long-time partner, Françoise (nee Gaeur), whom he married in 1987, as soon as the school holidays began he would leave his book-filled home in Nottingham for Europe’s galleries and cultural festivals. For many years he was London correspondent of the Spanish art magazine Indice, for which, under the nom de plume John Hathaway, he wrote about art exhibitions in London and articles under the heading Crónicas de Inglaterra (Chronicles from England). Despite living in England for more than 70 years, Francisco spoke English with a heavy accent. With his trademark beret and beard he was unmistakably Spanish but regarded himself as a citizen of the world. Francisco remained in Nottingham after retirement, visiting galleries, theatres and cinemas and eating out in restaurants and pubs, where he would always be chatting to people he had just met. He had many friends in Paris and Madrid, and regularly stayed in Tübingen in Germany, where he was researching the writer Friedrich Hölderlin. Françoise died in 2002. Francisco is survived by their son, Pedro, and by Rafael, Maria, Gabriel and Miguel, the children from his first marriage. Another daughter, Teresa, died in 1995.Two of the UK’s leading mayors are calling for urgent action to prepare for mass migration to cities due to the climate emergency, as a major report into the issue launches at the UN headquarters in New York on Wednesday. Mass migration to some of the world’s cities due to the climate emergency is already under way and the World Bank has estimated that unless significant action is taken, 216 million people could be on the move by 2050. In 2020, 30 million people were displaced due to the climate crisis, and 70% of people internally displaced due to the climate crisis are living in urban areas. The World Bank predicts that more than 1 billion people are at risk of being driven from their homes for climate-related reasons. The report, launched during UN Migration Week, uses several countries in Latin America as case studies for what is happening to cities as a result of the climate emergency, and makes recommendations to ameliorate the gloomy projections about the impact of climate emergency-linked migration across the world. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, and the Bristol mayor, Marvin Rees, are key players in efforts to tackle climate emergency-related migration to their own and other cities due to climate change. Khan is chair of C40 Cities, a global network of almost 100 world leading cities dedicated to combating the climate crisis and the devastating human cost of forced and unmanaged migration to cities caused by the climate crisis. Rees is one of nine mayors around the world in the Global Mayors’ Taskforce on Migration The taskforce includes mayors from Lima to Los Angeles, and from Barcelona to Bristol. The report, which will be launched at the UN headquarters with president of the general assembly, Abdulla Shahid, and secretary general, António Guterres, has been produced by researchers at Columbia and New York City universities and has been commissioned by the Mayors Migration Council, working with the UN. Khan told the Guardian: “Cities are leading the way in tackling the climate emergency. As chair of C40, one of my priorities is taking urgent action to address the causes and devastating human cost of forced migration created by the climate emergency. “By tackling the climate crisis we can avoid the worst impacts of climate change while creating new growth and jobs opportunities in our cities. In London I am working towards doubling the size of London’s green economy by 2030. All over the world, people are already being forced to move due to the climate crisis. Mayors are taking urgent action to address these issues, but we cannot do it alone. Cities need more funding and powers from national governments to urgently address the climate emergency at a local level.” Rees added: “Cities hold the key to tackling climate change, with over half the world’s population living in densely populated urban areas. This percentage will grow as cities will also house the majority of those forced to migrate because of climate change in their home countries. It’s therefore imperative that Bristol, alongside other cities in developed nations, show leadership in how to minimise the long-term need for climate displacement. At the same time we recognise that migrants are an asset to our cities and can aid our inclusive green transition by bringing diverse skills and experience.” He called for city mayors to push for the investment needed to futureproof services and infrastructure so that cities can be prepared for climate emergency-related migration in future years. The report, Climate Migration in Mexican and Central American Cities, makes global recommendations for new projects in cities to tackle the climate emergency, which include migrants as part of the solution to greening economies and making them more sustainable. It also calls for city governments to become more involved in shaping policy on climate migration. Early planning and local investment in cities could change the new migration from a crisis into an opportunity, says the report. “Our hope is that this work highlights the clear and immediate urgency for driving national and international investment to city governments and local communities as first responders to climate migration,” it adds.Sadie Barnette’s work honours her father’s time in the Black Panther party, a political organisation founded in the tumultuous 1960s that tried to combine socialism, Black nationalism and armed defence against police brutality. In particular, she takes as raw material a 500-page surveillance file on Rodney Barnette, compiled by J Edgar Hoover’s FBI, which described the Black Panthers as the “most dangerous and violence prone of all extremist groups” in America. The latest in the series, a diptych using powdered graphite and coloured pencil on paper, is on display in This Tender, Fragile Thing, a group exhibition at the Jack Shainman Gallery in upstate New York that offers a fresh look at the Black Panthers in the era of Black Lives Matter. “I think of my father very much as a kind of collaborator and co-conspirator of this project,” says Sadie, whose parents filed a Freedom of Information Act request for the FBI file in 2011. “Eventually we received this document and were totally blown away by how invasive and intrusive and terrifying and extensive it was.” Now 77, Rodney grew up Medford, Massachusetts, one of 11 siblings, another of whom worked closely with Malcolm X in Boston. In 1966 he was drafted into the army and sent to Vietnam, where he was wounded and earned a Purple Heart. He returned to the US and went to Compton, Los Angeles, to bury his nephew, who had been killed in the war. Sadie recalls via Zoom: “He says he felt like he was still at war because of the police presence in the Black neighbourhoods in Compton and the military-style raids that they were doing.” Rodney felt that he had to act and saw the Black Panthers as a positive option in the community. Sadie continues: “I’m always fascinated that what we see after almost every war in the history of our country is that a generation of Black and brown men (at that time, mostly men) come home from a war and haven’t earned any more rights or status or dignity in this country than before, and so you’ll often see this upsurge of political activism or organising.” Rodney opened the Black Panther chapter in Compton before moving to the San Francisco Bay Area and joining activist efforts to defend leading activist Angela Davis, whom he lived with during her trial on murder, kidnapping and conspiracy charges. “He says one of his most important tasks was getting her to court on time every day.” She was acquitted 50 years ago this June. When Rodney finally obtained his FBI file, after haggling that took nearly five years, it was startling in its breadth and depth. There were his family members with their birthdates and other details, interviews with his old school teachers and a list of Black Panthers with “deceased” ominously written in parentheses after each name. The file showed that the Black Panther chapter in Compton had been infiltrated by informants and agent provocateurs, hastening Rodney’s departure. It also made clear that the FBI had been responsible for getting him fired from his job at the post office for the supposedly unbecoming conduct of cohabiting with a woman to whom was not married. Sadie, 37, says: “It was infuriating and chilling and we both felt he was very lucky to be alive. There are so many people who are still incarcerated as political prisoners, even as it’s become somewhat fashionable to celebrate these moments. But people are still incarcerated. Families still haven’t received any type of reparation or compensation for lost loved ones. So my father felt lucky that he lived to tell and I felt lucky that I was born.” The artist adds: “I felt a strong desire to use this material to do something other than it was intended to do, to make it live in my world and tell my father’s story, not in a sense that this is going to completely repair or fix something but just as a meditation on thinking about these issues. And of course connecting surveillance of the 60s in [the FBI programme] Cointelpro and surveillance now which, with all of the digital capabilities, is just even beyond.” At first Rodney was surprised by the idea of turning his FBI file, a product of leaden bureaucracy with only one picture (his mug shot), into art. But when on one occasion someone asked him how it felt to see the pages blown up and displayed all over the walls; he replied that it made him feel free. Sadie, who has been living with her father, mother and partner in Oakland, California, during the coronavirus pandemic, says: “If I can make my father feel free in this country, even for one moment, that really felt like a sort of mission accomplished as far as the possibilities of what art can do, even in a very particular context of the audience of one. For him to feel that way is really all I could ask for.” Say Black Panthers to one generation and they might recall militants barking at Tom Hanks in the 1994 film Forrest Gump (he gets into a punch-up and says, “Sorry I had a fight in the middle of your Black Panther Party”). There have been more nuanced portrayals in movies such as Lee Daniels’ The Butler and Judas and the Black Messiah. Today fans of the Marvel superhero franchise might think instead of Black Panther starring the late Chadwick Boseman. But the party’s revolutionary legacy is complicated and elusive. Its members epitomised radical chic when patrolling the streets with berets, sunglasses, black leather jackets, rollneck jumpers and guns. Its support network offered clothes, self-defence classes, ambulance services and protections from eviction. Its free breakfast programme for children was described by Hoover as “potentially the greatest threat to efforts by authorities to neutralize the BPP and destroy what it stands for”. The corruption of the party’s leadership, however, was noted in a New York Times article in 2016 that said: “Historians have detailed its mistreatment of female members, extortion, drug dealing, embezzlement and murder. At least 19 Panthers were killed in shootouts with one another, the authorities or other black revolutionaries.” The way cultural perspectives shift over time is evident in This Tender, Fragile Thing, on view through 30 April, combining period materials relating to the Black Panthers with works by contemporary artists in a 30,000 square foot former high school in Kinderhook, New York. The show includes photographs by Gordon Parks and John Simmons in the civil rights era, as well as by Devin Allen in Baltimore after the death of Freddie Gray in 2015, and by Ada Trillo at protests in Philadelphia that followed George Floyd’s murder in 2020. Theaster Gates’s immense sculpture Walking Prayer is a vintage cast-steel Carnegie library shelving unit housing more than 2,000 books on the Black experience. Gates rebound each book in black, with single words or phrases embossed in gold, culled from its contents in lieu of titles. Gallery owner Jack Shainman says via Zoom: “The last couple of years, sitting working from home in the pandemic while everybody is watching every night another unarmed Black man gets killed by police, was mind-boggling and so it seemed a time to do this show and re-examine. There’s no answers. It just shows the struggle, the battle, and it really starts with slavery and all those injustices.” Why the title This Tender, Fragile Thing? Shainman explains: “We never learned about the Black Panther movement in school; we learned such a weird version of the history of this country. But the point of the matter is these very brave, very courageous people stepped up to the plate and had to do something; it wasn’t like a choice. “The Black Panther movement always got demonised by white people but it was an amazing thing where they were educating, teaching, feeding people, et cetera. So using that title was about it being such a fragile thing because it takes all those people believing and trying to do something to change it.” Jaci Auletto, associate director of the gallery, believes the Panthers have lessons for today, especially those made uncomfortable by Black Lives Matter’s direct action. “I feel like the urgency when you’re looking at the Panthers is so apparent and I don’t know if it’s because they did have this more aggressive way of dealing with things where they weren’t really trying to sugarcoat things for everyone. “It was a more matter-of-fact way of dealing with what their community and minority communities were dealing with and I think maybe that speaks to where we are today. There are so many things facing us that need urgency and we try and make it nice so that everyone wants to face it, and it doesn’t necessarily always lead to as much action.” Towards the end of the exhibition, Arthur Jafa’s film Love is the Message, The Message is Death brings together original and appropriated footage that juxtaposes police brutality with representations of Black pride and beauty. This and others works on display leave Shainman feeling pessimistic about the future. But Auletto says the show makes her hopeful. “Yes, there is this history and these disturbing images and depictions of violence but at the same time it’s all intermixed with these beautiful songs and moments of joy. The fact that people are starting to have a conversation and pay attention and want to learn more and see the complexities of it – that’s encouraging.” This Tender Fragile Thing runs until 30 April at Jack Shainman Gallery, Kinderhook, New YorkRupert Murdoch’s publishing arm is considering making a move into the frothy market of non-fungible tokens, or NFTs, by turning the Times and the Sun’s extensive archive of photos, cartoons and classic front pages into unique digital versions. News UK is in the early stages of evaluating whether the crown jewels among its tens of thousands of physical images, such as exclusive pictures of the Queen, to front pages such as “It’s The Sun Wot Won it!”, to Freddie Starr Ate My Hamster, could be given a lucrative second life as exclusive digital collectibles the public could buy and trade. Its interest comes as the market for the controversial trading of NFTs, which is viewed by sceptics as a speculative bubble akin to the cryptocurrency craze, grew to an estimated $22bn (£16bn) last year. The possible entry into the world of NFTs, a market that has been questioned by News UK’s own titles, is understood to be driven from the top, with the chief executive, Rebekah Brooks, and the chief operating officer, David Dinsmore, said to be involved. The Times unwittingly played an important role in the rise of crypto assets. Satoshi Nakamoto, the presumed pseudonym for the person or persons who created bitcoin, embedded and quoted the 3 January 2009 front page, which led with “Chancellor on Brink of Second Bailout of Banks”, in the first ever bitcoin block chain transaction in what is now known as the Genesis Block. The move, a nod to Nakamoto’s hope that cryptocurrencies may change the global financial system for the better, led to the edition being referred to as “the most rare, and most valuable crypto-collectible in existence” – in the newspaper industry, at least. One of the areas News UK is understood to be looking at is how to leverage the crypto-fame and financial potential of the 3 January 2009 edition of the Times. However, the question of value is a thorny one. While an owner of an NFT has a digital “token” proving they own the “original” work – which could result in multimillion pound auctions at Sotheby’s and Christie’s – it may be difficult to recreate a unique element to a picture or front page that people would want to pay for when the image is readily available on the internet. News UK, which declined to comment on its crypto project, is understood to also want to keep the rights to continue to use the originals in its publications, a common phenomenon among creators of NFTs. Last month, Julian Lennon sold several items of Beatles memorabilia as NFTs, including items of clothing worn by his father, John, as well as Paul McCartney’s handwritten notes for the song Hey Jude, but kept the physical items. The financial attraction is clear: creations such as the Bored Ape Yacht Club’s 10,000 NFTs, which now trade for almost $300,000 and have been sold to celebrities including Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Paris Hilton and Jimmy Fallon, have brought in more than $1bn in sales since launching last April. But like cryptocurrencies, the NDT market is attracting increasing scrutiny from regulators because of concerns it is a bubble that could cost inexperienced investors their savings. In December, the UK advertising watchdog banned a promotion of digital “fan tokens” by Arsenal football club, saying it was exploiting supporters’ “inexperience or credulity, trivialising investment in crypto assets, misleading consumers over the risk of investment and not making it clear the ‘token’ was a crypto asset”. This week, HM Revenue and Customs announced it had seized three NFTs as part of an investigation into a suspected VAT fraud scheme involving 250 fake companies. Warnings about crypto assets, which are unregulated in the UK, have come from institutions including the Bank of England and the Financial Conduct Authority, which last month was given powers by the Treasury to ensure cryptocurrency ads adhered to the same rules as other financial marketing. There have also been calls for Transport for London, which runs the UK capital’s bus, underground and train network, to ban the rapidly proliferating cryptocurrency ads that often attempt to lure naive investors with the promise of big returns.Sarina Wiegman readily acknowledges she is stepping into the unknown and does not know quite what to expect. As a first-time visitor to Middlesbrough on Thursday night England’s coach will be confronted by not only Temenos, the giant, futuristic, Anish Kapoor sculpture situated outside the Riverside Stadium but the town’s famous Transporter Bridge spanning the River Tees. Yet intrigued as Wiegman may be by her temporary Teesside habitat, events on the pitch could leave the most significant impression. Although the former Netherlands coach has been in charge of the Lionesses for six games, they all involved significantly weaker opposition, resulting in six victories, with 53 goals scored and none conceded. Impressive as November’s 20-0 win against Latvia undeniably was, England face the first proper litmus test of Wiegman’s tenure against Canada’s Olympic gold medallists on Thursday night in the first fixture of the inaugural Arnold Clark Cup. Played across six days in a round‑robin format as England limber up to host the European Championship this July, it also involves fixtures against two more of the world’s top 10 teams in Spain and Germany. “Since I’ve come in we’ve played games where we were in possession all the time,” said Wiegman, speaking from England’s training base at Rockliffe Park, near Darlington. “Although we did really well, the pressure wasn’t as high as we expect from these upcoming games. After these opponents I’ll know better where we are as a team. In order to become better we need to be know where we are at this point; it will be good preparation for the Euros. We really need these games against a higher level of opposition.” As Storm Dudley began battering the north-east, Wiegman was busy devising tactical plans to combat not merely Canada but Spain at Carrow Road on Sunday and Germany at Molineux on Wednesday. “We need to work on our out-of-possession game and our in-transition game so, after this tournament, I can maybe tell you a bit more about how well we’re developing our new style of play,” said Wiegman, who led the Netherlands to Euro 2017 glory and the final of the 2019 World Cup. “Afterwards we can evaluate and decide what we need to do better to go to the next stage. We can see what we need to change. “We want to see how our players relate to each other in different situations and we want to try some things out too. The next week will be a combination of trying things out, developing our style of play and managing the workload of some players who have heavy schedules with their clubs. We want to be tested in every area of the team: in defence, in possession and in transition moments.” Although Wiegman is delighted to be able to work with Lucy Bronze, arguably the world’s finest right‑back, for the first time since the Manchester City defender’s recovery from the fifth knee operation of her career, England’s captain, Steph Houghton, continues to be sidelined by injury. Houghton’s absence dictates that Leah Williamson once again captains the Lionesses. Like Wiegman, the Arsenal defender believes the coming week will be largely about self‑discovery. “We have an opportunity to learn more about ourselves this week, which is a gift really,” Williamson said. “But we’re going into this tournament to win it. It’s perfect preparation for the summer.” After a run of semi-final defeats in major tournaments, England know there is room for improvement. “We know we’ve underachieved a little bit as a team in the last few tournaments and I think everybody wants to turn that round,” Williamson said. “The dynamic of our team has changed a little bit; there’s more of a collective push to reach the next standard. The training now is some of the most competitive I’ve been involved with.” A Canada side managed by the Consett-born Bev Priestman – England’s popular assistant manager when they reached the last four of France 2019 during Phil Neville’s time in charge – are unlikely to be broken down easily. “I would call Canada a real team,” an admiring Wiegman said. “They’ve got real structure in and out of possession – and real quality.”The City watchdog has raised concerns about a deal to give the cryptocurrency platform Binance access to the UK payments network just months after it ordered the company to stop all regulated activities in Britain. The Financial Conduct Authority said it had limited powers to object to the arrangement with Paysafe, a London-based payments provider, despite its concerns about Binance offering complex and high-risk investments to consumers. The FCA had ordered Binance to stop all UK regulated activity last June over worries about weak consumer protections, amid a wider crackdown on the cryptocurrency industry’s potential role in fraud and money laundering. Some of the UK’s largest high street banks, including Santander and Barclays, also took action, barring customers from sending money to the exchange. However, the deal opens up the potential for Binance users to deposit sterling via Paysafe through the Faster Payments Service, the network for sending money between bank accounts operated by Pay.UK, which owns the system. An FCA spokesperson said: “Our concerns about Binance remain. We received a notification of this business partnership but have limited powers to object to arrangements of this kind.” The spokesperson added that Paysafe was “aware of our concerns” about Binance, and said the payments provider was “subject to close ongoing supervision consistent with our approach for firms of its size”. The regulator’s concern was first reported by the Financial Times. Paysafe said it was a reputable payments partner with deep regulatory knowledge and experience. “We take our regulatory obligations extremely seriously and comply with the highest industry standards,” a spokesperson said. “We always adopt a fully transparent approach when dealing with regulators.” Binance issued notices to UK customers in December asking them to provide additional information in order to continue to access high-risk derivatives on the platform. Paysafe will maintain full control of anti-money-laundering and compliance checks based on the information it receives about customers via the exchange. The FCA consumer warning was among the first in a series of global setbacks for Binance, which is one of the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchanges. Regulators in Japan and Hong Kong also ordered restrictions on trade in their financial systems. Binance has no fixed headquarters, instead relying on a network of affiliated organisations that link with financial groups in different countries. Its affiliate in Britain, Binance Markets Ltd, was accused by the FCA of failing to respond to questions about the group in August 2021, making it near impossible to manage. The regulator also issued a consumer warning against Binance Holdings Ltd, which is registered in the Cayman Islands. Binance said it took its compliance obligations “very seriously” and that the firm worked collaboratively with regulators. A spokesperson added: “We have worked hard to build a robust compliance programme that incorporates anti-money-laundering principles and tools used by top financial institutions.”Name: Gorgeous people. Age: Considerable. Certainly of greater longevity than poor saps like you who’ve been battered by the ugly stick and, let’s face it, will probably die sooner than hotties like me. Appearance: Radiant, darling. Symmetrical of face, bright of eye, pert of buttock, toned of muscle. The whole package. Why is appearance important? Traits linked to attractiveness may indicate a person’s body is better at fighting infection, according to a study by the Texas Christian University. Are you saying that if you’re hideous you’re more likely to need a Covid jab than if you were beautiful? No, not even anti-masker Piers “fart in your trousers” Corbyn believes that. So what are you saying? Beauty is not just skin deep, but is correlated with a body’s ability to resist infection. For instance, men judged as more handsome by women were found to have more effective “natural killer” cells, which can wipe out virus-infected cells in the body. Natural killer cells? Really? Missed that lesson in biology class. But it’s true! Most attractive people have higher rates of phagocytosis. Which sounds like an STD, but actually is? A process by which white blood cells ingest and eliminate bacteria before it can make you sick. So gorgeous people such as Robert Pattinson and Rihanna have more virus-repelling cellular processes than, say, less genetically blessed politicians? Precisely. For this study, scientists photographed 152 young adults without makeup. They were then rated on their attractiveness by people online. The hottest men and women – judged by members of the opposite sex – were found to have higher rates of phagocytosis. Isn’t rating people of opposite sex, frankly, disappointingly heteronormative? Nobody said the research methods were perfect, though the results have just been published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B. What does Prof Soundslike Amadeupname, sorry, Summer Mengelkoch conclude from the study she led? “People who go out to a bar looking to talk to someone attractive are often dismissed as being shallow ... But they are really just following their instincts to find a high-quality mate.” Is there any good news for those less fortunate, namely monobrowed warty baldies? Yes! Mengelkoch adds: “With modern medicine, infections are not as deadly as they used to be, so perhaps it’s OK if people lower their standards and start to give people who are less attractive a shot.” Don’t say: “If I said you have a beautiful body, would you hold it against me to stop me getting ill?” Do say: “Hey baby, they say beauty is skin deep, but mine goes all the way through and indicates I have superior infection-resisting cellular structures. Your place or mine?”Tate Britain has commissioned a new artwork to be exhibited alongside a mural containing racist imagery, after discussions with historians, artists, cultural advisers and civic representatives. The new installation will be “in dialogue” with the floor-to-ceiling mural by Rex Whistler in what was formerly a restaurant at the London gallery. A report by the Tate ethics committee concluded in 2020 that the mural was “unequivocally … offensive”. The committee called for a bold approach in contextualising the mural but said it should not be altered or removed. The new artwork will be joined by interpretative material that will “critically engage with the mural’s history and content, including its racist imagery”, Tate said in an announcement on Wednesday. The artist who will create the new work has not yet been chosen, but Tate said the room containing the mural and the new installation will open to the public next winter. Alex Farquharson, the director of Tate Britain, said Whistler’s mural was “part of our institutional and cultural history and we must take responsibility for it, but this new approach will also enable us to reflect the values and commitments we hold today and to bring new voices and ideas to the fore”. Tate’s move comes amid widespread debate about art, statues and monuments that have racist or colonial imagery or associations. Some campaigners have called for the removal of such works from the public sphere, while others have argued that they should be explained and contextualised. The mural, The Expedition in Pursuit of Rare Meats, was commissioned in 1926 when Whistler was 21, and completed in 1927. It is one of the artist’s most significant works, according to Tate. It tells the story of an imagined hunting expedition and includes images of a black child being kidnapped and enslaved and caricatures of Chinese figures. In 2018 Tate presented an explanatory text on the mural’s racial content, and in 2020 the room was closed as a restaurant. A discussion group with five co-chairs was set up to explore options regarding the future of the mural. The group’s recommendations were approved by Tate’s board of trustees this month. Amia Srinivasan, of All Souls Oxford and a co-chair, said discussions about the mural were “open, rigorous and filled with good-natured but deep disagreement … One of the few points of consensus was that Tate had to take ownership of its history, and that whatever decision was made had to be an invitation to a broader conversation, not the end of one.” David Dibosa, of the University of the Arts London and another co-chair, said the discussions had “not been easy”. He added: “I stand side by side with those who seek to address the difficulties of the past honestly and fearlessly. It takes enormous courage to face our faults.” Whistler, one of the “Bright Young Things”, a group of London socialites in the 1920s, was killed in action in the second world war.Camille Pissarro isn’t worried if he looks past it with his big white beard. He doesn’t care if he appears weak. He looks straight back at you from his self-portrait at the start of this exhibition, over the top of his spectacles, aged and maybe myopic. He is staring in the mirror, seeing himself honestly, with a grey Paris street on view through the window behind him. Pissarro’s belief in art as a fundamentally honest enterprise shines through in this intimate exhibition that digs into avant-garde lives. His warmth is disarming. There are portraits of his wife, Julie, who was a cook’s assistant in his parents’ house when he fell in love with her, and some of their eight children, especially Lucien, who was evidently the apple of his father’s eye and grew up to become an artist. A drawing of a family picnic by his second son, Georges remembers a childhood among geniuses: while Julie cooks on a campfire, white-bearded dad talks to friends including Gauguin. Another friend, Cézanne, ignores them to paint the landscape. The Ashmolean Museum has called its show Father of Impressionism and this reflects Pissarro’s status among his friends: they nicknamed him “father Pissarro”, for he was already well into his 40s when the first impressionist exhibition was held in Paris in 1874. Perhaps it should have been called Modernist Dad. For Pissarro was always pushing art forward. He had no religious faith in a single style. He was Jewish but his wife wasn’t, and it is clear that politics meant more to him than religion. A drawing from 1889 depicts black-suited brokers on the Paris Bourse, the French stock exchange: it was intended for an unfinished book satirising the bourgeoisie with words by an anarchist friend. Pissarro does not fit anyone’s cliche of impressionism – which may be why he is less famous than Monet, Renoir or Degas. You think the impressionists’ delight in immediate sensations was all about celebrating middle-class pleasure? Pissarro is more interested in the workers. He makes a point of showing women at work, trudging through a field with firewood, driving stakes into the ground to grow peas, lighting a bonfire on a breezy morning. His 1886-88 canvas View from My Window is a widescreen epic of a landscape, every detail equally observed with a pointillist precision inspired by his young friends Paul Signac and the anarchist critic Félix Fénéon. But in the equal, underemphasised field of bright pixellated colour, your eyes come to rest on a farm worker doing her chores while hens cluck around her. Pissarro always makes you think, not feel. He is obsessed with the nature of vision – but does not trust it. Those rheumy old eyes in his self-portrait are acutely aware of what gets in the way of seeing. In his great 1877 painting The Côte des Boeufs at L’Hermitage, he gives us broken glimpses of village houses through the thick barred window of a winter woodland: the trees are in the way, but are they the real subject? Pissarro points the way to the next generation of modern painters in these subtle meditations on what we select to see from the constant variety of our visual perceptions. Spring: Plum Trees in Bloom makes you choose between two foci, a group of houses on a hillside and the snowstorm of white plum blossoms that gets in the way. In The Pork Butcher, a market crowd is seen as a deliberately confused and broken visual field: who are we meant to look at, what is the story here? Of course we need to look at everyone and there is no single, simple story. Pissarro didn’t just point the way to radical new visions. He warmly supported young friends whose difficult characters went with revolutionary perceptions. Gauguin and Cézanne worked side by side with kind father Pissarro in Pontoise, just outside Paris. Cézanne’s own painting of the Pontoise countryside hangs next to Pissarro’s woods hiding houses – he uses the same trick, showing houses in a valley through a thick screen of leafy trees. You can see how Pissarro helped him to look at the stuff we are schooled to ignore. But what gratitude did Pissarro get? After the Jewish army officer Alfred Dreyfus was falsely convicted of treason in 1894 the resulting fight for his pardon brought out frightening antisemitism, not just in French society but the impressionist movement itself. Pissarro and Monet supported Dreyfus. Cézanne, however, sided with the right. Even worse was Pissarro’s old pal Degas, whose early prints, donealongside Pissarro, are here. Degas crossed the street to avoid Pissarro. Given how rawly he was betrayed, I would rather have seen less of the other artists in this show, and instead a more passionate championing of Pisarro’s own genius. The power of Cézanne and Gauguin transcends their terrible characters and threatens to steal the show: there’s even a stupendous Cézanne still life loaned by MoMA in New York. Nice guys finish last in art history, it seems. • Pissarro: Father of Impressionism is at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, from 18 February until 12 June.A final result in the men’s ice hockey, and another surprise as Sweden beat Canada 2-0 with two goals in the third period. That means Canada join the USA in crashing out today. The semi-finals will be ROC v Sweden and Finland v Slovakia. Catch up with today’s other stories: Elise Christie has told the BBC that she is planning an unexpected return to the ice in 2026. “Watching the 500 metres event the other day, I’ve made a vow I’m going to do everything I can to try to get back out at the next one,” the former world champion said. “It’s not going to be easy and it’s not something I can say I’ll definitely be able to do because I don’t have the financial backing to do it at the minute,” Christie added. And that’s the end of day 12. Another gem. See you tomorrow. Bye! Curling: Canada have the hammer in their extra end against China, who knocked off Team GB earlier today it is worth recalling. If they finish it here, they advance their record to 5-3 and will be in the box seat to join Sweden and the Swiss in the final four - at least they will control their own destiny when facing Denmark tomorrow. But they have some work to do - China have a shot in position, and a guard. Jennifer Jones, two to go for Canada, takes out the guard but knocks it onto the nose of the shot, moving the second stone alongside the button! Here goes China’s Wang Rui, brought in as the alternative skip... and it’s spot on. Two on the button. Back to Jones with the final stone of the extra end; they take their time out. Down the middle... and she’s missed! Badly! China win 11-9, saluting in the extra end. Goodness me, China have really thrown a spanner in the works today, beating GB then Canada. Needless to say, it will be a massive final session at the water cube tomorrow. Curling: A very poor stone from Denmark’s Madeleine Dupont, missing Korea’s stone on the button with their final shot! If Kim Eun-jung can one into two here, they’ll take the match 8-7. All eyes on the Korean skip - from right to left she takes it... and she’s spot on! Korea (4-4) keep their hopes alive of a semi-final berth. Curling: Sweden defeat ROC 8-5, a fine performance after going down 3-0 early and, in the process, ensuring that they will be there with the Swiss in the semi-finals. Curling: China, with the hammer, are going to have the chance to put their match against Canada to an extra end with the final stone of the night. So it is with Korea and Denmark; the very same situation, barely a stone in the house. Canada’s final stone first and it’s well directed - they have two shots in position. Over to Han Yu, the Chinse skipper and... it is good! Yep, by inches, but to an extra end. Curling: Japan win 10-7 over the USA, who are out of contention. Despite being in third position they aren’t a lock for the semi-finals - and have top-of-the-table Switzerland tomorrow to finish the round robin - but they’ve done the job tonight. Ice Hockey: At the National Indoor Centre, still no score as yet in the men’s quarter final between Sweden and Canada with five minutes left in the second period. Curling: No points scores in the ninth between Sweden (2) and ROC (10) with the higher-ranked team 6-5 but the Russians have the hammer in the tenth. That’s got extra end written all over it. And Canada (4) have the final shot in their tenth end as well, leading China (9) 9-8. A funny old match that one, with Canada scoring five of their nine points in just one end - the sixth. They must hold their nerve here. Curling: right, let’s try and watch four of these at once. Korea (7) and Denmark (9), the latter with the hammer, 6-6 with three stones to come in the ninth. Madeleine Dupont drives and catches the Korean shot on the nose but leaves two big targets at the top of the four foot ring. Kim Eun-jung’s final stone - is she on target? Yep! Stones everywhere. That’s a brilliant bit of curling - Denmark had three in position and now need to thread the needle to stay ahead... but Dupont closes it out. Denmark 7-6 with an end to go. Meanwhile, a steal from Japan in their penultimate end, they lead the USA 10-7 and hold the hammer to finish the match and end America’s medal hopes. The Daily Briefing - it’s here as well. Always a helpful read, do yourself a favour. Ice Hockey: Still no goals at the National Indoor Stadium in the men’s quarterfinal between Sweden and Canada. They’re three minutes into the second period. Curling: With a couple of ends to go in regulation (surely some extra ends await in the close matches), here’s how the teams are placed. Of note since the last update, Sweden used the hammer well, adding a couple of points to take the lead back. (7) Korea 6 v (9) Denmark 6 (3) Japan 9 v (6) USA 7 (10) ROC 5 v (2) Sweden 6 (4) Canada 8 v (8) China 8 Team GB: More from Sean Ingle, who had a chat with veteran slalom athlete Dave Ryding after finishing 13th in the event at his fourth Winter Olympics. The popular 35-year-old, who learned his trade on a dry slope in Lancashire where wandering sheep and their slippy excrement were a frequent hazard, has developed into one of the world’s best alpine skiers. But a mistake while leading on his first run cost him the best part of a second and any chance he had of finishing his career with an Olympic medal. “I started great in the first run and lost the rhythm,” he admitted. “My second run I knew that I wasn’t quite flowing enough. You can feel it when you’re skiing. It felt more like a struggle than a flow. I gave it what I had. which I always do, so I can’t be too disappointed. It was just what it was today.” Figure skating: Tomorrow is going to be quite something. Kamila Valieva, the 15-year-old Russian marvel, is in top position after last night’s short program in the women’s figure skating. If she can do as she did in the team event in the free skate, she’ll win again. But... but. Sean Ingle in Beijing has the latest on the sorry saga. It has been revealed that Kamila Valieva listed two legal substances used to improve heart function on an anti-doping control form she filled out before her drug case at the Olympics emerged. Though both are legal, the inclusion of L-carnitine and Hypoxen on the form undercuts the argument that a banned substance, trimetazidine, might have entered the skater’s system accidentally, according to the World Anti-Doping Agency. Travis Tygart, the chief executive of US Anti-Doping Agency, also warned that such medication was “an indication that something more serious is going on,” adding that “it totally undermines the credibility” of the Russian’s defence. Curling: What we’re really after here is a live ladder. If we had one, the positions would be bouncing around end to end, such is the logjam from 2nd to 7th on a night where there are a number of high-scoring matches around the rinks. A huge play from the USA in the seventh end, picking up four points to pull level with Japan. (7) Korea 5 v (9) Denmark 6 (3) Japan 7 v (6) USA 7 (10) ROC 5 v (2) Sweden 4 (4) Canada 8 v (8) China 7 The photos have landed. The very best of day 12 at Beijing - get this into you. Curling: progress scores in the women’s event, session 11. Seven teams can make the the semi-finals and medal rounds - Switzerland are the only outfit guaranteed to finish in the top four. For Team GB, having dropped that match to China today, they have to beat the ROC tomorrow and even then their destiny isn’t in their own hands. (7) Korea 5 v (9) Denmark 6 (3) Japan 7 v (6) USA 3 (10) ROC 5 v (2) Sweden 4 (4) Canada 8 v (8) China 7 Ice Hockey: Still no score between Sweden and Canada in the men’s quarterfinal, deep into the first period. And that’s it for the medals on this 12th day at Beijing. Sure enough, Norway remain at the top with 13 gold medals, ten of those in cross country skiing in one form or another. Germany have ten of their own in second spot, seven in the sliding centre. By way of comparison, it was the same two countries that led the way four years ago in Pyeongchang with 14 gold medals apiece. Ice Hockey: Moving from Wukesong and the women’s bronze medal game to the National Indoor Stadium for a men’s quarterfinal between Sweden and Canada. The former had the better of the early stages if the tournament, finishing second in their group. The latter had go via the repechage to reach the final eight, thumping China yesterday. No goals for either team as yet, five minutes into the opening period. Ice Hockey: The floodgates have opened with Finland piling on three goals in the third and final period. Class from veteran Michelle Karvinen to finish on the near post within the final minute. And here is the siren, Finland win 4-0 over Switzerland. That’s the fourth time they’ve claimed bronze in this event. Speed skating: Arianna Fontana (ITA) has an 11th Olympic medal - brilliant. It’s unclear what colour it is though, the photo yet to come back between her and Suzanne Schulting (NED) for silver. Meanwhile, Desmet came late but doesn’t get a medal - a fine competitor. And Fontana gets the nod! Schulting, the world champion, has to settle with bronze. Another wonderful final in the women’s short track. GOLD - Choi Minjeong (KOR) 2:08:44 SILVER - Arianna Fontana (ITA) 2:08:60 BRONZE - Suzanne Schulting (NED) 2:08:69 Speed skating: It is a race in three as the bell rings, Minjeong, Fontana, Schulting... and it’s Choi Mingjeong! She’s defended her title! A mighty performance! Speed skating: Fontana at the back, Desmet is with her. A move from Han with Schulting going with her to shut down the breakaway. Eight laps to go; they’re back in a bunch. Minjeong, the 2018 champion, is leading the way. Fontana is threading her way through the field, the champion is sitting in fourth. Four laps to go! Speed skating: To the final of the women’s 1500m. A reminder of the start list: Choi Minjeong (KOR) Yutong Han (CHN) Xandra Velzeboer (NED) Suzanne Schulting (NED) Hanne Desmet (BEL) Lee Yubin (KOR) Arianna Fontana (ITA) And they’re away in the race for gold! Ice Hockey: Finland get a second! Early in this final period, Susanna Tapani, the 28-year-old forward, delivers a bit of breathing room in the bronze medal game against Switzerland. The Finnish women are on track to match their result from 2018. Curling: A correction on what I said earlier about Team GB - they’re actually now in fifth place at 4-4. I didn’t realise they played earlier today before getting tonight’s session off, going down 8-4 to China. Here are the updated scores (and rankings!) (7) Korea 3 v (9) Denmark 5 (3) Japan 6 v (6) USA 2 (10) ROC 4 v (2) Sweden 2 (4) Canada 3 v (8) China 3 Speed skating: We’re nearly ready for the women’s 1500m final; it’s about 10 minutes before they jump in the medal final. Here’s the official start list. Choi Minjeong (KOR) Yutong Han (CHN) Xandra Velzeboer (NED) Suzanne Schulting (NED) Hanne Desmet (BEL) Lee Yubin (KOR) Arianna Fontana (ITA) Storylines everywhere here. Minjeong’s speed was extraordinary when it mattered most in the semi, swooping the field to break the Olympic Record that she set when taking this event four years ago. Fontana, a legend of the sport, is seeking an 11th medal and a third gold - she’s already been a winner here in the 500m. Schulting is the world champion, shooting for a third gold of these Games. And then there’s Desmet, who has skated so aggressively across the program. She could win this. Curling: Some progress scores from the water cube in the women’s competition. (7) Korea 3 v (8) Denmark 2 (5) Japan 4 v (4) USA 2 (10) ROC 4 v (2) Sweden 2 (6) Canada 1 v (9) China 3 Ice Hockey: We’re into the third and final period of the bronze medal game and the score remains the same with Finland’s women leading Switzerland 1-0. Speed skating: Photo finish for third... and it goes Italy’s way! GOLD - Canada SILVER - Korea BRONZE - Italy Back to Charles Hamelin, he won both this event and the 500m back in 2010 at his home games in Vancouver, the 1500m at Sochi in 2014 and finishes his career atop the podium again. His first medal was in 2006 at Turin in this relay - what a story; a six-time medal winner. He’s an Olympic champion alongside Steven Dubois, who skated a stunning final leg to lock the race down, Maxime Laoun and Pascal Dion. Speed skating: Canada are skating away! Korea have too much to do - it’s gold! Charles Hamelin gets a fourth gold medal to end his extraordinary career at age 37. “It’s a fairlytale finish for him and a wonderful victory for Canada!” Wow! Speed skating: 13 laps to go, Canada leading the way with Korea and China second and third but all five teams are skating in file - this is getting quicker and quicker. A fall! China now down! ROC move into third. Nine laps to go, here’s the chaos! Canada, with all their experience, are controlling the tempo. Grandstand finish coming! Speed skating: The men’s 5000m relay final, with five teams instead of four, this is going to be loose - 20 skaters on the ice at any time. Find a telly for this one. China and Korea, who won silver and bronze at Pyeongchang, are here. As are Italy, Canada and the ROC. Predictions are useless here, anything could happen. Go! Curling: Over at the water cube, we’re half an hour into the 11th session of the women’s event. A reminder that Team GB have the night off, currently in third position after seven matches in this round-robin stage. Some progress scores, with the table position of the teams coming into this session listed in brackets. (7) Korea 2 v (8) Denmark 1 (5) Japan 4 v (4) USA 0 (10) ROC 3 v (2) Sweden 0 (6) Canada 0 v (9) China 3 Ice Hockey: during the B-Final of the men’s 5000m relay (the medal race follows), let’s go around the grounds. To begin, with a few minutes to go in the second period of the women’s bronze medal match, Finland are still 1-0 over Switzerland. Speed skating: What a move from Choi Min-jeong! With two laps to go she went from fourth to first with a mighty swooping move ! Wow, an Olympic Record too, 2:16:83. From there, they were skating for second - Han Yutong (CHN) got it done. Xandra Velzeboer (NED) is quick enough to get the final qualifying spot from third. Bosh. I’ll have the starting list for the final shortly, to begin about 45 minutes from now. Speed skating: The referee, always a big player in short-track speed skating, is reviewing the tape. Who is in strife here? It’s Jaszapati - she’s changed lanes at the wrong time and has lost her chance at making the Olympic Final as a result. Time for semi-final three with Choi Min-jeong (KOR), the winner in 2018, the skater to watch. Speed skating: Santos (USA) is leading through the middle stages of the race, Schulting (NED) safely tucked away in third, waiting to make her move, followed by Desmet on her shoulder. With six laps to go Schulting and Desmet make their moves in unison; to first and second. Three laps to go, they’ve put a gap in the field to third and take the automatic qualifying spots in style. Petra Jaszapati (HUN) finishes in third, with a quicker time than Boutin from the first semi. Speed skating: Semi-final two includes the superstar Suzanne Schulting (NED), who is the world champion in this event and already has a couple of gold medals from Beijing 2022. Also present, Hanne Desmet (BEL) who snared a bronze in the 1000m and is a gusty racer, I’ve enjoyed her work across the fortnight. They’re away! Speed skating: Okay, we’re to the semi-final stage of the women’s 1500m short track, three races to follow. There are seven skaters in the first of these, which includes all-timer Adianna Fontana (ITA) and Kim Boutin (CAN) who took bronze in this event four years ago and has never won Olympic gold. But it’s Lee Yubin from Korea who is leading the way at the business end, seeing of Fontana - coming around the outside - to take the win. Boutin finishes in third - she won’t qualify automatically for the final; we’ll know at the end of the third semi if her time is enough to sneak in. Ice Hockey: En route to the speed skating, a score update in the bronze medal game with Finland’s women 1-0 up over Switzerland early in the second period. Viivi Vainikka, the 20-year-old forward, was the scorer, of the go-ahead goal. Freestyle aerials: Burov isn’t taking on the 5.0 jump, instead opting for a 4.525 back full-full double full... and he’s on the money! If the judges assess it as perfect he can leapfrog into gold but that degree of difficulty will hold him back. 129 is the magic number, does the Russian get there? No! 114.93 - it’s bronze, he’s elated! But Qi Guangpu is the Olympic champion - at long last, at his fourth Games, he will have a gold medal around his neck. An emotional response; flag in the air. “The best final that has ever taken place in the event,” says the TV caller. Brilliant stuff. GOLD - Qi Guangpu (CHN) 129.00 SILVER - Oleksandr Abramenko (UKR) BRONZE - Ilia Burov (ROC) Freestyle aerials: 129 is the score to beat for Pirmin Werner of Switzerland. The 22-year-old is up, he’s through the tricks... but the form and the landing, neither are perfect. Qi Guangpu is going to stay in the lead with just the ROC’s Ilia Burov standing between him and an Olympic gold medal! Werner goes to third, 111.50. Over to Burov, the younger brother of the superstar Maxim, who can stun the world. Freestyle aerials: Christopher Lillis sticking with the quin-twisting back double full-full double full... and he’s done as his countryman and over-rotated the landing. “Oh no!” he says when skiing over to the cameras. So close to something special - that won’t be enough for a medal, he’s in fourth with 103. Two jumpers to go! Freestyle aerials: Qi Guangpu (CHN) is third to go. It’s the same jump for the third time in a row and it’s the best of the set! He hits the snow with a mighty thud but he’s upright! Gosh, he got up so high - magnificent. He’s a double world champion, surely that puts him into the lead in this Olympic Final. It does, 129 on the dot! Christopher Lillis (USA) is next, who hit a 135 when it mattered most to win the team final. Go! Freestyle aerials: Justin Schoenefeld to start the final! Here we go! And he botches his landing on the back double full-full-double full - the most difficult jump of the night. Barring something wild, 106.50 won’t get him a medal. Abramenko (UKR) the defending champion, is next... and he gets down, just, on a five-twist 5.0, the same just as the American. There was a hand touch; there will be a deduction. 116.50 is where the judges land. That small touch costs him big time. Four jumpers to go! Freestyle aerials: Jia Zongyang (CHN) crashes his landing on the back full-full-double full! After dominating qualifying, he won’t be adding to his bronze medal in this event from 2018. Qi Guangpu (CHN) to finish - he’s already safe, in fourth spot - a 114.48 is his score, hitting the 4.525 safely and cleanly without any pizzazz. And we have out six Super Finalists, Schoenefeld earning the last spot. The following group will jump just once in the super final - everything on the line, best score wins. Ilia Burov (ROC) 129.50 Pirmin Werner (SUI) 126.24 Christopher Lillis (USA) 125.67 Qi Guangpu (CHN) 125.22 Oleksandr Abramenko (UKR) 123.53 Justin Schoenefelt (USA) 123.53 Freestyle aerials: Noe Roth nearly over-rotates on the landing but keeps his hands off the snow. With a 4.525 he needs a lot to go right to move into the six... not to be. 110.41 is his score after some landing deductions. His competition is over. So, four qualifiers confirmed with just the Chinese pair to come: Burov (ROC), Werner (SUI), Lillis (USA) and Qi Guangpu (CHN). Freestyle aerials: Oleksandr Abramenko (UKR) doesn’t get the love from the judges either, he stays in fifth place on the back of his 123.53 in the first round. Four jumpers to go - Eric Loughran the first... and the American is on his back at the landing! That’s him done. Just Noe Roth (7th), Jia Zongyang (7th) and Qi Guangpu (4th) to come. Freestyle aerials: The first of the Ukranians, Oleksandr Okipniuk, and he’s going for the quin-twister too with the 4.9 degree of difficulty and he’s landed it! He was in 12th spot at the halfway mark but the judges don’t like it, 122.01 - he’s only 9th. He had four points deducted. To the naked eye, looks unlucky there. Christopher Lillis now, who started this round in second and doesn’t improve on 125.67, having to settle with 122.17. A stressful wait ahead of him with the defending champ next. Freestyle aerials: Pirmin Werner (SUI), who was the leader after the first round, follows Burov with the back double full-full-full... and he’s just got it down. Does it outscore his 126.24 from the first time though? Nup, 114.93. He stays in second spot. Freestyle aerials: Stanislav Niktin’s turn at the popular back full-double full-full and it doesn’t go as well as Schoenefeld’s with the judges, his 119 won’t be enough for a berth in the Super Final. His ROC teammate now, Ilia Burov - remember that his brother, the world champion Maxim, didn’t reach the final 12. A higher degree of difficulty on the back double full-full-full and it’s good! “The first quin-twister of the night!” says the TV commentator. And the judges are very into it! The Russian moves into first position with 129.50 - he’ll surely get to the medal round with that. Freestyle aerials: In the second round, you can’t repeat the jump from the first time around. To begin Stanislau Hladchenka and it’s a beauty! At 4.425, the Belarusian requires just about full points to push into the mid 120s - not quite; 116.29 is his score, placing him in ninth. He won’t reach the Super Final. Next up: Justin Shoenefeld, who won a gold medal in the team event. The same jump and it’s outstanding. The judges like it, a 123.53 - that’s enough for fifth. A tense wait whether it will remain enough by the end of the run... unlikely but possible. A busy little burst here. The second round of the men’s freestyle aerial jumps are about to begin, which I’ll stick with for the most part. Also starting now: the 1500m quarterfinals in the women’s short-track speed skating and the bronze medal game of the women’s ice hockey, Finland v Switzerland. I’ll try to stay on top of it all. Freestyle aerials: “You’re good!” roars Jia Zongyang’s coach as he’s midair with his back full-double full-full - he sure is, outstanding! The same jump as Roth with a 4.425 degree of difficulty but so much more air. To the top? Not quite - into fourth with 123.45. Difficult to see him not getting through to the Super Final. Over to Qi Guangpu (CHN), the double world champion, with the same jump once again. Gosh, that’s very good too. A lower degree of difficulty but so precise, and enough for third - 125.22 pops him just behind Lillis (USA) and Werner (SUI). A brilliant first round of jumps. They’ll tidy up the snow and go again shortly. Here are the top six so far - the qualifying spots for the Super Final ahead of the second attempts. Pirmin Werner (SUI) 126.24 Christopher Lillis (USA) 125.67 Qi Guangpu (CHN) 125.22 Olesksandr Abramenko (UKR) 123.53 Jia Zongyang (CHN) 123.45 Noe Roth (SUI) 122.13 Freestyle aerials: Eric Loughran is the third of the Americans but he’ll have to do better than his 111.95 the second time around - he didn’t quite get the landing right, leaving him in seventh position. No such issues for Noe Roth, back full-double full-full - no worries! He’s fourth with 122.13, behind his Swiss teammate Pirmin Wermer who remains in first place with 126.24 with just the two Chinese superstars to go. Freestyle aerials: Oleksandr Abramenko, the gold medallist in 2018, is into third after sticking a back full-full-double-full. And as TV explain, that’s on the back of no training having to endure seven days of isolation. Never write off a champion. Freestyle aerials: Halfway through the first round and it’s time for Christopher Lillis, who hit a 135 to win the USA gold in the team event on Thursday. And he’s straight into second position here with his first attempt, earning a 125.67 with a clean back full-double-full-full. That should be enough for him to get to the final along with Pirmin Werner (SUI), who is in the lead after clocking a 126.24. Next: the Ukranians. Freestyle aerials: Taking off in reverse order of where they qualified, the first four out of the blocks are already setting the standard with Justin Schoenefeld (USA) carding a 120.36 to lead the way with his back full-double-full-full. At this stage of the competition, each athlete jumps twice with their best taken rather than a cumulative score. The top six progress to that Super Final - one jump for glory. More cross-country gold for Norway, more gold for Klaebo. Why does this not surprise me as I take the baton from Luke? What a couple of weeks that team are having, way out in front of the medal tally. Speaking of the shiny stuff, three Olympic champions will be crowned on this the 12th evening of these XXIV Winter Games. For the first of those finals, we’re back to Genting Park where the men’s freestyle aerials competition has reached the business end with 12 competitors left in the running after yesterday’s qualifying rounds. From that dozen, only six will make it through to the Super Final – that’s one jump only, the pressure intense. The big shock yesterday was Maxim Burov not making it through – the Russian won four World Cup events leading up to Beijing. But plenty of the big guns did advance, including the 2018 champion, Oleksandr Abramenko. His Ukranian teammate Oleksandr Okipniuk there with him after recording the highest score in last night’s second heat. That, of course, came after Chinese stars Qi Guangpu and Jia Zongyang shot the lights out to start the competition – they’re desperate for success having fallen at the final hurdle in the team’s clash. And then of course the Americans, who overtook the Chinese in that event to win gold after Christopher Lillis’ magnificent jump - watch both for him and Justin Schoenefeld. In half an hour we’ll also be at the Capital Indoor Stadium for a huge night of short track speed skating. To begin, it’s the women’s 1500m where we’ll progress from six quarter finals into three semis then the medal race over the next two hours. Choi Min-jeong from Korea is defending her title but it’s the Dutch superstar Suzanne Schulting who has earned favouritism – not only is she the world champion over this distance but she has two gold medals already at Beijing in the 1000m and the 3000m relay; a silver too in the 500m dash. I’ll also keep an eye on Kim Boutin from Canada, who has three Olympic medals but none of them gold. Spliced into the short track program tonight too is the men’s 5000m relay – the longest race on the schedule. Hungary, China and Canada made the podium at Pyeongchang but, in keeping with the fortnight they’ve had, the Hungarians didn’t make it through to the final five. Italy, Korea and the ROC join the Chinese and the Canadians for the chaos that only a short-track relay can deliver. We’re also only 30 minutes away from the opening buzzer in the women’s ice hockey bronze medal game – Finland up against Switzerland. Then later tonight in the men’s division, it’s a quarterfinal between Sweden, who were 2nd in their group, against Canada, who made it through via the repechage, beating China 7-2 last night. And last but not least, back to the water cube for the 11th session of women’s curling. A night off for Team GB, who are currently in third spot after seven matches, but a big night for Japan and the USA with the winner to stay in a semi-final position as we nudge towards the closing stages of the round robin stage. Alright, let’s get into it! Talk to me throughout the night by sending me a note or pinging me a tweet. That’s the lot from me today. I will leave you in the capable hands of Adam Collins. And that’s that. Finland 5-1 Switzerland is a final score in the men’s hockey. Empty-net goals from Teemu Hartikainen and Iiro Pakarinen were the incidents of note in the third period. So that means Slovakia, ROC and Finland are the winning quarter-finalists, thus far, with Sweden v Canada coming up later today. Men’s hockey: With under a minute to play in the third period, Finland lead Switzerland 5-1. The United States’ improbable, unbeaten run through the Olympic men’s hockey tournament came to a devastating halt at the quarter-final stage on Wednesday with a 3-2 penalty shootout defeat by Slovakia. More from Clement Noel, via AP, whose slalom triumph is France’s first Olympic gold in Alpine skiing since Antoine Deneriaz won the downhill at the 2006 Turin Games. “It was a goal for me to go back to France with a medal,” Noel said. “I knew I can do this but it’s always really difficult to do it in the most important moment. It’s not the same as a World Cup race. Everyone will push hard for the Olympics and I had to do the same without asking myself any questions.” Slalom is also the most accessible discipline, evidenced by skiers from 61 nations entering the Olympic race. “You are able to train slalom in a lot of places in the world,” said Johannes Strolz of Austria who won slalom silver, having taken the gold in combined last week. “It’s great for our sport, great when a lot of athletes are competing for the top spots. “Guys like Marcel Hirscher [the eight-times overall World Cup champion who retired in 2019] really set the bar high and inspired a lot of guys to ski fast,” Strolz said. “At the moment you don’t have a chance but [by] going 100% ... You hold back and you will be punished immediately by the other guys.” “I knew that the last pitch was not good,” said Henrik Kristoffersen of Norway who finished fourth behind his compatriot Sebastian Foss Solevåg, who won bronze. “I skied too safe and technically bad. Noel deserved the win. He was by far the fastest in the second run.” (AP) The Swiss have pulled a goal back against Finland in the men’s ice hockey quarter-final and they trail 3-1. What’s coming up later today? Quite a bit: Freestyle Skiing: Men’s Aerials – Final Women’s ice hockey bronze medal game: Finland v Switzerland Men’s ice hockey quarter-final: Sweden v Canada Short track skating: Women’s 1,500m quarter-finals, semi-finals and final Short track skating: Men’s 5,000m relay Women’s curling: Korea v Denmark, Canada v China and Japan v USA The full schedule is here, as well as live scores – With 13 gold, seven silver and eight bronze medals, Norway top the table. Germany are second and the USA, who endured a tough start to the Games to say the least, are now up to third: “It’s really stressful when you’re competing for an Olympic medal, you have one chance every four years ... right now, I have no words.” The French skier Clement Noel reacts after his lightning-fast second run claimed gold in the men’s slalom earlier today. Noel moved up from sixth following the first leg to beat first-run leader Johannes Strolz of Austria by 0.61sec. The world champion Sebastian Foss-Solevaag of Norway held his position and picked up the bronze, finishing 0.7sec behind. Noel finished fourth in the slalom at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games. Dave Ryding of Great Britain finished 13th. Simply too good from Klaebo. Maki tried to distance him on the final descent. But into the closing metres, and the final sprint, the Norwegian leaves his rivals in his wake. Finland win silver, ROC win bronze. Norway clock a time of 19min 22.99sec, Norway 2.46sec down, ROC 4.29sec back. That’s a fifth Olympic gold medal for Klaebo, added to a silver and a bronze that’s he won at these Games. A legend of the sport. Joni Maki is out front for Finland. Klaebo on his tail for Norway. Terentev (ROC) is right there ... but Klaebo now makes his move! He streaks away at the front. One circuit remaining for each of the athletes in the cross-country skiing, Men’s Team Sprint Classic Style, and it’s all bunched up with eight teams within 1.5sec of each other. All to play for. Richard Jouve (France) has hauled them back into the reckoning for a medal with a speedy previous leg. Johannes Klaebo takes it up for Norway now. Men’s ice hockey: Finland – who of course, mounted that incredible comeback from 3-0 down in the third period against Sweden three days ago – now lead 3-0 in their quarter-final against Switzerland. Earlier on, ROC beat Denmark 3-1 and Slovakia shocked the USA 3-2 in a shootout. Cross-Country Skiing – the Men’s Team Sprint Classic Style is under way. A large leading group is headed by Norway, with Canada, Italy, Finland, Sweden and ROC all in attendance. That was some finish. Sundling was in control for Sweden coming around the final bend and into the finish straight. Then it was a straight-out fight between Carl of Germany, Natalia Nepryaeva of ROC and Sundling. The German athlete was just too strong on the final push to the line. And the German celebrations at the finish line are enthusiastic to say the least. Cross-country skiiing – Women’s Team Sprint Classic: Sweden, USA, Finland, ROC and Germany look set to fight for the medals ... under two kilometres to go! Jonna Sundling is on last-leg duties for Sweden. Krista Pärmäkoski for Finland and Victoria Carl for Germany. Jess Diggins has dropped back for the USA ... Men’s ice hockey: Finland hold their 2-0 quarter-final lead against Switzerland at the end of the first period. And in curling news: Eve Muirhead’s hopes of a second Olympic medal were hanging by a thread after her women’s curling team lost 8-4 to the hosts China in Beijing. Muirhead’s only chance of reaching the semi-finals were left resting on Great Britain beating the ROC team in their last match and hoping a number of other results go their way. The 31-year-old had hoped her team had finally gained momentum with a big win over Japan on Tuesday, but Muirhead missed a clever double take-out attempt to force an extra end with her final stone. “It’s frustrating because we are playing really well as a team and we’ve had some great performances since winning the Europeans and coming through the qualifiers,” Muirhead said. “We need to hope a few results go our way but, because we beat Japan and the USA, we need to hope they drop a game. We need to come out and concentrate on our performance against Russia and focus on what we can do and then hope the curling Gods are on our side.” (PA) A bit of reaction from Canada here, via Reuters, following Japan’s late calamity in the team pursuit speed skating yesterday: The Canadian women’s speed skating pursuit team, who glided to victory at the Beijing Olympics after Japan’s Nana Takagi suffered a late fall, said they felt sorry for their rivals. Takagi slipped at the last corner in Tuesday’s final to end the defending champions’ hopes of winning gold. “It’s obviously a thing we’ve thought about for sure ... We were like, how do we feel about this? Because they did fall on the last corner,” Canada’s Isabelle Weidemann said. “But the other thing is that they weren’t able to do six laps is also how we look at it,” added the 26-year-old, who has won a silver and a bronze medal in individual races in Beijing. Canada gradually cut Japan’s lead at the National Speed Skating Oval, narrowing the gap to 0.3sec before Takagi crashed into the wall. The Canadians finished in an Olympic record time. “We have a lot of respect for their team,” Weidemann said. “I also feel like we pushed the limit and so did they, and they weren’t able to hold it in the last corner. We stayed on our feet, and we also had the Olympic record. We really felt for the Japanese. They’ve been such incredible competitors, and it’s been a pretty big honour, racing against them.” Men’s Cross-Country Skiing – Team Sprint Classic Style: The 10-team lineup for the final will be Norway, France, Finland, Canada, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, plus ‘lucky losers’ ROC and USA. And the women’s final is coming up first: The teams through are ROC, Germany, Finland, USA, Sweden, Austria, Norway, Sweden, France and Poland. It’s a beautiful scene at the Zhangjiakou national cross-country skiing centre but the temperature is plummeting: Currently around -10C, and it’s only going to get colder as the sun goes down. Men’s ice hockey: Finland lead Sweden 2-0 in the first period of their quarter-final. Miro Aaltonen and Mikko Lehtonen with the goals. Elvira Öberg brings it home for Sweden! The ROC team win silver, Germany win bronze, and disappointingly for them, Norway finish fourth and out of the medals. ROC were 12sec behind Sweden, Germany 37.4sec back, and Norway 50.7sec down. Men’s curling: Great Britain close out an 8-6 win against the ROC team. That makes it six wins out of seven for Bruce Mouat and co. They are qualified, but have another round robin match against Canada tomorrow, and then go straight into their semi-final on the same day. Bruce Mouat has a chat with Steve Cram on the BBC: “Tactically they [ROC] are a strong team ... it’s quite tough to keep a lead, but we were hitting really well today. It felt comfortable, but not completely comfortable ... if it’s Canada twice [tomorrow, in the round robin and then semi-final] then bring it on.” Grant Hardie: “We had a great first end and it just kind of settles you down.” Bobby Lammie: “We thought the ice was excellent and it’s been excellent all week.” Women’s 4x6km Relay Biathlon: Sweden have taken control of the race. Elvira Öberg is out at the front now and is on the shooting range ... she misses one out of five initially, but then reloads and nails the fifth target at the second time of asking. Sweden are around 24sec ahead, ROC and Germany will battle it out for silver, it seems. Via the official Olympics site, quotes from the USA men’s hockey team captain, Andy Miele, after his side crashed out against Slovakia: “It’s pretty hard to describe right now… We had our opportunities,” he said. “It’s unfortunate it’s over. I enjoyed my time. Just blessed to be here, blessed to have had this opportunity and to lead that team; they’re a great group and just try to enjoy the time we have left together here.” And from the Slovak captain Marek Hrivik: “It was a great game. It was probably one of the best ones I’ve played so far in my career. It was intense, it was a battle, we know how good a team they have, how hard they fight out there on the ice, so we tried to match that and we just tried to grind it out and it worked, and we’re going far.” Men’s curling: The ROC team have fought back against Great Britain’s men. The score is 7-6 to GB in the 10th end. ROC will be looking to force an extra end. Great Britain will take a blank in this 10th and final end and a narrow win ... Women’s 4x6km Relay Biathlon: Hanna Öberg is out there for Sweden an giving chase but the gap to Svetlana Mironova (ROC) is 28.2sec. Tiril Eckhoff just endured a leg to forget for Norway ... Norway’s shooting penalties are 2+5. Cross-Country Skiing – Men’s Team Sprint Classic Style: Iivo Niskanen leads the way for Finland on the third leg in the second semi-final. Norway and Canada hot on his tail. It wasn’t the clean sweep of eight years ago, but a pair of Americans topped the men’s freeski slopestyle podium on Wednesday after Alex Hall soared to Olympic gold ahead of teammate Nick Goepper, who took the silver. The International Olympic Committee has dismissed claims that a double standard was applied to US sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson compared to Russian skater Kamila Valieva after both tested positive for a banned drug. Women’s 4x6km Relay Biathlon: The ROC team lead on the second leg, by 10.7sec. Reztsova is skiing like a dream for the Russians. Italy, Sweden (27sec back), Germany (45.9sec down) and the Czech Republic (1min 17 sec back) make up the top five as it stands. Eve Muirhead spoke to the BBC after Great Britain’s women lost 8-4 to China in the curling: “China played very well ... we weren’t bad out there ... overall we can’t be too disappointed with that performance. We gave ourselves a lot of chances but just didn’t finish it off.” Great Britain now have to win their final match, against ROC, and hope other results go their way if they are going to progress from the round robin stage. Thanks Emma. Hello everyone. I’ll bring you some reaction from that huge result in the ice hockey (where Slovakia beat the USA 3-2 to move into the semi-finals) as soon as I have it ... now to keep tabs on the Women’s 4x6km Relay biathlon, the Women’s Team Sprint Classic Style cross-country skiing, and the men’s curling, which are the events happening right now. Lena Quintin of France, who are placed fifth and at this stage vying for one of those lucky loser spots, has moved to the outside lane in a bid to gain some ground on the rivals just a smidge ahead of her. We are in the fourth exchange. Amid this excitement, I’m going to hand you over to my colleague Luke McLaughlin, who will steer you through the next few hours. Bye for now, been a pleasure. The second semi is happening. It’s happening under the sun, in -14C. For the uninitiated, the team sprint consists of six alternating sprints between two teammates around a course measuring about one and a half kilometres. Each lap they switch. Right now they are in the third exchange and ROC have the lead, with the Finland, Norway and Sweden teams in second, third and fourth. The top four have settled into a rhythm and are breaking away from the chasing pack. Germany have got it done with 4.03 seconds to spare over Team USA. Austria and Switzerland cross next are these are the four automatic qualifiers for the final. China and Canada secure fifth and sixth and face a nervous wait to see how quick the second semi is. But for now, they need to rest, which is obvious in the way Chi Chunxue literally throws herself over the line. An Australian team of Jessica Yeaton and Casey Wright finish eighth. Cross-country skiing: Austria, Germany and the US are jostling for the top three positions in the first semi-final of the women’s team sprint classic. At the fourth exchange, the US have edged ahead but it’s all these three countries in terms of contenders. Switzerland are pretty clean in fourth ahead of the rest of the field. I am no expert on cross-country skiing (to say the least) but am intrigued by the tactical approaches to this. The US’s Rosie Brennan is taking a slightly wider track as the others cruise in her slipstream. Germany’s Katharina Hennig is shaking up the pace with bursts of energy but still sits third. Austria is ahead now. The rules are: The top four teams from each semi-final qualify to the final, as do the next two fastest teams from both semis. Curling: Do we need an update? We need an update. It is midway through the latest men’s round-robin session and GB lead ROC 5-2 after five ends. Sergei Glukhov scores late in the first half of this contest but it’ll take a lot to overturn this deficit. In other matches, China and Switzerland are neck and neck at 3-3 and Italy are 5-3 ahead against Denmark. Here are those comments on Valieva from the IOC I mentioned earlier (full story below): The International Olympic Committee has dismissed claims that a double standard was applied to US sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson compared to Russian skater Kamila Valieva after both tested positive for a banned drug. Ice hockey: Big news in the men’s competition at the National Indoor Stadium, where Slovakia have beaten the US in a penalty shootout to reach the semi-finals. Huge result. It was all happening on the Slovakian bench. Ryding reflects on his performance. “It was OK,” he tells the BBC. “I left myself way too much to do and for some reason I didn’t have my best skiing, it’s disappointing, it is very tight and I was missing my A game really.” The 35-year-old thinks he has another year in him, and why not? Only this month he became Britain’s first World Cup race winner. This is another great feature from Sean Ingle in Beijing if you haven’t had a chance to read yet: Noel’s performance had shades of his display at the World Cup at home in Val D’Isere in December. For those waking up in Britain, Dave ‘Rocket’ Ryding has finished 13th, 1.48 seconds off the top. He had a moment in the sun in the gold-medal position but it did not last long. He is France’s third men’s slalom Olympic champion. And the results show he has blitzed that field, finishing 0.61 seconds ahead. To put that into perspective, there are only 0.35 seconds separating places 2-8. Gold: Clement Noel (FRA) – 1:44.09 Silver: Johannes Strolz (AUT) – 1:44.70 Bronze: Sebastian Foss-Solevåg (NOR) – 1:44.79 Austria’s Johannes Strolz, who put down the fastest opening-run time, starts with a negative split, and another, and another. And now he’s in the red with a few gates to go. Can he get it done? He cannot, which means ... Henrik Kristoffersen head down and he could well have claimed gold with the second part of his run but the opening stages have let him down. Little mistakes leave him in third, and now he faces a nervous wait. Switzerland’s Loïc Meillard stutters early but recovers in an instant and regains the time he lost. It’s not enough for the lead but it is for second. Now Norwegian reigning world champion Sebastian Foss-Solevåg has claimed his spot by shunting Meillard down to the bronze medal position. The top three have opened up a bit of a gap now. 1. Clement Noel (1:44.09) 2. Sebastian Foss-Solevåg (1:44.79) 3. Loïc Meillard (1:44.79) What can the final couple of skiers do? Clément Noël has raced out of the gates and keeps his splits negative by more than half a second all the way until ... he extends it! Across he goes -0.86 quicker than Yule. France has not won gold in this event in two decades. Nobody else so far is touching the top. Still a few racers to come, though. Italian Giuliano Razzoli is going for gold now, in an attempt to become the first in history to win two gold medals in this notoriously open event. The 2010 champion can’t get it done. He sits second (1:45.05), 0.10 seconds behind Yule. Bulgarian Albert Popov is third (1:45.15), ROC’s Alexander Khoroshilov fourth and Swiss Ramon Zenhäusern fifth, in front of Ryding, who is now well out of the running. Alexis Pinturault manages a -0.01 early split but the Frenchman soon fades to +1.20. And Atle Lie McGrath’s Olympics debut is over after falling, getting back up, then finishing 11.78 seconds behind Ryding. The Norwegian 21-year-old has a future ahead of him. Oh hello! Daniel Yule is looking the goods. He is dancing around the gates with ease and, crucially, with negative splits. The Swiss (with Scottish parents) overtakes Ryding. “Let’s see where we end up,” Yule says. “Let’s go. Some mistakes on some of the last gates from the finish are ruining a few of the skiers’ rhythms but Britain’s Dave Ryding recovers after an almost blip to better Luca Aerni’s leading combined time of 1:45.83 by 0.26 seconds and take position at the summit. Ryding, who in January became GB’s first racer to win a World Cup event, has set the combined time to beat at 1:45.57. Bad news for Canadian Erik Read, who was quicker than Schwarz in his early splits but took a tumble and is out of contention. Croatia’s Filip Zubčić finishes 0.07 seconds shy of the top time and sits second in front of German Alexander Schmid. Alpine skiing: The second run of the men’s slalom is starting and there are medals waiting to be claimed by a wide-open field which started with 87 skiers, of which 52 were left at the end of the first run. Team GB’s Dave Ryding will be up soon and sits in 15th position after run one. Already a couple have failed to finish their second run after getting caught on some tricky early gates, but Austria’s Marco Schwarz has made it through. The second run is in reverse order, with those out of the gates earlier likely to get slightly better conditions. Curling: Team GB’s women lost today’s round-robin match against China, in a contest that was a little closer than what the 8-4 scoreline suggests. Eve Muirhead narrowly missed two vital shots in the last three ends. “China played very well, we weren’t bad out there,” Muirhead said afterwards. “Overall, we can’t be too disappointed [with] that performance. We gave ourselves a lot of chances, but unfortunately weren’t able to finish it off.” They next play ROC on Thursday. The Kamila Valieva story keeps ticking along. Yesterday, after her court of arbitration for sport reprieve, the Russian 15-year-old blitzed the women’s single skating competition and leads heading into Thursday’s free skating programme. Here is the latest from Sean Ingle in Beijing: In another development on Wednesday, the IOC has had something to say about these comments made by American sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson, who missed the summer Olympics after a positive cannabis test and spoke out about a perceived double standard between her case and that of Valieva. Sean will provide us with an update on that shortly. Ice hockey: The men’s play-off quarter-finals have started and the US lead Slovakia 2-1 late in the second period. There are silly mistakes, and there are silly mistakes that cost you a medal at the Olympics. Poor Jarl Magnus Riiber now knows something about the latter. The Norwegian was well in contention in the Nordic combined large hill/10km when he took a wrong turn and had to turn around and go back whence he came. To compound the devastation, he had only just been cleared to compete after being released from two weeks of Covid-enforced isolation, during which time he was unable to train. Here is more on the slopestyle from my colleague on the ground, Bryan Armen Graham: It wasn’t the clean sweep of eight years ago, but a pair of Americans topped the men’s freeski slopestyle podium on Wednesday morning after Alex Hall soared to Olympic gold ahead of team-mate Nick Goepper, who took the silver. Sweden’s Jesper Tjader won the bronze ahead of Andri Ragettli, the defending world champion from Switzerland who qualified in first place but settled for fourth on another bitterly cold morning in the mountains roughly 120km northwest of Beijing. Hello again and welcome to day 12 of the Beijing Games. Some stuff has already happened. The US have claimed a one-two in the men’s freeski slopestyle thanks to Alex Hall and Nick Goepper. The men’s slalom competitors have completed their first run and will be vying for medals in not too long, and the curling keeps on coming. But there is more on the itinerary. Herewith: Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 2.05pm and 8.05pm curling – more round-robin matches in a stage of the competition that appears to last forever but – especially in the women’s contest – has a lot at stake in each match 🥌 7pm-8pm freestyle skiing – men’s aerials final 🥇 1.45pm alpine skiing – second run of the men’s slalom 🥇 2pm and 4.40pm and 9.30pm men’s ice hockey – the four quarter-final matches. The US are up first 🏒 7.30pm women’s ice hockey – the bronze medal face-off between Switzerland and Finland 🥉 3.45pm biathlon – the women’s 4 x 6km relay 🥇 5pm-7.30pm cross-country skiing – the women’s team sprint and men’s team sprint have their semi-finals and finals 🥇 7.30pm-9.18pm short track speed skating – this session includes the women’s 1,500m contest and the men’s 5,000m relay 🥇During a speech on Tuesday, Joe Biden jokingly reminisced about putting a dead dog on a Republican woman’s doorstep during his time serving in county government when he was in his 20s. While giving remarks at the National Association of Counties 2022 Legislative Conference in Washington, he president spoke about his time representing what he described as a mixed-income district. He said at one point he fielded a request from a wealthier Republican woman who had a dead dog on her lawn. “I got a call one night; the woman said to me – obviously not of the same persuasion as I was politically – called me and said: ‘There’s a dead dog on my lawn,’” said Biden, telling the story. “And I said: ‘Yes, ma’am.’ I said: ‘Have you called county?’ She said: ‘Yes, they’re not here.’ And I said: ‘Well, I’ll get them in the morning.’” The woman was not satisfied by Biden’s answer, telling Biden that she wanted the dog off her lawn now and that she paid his salary. So Biden responded in kind: “So I went over,” said Biden as the conference crowd laughed and applauded. “I picked it up. She said: ‘I want it out of my front yard.’ I put it on her doorstep. “But I’ve gotten much better since then,” said Biden after wrapping up the story. In the 1970s, Biden served as a county official in Delaware before being elected to the US Senate in 1972 at the age of 29. “I ran for the Senate because it was too damn hard being in the council,” said Biden, jokingly, at the beginning of his conference remarks. This story was first reported by the Daily Mail.A Chinese informant for MI6, now serving a life sentence for murder in a British jail, has given information about the telecommunications company Huawei to the parliamentary intelligence and security committee (ISC), the Guardian has learned. He has been thanked by the chair of the committee, the senior Conservative backbencher Dr Julian Lewis, and told that he had raised “several important areas of concern” and that the committee’s findings may be “of interest” to him. The revelation comes amid concern about Chinese infiltration into British politics. The controversy over Huawei has also resurfaced with the disclosure that Guto Harri, the prime minister’s new communications director, lobbied a former chief of staff at Downing Street not to ban the Chinese company. Wang Yam, who was found guilty in 2009 of the murder of the author Alan Chappelow, a crime of which he continues to protest his innocence, contacted the committee last year. He sent the ISC – and a number of prominent individuals – documents about his knowledge of the background and intentions of the Chinese telecommunications company, Huawei, and the potential risks in Britain’s involvement in the company. He has long claimed in letters from prison that he provided MI6 with detailed warnings and information about Huawei. Wang, a grandson of Chairman Mao Zedong’s third-in-command, was a research assistant in the Chinese nuclear weapons research institute. He fled China via Hong Kong and was granted refugee status in Britain in 1992. It is accepted that he was an MI6 informant. In a letter responding to Wang, currently in Lowdham Grange prison in Nottingham, the chair of the committee, Lewis, wrote: “You discuss several important areas of concern regarding the influence of China generally and Huawei in particular within the UK’s telecommunications infrastructure and public sector. As you may be aware, the ISC is currently conducting an inquiry into the national security issues relating to China. “The committee noted the significance of Huawei to the UK’s 5G infrastructure in April 2019 and announced that it would prioritise this aspect of its inquiry. I cannot comment on the substance of the inquiry which is ongoing but you may find the committee’s conclusion and recommendations of interest when it lays its findings before parliament.” Huawei has previously said it had never engaged in espionage or allowed its technology to be knowingly hacked by the Chinese state. Lewis told the Guardian that the committee “noted the policy issues raised by Mr Yam: the ISC is currently conducting an inquiry into the national security threat posed by China”. He also noted that Wang Yam also raised several points about his “personal issues” – a reference to his trials and his complaints against the intelligence agencies. He referred Wang to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT) which he said was the appropriate body for him to contact. The IPT investigates allegations of unlawful activities of state bodies, including the security and intelligence agencies. Wang also told the Guardian that his correspondence with the “relevant authorities” in the US had met with a sympathetic response and an assurance that his points were taken “most seriously.” Wang was recruited as an informant by MI6 after defecting from China and being granted refugee status in the UK in 1992. He was assigned to making contacts with Chinese embassy staff, he has claimed. Chappelow, an 86-year-old author and photographer, was found dead in his home in Hampstead, north London in 2006, after police had been alerted by his bank following suspicious transactions. Use of his stolen credit cards was traced to Wang Yam, who lived nearby and was later arrested in Switzerland. His initial Old Bailey trial in 2008 was held under unprecedented levels of secrecy for a murder case. Journalists were not allowed to attend court to hear the defence. The prosecution suggested that Wang was confronted by Chappelow as he stole letters and bank information from his post box before entering his house and killing him. Wang was convicted of theft and fraud but the jury could not reach a decision on the murder charge. At a second trial, he was convicted of murder and jailed for a minimum of 20 years. From prison, he contacted the Guardian protesting his innocence. Following an article in the paper in 2014, new witnesses emerged, leading to a referral back to the court of appeal by the Criminal Cases Review Commission. A near neighbour of Chappelow told the appeal court that, soon after the murder and with Wang already in custody, he was confronted by an intruder who told him: “Do not call the police or we will kill your wife and baby.” Another witness gave evidence that Chappelow was a regular visitor to the “spanking bench” on Hampstead Heath and he had seen him there shortly before his death leaving with young men. There were also fresh footprints and cigarette butts found in the house that did not relate to Wang Yam. Despite the new evidence, which his lawyers argued would have almost certainly led to an acquittal at his original trial, the appeal was turned down. There is now a possibility that fresh developments in DNA testing could assist in a further appeal. There are also plans for a film, according to Thomas Harding, author of the prize-winning book on the case, Blood on the Page. Wang has complained to the IPT about the way he was treated by MI6 and that the agency asked him to participate in unlawful activities. His lawyer, Edward Preston, confirmed that an application had been made to the IPT, which did not respond to the Guardian’s request for a comment. The potential threat Huawei presents to British interests and competing commercial and security interests has preoccupied the ISC and the intelligence agencies for many years. Back in 2013 the ISC released a stinging report into the way the government handled contracts with Huawei. Seven years later, British telecoms providers were banned from installing Huawei equipment in Britain’s 5G mobile network. • This article was amended on 18 February 2022. An earlier version said Wang Yam set out concerns about Huawei’s 5G infrastructure in documents sent to the ISC and prominent individuals. While he has expressed views about Huawei and 5G, he does not, as the article may have implied, have direct knowledge of 5G because it was developed since he was in prison. That reference has been removed to avoid any possible confusion.The story of Charlie Chaplin only gets more incredible as the years go by: the man who left behind poverty and the workhouse to become the inventor of cinema, celebrity and modernity. As his movies took off, his globally adored “little tramp” character became mass produced, like the Ford Model T or the populist political movements of interwar history. In his heyday, Chaplin’s wealth and fame fused together to create something beyond anything people had conceived those two things to be. No wonder his triumph created a residue of wariness and resentment among America’s governing classes, which spilled out into outright red-scare rage when Chaplin, the bumptious autodidact and autocrat, opened his mouth about communism. Film-makers Peter Middleton and James Spinney are well positioned to take advantage of this enduringly potent real-life legend with their own retelling; they also use new archive material of press conferences and interviews, which they transform with “verbatim cinema” reconstruction techniques. Anything like this inevitably stands in the shadow of David Robinson’s mighty 1985 biography, which set the gold-standard for Chaplin studies and inspired Richard Attenborough’s 1992 biopic starring Robert Downey Jr. But interestingly this documentary moves away, just a little, from the unitary single-stranded heroic biography – to the multi-faceted question of Chaplin’s elusive personae, with and without voice, with and without moustache, with and without political opinions. No matter how often I see it, Chaplin’s non-moustached face is thrillingly naked and strange: with upper lip exposed, the quirky little sketch of a face suddenly evolves into something hyper-intelligent, ambitious, sensual. And this film is more concerned to give Chaplin’s wives more of a presence, rather than being simply walk-on players in the tabloid-gossip farce about the great genius’s weakness for sex. Chaplin’s amazing story is something that would have electrified Charles Dickens, that other poverty survivor who conquered the US. In fact, Chaplin probably became something that Dickens would have dreamed of being in the future century, and what he might have imagined for one of his characters. This film recounts Chaplin’s almost superhuman success, his mythic reach into the hearts and minds of millions of people all over the world – because of silent cinema. Language was no barrier and Charlie/Charlot was universal. Fascinatingly, tragically, the coming of the talkies is what took Chaplin, briefly, up to the next plane before bringing him down, and the film convincingly argues that his famous closing speech in the great anti-Nazi film The Great Dictator, audaciously playing on his own resemblance to Hitler, planted the seed of his downfall. As the Jewish barber mistaken for a despot, Chaplin’s hero makes a passionate oration pleading for democracy and human understanding, a speech he was invited to reprise at Roosevelt’s presidential inauguration. It undoubtedly irritated many on the right, while giving Chaplin a new taste for political speech-making and bien-pensant prestige, which only infuriated the reactionaries of the FBI and the press still further. Chaplin was to become the most famous victim of the HUAC red scare – more important, surely, than Dalton Trumbo and the “Hollywood Ten”. He was finally forced into exile in Switzerland, although this film spares us the macabre story of what was to happen to his body after burial. This film may not have all that much new material but it piercingly asks the right questions about Chaplin’s elusive reality. • The Real Charlie Chaplin is released on 18 February in cinemas. • This article was amended on 18 February 2022, to correct the suggestion that Charles Dickens survived a workhouse – in fact at age 12 he had to work in a factory making boot-blacking.I was told by someone who’d been on an intensive course of self-improvement that we need to identify three important moments in our childhoods: when we first experience fear; when we first feel we don’t fit in; and when it dawns on us that we are alone in the world. Or something like that. I’ve no idea if these things are particularly important, but I can’t stop thinking about them. I bawled my eyes out when I was first taken to nursery school. I don’t think that was fear as such, more that I was just a bit of a wuss. Anyway, I bawled at such length and volume that my mummy was asked to come and take me away and never bring me back. This suited me. Apparently, first fears are commonly felt in the moments you are conscious of being separated from your parents, or lost. I was briefly lost once when I was little, in a crowded airport somewhere. A stranger lifted me on to his shoulders so someone could claim me. I was terrified, but that was because I knew what kind of hiding awaited me from my mum when she got hold of me, furious at my wandering off. No, I first knew proper terror when I was about eight and realised that my grandad would die one day before long. This was awful to know, quite impossible to get my head around. I cried and shook in bed. The horror soon deepened when it dawned on me that the same fate awaited my dad. Appalled, I wailed in even deeper terror at this new knowledge, but not half as loudly as I did when the penny dropped that this unpleasant mortality business applied to me too. I would die one day. I was gripped by this fear night after night. I became frightened of going to bed. As for when I first felt I didn’t fit in, I’m not sure I’ve ever felt that. And when did I first realise that I was alone in the world? It’s probably somewhat to my discredit that I’m not sure I’ve ever felt that either. There’s a saying that you only feel properly grown up once both of your parents have died. Deluded I may well be, but I can never feel alone in the world as long as my parents are yet to join the great majority. Childish, really. It’s not that I consider them infallible – I don’t think either of them is right about much any more – but knowing they care about me is enough. All this has got me wondering how the children of the pandemic, those of early or preschool age, might answer the above questions in years to come. In the darkest days of the last two years, millions of them were cooped up at home with concerned parents who couldn’t shield the kids from what was happening. All these nippers must have caught sight of some news bulletins, on which they’ll have seen something no other cohort of kids in history ever had to see: evidence that for a good while there wasn’t a single grownup in the world who had a clue what was going on. This is quite something for young minds to compute. It is probably the first real fear millions of today’s kids have experienced and, with the adults at sixes and sevens, a strong indication that they’ll have to start figuring things out for themselves. I suppose that sooner or later everyone needs to realise that no one knows anything but, as with stuff about sex, mortgages, mortality and Santa Claus, that truth can wait. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistFrance’s nightclubs reopen for the first time in three months on Wednesday and the Netherlands returns to “almost normal” from next Friday, as European countries continue to lift their coronavirus curbs despite relatively high infection numbers. Groups may also play to standing audiences in French concert venues, customers in bars and cafes will be allowed to eat and drink while standing at the counter and cinemagoers and train passengers can snack during their film or journey. “The skies seem finally to be clearing,” said the French government’s official spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, adding that restrictions “can be lifted according to schedule” but urging people to continue to exercise caution and restraint. France is due to drop its rule mandating face masks in indoor public spaces that require a vaccine pass, such as restaurants, cinemas and gyms, on 28 February, although the obligation will remain on public transport and in shops. The health minister, Olivier Véran, said on Wednesday all remaining mask rules could be lifted and vaccine pass rules “significantly eased” by mid-March, “providing infection numbers continue to fall and the pressure on our hospitals permits”. Nightclubs and bars in the Netherlands can also open until 1am from this Friday, the health minister, Ernst Kuipers, said, before all limits on opening hours are lifted on 25 February. “Young people should be able to unleash their wings,” Kuipers said. Bars, restaurants and clubs will all return to pre-pandemic opening hours and full capacity for the first time in almost two years from that date. Masks will no longer be required in most places, but will remain obligatory on public transport and at airports, and quarantine for those with Covid-19 will be cut to five days. “The country will open again,” Kuipers said. But he warned that while the Netherlands seemed “over the peak” and pressure on hospitals was manageable, the pandemic was “not over”: “We can be optimistic, but we also have to be realistic.” Alpine neighbours Austria and Switzerland on Wednesday also announced they would be dropping most restrictions, including the use of Covid certificates and advice to work from home. From Thursday in Switzerland, the only remaining requirements in place will be the obligation to self-isolate for five days after a positive test and the wearing of masks on public transport and in healthcare institutions – which are expected to remain until the end of March at the latest. Austria plans to drop its curbs from 5 March, retaining mask wearing in essential shops, on public transport and in hospitals and other places with vulnerable groups. “The outlook shows us that together we can cautiously and prudently but with determination take back the freedom that the virus took,” said the chancellor, Karl Nehammer. The decisions follow similar moves by England, Sweden, Denmark and – from Saturday – Norway, all of which have recently lifted almost all coronavirus restrictions after hospital admissions in their latest waves, fuelled largely by the milder Omicron variant, did not rise in parallel with often record infection rates. Hans Kluge, the director of the World Health Organization’s 53-country Europe region, said this month that vaccine-derived and natural immunity, the arrival of spring and the less severe Omicron variant had opened up the prospect of “a long period of tranquillity” in the pandemic, with a “much higher level of defence” against any fresh resurgence in infection rates. In Germany, where the Omicron surge began several weeks later than in many European countries, the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, consulted the 16 state leaders on Wednesday to map a way out of coronavirus restrictions as official figures showed new infections beginning to fall. “We are past the peak of the Omicron wave, pretty much exactly on the day I predicted a month ago,” the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Tuesday, making a “modest loosening” of restrictions possible. Many German states have already moved to scrap rules preventing people without proof of vaccination or recovery from visiting non-essential stores, and Scholz and the state governors are looking at proposals to gradually drop most restrictions by 20 March bar face masks on public transport and in indoor public spaces. Germany is also hesitating over plans to introduce a general vaccination mandate this spring, with a growing number of politicians questioning whether the initiative will find a majority in parliament. Health authorities in Denmark said last Friday they were considering “winding down” the country’s vaccination programme in the spring and saw no reason now to administer a booster dose to children or a fourth shot to any more residents at risk of severe Covid-19. The Danish health authority said the country’s third infection wave was waning “due to the large population immunity”, meaning “we can cope with increasing infection without getting serious illness”.Constituents of Steve Baker MP who are concerned about his environmental position have set up a “Steve Baker Watch” group and are launching a crowdfunding page to raise money. The constituents in Baker’s constituency of Wycombe in the rolling Chiltern Hills believe that Baker is trying to “wreck the government plans to improve the environment”. Baker, who as chair of the European Research Group was instrumental in pressing for a hard Brexit, helped set up the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG), which has close links to the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a lobbyist group that has been accused of denying climate science. Last week the Guardian reported on fears that the group was trying to derail the government’s green agenda, linking it to the cost-of-living crisis and leading to fears of a “culture war” campaign around net zero. The campaigners told the Guardian: “Steve’s Net Zero Watch campaign will make people’s lives in Wycombe miserable. He wants to stop us getting cheaper clean energy, insulating our homes and creating a better future for our children. We’ve had enough!” They plan to “educate” local people about their MP’s views on climate action, including doing leaflet drops, holding vigils outside his office and setting up a website. Baker told the Guardian: “I see the people associated with this campaign come from opposition parties in the constituency. I am thankful for everything they are doing to highlight that the voters of Wycombe will be poorer and colder unless we change course as I am setting out. “We all care for the planet but our current net zero strategy only works for those who can afford much higher bills. If this is what local Lib Dems and Labour want then I’m happy to explain that to voters.” The group, however, says it does not represent any political faction. It said: “We’re a group of concerned citizens who care about climate change and the lives of ordinary people. We don’t represent any political party.” The NZSG group, which has gained widespread media coverage in the past month despite being small in number, says it does not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise. It has called for cuts to green taxes and an increase in fossil fuel production to address the energy crisis, and recently pushed for fracking in the UK.Stephen Colbert On Tuesday evening, Stephen Colbert tentatively celebrated the possibility that Russia would remove some troops from the Ukrainian border, de-escalating a tense international standoff that has threatened military conflict. “OK, so Russia might be pulling out,” the Late Show host said. “That would be good, right, Joe?” To quote Joe Biden on Tuesday: “That would be good, but we have not yet verified that, and danger remains distinctly possible.” “OK, probably smart not to trust Vlad on this one – dudes like him never pull out when they say they will,” Colbert quipped. (Nato has since accused Russia of adding more troops to the border despite saying it would withdraw forces.) Information on troop movements has come from videos by Ukrainian and Russian civilians posted to TikTok, prompting some to refer to the conflict as “the TikTok war”. “Oh no, not a TikTok war! That would be … I don’t know what that would be. I’m 57,” said Colbert. “Instead of TikTok war, can it be just a longform podcast battle or a stack-of-old-New-Yorkers conflict?” In other news, the Oscars announced three hosts for its ceremony next month: Amy Schumer, Regina Hall and Wanda Sykes. “Three hosts, meaning this year, there could be more people hosting the Oscars than watching them,” joked Colbert. “The Oscars are trying something new this year: caring what the audience thinks,” he added, by allowing Twitter users to vote on their favorite movies, whether it was nominated for an Oscar or not. The top-voted film will be recognized during the broadcast, and three Twitter users will also be selected for an all-expenses paid trip to Los Angeles to be present at the 2023 ceremony. “So get ready to hear: ‘And now, presenting the award for best actor in a supporting role, Dame Helen Mirren and Twitter user @buttburgerpimp420,’” said Colbert. Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah discussed a wave of book ban attempts in American schools; since the start of the school year, the American Library Association has tracked over 230 book challenges in school districts across the country. Parents wanting some books banned from school libraries isn’t new – “conservatives wanted to ban Harry Potter for promoting witchcraft, liberals want to ban Huckleberry Finn for using the N-word, mockingbirds want to burn that book about killing them,” Noah explained. But the number of books targeted in recent months has soared, “and the types of books being targeted now are very revealing”. Namely, books on race, gender and sexuality, such as Maus, a Pulitzer-winning graphic novel on the Holocaust, books on school segregation and civil rights, even a biography of Michelle Obama. “I can’t believe these people want to ban a Michelle Obama biography. It’s a biography,” said Noah. “That totally gives away the game that this is more about ginning up a culture war than protecting kids.” “There’s no book about a first lady that’s controversial, you know? Unless maybe it’s Martha Jefferson’s book ‘101 Tips for Owning Slave Children Who Kinda Look Like My Husband,’” Noah joked. “Yeah, that’s a little edgy for the kids, but otherwise it’s pretty chill. “This isn’t about books,” he concluded of the bans. “This is about keeping the culture war going for political benefit.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel reacted to news that Mazars, Donald Trump’s longtime accountancy firm, had severed ties with the former president amid ongoing criminal and civil investigations into whether he illegally inflated the worth of his assets. In a letter to the Trump Organization, the accounting firm acknowledged that its financial statements for Trump between June 2011 and June 2020 “should no longer be relied upon” – a conclusion “based, in part, upon the filings made by the New York attorney general on January 18, 2022, our own investigation, and information received from internal and external sources.” “In other words: we are not going to prison with you, Mr Trump,” said Kimmel. “There’s nothing more depressing than getting dumped by your accountant during tax season,” he added. “It’s like getting divorced on Christmas Eve. “I like the idea of Donald Trump now angrily setting up a TurboTax account to get his taxes done. “A lot of people believe this could be it for Donald Trump, this could be the one,” he continued. “But I don’t know, how many ‘the ones’ have we had now? Like 400 or something? Last week we found out he was flushing documents down the toilet. The week before that he wanted Homeland Security to seize the voting machines. He’s still on the loose – what else do we need to know?”San Francisco residents recalled three members of the city’s school board in the first recall vote in the city since 1983. Voters on Tuesday overwhelmingly approved the recall of school board president Gabriela Lopez, vice-president Faauuga Moliga and commissioner Alison Collins, according to tallies by the San Francisco department of elections. Parents had launched the recall effort in January 2021 out of frustration over the slow reopening of district schools, while the board pursued the controversial renaming of 44 school sites and the elimination of competitive admissions at the elite Lowell high school. Opponents called the recall a waste of time and money as the district confronts challenges that include a $125m budget deficit and the need to replace the retiring superintendent, Vincent Matthews. San Francisco’s school board has seven members, all Democrats, but only three had served long enough to be eligible to be recalled. Their temporary replacements will be named by Mayor London Breed. Pressures of the pandemic and distance learning have merged with politics nationwide, making school board races a new front in battles over Covid-19 policies and politics. Across the country, Republicans are increasingly looking to the education fight as a galvanizing issue that could help them sway voters. But in San Francisco, one of the nation’s most liberal cities, the recall effort split Democrats. Breed, a Democrat and one of the most prominent endorsers of the recall, had criticized the school board for being distracted by “political agendas”. Collins, Lopez and Moliga had defended their records, saying they prioritized racial equity because that was what they were elected to do. Both sides agreed that San Francisco’s school board and the city itself became the focus of an embarrassing national spotlight. One of the first issues to grab national attention was the board’s January 2021 decision to rename 44 schools they said honored public figures linked to racism, sexism and other injustices. On the list were Abraham Lincoln, George Washington and California’s senior senator, Dianne Feinstein. The effort drew swift criticism for historical mistakes. Critics said it made a mockery of the country’s racial reckoning. Angry parents asked why the board would spend time renaming schools when the priority needed to be reopening classrooms. After an uproar, the school board scrapped the plan. Collins came under fire for tweets she wrote in 2016 that said Asian Americans used “white supremacist” thinking to get ahead. Collins said the tweets were taken out of context and posted before she held her school board position. But she refused to take them down or apologize for the wording and ignored calls to resign from parents, Breed and other public officials. She sued the district and her colleagues for $87m, fueling yet another pandemic sideshow. The lawsuit was later dismissed. Many Asian parents were already angered by the board’s efforts to end merit-based admissions at the elite Lowell high school, where Asian students are the majority. As a result, many Asian American residents were motivated to vote for the first time in a municipal election. The grassroots Chinese/API Voter Outreach Task Force group, which formed in mid-December, said it registered 560 new Asian American voters. Ann Hsu, a mother of two who helped found the task force, said many Chinese voters saw the effort to change the Lowell admissions system as a direct attack. “It is so blatantly discriminatory against Asians,“ she said. Breed on Tuesday welcomed the results of the vote. “The voters of this city have delivered a clear message that the school board must focus on the essentials of delivering a well-run school system above all else,” she said in a statement. “San Francisco is a city that believes in the value of big ideas, but those ideas must be built on the foundation of a government that does the essentials well.”The New South Wales Liberal party has been told a federal intervention is needed to prevent it becoming in breach of its constitution, raising concerns that such a move would allow Scott Morrison’s preferred candidates to be installed for the federal election. In an extraordinary meeting of the NSW division held on Wednesday, the state director, Chris Stone, presented legal advice suggesting federal party intervention was required to reappoint members of the state executive until the party’s postponed annual general meeting was held in March. However, amid a fractious standoff over preselections in NSW, the prospect of federal intervention was met with fierce resistance, with some members of the state executive threatening a supreme court challenge. The right faction’s Matthew Camenzuli is understood to have presented competing legal advice at the meeting that suggested the federal intervention was not necessary. Moderate members of the state executive are also understood to hold concerns the move could result in an effective federal takeover of the division, which could allow Morrison’s centre right faction, represented by Alex Hawke, to install their preferred candidates before the election. The latest twist in the long-running feud over preselections, which affects a number of key federal seats including Warringah, Hughes and Dobell, comes as factional chiefs had been negotiating for a ballot that would allow plebiscites to take place in certain seats, while protecting incumbents. According to multiple sources, members at Wednesday’s meeting were presented with legal advice claiming the executive could risk becoming in breach of the division’s constitution because an annual general meeting that was due to happen by the end of February had been delayed. To avoid the breach, it was suggested that the party’s federal executive be asked to step in to reappoint current state executives. But that suggestion led to an escalation in the already deep hostilities between the rival factions of the party in NSW because of suspicions a federal takeover could see the party’s state factions cede control. Earlier this month speaking on Sydney radio station 2GB, Morrison raised the prospect of federal intervention unless the executive dealt with preselections in a number of key seats. Members of the right faction came to Wednesday’s meeting armed with their own contradicting legal advice arguing the state executive could continue to operate until it holds its annual general meeting currently planned for the end of March. In a statement, the NSW Liberal party president, Philip Ruddock, said the proposal was merely aimed at addressing the functioning of the executive. “Due to the significant challenges associated with holding an AGM in late 2021 [and] early 2022 related to Covid restrictions, the NSW division is taking proactive steps to ensure elected officials on its state executive can continue to serve until the AGM can be held in March,” he said. “This does not affect the functioning of the NSW Liberal Party itself.” While members of the right faction have been pushing for local plebiscites to install candidates in a number of key seats, the preselections have been delayed by Hawke because of concerns a number of sitting MPs could lose their preselection in a ballot of local members. Those current MPs including Hawke, fellow minister Sussan Ley in Farrer, and key moderate Trent Zimmerman in North Sydney. Party figures have been holding out hope of reaching a compromise deal which would see the rival factions divide the spoils in a number of NSW seats including Warringah and Hughes, while protecting the government’s sitting MPs. Sources on the right told the Guardian they were fully prepared to “take things further” if an attempt at federal intervention was made, including the prospect of court action. Members of the state executive are expected to hold a vote on Thursday to resolve the matter. The dispute over federal preselections comes after the party’s poor showing in Saturday’s NSW state byelections, which saw the Liberal government lose the previously safe seat of Bega and suffer a 19% swing in Gladys Berejiklian’s former seat of Willoughby on Sydney’s north shore. Although the seat is expected to remain in the government’s hands once postal votes are counted, the swing has focused attention on the government’s slim hold on a working majority in the NSW parliament. The Coalition has effectively been in minority since early last year, after two MPs – Gareth Ward and John Sidoti – were sidelined over separate scandals. Now on the crossbench, those two MPs have remained an electoral buffer inside the parliament, continuing to vote with the government, but the loss of Willoughby would mean they require another vote. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning To avoid that, the Guardian can reveal the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has struck a deal to ensure supply with three key cross-benchers. After a meeting with Perrottet on Tuesday three independents – Greg Piper, Alex Greenwich and Joe McGirr – all agreed to give the government a guarantee on supply. Greenwich said the supply deal would not extend to issues related to “corruption and maladministration”, and that the independent MPs would “judge every motion and piece of legislation on its merits”. Piper put it in plainer terms, saying he had warned the premier: “Maybe you will lose some votes.” “We also told him, as with Gladys Berejiklian, we’ve still got every right to not support legislation or to support non-government bills,” he said. “That’s life in minority government. They might not like it but that’s the way it is.”The Omicron variant has caused an avalanche of Covid-19 cases in Australia in the past months. While most people who catch the disease experience mild symptoms, many report feeling short of breath and sluggish for weeks afterward. “It’s normal to feel tired after a viral infection, and everyone’s recovery is different,” says Janet Bondarenko, a senior respiratory physiotherapist at Alfred hospital in Melbourne. “But the severity of your Covid illness doesn’t necessarily predict whether you will have those lingering symptoms.” The coronavirus can damage various organs, causing ongoing fatigue, says Dr Robert Newton, professor of exercise medicine at Edith Cowan University. “The cardiorespiratory system can’t deliver oxygen to the working muscles efficiently. So what was a light to moderate intensity activity previously feels quite vigorous now.” Sleep and rest help your immune system to fight the disease but it is critical to start moving again to avoid further weakening of your body about seven days after the major symptoms have disappeared, Newton says. Exercise increases capacity of muscles, heart and lungs, as well as the numbers of mitochondria – the energy factories within the muscle cells – which counteract the debilitating effects of the infection. Here is a simple guide that can help you get moving again, but specialist advice from your GP or an exercise physiologist is recommended before you begin an exercise program. The class: yoga There is some evidence that the practice of yoga and meditation may help improve lung health, reduce viral susceptibility and speed the recovery from acute respiratory infections thanks to their relaxing effects. “Controlling stress and anxiety is critical for recovery,” says Newton. “It’s very important to look at strategies such as meditation, mindfulness and yoga to help the body to recover from the coronavirus infection.” In a paper published in the Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, researchers stated that “certain meditation, yoga asana (postures), and pranayama (breathing) practices may possibly be effective adjunctive means of […] helping to reduce severity of Covid-19 disease, including its collateral effects and sequelae”. The move: bodyweight exercise Newton says incorporating resistance training is crucial to reactivate muscles. He says that bodyweight exercises, such as squats and push-ups on your knees, are a good starting point. As you gradually regain your strength, you can begin to add light weights to your routine, using milk cartons or a weighted backpack. Light resistance training triggers the production of hormones and cell-signalling molecules such as cytokines that work with the immune system to help the body repair. The activity: walking According to Bondarenko, the most accessible physical activity to do after a Covid-19 infection is walking. Especially if you can do it outdoors, Newton agrees. Anyone can easily control the intensity of their walking, they say. Beginning with easy, short strolls is ideal, says Bondarenko. Gradually, you can increase the length and the pace of your walks as long as that does not cause you extreme fatigue or leave you feeling breathless. The hard pass: don’t push yourself Pushing through when you are still feeling sluggish after Covid-19 will not speed your recovery, says Bondarenko. “It pushes you back a few steps rather than helping.” She says it is essential to gradually allow yourself extra time to return to your pre-Covid shape. “Everyone’s recovery is different, but over time, everyone gets back to where they want to be.” “Use your body as a barometer,” says Newton. “Test your perceived exertion to make sure you don’t push the system into overtraining, because that will compromise your recovery.”The New South Wales government has admitted that land clearing has increased threefold over the past decade, woodlands and grasslands are deteriorating, and 62% of vegetation in the state is now under pressure from too much fire. The NSW State of the Environment 2021 report, released every three years, paints a grim picture for land and freshwater ecosystems, which are under increasing threat from habitat destruction, invasive species and the climate crisis. The report provides an overview of the environmental issues facing the state including for biodiversity, waterways and the climate. The number of species in NSW threatened with extinction has grown by 18 (to 1,043) since the previous report in 2018 and 64% of mammals are now considered to have suffered long-term reductions in their habitat range. Clearing of woody vegetation increased to an annual average of 35,000 hectares between 2017 and 2019, up from 13,000 hectares between 2009 and 2015. The rate of clearing for non-woody vegetation such as shrubs and grasses was even higher. Bird populations are declining, so too are freshwater fish populations, which were singled out as being in “very poor condition” across the state. More than 70% of endangered plants, animals and habitats in the state are threatened by invasive species, with pest animals and weeds costing the state’s economy $170m and $1.8bn respectively each year. The report, released on Wednesday by the NSW Environment Protection Authority, notes that although 62% of land-based species in the state are not considered to be threatened, the number of endangered species is expected to continue to grow. Although habitat restoration and revegetation programs are in place, these are “not restoring native vegetation at the rate of permanent clearing”, the report states. “Management and conservation efforts will not be enough to save many species without addressing key threats such as habitat removal and climate change.” The report highlights the devastating effects of the 2019-20 bushfires disaster, which affected 62% of the state’s vegetation communities, which are now under pressure from too much burning. It finds that although native vegetation covers 69% of NSW, the ecological carrying capacity of this vegetation is estimated to be just 31% of natural levels in the aftermath of fires. The state’s mean temperature from 2011 to 2020 was 1.1C higher than late last century and the period covered by the report included the warmest years on record (2018 and 2019). The report states emissions in NSW were now 17% lower than in 2005. Eighty-one per cent of electricity in NSW in 2019-20 was generated from fossil fuels, a decline of 7% since the previous report in 2018. Energy consumption had fallen overall but energy use for transport, along with transport emissions, was increasing. The report also finds the amount of waste generated per person has increased by 9% and total waste was up 17%. It states 64% of all waste was diverted for recycling and the volume of litter decreased by 43% between 2013 and 2020. The state’s new environment minister, James Griffin, said the report shone a light on the environmental issues the state was facing and “challenges us to do more”. He said in the three years covered by the report the state had experienced its worst bushfire season and one of its worst droughts. “I fundamentally believe that nature underpins everything on this planet, and for that reason, this report should matter to business leaders, it should matter to environmental advocates, it should matter to academics, and to every citizen in the state,” Griffin said. “Protecting and conserving the environment requires a concerted effort from all of us, and I’m eager to work collaboratively to achieve that goal.” Penny Sharpe, the opposition’s environment spokesperson, said the state’s environment was in serious trouble. “For all the talk from the previous minister [Matt Kean], this report is an indictment on his tenure as minister,” she said. “The report is so bad that he refused to put his name to it.” Sharpe said the new minister’s tenure would “mean nothing” without serious action to protect habitat, reduce clearing and allow landscapes to recover from the fire disaster. Comment was sought from Kean.You are forced to “swallow your screams”, says an anguished father about the loss of his son. It is one of the many piercing moments in this moving drama about grief, mental illness and the harmful culture of silence that surrounds them within the British Caribbean community. An inter-generational drama that reveals the emotional landmines that this silence has left in one family’s life, we are taken from an opening scene of bonding between siblings, Joshua (Nickcolia King-N’da) and Gloria (Velile Tshabalala), to a flash-forward in which he has died – his death never openly spoken of again – and she has suffered from “bipolar disorder” for years, which is hidden from the wider community. Sian Carter’s debut play showcases her ample talent and places her squarely as a star in the making. It is gratifying too that this co-production with Talawa Theatre Company finds a home on a large stage, which it fills with power and pain but also sparks of joy. Directed by Michael Buffong, its pace is initially slow but it finds its feet in the second half and there are some incredibly poignant scenes. Gloria’s 16-year-old daughter, Imani (Ruby Barker, understatedly brilliant) speaks about the psychological legacy of her mother’s mental illness – she is often left in the care of her grandparents, Shirley (Suzette Llewellyn) and Maxwell (Wil Johnson), in a charged exchange, and there are bristling mother-daughter battles between Gloria and Shirley too. The role of the church in this family’s life features in complicated ways. Maxwell, a pastor, tells a silently sceptical Gloria that the “gospel can heal you”, but in another scene he himself rails against his faith’s inability to lessen his grief after his son’s death. Alongside this there is joy: in music, dance and in family love which is palpable and heartfelt in both the writing and performances. Imani’s relationship with her grandparents is particularly tender, while the cuddly Maxwell and indomitable Shirley are so charismatic a double act that their story threatens to eclipse other elements of the plot. The script only needs tightening to raise it to greater heights but the jumbled set – a living room with revolving staircase and stars overhead – looks incoherent and is not helped by sometimes clunky lighting. Those niggles aside, this is a potent piece of theatre which, curiously, also has the episodic pace and rhythm of a TV drama. We know and care about this big-hearted family enough by the end to want more. At the Lyric Hammersmith, London, until 12 MarchFew Australians would realise just how close the recent bushfires came to destroying one of the most valuable art collections in the country. During Australia’s devastating black summer of 2020, the flames came within 1km of Arthur Boyd’s historic place of residence, threatening a collection of the artist’s works along with those of Sidney Nolan, John Perceval, Charles Blackman and others – including many created by the prodigious Boyd clan – estimated to be worth in excess of $40m. Some 3,800 works of art, including paintings, sculptures, ceramics and archival photographs, were evacuated from Bundanon – in New South Wales’ Shoalhaven region – between November 2019 and January 2020. They have remained in a secure Sydney location ever since. Now, over coming weeks, the collection will be quietly repatriated. But it will be returning to a dramatically different habitat. On 5 March the new Bundanon art museum officially opens its doors to the public: a $36m gallery that becomes one of just eight National Collecting Institutions (NCIs) recognised by the federal government. Six of those eight institutions are located in the nation’s capital, including the Australian National Gallery and the Australian National Museum. Bundanon is the only NCI in regional Australia. Perched on the shores of the Shoalhaven River, with Morton national park as a backdrop, there are high hopes from both the federal government (which contributed $22.5m) and NSW ($10.3m) that Bundanon will become a regional tourism destination. (Visitors travelling to Bundanon via Sydney can take advantage of another new regional gallery on the way: the Ben Quilty-established Ngununggula, a converted heritage-listed dairy which opened in Bowral in the Southern Highlands last October.) Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Rachel Kent left her position as the Museum of Contemporary Art’s long-serving head curator to lead the Bundanon venture. “I think this makes a really bold statement about this particular area; it is a serious investment in the south coast and the Shoalhaven Illawarra region,” she said. “What it will do is offer a new vision around destination tourism.” Kent draws an ambitious comparison between Bundanon and world-renowned art destinations such as the Dia Beacon in upstate New York and Japan’s cluster of art islands in the Seto Inland Sea, where art and architecture are embedded into the landscape. In the case of Bundanon, it is an art space embedded quite literally: a part-subterranean gallery carved in concrete into a hillock on the 1,000-hectare Boyd bushland estate, which the artist and his wife Yvonne bequeathed to the Australian people in 1993. The bequest includes the 1866 Bundanon Homestead 9km from the art museum, home to the artist and his family from the early 1980s. In keeping with Boyd’s desire to ensure Bundanon “be accessible to any Australian whose life can be enriched by interaction with Australian creative artists”, the homestead – along with the studio the artist painted in during the last two decades of his life – is open to the public every Sunday. Only the facade of the Kerstin Thompson Architects-designed building is visible, a key to its ability to not only withstand extreme weather, floods and fire, but also to provide thermal stability. Thermo cooling rods embedded 150 metres into the ground add to the comparatively low carbon footprint of the building, whose air conditioning needs claim to be 60% less than those of a standard art museum. “Art museums are some of the worst environmental offenders,” says Kent. “Of course you have to have temperature control to protect the collection, but it does mean that they crunch through a lot of fossil fuels.” The adjacent 165-metre Bridge structure – which includes upscale accommodation for 64 guests in 32 rooms, several dining spaces and a flexible learning and meeting space – has eschewed air conditioning altogether. (Packages, which include two nights’ accommodation, fine dining and a full tour, start from $1,320 for one person and $1,650 for two.) Constructed out of locally sourced blackbutt timber, the Bridge makes use of a cross-ventilation roof system, sliding louvres and shutters, natural breezeways and ceiling fans. Solar panels stretch the entire length of the structure’s roof, which is also deeply grooved to capture enough rain water to service the entire building. Boyd himself, an environmentalist ahead of his time, would have approved of Bundanon’s net zero energy target. The artist famously said that no man can ever own a landscape, and his mission was to foster an understanding and appreciation of the landscape in relationship to art. The art museum’s first exhibition, however, will not include any of Boyd’s famous Shoalhaven paintings. From Impulse to Action delves into the artist’s creative period in the 1960s, including his set and costume designs for a Robert Helpmann production of Elektra, which attracted critical acclaim when staged at London’s Sadler’s Wells Theatre in 1963. “[The works] look like they were made yesterday,” says Kent. “We’ve already had a few people come in who are real Boyd fans and they are quite blown away to see this quite different dimension of the artist’s practice.” The exhibition – the first of what is expected to be a total of three in any given year – also includes contemporary works from other Australian artists, including Shan Turner-Carroll and Dean Cross, in collaboration with local Shoalhaven elders Uncle Steve Russell and Aunty Phyllis Stewarts. Spaciously hung in four wide spaces flooded with natural light, curator Sophie O’Brien has delivered an exhibition that appears to make a seamless transition between the contemporary works and those of Boyd from more than five decades ago. Dance artist Jo Lloyd, for instance, used a seven-metre-high reproduction of Boyd’s central backdrop for Elektra as her own backdrop for video installation Death Role, while Rochelle Haley’s installation Dance on a Couch by an Open Window (After Boyd) was inspired by the vibrant colours Boyd used in his ink drawings from the 1960s. From Impulse to Action runs until 12 June. • Bundanon art museum opens to the public on 5 March. Guardian Australia stayed overnight as a guest of BundanonWe first got “the Internet” on our family computer in 1996. I recall staring at the thick CRT monitor for about 15 minutes as images on the Thomas the Tank Engine homepage appeared line by line and thinking this was pretty tedious. Skip forward to 1999 when a friend and I realised we could use our modem to make prank phone calls. The recipient – typically a classmate we didn’t like or, more often, their parent – would pick up the phone and hear something akin to a fax machine trying to establish a connection. We, on the other end, would hear confused voices coming out of the modem’s internal speaker. This gave me my first Friday detention; we did get a bit carried away. It also gave me my first fit of internet-spurred laughter – though certainly not my last. 1. Catchphrase: snake charmer I love everything about TV gameshows: the music, the sound effects, the fabulous prizes rotating slowly. I’ve written questions for a few. I even hosted my own on Channel 31. But I could never dream of matching this infamous 1994 moment from the UK’s non-Burgo version of Catchphrase. The way everything comes together is just magic. 2. Mr Bankrupt Mr Bankrupt was an Adelaide institution, much like Glenside. The discount retailer was known for its loud and annoying ads with probably the most over-the-top voiceover on Australian television. I love making fun of advertising but I don’t think it’s possible to make them more ridiculous than the real thing. And if you thought that ad was irritating, imagine a whole classroom full of 13-year-old boys doing their own renditions. 3. Aunty Donna’s Cresps As a rule, I hate all comedy and comedians. But the first time I saw Aunty Donna talking about crisps and tea towels on a Channel 31 Melbourne show called Lost Dog TV back in 2012, I snapped my finger, pointed at the TV and said “yes”, then went online and watched their entire back catalogue. They are quite simply the greatest sketch group in Australian history and it was evident right from their earliest work. 4. Stuart has cancer (dress rehearsal) The original and the best of SNL’s “The Californians” sketches. Depicting Los Angelenos as blond valley girls and beige surfer dudes who can only communicate using freeway routes is brilliant satire but what makes the dress rehearsal version so great is the actors cracking each other up. As soon as Fred Armisen (who rarely corpses) says “whattayoudoinhere?” you can see in Bill Hader’s eyes that he’s gone. And once he’s gone, they’re all gone. 5. A succulent Chinese meal I’ve been obsessed with the Democracy Manifest video for more than a decade. There are literally 15 killer lines in those 60 seconds. I quote at least one daily, even going so far as to shoot a shot-for-shot parody just for fun. Over the last couple of years more and more of the story behind that 1991 incident have trickled out, but this brilliant ABC podcast from Lawrence Bull is the definitive explanation of Mr Democracy Manifest, Jack Karlson. It’s not all laughs, but one particular anecdote 12 minutes in about his first time in prison in the 1950s had me rolling. And kudos to sound engineer John Jacobs. Can’t wait for the Jack Karlson biopic: A Succulent Life. 6. Simpsons shitposting I first discovered the joy of Simpsons shitposting in 2015 when Malcolm Turnbull challenged Tony Abbott and some hilarious memes from a page called Simpsons Against the Liberals appeared in my feed. There are now scores of Facebook groups where people mash up images from The Simpsons, paste other people’s heads on to the characters and add captions for satirical effect. It’s an incredibly versatile format. I reckon the best is Compuglobalhypermeganet Australia &amp; New Zealand – no doubt because so many Aussies were effectively brainwashed by 20 years of The Simpsons every night at 6pm on Channel Ten. And since the launch of the website Frinkiac in 2016, it’s never been easier to get a Simpsons screenshot and make your own meme. The guys who created that website deserve the Nobel prize for literature. 7. Interview with Anonymous hacker This is one of my favourite early sketches from my good friends and fellow Mad as Hell writers Alasdair Tremblay-Birchall and Andy Matthews. They do fine work. 8. Penis inspection day I saw this prank some Melbourne high school kids played a couple of years ago and thought it was hilarious. They’d gotten the pedantic language and formatting of the school letter spot on. It was especially funny because I went to an all-boys middle school and I was pretty gullible so I couldn’t help but imagine what my own reaction would have been. I suspect I would have been quite freaked out. Kids have been pulling this one all around the world since at least 2010. Guess that makes it a classic. 9. Bob Johnson smashes prices! It’s been 15 years since Australia’s funniest and therefore best radio show – Get This with Tony Martin, Ed Kavalee and Richard Marsland – went off the air but every now and then I’ll be driving and suddenly, a random line like “this box of sand isn’t compatible with my printer!” pops into my head. I would have included the Warwick Capper soundboard prank calls but Mark Humphries beat me to it. Instead, here’s my favourite fake ad. 10. Peter Russell Clarke swearing When it comes to TV chefs, as it often does, I came of age during the Iain Hewitson period. I’d never heard of Peter Russell Clarke until around 2008 when some sweary bloopers from a series of 80s cheese commercials surfaced online. They’re pretty funny on their own but I came across this video on Instagram recently where someone has mashed up the intro to his ABC cooking show Come &amp; Get It with the bloopers. To quote Keith Floyd, just brilliant! David M Green is a comedian and writer on Shawn Micallef’s Mad as Hell, which airs Wednesdays 8.30pm on ABC. He also reviews videotapes on his webseries VHS Revue. You can follow him on Twitter, Instagram, and FacebookThe ratio of gnarly infections and guts-splaying mayhem per screen minute is an important metric for zombie movies. While I am yet to analyse the data in a scientifically sound way, I can confidently declare that, on these merits, Wyrmwood: Apocalypse is a resounding success. The film is a perversely colourful, visually energetic and proudly splatterific sequel to its 2015 predecessor, a lean and mean midnight movie that, while stuffed with familiar genre elements, had a couple of rare or rare-ish distinguishing features. The first is simply that it was an Australian zombie movie. There have been few others, including Cargo, which saw a freshly bitten Martin Freeman stumbling around the Australian outback, desperately looking to find somebody to care for his baby before he turned into a flesh-muncher. And the 2003 film Undead included perhaps the funniest line ever spoken in a zombie film: “When I was a kid we respected our parents, we didn’t fuckin’ eat them!” The second rare element in Wyrmwood was more about how it was created, rather than the film itself. It arrived with an inspiring behind-the-scenes story of go-for-broke young artists and siblings Kiah and Tristan Roache-Turner, who self-financed the production and shot it on weekends. The film eventually found an audience – including many people who pirated it online (a bit of a mixed blessing). Now we have a sequel, which has a bigger budget, more impressive inventions, better sets and bad-arse vehicles that continue a long line of bizarro Australian movie cars à la The Cars that Ate Paris and Mad Max. Wyrmwood: Apocalypse throws us headfirst into the action, with gnarly, blood-red opening credits accompanied by a variety of awful sounds. Rhys (Luke McKenzie) – the twin of a character who died in the first movie – emerges from a ramshackle hideout, surrounded by the undead, many of whom he has imprisoned to use as lab rats, pets and even a boxing sparring partner. He is clearly a self-sufficient loner, until he must grudgingly team up with others to rescue a half-human, half-zombie Indigenous girl, Grace (Tasia Zalar). Rhys had delivered Grace to the wicked “Surgeon General” (Nicholas Boshier), who he believes is working on a cure to the virus. But Grace’s sister Maxi (Shantae Barnes Cowan) throws cold water on Rhys’s assumption that the people he’s mingling with – despite looking as evil as they come – are working for the betterment of (an admittedly pulverised) society. The Roache-Turners (with Kiah directing, writing and editing, and Tristan writing and producing) wear their genre influences on their sleeves and seem almost proud of their film’s unoriginality. There are bitumen-licking Mad Maxian road shots and laboratory scenes informed by Romero’s Day of the Dead, among others. In the latter scenes, Boshier (whose work in front and behind the camera includes Bondi Hipsters and Beached Az) carves it up as the scene-stealing Surgeon General, bringing manic, eye-bulging intensity to his mad scientist character, with enjoyably crazy results. One especially entertaining scene involves this evil bastard donning a VR-esque device that allows him to operate an undead body remotely. McKenzie delivers the kind of lead performance that doesn’t tend to get many plaudits – mostly because we’ve seen this character so many times before – but he brings a commanding presence. As does Barnes Cowan, delivering a kick-arse performance as Maxi: tough, gritty and zero tolerance for bullshit. Maxi and Grace would make good choices for the subjects of a spin-off movie. Kiah Roache-Turner keeps the camera moving and the cuts regular, setting a cracking energy that’s particularly important for midnight movies like this, concerned more with relishing carnage than telling a story. What matters most in Ozploitation films, of which this production is a spiritual descendent, is atmosphere and energy: watching them feels like sticking your head out the window of a fast-moving car. Film-makers find a true sweet spot when combining this feel with a great narrative – which Wyrmwood: Apocalypse doesn’t have, though it’s a bit of fun nonetheless. Wyrmwood: Apocalypse is in cinemas nowOn the night Bob Hawke died, the John Curtin hotel in Melbourne’s inner north was packed – its usual crowd of trendy twentysomethings rubbing shoulders with old trade unionists and ex-journos. Armed with cans of lager named in his honour, the Curtin was the natural place for mourners to remember Hawke, who in the heyday of the 1970s when he was ACTU president, would roll into the pub every Friday evening. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, was there, as was the former Labor premier Steve Bracks and the then federal Labor leader Bill Shorten. A photo of the three of them drinking their Hawke lagers under a black-and-white portrait of the former prime minister is now proudly displayed on the pub’s website. Now, the 150-year-old building is being sold to developers, and though its future is uncertain, the music venue’s operators have confirmed its time as a pub has come to an end. “It’s with an agonisingly sad heart, that The John Curtin hotel’s time on this earth will come to an end,” the hotel published to its Facebook page on Tuesday evening. “The owners … have decided to sell, making way, most likely for apartments.” “We have a lease until the end of November this year. Beyond that, we have no idea what the developers will have planned for us.” Located across the road from Victoria’s Trades Hall in Carlton and named after another former Labor prime minister, the John Curtin hotel has always been a favourite for party members. Students, unionists and journos have downed Coopers green at its shadowed booths for decades, though it was in the 70s the pub made its name as the preferred watering hole of Bob Hawke. Hawke’s daughter, Sue Pieters-Hawke, remembers as a child “sitting up at the old wooden bar with all these blokes”. “It was Dad’s watering hole, his second home,” she says. “It was a source of a lot of joy for Dad and a lot of joy, and occasional grief, for his family.” “Dad’s drinking was a source of trouble at times … but it was also how he got to know the trade union movement and form connections. He made amazing friendships at the Curtin, often across factional lines.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Barry Donovan worked as industrial relations reporter for the Age and the Herald Sun during Hawke’s tenure as ACTU president. The back bar was where journalists sourced their stories, and the front bar was for the builders and labourers. “The most important part of the Curtin was the people involved,” Donovan says. “The geography of it – opposite the Trades Hall, in the increasingly vibrant Carlton at the beginning of Lygon Street, with restaurants, theatre, drama. The Curtin was the starting point.” Donovan remembers one Friday evening when Hawke was considering his future at the bar. Many wanted him to continue as a union advocate while others thought he should move on to Canberra. “He asked me privately what I thought. I said, ‘Bob, you should go as far as you think you can go’. He looked at me, nodded and said ‘OK’. Subsequent to that, he ran for the seat of Wills and got endorsed.” Shorten came on the scene in the late 80s. While he may have missed out on the pub’s “wildest adventures”, the Curtin remained a vibrant hub in the Victorian trade union movement up until the early 90s. “You’re brought up on legends of arguments and beers had,” he says. “The dispersion of unions from around Trades Hall meant its political connections ebbed, but there were fights, arguments, tears, and many pots of beer consumed there.” More recently, the Curtin has cemented its legacy as one of Melbourne’s best live music venues, with its curtained band room home to sweaty punk gigs, electronic nights and folk ballads. The Victorian Trades Hall Council on Wednesday flagged its intention to raise the more than $6m required to save the hotel. “I’ve had a lot of people reach out to me overnight to say how important it is. I know some people are talking about ‘could we crowdfund it?’,” the Trades Hall secretary, Luke Hilakari, told ABC radio. “We’ll need some large people investing, but this is something we just can’t let go.” A spokesperson says the Curtin means a lot to generations of unionists who have fond memories of returning to the pub after large rallies. “The old guard still come down and reminisce about the bad old days, mingling with kids who just love the Curtin’s music scene,” they say. “It’s a place for plotting industrial mischief and celebrating wins – the road between John Curtin and Trades Hall was the scene of a seriously great party after the marriage equality vote.” The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said on Wednesday he could not comment on the future of the site but would like to see an “optimistic future” given the history of the “first-class establishment”. Current band booker Paris Martine says staff will keep fighting for the Curtin and other live music venues in Melbourne. “These are our community meeting places … the places we danced half-naked on the bar til the wee hours of the morning to celebrate the legalisation of same-sex marriage,” Martine posted on Facebook. “The place we met partners and made friendships … places for debate, for politics … places of arts and culture where you saw an act you came to love.” For Pieters-Hawke, the heyday of the Curtin in the 70s may have long since passed, the blokey, male culture no longer as dominant, the influence of the union movement on national politics lessened. But the memories of such “a rich time” remain strong. “It was a home away from home for Dad,” she says. “A place of not just drinking and bullshit but ideas, real debate, formulations of policy and action.”On Wednesday morning, the Treasury secretary, Dr Steven Kennedy, appeared before the Senate estimates economics committee. It became very clear from the shadow finance minister, Senator Katy Gallagher, and her opposite, Senator Simon Birmingham, that interest rates are going to be a big factor in the election campaign. To an extent you can understand why – the latest market expectations for rate rises have increased sharply over the past month. At the start of January, the market expected at most the cash rate getting raised to 0.75% by the end of the year. Now the market expects the Reserve Bank to raise the cash rate five times by the end of the year up to 1.25% and to 2.0% by June next year: If the graph does not display please click here Even worse for the government, the market rates it a 50:50 chance that the RBA will increase rates on 2 May – right in the middle of the election campaign. I actually think this is unlikely, because I suspect the Reserve Bank will wait to see the March quarter wages figures, which only come out on 18 May. But even if interest rate don’t go up in May, Gallagher’s question of whether interest rates will go up before the election and the awkward rebuttals by Birmingham demonstrate that this remains a potent political issue. Which, to be honest, is quite weird. Has anyone noticed that the cash rate is at 0.1% and that if it remains there that means not only is inflation not rising, but neither are wages? Shouldn’t we want wages to rise by more than 3%? Questions about interest rates always go to the issue of the budget deficit and government debt – and the belief that deficits and growing debt levels lead to increased interest rates. And yet what we have seen since the global financial crisis and especially through the pandemic is that government spending has been the big driver of economic growth. The Grattan Institute asserts that the combination of fiscal spending and the extraordinary monetary policy of buying bonds and cutting the cash rate to 0.1% added over $5,000 to Australia’s GDP per capita. My colleagues at the Centre for Future Work, Jim Stanford and Alison Pennington, sagely note that this spending not just “stabilised macroeconomic conditions” but also demonstrated that “governments were not restrained (at least initially) by conventional concerns about the impacts of these enormous interventions on either fiscal balances or on the purported ‘incentive to work’.” The jobkeeper program and increased jobseeker rate showed that not only is poverty largely a government choice but so too is the unemployment rate, while programs like “work for the dole” are more about politics than economics. On Wednesday, the Treasury secretary talked of the generational opportunity to reach full employment, which given we are in a pandemic should have us wondering what we have been doing over the past decade. Because what we had been doing was worrying too much about the debt and deficit. After the GFC, the ALP government sought to get back to a budget surplus and slowed public demand: If the graph does not display please click here This desire was shared with the following Coalition government. And so the view that a budget surplus equals better economic managers saw Australia’s domestic economy falter. In 11 out of the 14 years before the GFC, Australia’s gross national expenditure grew by more than 4%; in the 12 years since, it has happened just once – back in 2011-12. No doubt in the election campaign we will hear about how the Coalition government has increased net debt from $156bn in 2012-13 to a forecast of $915bn in 2024-25. But would we wish it otherwise? That spending has prevented a long recession and has alleviated poverty at a time when, had the labour market been left to itself, the unemployment rate would have hit 14% rather than peaking at 7.4%: If the graph does not display please click here If you were still wondering if Keynes was right when it came to how governments should act during economic downturns, the Covid pandemic was the biggest economic mic drop. But what about all that debt? Here in Australia, government debt is expected to reach over 37% of GDP, and yet the interest repayments are expected to be a mere 0.7% of GDP – the same level they were in the Coalition government’s first year of office in 2013-14: If the graph does not display please click here Ahh yes, but wait till interest rates go up, I hear. Except, well, they are not really going up all that much. Given the recent surge in inflation, it’s not surprising that both here and in the US, government bond yields (ie interest rates) have risen since the pandemic nadir: If the graph does not display please click here And yet both are still around 2.0% for a 10-year loan – historically low and below long-term inflation targets. The Treasury secretary is right to suggest that full employment is within our grasp. And yet without continued government support and investment, hopes for productivity gains that will lead to improved economic and wages growth will dissipate. When in 2007 interest rates were rising, Kevin Rudd was right to suggest “this reckless spending must stop”. And the Morrison government certainly has shown a knack for reckless spending. But stopping reckless spending does not mean stopping government stimulus, and it would be a sad thing if the economic debate in the election is stoked by fears about rising interest rates and about which party will have lower debt levels. • Greg Jericho is a Guardian columnist and policy director at the Centre for Future WorkThe ABC is an unbiased and “independent source of truth” and must not be undermined by political or commercial forces, the ABC managing director, David Anderson, has declared in a passionate defence of the public broadcaster. In a book published on Thursday, Now More Than Ever: Australia’s ABC, Anderson outlined the breadth and depth of the ABC’s output and its “overwhelming” influence on Australian life, saying “the critics don’t deter us”. “We know that for democracy to flourish, a nation’s citizens must have an independent source of truth they can turn to – one that is unwavering, unbiased, and committed to providing the accurate, relevant information they need,” Anderson wrote. “This is the core role played by the ABC. And any attempts to interfere with, or undermine, the independence of the ABC, by either political or commercial players, must and will be resisted at all costs.” Any attacks on the ABC’s legitimacy, or interference in its operations, will always be resisted by the vast majority of Australians who love the institution, he said. Anderson’s heartfelt defence of the ABC’s value and its independence comes a week after the Morrison government demanded that the ABC and SBS add a new layer of accountability, so-called statements of expectations, on top of the broadcasters’ already rigorous reporting requirements to parliament. Anderson told Senate estimates on Wednesday that some of the information the Coalition has demanded will not be handed over because of commercial in confidence and privacy concerns. In the book, the ABC veteran said support comes from a wide range of people who use the services: Australians who rely on the broadcaster’s Covid-19 information; those in regional and rural areas who rely on news reports for their safety during extreme weather events; and those who value the public-interest journalism that leads to royal commissions and changes in legislation. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The ABC matters to Indigenous Australians, who for so long did not see their own stories in our national narrative, but who now proudly declare and stand by their contributions and drive the conversations on reconciliation and better lives for their communities,” he said. Although the government has restored the ABC’s indexation – which reduced the budget by $84m over three years – in real terms ABC funding is 30% lower than it was in the mid-1980s. “This year, the ABC’s operational funding is more than 10% lower in real terms compared [with] 2013–14,” he said. “Meanwhile, our regular critics in the Australian media continue their campaign to try to discredit the ABC as an institution.” There is a dangerous rightwing agenda internationally to “defund” public broadcasters, including in Canada and the United Kingdom, which is fuelled by social media, Anderson said. While it is often under attack, the ABC has a lot to be positive about, including being the country’s leading digital news source, No 1 national radio network and No 1 daytime channel for Australian children as well as being the country’s most trusted source of news and analysis. Now More Than Ever: Australia’s ABC is out 17 February through Monash University PressAustralians eager to travel overseas and reunite with loved ones after two years of pandemic border restrictions are facing expensive international air fares, with a new analysis showing prices have surged by an average of more than 50% across all destinations compared with pre-pandemic travel. Many airlines cut all services and closed down local offices at the peak of strict quarantine arrival caps in 2021 as they slowly rebuild and resume services to the country, the cost of international travel to and from Australia is expected to remain high. International airlines are operating about a fifth of the number of passenger services into Australia compared with pre-pandemic levels – not factoring in Western Australia, where traffic is 1% – according to the Board of Airline Representatives of Australia. Prices for economy seats are on average 54% above pre-pandemic levels, according to data from travel website Kayak provided to Guardian Australia. The data was based on searches for flights between 1 February and 13 February that were departing within 180 days of the search date. New Delhi was the most searched-for international destination in early February by Australians looking to book holidays, with airline tickets to the Indian capital among the most overpriced when compared with pre-pandemic costs, the data shows. The average price of a return economy flight to New Delhi is currently $1,584, up from an average of $1,025 in February 2020. Bali is the second-most sought-after international destination among Australians, with return flights to Denpasar costing an average of $622. Air fares to Bali are among the closest to pre-pandemic costs, just 13% more expensive than in February 2020 on average. Flights to London – the third-most searched destination by Australians in February so far – cost an average of $1,832 for a return ticket. In February 2020, the average cost was $1,477. Manila is the fourth-most searched for destination, with a return average air fare costing $1,352. This is up 81% on pre-pandemic prices, when an average fare cost $746 in February 2020. Australians are also eager to travel to New Zealand with flights to Auckland the sixth most sought-after destination. Return tickets cost an average of $674, up 46% on pre-pandemic levels. New Zealand still has tight Covid entry rules in place but has announced it will accept vaccinated New Zealand citizens and visa holders coming from Australia from 27 February; this applies mainly to Australians residing in New Zealand. Vaccinated tourists from Australia and other eligible countries are to be accepted by July. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Many international airlines have announced the resumption of some Australian routes and increased frequency on others since the Morrison government announced it would reopen the country’s borders to allow all remaining visa holders, including tourists, to enter from 21 February. In the days following the announcement searches for flights to Australia increased by 80%, with most searches originating in the UK, the US and South Korea. People hoping to travel to Australia face slightly cheaper air fares, with Kayak data showing prices of return fares with an inbound first leg are on average about 40% higher than pre-pandemic costs. Dr Tony Webber, of the University of New South Wales’ aviation school, said he expects air fares to remain high for “at least four or five years”. Webber, who is also the chief executive of the Airline Intelligence and Research group and a former chief economist at Qantas, said this is partly due to the huge financial hit that airlines have taken throughout Covid. “The airlines are still repairing their balance sheets, they’ve had no profits the past few years, so they need to charge more on tickets, they need to squeeze more revenue out of customers.” “If you’ve got 80% fewer seats available, but much more demand for seats, then the prices have to be higher,” Webber said. “The airlines won’t immediately ramp up services to match demand, because it’s still so uncertain and risky, they’ll be conservative in returning supply.” Webber added that fuel costs – which plummeted at the beginning of the pandemic – have risen again and are now about 20% above pre-pandemic levels, contributing to higher air fares. Webber predicted that the high cost of international flying would drive more Australian tourists to take domestic flights – which have resumed at a much faster rate than international levels – with increased demand potentially driving up local air fares too. Meanwhile, Qantas has angered some local travellers, with a recent booking glitch resulting in a holding charge for the cost of some flights being placed on some customers’ credit cards, despite already deducting the cost of the fare at the time of purchase. One affected customer, who did not want to named, told Guardian Australia “as a result, we are overdrawn on our credit card and unable to make purchases until the three-to-seven days it takes to fix”. It is understood the glitch affected a small number of customers, with Qantas aiming to clear the holding costs within a week. A Qantas spokesperson has defended recent criticism from customers with flight credit vouchers who claimed their credits were not sufficient to cover the cost of a new fare on an identical route. She said that the issue affected customers who, from 1 October, booked a flight but chose not to go on it despite the service going ahead. She explained that while the airline made its traditional fare rules more flexible earlier in the pandemic, it has since “put some of those rules back”, which meant customers who asked for a flight credit could only rebook on services of an equal cost. • This article was amended on 17 February 2022 to differentiate between certain Australians allowed into New Zealand later this month, and the wider opening to tourists from Australia and elsewhere planned for July.Tax cuts planned to take effect in 2024-25 are highly regressive and would pay male beneficiaries twice as much as women, separate analyses by the Australia Institute, the Greens and the Australian Council of Social Service have found. The so-called stage-three tax cuts will remove the 37 cents in the dollar tax bracket, lower the 32.5 cent bracket to 30 cents, and raise the top tax bracket to start at $200,000 compared with $180,000 now. All up, the cuts will cost about $184bn over the first decade, the groups said. According to the Australia Institute’s analysis of tax office data, someone earning $200,000 a year would receive $174 a week in tax relief, or 73 times the benefit of those earning $50,000 who would save just $2.40 a week. Since men dominate the highest income tallies, with twice as many in the top bracket as women, they also end up grabbing the lion’s share of the tax relief. “This means that for every $1 of the tax cut that women get men get $2,” the Australia Institute said. “We can see those men in the top 10% of taxpayers get almost 40% of the tax cut,” it said. “Women in the top 10% of taxpayers get only 15% of the tax cut because there are much fewer women in the top 10%.” The bottom 40% of taxpayers – a group in which women outnumber men – receive just 2% of the tax cut. “The stage-three tax cuts will only serve to further entrench wealth inequality between men and women,” Matt Grudnoff, a researcher at the Australia Institute, said. Analysis done for the Greens by the parliamentary budget office delivered similar findings, with the average annual tax cut for a man assessed to be $1,430, or almost twice as much as for a woman at $730. Currently 3.5% of taxpayers occupy the top tax bracket for those earning more than $180,000 a year. This group stands to gain 45% of the tax savings. In 2024-25, the first year of operation, the top 1% of income earners would save $1.3bn in taxes, or almost twice the $700m saved by the entire bottom 60% of earners. Over the first decade, that top 1% would pocket $11.8bn compared with $12.7bn for those lower 60% of earners, the PBO assessment found. The $184bn cost to the budget over the decade amounts to more than triple the sum spent by the Rudd-Gillard Labor government to shield Australia during the global financial crisis, Greens leader Adam Bandt said. “Liberal and Labor have agreed to kill Australia’s progressive tax system,” Bandt said. “This great leap rightwards is a trickle-down disaster for the country.” If the Greens secure the balance of power after this year’s election, they would “push the next government to keep Australia’s progressive tax system and make billionaires pay more tax”, he said. Guardian Australia approached treasurer Josh Frydenberg for comment. Earlier this month, Frydenberg’s office circulated “unpublished” treasury data showing the government’s personal income tax plan had already delivered more than $14.4bn in tax relief to more than 5.2m women since the 2018-19 fiscal year to the end of 2021. “On average each Australian woman was $3,130 better off as a result of our tax cuts, with younger women the greater beneficiaries. Those under 24 had seen the amount of tax paid decline by more than 20%, the largest proportion of any cohort,” Frydenberg’s office said. Labor MPs used Senate estimates on Wednesday to seek access to Treasury’s calculations on those changes to assess their accuracy. Australian Council of Social Service CEO Cassandra Goldie said the use of percentage changes gave “the impression that women and young people gain a lot more from tax cuts than they actually do”. “People on lower incomes don’t pay much income tax because their wages are already so low,” Goldie said. For instance, a woman working part-time on $600 a week pays $40 in tax. A $10 weekly tax cut amounted to a quarter reduction in tax but just 1.6% of her income. The stage-three tax cuts would only reinforce gender income inequities because they advantage people already in paid work and those with higher incomes, Goldie said. “Over three-quarters [78%] of the value of stage three of the tax cuts starting in 2024 will go to the top 20% by income on $102,000 or more, and only one-third will go women,” she said, citing analysis provided to Acoss by the PBO. Acoss wants the major parties to drop the “damaging, unfair and unaffordable tax cuts” and guarantee essential services instead.The outgoing Liberal MP, John Alexander, says he would “seriously consider” supporting Helen Haines’s bill for a federal integrity commission if the independent member for Indi again attempts to have the draft legislation debated by parliament before the election. On Tuesday, the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, confirmed the government was “not progressing” its proposed commonwealth integrity commission until at least after the election, saying the government could not pass it without Labor support. This means the government will go to the election having broken its 2019 election commitment for an integrity commission, despite first releasing a bill for such a body in November 2020 and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, indicating last week there was still time to introduce it. Alexander, who has called for a bipartisan approach to establishing a federal anti-corruption body, told Guardian Australia he had “missed his chance” when Haines moved to debate her bill last month and the Tasmanian MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor in support. “I thought she was very, very brave. I think we’ve seen a lot of brave women lately, and maybe not enough brave men,” Alexander said. “At that point [of the vote], in this strange world without our advisers here, I wasn’t actually aware when that happened … so I wasn’t prepared and I missed my chance. But I think what she did was very, very brave and it was a statement that we want to move this forward.” Were it not for the Covid restrictions governing parliament, Haines would have secured the absolute majority required to suspend standing orders and debate her anti-corruption bill, which was also supported by the cross-bench, Labor and the Greens. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While saying he thought it was a “moot point” and it was unlikely Haines would have another chance to debate her bill with only one sitting week of parliament left before the election, Alexander said he reserved his right to cross the floor. “We on our side have the right to do that, but I think at this time, it’s unlikely to happen,” he said. “I won’t tell you what I would do [if Haines tried again], that’s between me, myself and I. “I certainly would think about it, but I really do dislike playing politics with things. It’s something to be seriously considered, but I’ve got to seriously consider also that we have put a bill forward and it’s been redrafted several times, and there’s been serious effort put in.” Alexander said he was disappointed the government’s bill had not been introduced, saying he believed leaders of both parties needed to “put their heads together” and come up with a proposal that could be sustained “for generations”. “Probably the most fundamental thing you expect of your elected leaders is honesty and integrity, and so it is absolutely fundamental,” he said. “Get together, instead of having a war and then having a peace treaty afterwards – get together, work things out and at least get something we can start with. “And then that can get added to as one party gets into power, they might add a little change, and it will evolve into something that is serviceable. The endless debate and then the just personal attacks that continue every day are not productive.” Haines said on Wednesday the government’s failure to introduce a bill indicated its fear of transparency. “We have a Coalition government who are dead scared of having an integrity commission and they’re doing everything they can to make sure we don’t have one,” Haines told ABC radio. “The bill has never been introduced … what they’ve put out is an exposure draft. People have come to this in good faith trying to improve what was a very flimsy proposition. The government didn’t engage.” In question time, Labor’s shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, asked about Morrison’s claim last week that a the national anticorruption commission could be legislated before the election. “Now the attorney general has confirmed the government will not put legislation to parliament this term. Why won’t the prime minister do his job and deliver an anticorruption commission?” Dreyfus asked. Morrison said: “We’ve tabled our legislation for that integrity commission. The Labor Party don’t support it, and that’s why it’s not proceeding.”Private rents in the UK are rising at the fastest rate in five years, ratcheting up the cost of living burden on millions of households. The average cost of renting for UK tenants rose by 2% in 2021 – the largest annual increase since 2017, figures from the Office for National Statistics show. Soaring rental prices, coupled with inflation hitting 5.5% in January, will pile further pressure on the government to increase support for vulnerable families. The east Midlands had the biggest increase in average rental prices, with tenants paying 3.6% more than a year earlier, while London had the smallest, 0.1%, as demand for city flats dwindled during lockdown and people favoured working remotely outside the capital. Renters including office workers and students are now flocking back to cities, pushing up rental prices. Demand has outpaced supply and 71% fewer homes were available on London’s rental market in December compared with typical levels a year earlier. Osama Bhutta, campaign director at the housing charity Shelter, said: “Our services are already hearing from people who are struggling to pay their rent and keep the lights on. Covid-era protections are now gone, and if you struggle to pay your rent you face eviction and homelessness. The government should reverse the damaging welfare cuts that are pushing people into impossible choices.” Calls for government action came after the insurer Legal &amp; General announced it would spend an extra £2.5bn on its “build to rent” schemes over the next five years. The company is aiming to provide more than 7,000 purpose-built rental homes in UK towns and cities in a move to cash in on the booming market. Dan Batterton, the head of build to rent at L&amp;G, said while the £2.5bn would not “solve the housing crisis”, it was part of the solution, funnelling new investment from pension funds into creating well-managed homes. “We’re looking at 40-year cashflow for these assets, so we are incentivised to build homes that will keep people happy in the long term. We want to make renting an aspirational option,” he added. Rent increases on L&amp;G blocks are capped at 5% for five years. “Our bulk buying power can bring down costs: from building workspaces so people can run businesses from their homes to offering car-sharing schemes,” said Batterton. The property website Zoopla found newly advertised rental prices were rising much faster across the UK. It said the average rent jumped 8.3% in the final three months of 2021 to £969 a month. House prices across the country also hit record highs, ONS data showed. The average price of a UK home was £275,000 in December, 10.8% higher than a year earlier. The increase was the biggest in almost two decades. Darren Baxter, policy manager at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, said: “Something is not right when the average house price in the UK has increased during the pandemic by more than the average full-time worker earned last year. “Renters searching for a new tenancy will struggle as rents in some areas have risen as much as 8%. Despite this, housing benefit has been frozen for two years. To address this, the government must urgently relink housing benefit to the real cost of renting.”The price that Prince Andrew will pay for settling the Virginia Giuffre civil lawsuit will go far beyond the reported millions it has cost him financially. As he celebrates his 62nd birthday on Saturday, the duke will undoubtedly contemplate what a future without the red carpet and royal trappings he has enjoyed since birth will actually look like. “He has been de-royaled. He has now got to live a private life, and any suggestion he could return to public life is delusional,” said Robert Lacey, a royal historian. Once called the “playboy prince”, who was feted for the part he played in the Falklands War, Andrew was part of the international jet-set. Photographs of him aboard luxury yachts surrounded by beautiful women earned him the soubriquet “Randy Andy”. He swapped that for “Air Miles Andy” when, as a roving business ambassador for brand UK, royal accounts revealed a life of first-class travel, private jets and helicopters to golf courses. His connections with controversial foreign figures – including politicians in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Tunisia, Libya and Turkmenistan – also raised concerns. His relations with Timur Kulibayev, a son-in-law of the then-president of Kazakhstan, were also scrutinised after Kulibayev bought the duke’s Sunninghill Park home for £3m more than its £12m asking price in 2007. A spokesman for Kulibayev said it was a “commercial, arm’s length transaction” using “entirely legitimate” funds. Simon Wilson, Britain’s deputy head of mission in Bahrain from 2001 to 2005, wrote in the Daily Mail that the duke was “more commonly known among the British diplomatic community in the Gulf as HBH: His Buffoon Highness”. “The problem has been his judgments and his friendships,” said Lacey. “The price is total obscurity. If you are looking outside the royal family for a parallel, John Profumo, who suffered abject disgrace at the time of the Profumo affair, actually through totally private quiet charity work eventually redeemed himself in the eyes of himself, his friends and in due course the world. “It’s an existential challenge for Andrew. He’s got to reinvent himself.” He added: “The problem with Andrew is he is a dreadful reminder of the distinction between the family and the institution, and a reminder that the institution is ultimately more valuable than the family, and the family are only custodians of the institution.” Andrew may attend next month’s thanksgiving service for his father, Prince Philip. “He has a right as a family member and the family has a duty to accept him on family occasions,” said Lacey. “And the challenge for the royal family is those occasion are public.” Andrew has always denied Giuffre’s allegations. The settlement statement does not dispute them, nor admit them. Lacey believes Andrew is unlikely to appear on the Buckingham Palace balcony for the platinum jubilee. “That’s the occasion when the institution outweigh the family”. Joe Little, the managing editor of Majesty magazine, said of Andrew’s future: “My guess is he will do now what he’s been doing for the last two years, seemingly not very much, certainly not in public. We would occasionally see him out riding in the grounds of Windsor Castle and driving in and out of Royal Lodge. And that was pretty much it.” The riding was to improve his performance in his role as colonel of the Grenadier Guards, a position he has since lost, so he would be able to take part in the trooping the colour birthday parade. “Well, clearly, there is no longer a need to do that,” said Little. Golf has always been Andrew’s passion. He was captain of the Royal and Ancient, but has been forced to give membership of that up, too. Little said: “He can continue to play golf, but in a private capacity. There is a golf course at Windsor Castle so he could do that in total privacy. But that is no more than a pastime for him nowadays, whereas it previously had a wider meaning. His positions meant he could travel around the country to use the various golf courses.” Of Andrew’s promise to support victims’ right, Little added: “How will that manifest itself? Will he attach himself to a charity for that purpose? Given that he has a very tarnished reputation, do charities want the Queen’s second son these days? I am inclined to think that they won’t. “Will it help to rehabilitate him? I’m not sure it will. I think we are past that point now, and I think he’s reputation is so badly dented there is no coming back, certainly in any public role.” Without a trial to totally clear his name, and unable to speak about details of the settlement, “there will always people who wonder about his guilt or innocence, and he can’t do a darn thing about it. It will be with him for the rest of his life”. Hugo Vickers, a royal historian, said: “I think it’s been established he is not going to do any more royal duties. One, it’s been said, and secondly, unfortunately innocent or guilty, they don’t want him any more. He’s tarnished.” “I don’t think he is going to do anything more in the royal world, or the world of regiments or charities, because he is not a help to them, so he has to do something else. “He would be well advised to buy himself a house in his own name, because as far as I know Royal Lodge doesn’t actually belong to him and it’s not impossible he might be asked to move by somebody in the future. “And I’ve always said he ought to open an animal sanctuary, or do something with animals, because that’s what the British public love. It will be interesting to see where he is in five years’ time.”In a reversal of its previous policy, the Coachella music festival will not require Covid-19 vaccination, testing or masking when it resumes this April in southern California, the organizers said. The hugely popular festival saw up to 125,000 attendees leading up to the start of pandemic, during which it was cancelled three times. On Tuesday, Coachella and its sister festival, Stagecoach, due to take place the following week, announced the lifted restrictions on their websites. “As we prepare to spend an incredible weekend in the desert together we are announcing that there will be no vaccination, testing or masking requirements at Stagecoach 2022, in accordance with local guidelines,” the festival organizer said on its Twitter account. Similarly, Coachella updated the health and safety section of its website, and added: “There is no guarantee, express or implied, that those attending the festival will not be exposed to Covid-19”. It emphasized that Covid-19 is “an extremely contagious disease” and went on to recommend face coverings for concert-goers – though claiming it was doing so to help them protect themselves against desert dust. Both festivals are run by Goldenvoice, a division of the international concert organizer AEG Live, and are held at the Empire Polo Club in Indio, California, within weeks of each other. California’s department of public health strongly recommends that outdoor mega-events, such as music festivals or marathons, require attendees to show proof of vaccination or a negative Covid-19 test. It also asks attendees to “consider better fit and filtration for masks”, and recommends more effective alternatives to cloth masks, including N95, KN95 and KF94 surgical masks. Some on Twitter condemned the decision. One responded to Stagecoach’s tweet: “Celebrate the death of a few hundred thousand? You are amazing people.” Another wrote: “In other words, Coachella is setting up a superspreader event. Awesome.” “It will be renamed Covidchella,” another joked. The decision marks a reversal of policy. Last October, the festivals’ organizers said they would require attendees to show proof of Covid-19 vaccination or a negative test. This year’s incarnation of Coachella, which is scheduled to run on the weekends of 15-17 and 22-24 April , will be headlined by Harry Styles, Billie Eilish and Ye, while Thomas Rhett, Carrie Underwood and Luke Combs will headline Stagecoach, which runs from 29 April to 1 May. Last summer the Chicago-based musical festival Lollapalooza operated at full capacity, ushering in more than 400,000 concertgoers who were required to show either vaccination proof or a negative Covid-19 test. Lollapalooza organizers subsequently released data that it claimed showed infection rates were low among attendees, and declared that the festival was not a “super-spreader event”. This year, Lollapalooza organizers have said that “preventative health measures (eg proof of negative Covid-19 test or full Covid-19 vaccination, masks) may be required for this show.” Currently, most major music festivals scheduled in the US for later in the year, including the Miami-based Ultra and New York’s Governors Ball, are requiring all ticket holders to be vaccinated or show a negative Covid-19 test.WHAT’S THE MATTER, LIONEL MESSI? It was a fairly instructive evening in Paris last night. Leo Messi wandered around the Parc des Princes with a scribble of comic-strip-cloud misery constantly hovering above his head. With a faint but unmistakable air of hopelessness and ennui enveloping the poor little chap, the Fiver couldn’t help but notice his increasing resemblance to Charlie Brown. When he missed that penalty, we found ourselves hitting rewind, just to double check whether Lucy had moved the ball just before he kicked it. Good grief. Fortunately for Paris Saint-Germain, just as Messi was working through his existential crises, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé combined in the last minute of injury time to give the French side a slender first-leg advantage against Real Madrid and dig their teammate out of his penalty-hell hole. It felt epochal, though there was less a sense of the simple passing of a torch, more of one being cheekily back-flicked down the wing then confidently swept through someone’s legs in the circus-troupe style. Fortunately the torch handed over by Messi had nearly gone out, so there was never any real danger of Thibaut Courtois’ low-hanging fruit being accidentally flambéed. There was also the sense that if Manchester City ever get a shot at either of these otherwise ponderous teams, things could get ugly at warp speed. City utterly eviscerated Sporting in Lisbon, the tie as good as over in half an hour. Bernardo Silva in particular enjoyed himself, his two goals silencing the boos of fans who simply can’t forget his legendary stint at arch-rivals Benfica, for whom he made three appearances as a 19-year-old. Only a fool – or Thomas Tuchel, who has their number – would want to draw City in the next round. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Big Cup continues! Join Scott Murray for Internazionale 1-1 Liverpool, while Paul Doyle will be all over Red Bull Salzburg 2-4 Bayern Munich (both 8pm GMT). QUOTE OF THE DAY “I don’t think Roma were prepared for us in any way. They came late to the city. They didn’t have a training session. I don’t think they were ready for the weather, the conditions – or our players” – Bodø/Glimt’s Ulrik Saltnes has warned the Queen’s Celtic not to take things lightly when they meet in Big Pot on Thursday night, or a repeat of that 6-1 drubbing could be on. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly Extra is here! Join Max, Barry and co to break down the Big Cup action, with Manchester City and Kylian Mbappé looking magnifique. FIVER LETTERS “Now The Fiver has exclusively revealed that Ralf Rangnick, 63, is 63 years old, the question is, given their uninspiring form, will Manchester United still need him, will they still feed him, when he’s 64?” – Michael Smith. “What’s all this nonsense about Manchester United’s decline? They’re playing football on a Big Cup night, aren’t they?” – Maurice Devenney. “Re: beef between Fiver readers [Tuesday’s Fiver] How will Brian respond?! I haven’t looked forward to an edition of the Fiver this much since, well … ever. I was Team Copestake until he asked for the concept of a joke to be explained to a Fiver reader” – Alex Headey. “Regarding Ian’s response to my non-prize-winning letter, I would refer him to grammarly.com – ‘Not all questions are phrased as questions. Sometimes we phrase questions the same [snip! – Fiver Ed] … but in writing, you need a question mark to signal to readers that they should read the sentence as a question’” – Brian Ross. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Michael Smith. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Kylian Mbappé has said he is happy at PSG but left the door to Real Madrid firmly ajar. “I’ve not decided my future,” Mbappé trilled after scoring a late Big Cup winner against his potential future employers. Reports in Spain suggest that Florentino Pérez is so hopping mad about Real’s first-leg defeat, he’s already making plans to ditch Carlo Ancelotti in the summer. The Real Madrid head honcho is “very clear that the Italian is not the right person to rebuild” the club, according to Sport. Pep Guardiola insists Manchester City have plenty of room for improvement after their Big Cup thrashing of Sporting. “The result is a dream, but the performance – we can do better,” bragged Guardiola. City are also in early talks with Bernardo Silva to extend his contract, with the midfielder absolutely running things in Lisbon. Cristiano Ronaldo ended his 47-day goal drought with the opener in Manchester United’s 2-0 win over Brighton on Tuesday. “An amazing goal,” hooted 63-year-old Ralf Rangnick after Ronaldo edged ahead of Neal Maupay in the scoring charts. Uefa has been accused of exposing supporters to “crypto-mercenaries” after signing a deal with the fan token company Socios.com. “We are appalled by Uefa’s decision to team up with Socios, a company that monetises fan engagement at the expense of match-going fans,” said Football Supporters Europe. Dundee have sent manager James McPake skidding through the Door Marked Do One, despite back-to-back recent victories. The good news for McPake is that, with Tannadice just 200 yards down the road, he might end up at Dundee United if his former club threw him hard enough. Jess Fishlock scored twice and Natasha Harding added a third as Wales defeated Scotland 3-1 in the Pinatar Cup, advancing to the semi-finals of the friendly tournament in Spain. And a progress update: two years after resigning in the wake of a legal filing that claimed female players had less ability than their male counterparts, Carlos Cordeiro is running for his old gig as president of USA! USA!! USA!!! Soccer. STILL WANT MORE? England host Olympic champions Canada in the Arnold Clark Cup on Thursday – the Lionesses’ first real test under Sarina Wiegman. Louise Taylor sets the scene. Sid Lowe is in thrall to Kylian Mbappé after the Frenchman put on quite the audition against Real Madrid. Simone Inzaghi’s shrewd signings and tactical tweaks have put Inter back in the Champions League last 16 and will give them hope against Liverpool, writes Nicky Bandini. “City did not just put the tie to bed: they embalmed it, sealed it in a lead coffin, wreathed it in chains and dropped it somewhere off the north Atlantic coast” – it’s Jonathan Liew on a one-sided Big Cup night in Portugal. Mason Mount: Champions League winner and a double Wordle answer. The Knowledge tackles more of the big questions. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! KEEP ROLLIN’Winds of up to 100mph from Storm Eunice could pound coastal parts of west Wales and southwest England on Friday with forecasters warning of power cuts, large waves and significant travel disruption. “Friday is not a day to venture out,” said the BBC Wales weather presenter Sabrina Lee who added there was potential for rare red weather warnings to be issued. Storm Eunice will make Friday a treacherous day for most of the UK. The storm is hot on the heels of Storm Dudley which arrived on Wednesday afternoon with strong winds battering Northern Ireland, southern Scotland and northern England. As of 5pm, Capel Curig in Wales had experienced gusts of up to 81mph, with Emley Moore in Yorkshire seeing 74mph winds, while Drumalbin in Scotland was hit by 71mph gales. Eunice, the Met Office said, “could see even more dangerous weather conditions, with extremely strong winds expected for the southern half of the UK, especially in exposed coastal areas in the south and west.” Chief meteorologist Frank Saunders said an active jet stream was helping to drive the low pressure systems across the UK. “Significant disruption is possible from both Storm Dudley and Storm Eunice with strong winds one of the main themes of the current forecast,” he said. “Storm Eunice is expected to track eastwards from early on Friday, bringing the most significant winds to the central and southern areas of the UK, with some gusts possible in excess of 95mph in exposed coastal areas.” An amber, previously yellow, weather warning for Friday has been issued covering Wales, southern England and the Midlands. A yellow warning of wind and heavy snow as a result of Eunice on Friday was in place for northern England, southern Scotland and Northern Ireland. About 5cm of snow is predicted at low levels and up to 30cm above 250m. East Midlands Railway and London North Eastern Railway have warned customers to expect disruption to services in the coming days, with LNER asking passengers planning to travel on Friday to move their journey because of the weather. Rod Dennis, spokesperson for RAC Breakdown, said: “Drivers should take the fact the Met Office has upweighted its warnings from yellow to amber on Friday very seriously. Storm Eunice will make road conditions hazardous, so we strongly urge drivers not to risk it and instead consider delaying their journeys until the storm passes.” Quite how bad the predicted storms will be remains to be seen. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, said the coming days would be “very challenging” and urged everyone to plan their journeys in advance, exercise caution on the roads, and follow the latest travel advice. ScotRail said as a safety precaution the vast majority of services would be wound down by 4pm on Wednesday, when the worst of Storm Dudley was expected. Avanti West Coast urged passengers travelling north of Preston to do so before 4pm and said ticket restrictions would be removed. Wednesday tickets could be used on Thursday, it said. The Dudley amber weather warning included “injuries and danger to life” from large waves and beach material being thrown on to coastal roads and seafronts. Power firms said they were prepared after storms Arwen, Malik and Corrie caused widespread power cuts. Northern Powergrid said there was a relatively high likelihood of disruption to power supplies. Paul Glendinning, the director of policy and markets, said the company had ensured resources were in place to respond to the storms. “Our network control engineers have capability to restore power supplies remotely, switching electricity through alternative routes on our network wherever possible to get customers back on supply,” he said. “In parallel our frontline workforce will be deployed to carry out local switching and repairs to restore power as safely and quickly as the conditions allow.” Northumberland fire and rescue service urged people to be prepared. That included having batteries for torches and radios and some food that did not need cooking, charging phones and checking in on elderly and disabled neighbours. The chief fire officer, Paul Hedley, advised residents not to go out in the storms unless it was absolutely necessary. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution asked people to stay well back from stormy seas and cliff edges. If there was any light relief in the storm warnings it was in the names. David Baddiel tweeted: “I’m not convinced that a storm called Dudley, or indeed one called Eunice, presage a sense of devastation. I think they presage a sense that these storms might offer you a nice cup of tea.”Thousands of baptisms at a Catholic church in Arizona have been invalidated because a priest used the wrong words in performing the ceremony. Father Andres Arango resigned from the St Gregory parish church in Phoenix earlier this month after diocese leaders discovered he had mistakenly used the phrase “we baptize you” instead of “I baptize you” for years. His error means that countless baptisms – an irrevocable requirement for salvation in Catholic theology – will have to be performed again. And some churchgoers could find their marriages are not recognized. “An invalid baptism … invalidates any subsequent sacraments, especially confirmation, marriage, and holy orders,” the diocese of Phoenix said in a webpage intended to answer parishioners’ questions. In announcing the priest’s resignation, the bishop of Phoenix, Thomas Olmsted, urged churchgoers to “join me in praying for Fr Andres and for all of those who are going to be impacted by this unfortunate situation”. The contrite Father Arango, meanwhile, has sought forgiveness in his own message to the faithful. “It saddens me to learn that I have performed invalid baptisms throughout my ministry as a priest by regularly using an incorrect formula,” he wrote. “I deeply regret my error and how this has affected numerous people in your parish and elsewhere,” adding that he would remain a priest and “dedicate my energy and full time ministry to help remedy this and heal those affected”. The fount of knowledge on the matter is the Vatican’s 2020 congregation for the doctrine of the faith, which along with declaring Covid-19 vaccines “morally acceptable” also spelled out the correct words that needed to be used during baptisms. The congregation “affirms that baptisms administered with modified formulas are invalid, including: ‘We baptize you in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit’,” the Vatican announced. The declaration was deemed necessary following questions over whether such phrasing meant that three separate holy entities were involved in the baptisms, or only one. “The issue with using ‘We’ is that it is not the community that baptizes a person, rather, it is Christ, and Him alone, who presides at all of the sacraments, and so it is Christ Jesus who baptizes,” Olmsted wrote in a message posted to the Diocese of Phoenix website. “I do not believe Fr Andres had any intentions to harm the faithful or deprive them of the grace of baptism and the sacraments. On behalf of our local church, I too am sincerely sorry that this error has resulted in disruption to the sacramental lives of a number of the faithful.” He said the determination was made “after careful study by diocesan officials” and consultation with Catholic leaders in Rome. Arango, who was born in Brazil, became a priest in 1995 and moved to the US in 2001, working at one church in California, then three in the Phoenix area, most recently at St Gregory. The diocese of Phoenix website includes a form to register for a new baptism, and a spokesperson said that several churchgoers have already taken advantage. Any baptisms performed after 17 June last year, when the mistake was discovered, are considered valid, the diocese adds. But anyone who was married after being baptized by Arango is asked to call the diocese urgently. “If your baptism was invalid and you’ve received other sacraments, you may need to repeat some or all of those sacraments after you are validly baptized as well,” the website states.In 1953, when Norma Young was seven, her family became the first in their Glasgow tenement to get a TV set. It was a big deal – the Youngs had had to choose between a car or a TV. They opted for a 14in Ekco TV as deep as it was wide – and Norma was opened up to the world of The Woodentops and Andy Pandy, two shows that rapidly became her favourites. But at 6pm every evening the screen went blank, and Norma’s viewing was at an end. This wasn’t her parents regulating her TV time – it was the state. Abolished 65 years ago on Wednesday, the break in programming between 6pm and 7pm every night was a government policy, known colloquially as the toddlers’ truce. Most readers under the age of 70 will probably never have heard of this peculiar artefact, but those of Norma’s vintage certainly remember it. This paternalistic approach to broadcasting was seen at the time as being socially responsible, with the idea being that a TV-free hour would, as Time magazine put it, allow parents to “wring out their moppets and put them to bed”. It was also in place to ensure that children didn’t accidentally stray into the dangerous world of adult television, where their fragile minds could be corrupted by the unutterable filth of Dixon of Dock Green or This Is Your Life. To modern parents, struggling to combat their children’s unfettered access to social media at 11pm on a school night, the idea of the toddlers’ truce might seem a trifle quaint. But in the early 1950s, it was simply accepted as part of life. “We didn’t think about it really,” says Norma. “You just got on with it. The TV stopped broadcasting at six o’clock, and that was my cue to have a bath and get into my jammies.” Admittedly, this was against a backdrop of TV that was broadcast for less than 12 hours every day. The rules, laid out by the postmaster general as the post office oversaw telecommunications and broadcasting, stated that the BBC (and later ITV) could broadcast between 9am and 11pm, but with only two hours shown before 1pm. The rules were even more draconian at weekends. Only eight hours of broadcasting was permitted on Saturdays, and only seven and three-quarter hours on Sundays. And on Sundays, no children’s programmes were permitted between 2pm and 4pm, lest it prevent youngsters from studying the Bible. Try getting your kid off TikTok to go and read Deuteronomy this weekend and see what happens. LP Hartley famously opened his novel The Go-Between with the line: “The past is a foreign country; they do things differently there.” That was true nowhere more than television in the 1950s, and, viewed through the prism of modern sensibilities, some of the programming appears positively antediluvian. There was a children’s TV segment called Watch With Mother, the implicit message being that good mothers stayed at home while fathers went out and worked. But by the mid-50s, in spite of the prevailing conservatism of the age, the toddlers’ truce was under threat, thanks to the booming popularity of TV as a medium. In 1950, only 350,000 homes in the UK had televisions. By 1960, the figure had risen to almost three-quarters of homes. When only a handful of the population were affected by the hour’s break, it seemed an irrelevance, but when tens of millions had their entertainment interrupted, it became an issue. The second front that opened up against the toddlers’ truce came with the formation of ITV in 1955. (With Ant and Dec’s births still decades away, you wonder how they filled the airtime.) The BBC had always been rather in favour of the hour’s break. Funded by the licence fee, fewer hours of broadcast meant lower costs. But ITV was funded by advertising revenue. Having to shut down for an hour every day at 6pm denied it access to a lucrative teatime audience. And so the Independent Television Authority (ITA) began to lobby for the truce to be dropped. In the early 50s, the Conservative government’s postmaster general had been Herbrand Sackville. In spite of his seemingly progressive politics earlier in life – he was the first hereditary peer to join the Labour party by 1924 was a Labour cabinet minister at the age of 23 – he broadly agreed with the evening break in transmission. But in April 1955, he was replaced by Charles Hill, who took a rather different tack. Hill later recalled: “This restriction seemed to me absurd and I said so. It was the responsibility of parents, not the state, to put their children to bed at the right time … I invited the BBC and the ITA to agree to its abolition.” The BBC definitively did not agree to it – or even to a proposed compromise of a 30-minute break. But a groundswell of opposition was building, characterised by an editorial in the Daily Mirror that stated: “If parents can’t drag their children away from the TV screen, there is something wrong with the parents, not the TV programme.” With the BBC resolutely intransigent on the issue, Hill asked parliament to intervene, and on 31 October 1956, the abolition of the toddlers’ truce was agreed. Even then, the BBC and the ITA couldn’t agree on a date for it to finish, so Hill decided himself: Saturday 16 February 1957. The first programme the BBC broadcast in the slot was called Six-Five Special, an entertainment show with a heavy leaning towards rock’n’roll. On weekdays, the vacancy was filled by the news and current affairs show Tonight. With its informal approach, and willingness to embrace both the serious and the trivial (one early segment involved a dog that smoked a pipe), it was a precursor to The One Show, if The One Show was exclusively presented by white men in suits. The show’s presenter, Cliff Michelmore, ended each night’s broadcast with the phrase: “That’s all for tonight, the next Tonight will be tomorrow night. Until then, goodnight.” Years later, the great Alan Whicker, who cut his broadcasting teeth on Tonight, commented: “The BBC was still embedded in its civil service ethos, which took broadcasting off the air every night between 6pm and 7pm, in case viewing parents had trouble getting their children to bed. Can you imagine? We were then writing the grammar of television, so that quaint, hour-long toddlers’ truce of 1957 did not long survive Tonight’s arrival. [In fact, it preceded it by two days.] Soon, viewers were being treated as grownups, where the next Tonight was always tomorrow night and you could make your own house rules in your own home.” The toddlers’ truce was at an end. At least, almost at an end. A vestige of it survived for another year. On Sundays, transmission stopped between 6.15pm and 7.25pm, to allow viewers to attend church. By 1958, however, religious programming was allowed in what became known as the God slot. In 1961, Songs of Praise was launched. Remarkably, the fabric of the nation remained intact in spite of TV now transmitting between 6pm and 7pm at night. Indeed, an expected backlash from parents unable to get their square-eyed small people into bed never materialised. The BBC received a grand total of six complaints on the subject. Norma Young’s family were not among those who complained. While she admits that “they didn’t really enjoy us watching too much telly”, her dad was delighted. “My father loved television. He would watch any old rubbish.” When the adult programmes kicked in, Norma was sent to her bed to read – although she was occasionally allowed to stay up later to watch nature programmes presented by a nice young chap called Attenborough, still going strong 65 years later, with the toddlers’ truce now merely a strange footnote in TV history. • This article was amended on 17 February 2022 to make clear that while his early political roots were in the Labour party, Herbrand Sackville was postmaster general in a Conservative government.All nations of the UK will offer Covid-19 vaccines to all 5-11 year olds, with England, Northern Ireland and Scotland all joining Wales in offering the jabs to younger children on Wednesday. Britain has been slower than some other countries in offering the shots to this age group. Many EU member states began offering vaccination to all children aged five to 11 in December, but progress has been patchy, with authorities blaming hesitancy among parents and some doctors as well as mixed messaging from experts. Spain, whose vaccination campaign is one of the bloc’s most successful – more than 82% of the country’s population is double jabbed, against an EU average of 71.7% (and 71.4% in the UK) – has given 56.3% of five- to 11-year-olds a first dose and is moving on to second doses. Experts note that the pace of this rollout is slower than that of the adult vaccination programme, with an average of about 3,000 children a day being jabbed over the past week. “There’s no denying people have become weary with the pandemic, there are doubts among parents, contradictory messages from some experts and a perception that the risks are lower for children and young people,” Amós García, of the Spanish Vaccinology Association, told El País last week. Denmark has given about 47% of younger children at least one dose. Other countries are advancing more slowly. Barely 22% of younger children have been jabbed in Italy, compared with more than 80% of those aged 12 to 19. Roberto Burioni, a professor of microbiology and virology at Vita-Salute San Raffaele University in Milan, said it was important for health authorities to continue to “push for a higher rate among children, since they spread the virus”. Germany’s vaccination regulator recommends jabs against Covid-19 for all children aged 12 to 17, more than 60% of whom are fully vaccinated, but in the five to 11 cohort it has advised vaccination only for those with pre-existing health conditions. Younger children without underlying conditions can get vaccinated if their parents wish, but there is no explicit recommendation. Of 5.3 million children in the five to 11 age group in Germany, only 13.6% have had at least one shot of vaccine so far. France, which is also in the EU’s leading group for vaccination in adults and older children, with more than 77% of the total population double jabbed, has made even slower progress with younger children: less than 5% have received a first dose. “The individual benefit for children is so significant that we really have to go much further, much faster, much stronger” the health minister, Olivier Véran, said this month during a video conference with family doctors and paediatricians. Experts point to hesitancy among parents, with opinion polls showing as many as 60% of those with younger children are reluctant to vaccinate five- to 11-year-olds. Official messaging in the first wave of the pandemic that children were not at serious risk from the virus and did not play a role in spreading it has not helped. Throughout France’s recent double coronavirus wave – fuelled by the Delta and Omicron variants – children have often been the most infected age group and schools the greatest single source of contamination. While they remain at far lower risk of serious illness or death than adults, more than 7% of all six- to 10-year-olds in France were infected with coronavirus every week in January and early February, data shows, and more than 100 children aged nine and under were in intensive care with Covid-19. “We need to urgently review the messaging,” said Sydney Sebban, a paediatrician. “Convince parents that Omicron is absolutely not anodyne, that unvaccinated children can develop very severe forms, and that even if they have had Covid, getting vaccinated gives them longer-term protection against a future variant.” A few EU countries have decided not to offer vaccines to younger children. Sweden’s health agency announced at the end of last month that it had decided against recommending vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds because it said the benefits did not outweigh the risks. “With the knowledge we have today, a low risk for serious disease for kids, we don’t see any clear benefit,” said an agency official, Britta Bjorkholm, adding that the decision would be reviewed if the data changed or a new variant emerged, and that children in high-risk groups would still be advised to get vaccinated. Outside Europe, the US has vaccinated about 10 million five- to 11-year-olds. The Food and Drug Administration has delayed until April a decision on whether to approve the Pfizer/BioNTech shot for children between six months and four years of age, saying it wanted to wait for more data from clinical trials. Additional reporting by Philip Oltermann, Sam Jones and Angela GiuffridaThe American humorist PJ O’Rourke, who has died aged 74 of lung cancer, was a writer of sharp wit that ranged from dry to lusciously over the top, but was always leavened by a measure of self deprecation that stopped it from being cruel or harsh. In the political satire that dominated his later writing, he became that rarest of things, a funny conservative. His political writing was based on his early change of tack from 1960s lefty to what he could call the libertarian right, libertarian being the escape hatch for those trapped within the Republican party. His changing stance mirrored the course of his career, from the satire of the National Lampoon and hipness of Rolling Stone to more earnest outlets such as the Atlantic Monthly and the rightwing Cato Institute. He had been instrumental in making the Atlantic Monthly Press a success; its editor Morgan Entrekin called him “one of the major voices of his generation”. The recurrent theme in his writing was his place in his generation – the baby boomers. “My generation spoiled everything for you,” he told younger readers. “It has always been the prerogative of young people to look and act weird and shock grownups. But my generation exhausted the earth’s resources of the weird ... all you had left was to tattoo your faces and pierce your tongues. Ouch. That must have hurt. I apologise.” He was born in Toledo, Ohio, to Delfine (nee Loy), a housewife and later a school administrator, and Clifford O’Rourke, a car salesman. He went to Miami University in Oxford, Ohio – “the one where you can’t major in windsurfing” – and took a master’s in English (1970) at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, where he began writing for a local underground paper, Harry, and the Rip-Off Review of Western Culture, which got him a gig with the National Lampoon magazine in 1973. He made his mark quickly, working on the stage show Lemmings, which made stars of John Belushi, Chevy Chase and Christopher Guest, and co-writing with the Lampoon founder Doug Kenney The National Lampoon High School Yearbook, based on a piece by Michael O’Donoghue. There was a strong Irish-American wise-guys at the back of the class vibe at the Lampoon. Kenney also hailed from Ohio, but had attended a private school; the record of the fictional class of 1964 at a high school in Dacron (the name a cross between Ohio cities Dayton and Akron, but also a popular brand of cheap polyester cloth) was based squarely on O’Rourke’s days at Toledo’s DeVilbiss high. The yearbook itself was purportedly the property of one Larry Kroger, who would reappear in 1978 as the naive protagonist of the film National Lampoon’s Animal House. By the time Animal House became a hit, O’Rourke was the editor-in-chief of the Lampoon, charged with “the Squaresville task of making the magazine show a profit”. In the 2018 biopic of Kenney, A Futile and Stupid Gesture, O’Rourke is portrayed in just that light – but his empathy with squares was crucial to the yearbook’s success. Now he found himself out of place in a “clubby and snitty” atmosphere which remained as the creative core of the Lampoon moved on to Hollywood and Saturday Night Live. He turned the magazine, according to one critic, into “comedy you can jack off to”. In 1981 he went freelance, writing for the top-payers such as Vanity Fair and Playboy. His key Lampoon essay “How To Drive Fast on Drugs While Getting Your Wing-Wang Squeezed and Not Spill Your Drink”, was reprinted in his first book, Republican Party Reptile (1987), a homage to Hunter Thompson, the chief exponent of gonzo journalism, that saw him appointed “foreign desk chief” at Rolling Stone, the ultimate hip boomer journal. His writing moved from social satire to politics and he reported from war zones, where his knack for satirising the absurd found its true metier. His 1988 collection, Holidays in Hell, is perhaps the best of his 20 books. He became a celebrity, without slowing down in the least, but as I can attest after surviving a London evening with him and my then ABC television colleague Charles Glass, O’Rourke was one of those rare people who was nicer in private, going beyond his public affability, which often surprised those expecting combative wit. In 1991 O’Rourke interviewed Bill Clinton, along with his Rolling Stone colleagues Thompson and William Greider, and its publisher, Jann Wenner. He quickly slid Clinton into identity politics via the Lampoon yearbook template. Clinton’s favourite Beatle was Paul McCartney: Clinton was the “band geek” who paid attention in class. For a short time O’Rourke held down the right side of Point/Counterpoint on CBS’s flagship news show 60 Minutes, opposite the equally funny and acerbic Molly Ivins, but they were too brilliant a mix to last on network TV. As he once wrote, “no humorist is under any obligation to provide answers”. That voice could lose its affability when writing for the Cato Institute, but the new millennium presented new problems, which his work for the Atlantic laid out clearly. A 2004 essay on listening to the radio host Rush Limbaugh shouting to his echo chamber of “ditto heads” led him to search for a leftwing equivalent, but when he could not find one he wound up blaming the entire media landscape. He complained in another essay you could not tell the “liberals who once led Vietnam protests in clown pants from the car ads”, ironically putting his young self and his father into the same boat. His libertarian conservatism reached its apotheosis with Donald Trump’s taking over the Republican party, reflected in his 2016 book of election coverage How the Hell Did This Happen? He endorsed Hillary Clinton, because “she’s wrong about absolutely everything, but she’s wrong within normal parameters”. Although he claimed in 1992 he had “given up” the 60s, Trump was exactly the sort of spoiled preppy boomer O’Rourke could despise. But he might have looked back to his childhood, and Walt Kelly’s comic strip Pogo. It was Pogo who said: “We have met the enemy and he is us.” In 1990 O’Rourke married Amy Lumet, daughter of the film director Sidney and granddaughter of the entertainer Lena Horne. They divorced three years later, and in 1995 he married Tina Mallon. She and their children, Olivia, Clifford and Elizabeth, survive him. • PJ (Patrick Jake) O’Rourke, writer, born 14 November 1947; died 15 February 2022Re the 50 gigs that changed music (11 February), my “I can’t believe you missed this one” is Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band at the Hammersmith Odeon in London in 1975. Starting with the wonderful Thunder Road, it was two hours of brilliant music – taking in Jungleland, Rosalita and, of course, Born to Run. He’s still the Boss, playing marathon gigs in his 70s. Orlando Goodden Frome, Somerset • Andrew Clements (BBC 100: Celebrating the BBC Orchestras review, 14 February) writes that Hamilton Harty’s Piano Concerto is “the only piano concerto I know that includes a tam-tam in its orchestration”. Bartók’s Piano Concerto No 1 and Ravel’s two concertos also include tam-tams. Roger Mortimore Madrid, Spain • To get to sleep, my husband counts the number of people he knew from work who were divorced (Letters, 14 February). He gets to over 100. He is a retired police officer. Katherine Hind Stocksfield, Northumberland • At 87, I count backwards from 100 in sevens when I can’t get to sleep, and so reassure myself that I don’t yet have dementia. Betty Clarke Malvern, Worcestershire • I, too, am pleased about the Post Office inquiry (Letters, 15 February). But as inquiries go, I wonder whether we will ever get a full, judge-led inquiry concerning our 20 years in Afghanistan. This was possibly our biggest political, military and intelligence failure in modern times, with enormous cost in lives and money. Dr Nigel Mellor Newcastle upon Tyne • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Here’s a roundup of the key developments from the day: Keir Starmer said it was “a mistake to end free Covid tests” – a measure which Rishi Sunak is pushing – though he stopped short of calling for mandatory isolation to continue in England beyond next week. The Labour leader said in an interview with the Guardian he would reserve judgment on ending isolation until these proposals were put forward next week. Ministers’ plans to scale back free PCR Covid tests could weaken the UK’s defences if a new variant of the virus emerged that resulted in “significant new waves” of cases, a group representing local public health chiefs has warned. The group said that despite the government being expected to roll back the last remaining Covid laws from next week, coronavirus was “yet to become endemic”, and added it was “difficult to predict when this state may be attained”. Inflation in the UK increased to the highest rate for three decades in January as the impact of rising energy bills fed into a wide range of goods and services, adding to the squeeze on household living standards. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, responded by saying: “We understand the pressures people are facing with the cost of living. These are global challenges but we have listened to people’s concerns.” Workers are entitled to ask for a pay rise after a gruelling pandemic and faced with a severe cost-of-living crisis, Keir Starmer has said as official figures showed wages falling in real terms. The Labour leader’s call came in contrast to comments by the Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, who warned this month that wage rises would fuel inflation Dozens of Conservative MPs had been in private contact with Labour leader Keir Starmer expressing dismay at Boris Johnson’s false claim he had failed to prosecute the child abuser Jimmy Savile. The accusation – which the prime minister has “clarified” but never withdrawn – caused many Conservative MPs to get in touch with Starmer privately to express distaste. The Cabinet Office has sought to clarify with the Metropolitan police whether it will publish more than 300 photos received as part of the inquiry into alleged parties in Downing Street and across Whitehall. The force is unlikely to reveal the names of any individuals hit with fines linked to the 12 gatherings under investigation, as the identity of people issued with a fixed penalty notice (FPN) is not usually disclosed by police. The Scottish government has confirmed it will offer Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 years, adding to the pressure on UK ministers to do so in England. The Scottish decision follows an announcement on Tuesday from the devolved government in Wales that it would follow unpublished advice from the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) that all children in that age group should be jabbed. Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance had not seen any evidence of a Russian withdrawal from the Ukraine border. Arriving at the meeting of Nato defence ministers in Brussels, he said: “So far we have not seen any de-escalation on the ground – on the contrary, it appears that Russia continues the military buildup.” Russia has the ability to “overwhelm” Ukraine despite claims to have pulled back some forces from the border, defence secretary Ben Wallace has warned. He urged caution about the “direction of travel from the Kremlin” as efforts to resolve the crisis by diplomatic means continued. Nato defence ministers have reaffirmed their support for the “territorial integrity and sovereignty” of Ukraine. In a statement released on Wednesday afternoon, they warned that any further Russian aggression against the country will have “massive consequences” and “carry a high price”. Thanks so much for joining me today and for all your tweets, emails and comments below the line. Sorry I couldn’t reply to everyone. We’re closing this blog but I’ll be back again tomorrow and we have some other live blogs which are still live. Our dedicated blog on the Russia/Ukraine crisis is here: Meanwhile our global coronavirus blog is here: Nato defence ministers have reaffirmed their support for the “territorial integrity and sovereignty” of Ukraine. In a statement released on Wednesday afternoon, they warned that any further Russian aggression against the country would have “massive consequences” and “carry a high price”. The ministers said: Nato remains committed to the foundational principles underpinning European security, including that each nation has the right to choose its own security arrangements. We reaffirm our support for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders. As stated previously, any further Russian aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and carry a high price. Nato will continue to closely co-ordinate with relevant stakeholders and other international organisations including the EU. Warm words from Rishi Sunak won’t help fix cost of living crisis, our economics editor Larry Elliott writes in this column for Viewpoint: Every month the story is the same. The annual inflation rate goes up and the chancellor puts out a statement saying he understands life is tough for the British public. The only real difference between this month and last was that, in the interim, Rishi Sunak announced his package of measures to soften – but by no means fully offset – the blow from the huge increase in energy costs households are facing in April. The whopping 54% increase to the average domestic bill will alone add 1.6 percentage points to the annual inflation rate, making the latest figures released by the Office for National Statistics for the cost of living in January something of a temporary respite. Even so, there was still a rise in the annual rate – as measured by the consumer prices index – from 5.4% in December to 5.5% last month. The figure was actually a bit worse than it looked because without a temporary fall in petrol prices it would have been higher. Read the full column here: As the Met police continue to investigate the illegal parties at No 10 and the Cabinet Office, Boris Johnson’s legal advisers are working on his defence. According to ITV News, they believe that if he can prove he did not get drunk at any of the events he allegedly attended, and resumed normal prime ministerial duties afterwards, he may be able to make the case they were part of his working day. The prime minister previously admitted he was present for 25 minutes at the notorious “bring your own booze” gathering in the Downing Street garden in May 2020, but said he thought it was a “work event” to thank staff for their efforts during the pandemic. Downing Street has also admitted that staff “gathered briefly” in the cabinet room in June 2020 in what was reportedly a surprise get-together for the prime minister. The Met has sent a questionnaire to approximately 50 people as it conducts its inquiry, titled Operation Hillman, which is examining whether Covid restrictions were broken in Downing Street and across Whitehall. Johnson received his questionnaire on Friday. Downing Street has since said his responses will not be made public. Asked about reports Johnson requested that police write directly to his lawyer, rather than to him, No 10 said on Monday it would not go into any more detail about “what legal advice the prime minister has or hasn’t received”. The Cabinet Office has sought to clarify with the Metropolitan police whether it will publish more than 300 photos received as part of the inquiry into alleged parties in Downing Street and across Whitehall. The force is unlikely to reveal the names of any individuals hit with fines linked to the 12 gatherings under investigation, as the identity of people issued with a fixed penalty notice (FPN) is not usually disclosed by police. It is understood the cabinet office is now seeking to clarify whether the photos sent to the Met as part of its inquiry will be made public, given that they could potentially identify those involved, PA News reports. The Met declined to comment, and it is not thought the cabinet office has yet received a response to its query. More than 300 photos and 500 pages of information were given to the force by the cabinet office last month. ITV News reported the query was lodged by the department’s liaison unit, which is separate to senior civil servant Sue Gray’s investigations team. The cabinet office said it will not comment on an ongoing investigation. It follow reports that a Q&amp;A sheet was sent by the liaison unit to government officials caught up in the inquiry, detailing certain aspects of what information will and will not be published by the police over the course of their investigation. The document, cited by the Daily Telegraph, reportedly suggests the number of fines issued for the alleged parties – if any – will be made public by the Met. Scotland Yard is also expected to publish its reasons for issuing any tickets, according to the advice sheet. However, officials were reportedly told the names of those receiving FPNs – if such fines are imposed – will not be revealed and their details will not be shared with the civil service. The Met confirmed a document had been drawn up by the cabinet office to brief staff and it was “consulted on those aspects relevant to its investigation and legal processes”. Meanwhile, it has been reported that the prime minister is working with a personal lawyer on his response to the police investigation. The Scottish government has confirmed it will offer Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 years, adding to the pressure on UK ministers to do so in England. The Scottish decision follows an announcement on Tuesday from the devolved government in Wales that it would follow unpublished advice from the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) that all children in that age group should be jabbed. Scottish government officials have started conversations with health boards about how to deliver the vaccinations, following advice circulated by the JCVI to all the UK’s governments earlier this month. The UK government, which runs health services in England but also oversees the UK-wide purchase and distribution of the vaccines, has delayed making a decision on the recommendation. Ministers in all four governments normally immediately follow JCVI advice but on this occasion, with the Treasury pressing hard for steep cuts in Covid test spending, have decided the need to vaccinate children is not urgent. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said: I can confirm that ministers have considered this draft advice and are content to accept its recommendations. Throughout the pandemic it has been our intention that we follow the clinical and scientific evidence available to us and I’d like to once again thank the JCVI for their hard work in scrutinising the science and providing clear guidance. Discussions with health boards on the best way of delivering vaccinations to five- to 11-year-olds have already begun. These will continue and we will provide further information when this approach is finalised. In the meantime, parents and carers of children aged between five and 11 need not do anything. This draft advice does not affect children in the five- to 11-year-old age group who have specific medical conditions which place them at greater risk from Covid-19. This group is already being vaccinated. Read the full story here: Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said it was “very important that we stand united with our allies, united with Nato” against “Russian aggression”. He added: It’s also important that in the UK our political parties are united against Russian aggression. But I do want to see the government going further in relation to sanctions. I don’t think they’ve used the powers they’ve already got as much as they should have done and I don’t think they’ve looked closely enough at their own donations. Starmer added that any donations to the Conservative party that have any link to Putin should be looked at “very, very carefully”. He said: I want to see further sanctions put in place as quickly as possible. We’ve been waiting for an economic crime bill for some time now, that needs to happen, it needs to happen fast and we will push the government all the way on this. Keir Starmer said the settlement between Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre had ended “a sorry chapter” but it was important not to lose sight of sexual abuse victims. He said: I’m not going to comment on the details of the case that’s now been settled. In any of these issues, whoever is involved, my starting point is always the same – which is to think about the victims of sexual abuse. Across the world there are many, many victims and we should always start from that perspective. Whatever the rights and wrongs of this settlement – and it does seem to end a sorry chapter – I think it’s very important we don’t lose sight, don’t lose focus, on the victims of sexual abuse. Russia has the ability to “overwhelm” Ukraine despite claims to have pulled back some forces from the border, defence secretary Ben Wallace has warned. He urged caution about the “direction of travel from the Kremlin” as efforts to resolve the crisis by diplomatic means continued. Wallace, who is in Brussels for talks with fellow Nato defence ministers, said there needs to be “clear de-escalation” by the removal of Russian troops from the border, PA News reports. Russia’s defence ministry has claimed troops are returning to base following the conclusion of military exercises, with units crossing out of Crimea on Wednesday. But Wallace said Russia will be judged by its actions but he has not seen “evidence of withdrawal”. Reports based on US intelligence sources had suggested Wednesday could see Vladimir Putin launch his invasion, but Wallace said he has never talked about a specific date on which troops might cross the border. He told Sky News: I’ve never talked about a date because in all the intelligence I’ve seen dates are not the issue, the issue here is the significant amount of forces. But he added “there are definitely dates in the mix” and the Russians “haven’t taken the foot off the gas”. Wallace said Nato will work to “reduce tension and try and de-escalate” but Russia has a “force that would overwhelm Ukraine should it be deployed, and I think that’s why we need to see clear de-escalation by the removal of troops at the same time as enter into discussion with Russia”. He said there are more than 100 battalion tactical groups of the Russian ground forces - some “60% of the entire Russian land combat power” - on the borders of Ukraine. The defence secretary warned that there are “130,000-plus troops, both in Belarus and indeed Ukraine, but also out at sea there’s effectively a significant flotilla of Russian and amphibious landing ships, and indeed war ships and missile ships, and from a Ukrainian point of view they’re fairly surrounded by a very large force of ready troops”. Ministers’ plans to scale back free PCR Covid tests could weaken the UK’s defences if a new variant of the virus emerges that results in “significant new waves” of cases, a group representing local public health chiefs has warned. Before a meeting of cabinet ministers and the prime minister later this week to discuss the “learning to live with Covid” strategy, the Association of Public Health Directors (APHD) said that forcing people to pay for lateral flow tests would also have a “detrimental impact” on take-up, particularly among disadvantaged communities. The group said that despite the government being expected to roll back the last remaining Covid laws from next week, coronavirus was “yet to become endemic”, and added it was “difficult to predict when this state may be attained”. “Significant levels of cases, hospitalisations and deaths continue to disrupt and devastate individuals, public services and the economy,” a briefing note said. “There remains a degree of unpredictability about the course ahead.” Whitehall sources told the Guardian on Monday that ministers were pressing ahead with plans to start winding down Covid testing and payments for isolation from next week to save more than £10bn. In a veiled criticism of Boris Johnson, given his investigation by the Metropolitan police for allegedly attending a series of lockdown-breaking parties, the APHD said political leaders had “a responsibility to model good behaviour and foster an environment of trust and collective spirit”. While the group said it wanted to “avoid strict measures and lockdowns”, it called on Johnson to “chart a sensible path between the extremes of lockdowns and letting the virus rip”. Read the full story here: Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance had not seen any evidence of a Russian withdrawal. Arriving at the meeting of the alliance’s defence ministers in Brussels, he said: So far we have not seen any de-escalation on the ground – on the contrary, it appears that Russia continues the military buildup. He added that “we have not seen any withdrawal of Russian forces”, and “that contradicts the message of diplomatic efforts” from Moscow. Stoltenberg said: We will continue to convey a very clear message to Russia that we are ready to sit down and discuss with them but at the same time we are prepared for the worst. And if Russia once again invades Ukraine, they will pay a high price. Dame Clare Moriarty, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, has called for more support from the government as more and more people are hit by the cost of living crisis. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Moriarty said the organisation is “really worried” about the people coming for help, adding: “We think that for people on low incomes, the government needs to provide more support. She said: More and more people are finding that they can’t get to the end of the month and money runs out before the next cheque comes in. They can’t pay for gas and electric, so we’re hearing about people who are living and sleeping in a single room, who are using coats and hot water bottles to keep warm, and people having to turn to food banks to get by. That’s a problem that’s happening right now and, as we were hearing prices are still rising, this is a problem that’s going to get worse before it gets better. Moriarty added that the current government support is not enough for those on the lowest incomes, saying: There needs to be more support and it needs to come through the benefit system to the people who need it most. Responding to the responded to the inflation data released today, Pat McFadden, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said: With inflation expected to rise even further, and working people already feeling the crunch, the Tories should have taken action by now. Instead, the chancellor’s buy now pay later scheme on energy bills loads up debt for future years, while his tax rises will only make matters worse. Workers are entitled to ask for a pay rise after a gruelling pandemic and faced with a severe cost-of-living crisis, Keir Starmer has said as official figures showed wages falling in real terms. The Labour leader’s call came in contrast to comments by the Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, who warned this month that wage rises would fuel inflation, saying the UK needed to see “restraint in pay bargaining, otherwise it will get out of control”. Data from the Office for National Statistics on Tuesday showed real wages fell behind increasing inflation, which is likely to exacerbate the cost-of-living squeeze from rising prices, high energy bills and a national insurance rise this April. In veiled criticism of Bailey’s comments on pay, Starmer said it was reasonable for workers to demand higher wages but said he wanted to put the main onus on the government to tackle the cost of living. “It’s very difficult to universally say to people – you are not entitled to even ask for a pay rise,” he said. Bailey’s remarks, which were prompted by fears that higher wage demands could push companies to increase prices further, sparked widespread criticism including from trade unions and the chair of Tesco, plus a rebuke from Downing Street. Read more here: Dozens of Conservative MPs had been in private contact with Labour leader Keir Starmer expressing dismay at Boris Johnson’s false claim he had failed to prosecute the child abuser Jimmy Savile. The accusation – which the prime minister has “clarified” but never withdrawn – was a moment for many Conservative MPs. Though only a handful have spoken publicly, Starmer told the Guardian that many had been in touch with him privately to express distaste. “You can see the disquiet because as he drags people down by this way of acting.” Starmer told my colleague Jessica Elgot that it was clear the public were taking a new look at Johnson’s character since his repeated obfuscations over Downing Street lockdown breaches. Has he changed his mind since saying in his Labour conference speech that Johnson was not bad? He said: I don’t know how people judge whether someone’s a bad person or not. What I do know is he’s not fit to run the country. And it’s not surprising that more people think he should now resign than don’t. So that’s a marked change, obviously, in four or five months. Read more from the interview here: The chancellor of the exchequer, Rishi Sunak, has responded to the inflation data. He said: We understand the pressures people are facing with the cost of living. These are global challenges but we have listened to people’s concerns and recently stepped in to provide millions of households with up to 350 to help with rising energy bills. We’re also helping people on the lowest incomes keep more of what they earn by cutting the universal credit taper rate and freezing alcohol and fuel duties to keep costs down. In total, we’re providing support with the cost of living worth over 20 billion across this financial year and next. As my colleague Graeme Wearden points out on his live blog, that £350 of help includes a £200 cut to energy bills in October ... which will be recouped with £40 added to bills for the following five years (whether you got the £200 saving or not!) Plus, lowering the UC taper rate has only mitigated the impact of ending the £20 per week uplift to Universal Credit last autumn, and won’t help families out of work. Inflation in the UK increased to the highest rate for three decades in January as the impact of rising energy bills fed into a wide range of goods and services, adding to the squeeze on household living standards. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said the consumer prices index (CPI) measure of inflation increased to 5.5% in January from 5.4% a month earlier, driven by prices for clothing, footwear and furniture. City economists had forecast the inflation rate to remain at 5.4%. The ONS said inflation was last higher in March 1992, when it stood at 7.1%. With inflation predicted to hit more than 7% in April, the latest increase is expected to heap further pressure on the government, while putting the spotlight on the Bank of England to raise interest rates again. Business and consumer groups warned the rise in prices since last summer would harm living standards and push more firms towards insolvency. The CBI lobby group said the government needed to react by cutting taxes on investment to boost productivity and allow businesses to award sustainable annual wage rises. Suren Thiru, the chief economist at the British Chambers of Commerce, said he expected the Bank to raise rates at its March meeting to 0.75%. Threadneedle Street raised rates in December and February to the current level of 0.5% against a backdrop of surging inflationary pressure. However, Thiru warned that tightening monetary policy too quickly risked undermining confidence and the wider recovery. “[It] will do little to curb the global factors behind the current inflationary surge,” he said. “More needs to be done to limit the unprecedented rise in costs facing businesses, including financial support for those struggling with soaring energy bills and delaying April’s national insurance rise.” Read more here: You can also follow our business live blog here: Defence secretary Ben Wallace said that “until we see a proper de-escalation, I think we should all be cautious about the direction of travel from the Kremlin”. He told Sky News: I think what we haven’t seen is evidence of withdrawal that has been claimed by the Kremlin, in fact we’ve seen continued build-up of things like field hospitals and strategic weapons systems. I think the reality is ... that we’ll take Russia at its word, but we’ll judge them on their actions ... and until we see a proper de-escalation, I think we should all be cautious about the direction of travel from the Kremlin. Wallace has warned that Russia has a “a very significant force ... that would overwhelm Ukraine should it be deployed”. On the latest intelligence, he said: There’s over 100 battalion tactical groups of the Russian ground forces, that’s 60% of the entire Russian land combat power on the borders of Ukraine. 130,000-plus troops, both in Belarus and indeed Ukraine, but also out at sea there’s effectively a significant flotilla of Russian and amphibious landing ships, and indeed war ships and missile ships, and from a Ukrainian point of view they’re fairly surrounded by a very large force of ready troops. That continues, they haven’t taken the foot of the gas. He added: That’s why we’re all here at Nato today and tomorrow to try and work together to reduce tensions and try and de-escalate, but it’s a very significant force, it’s a force that would overwhelm Ukraine should it be deployed and I think that’s why we need to see clear de-escalation by the removal of troops at the same time as enter into discussion with Russia. Keir Starmer said it was “a mistake to end free Covid tests” – a measure which Rishi Sunak is pushing – though he stopped short of calling for mandatory isolation to continue in England beyond next week. No 10, the Treasury and the health department will decide this week on a “living with Covid strategy” due to be unveiled on Monday, which will involve phasing out free Covid testing and all but ending the tracing system. The Labour leader said in an interview with The Guardian he would reserve judgment on ending isolation until these proposals are put forward next week. Whitehall sources say the Treasury is driving efforts to reduce costs from an estimated annual £15bn, with an opening suggestion of cutting the budget by more than 90%, to £1.3bn. It is unclear whether the changes will apply to England only or UK-wide. Under plans for the “living with Covid” strategy, from Monday 21 February people will no longer be advised to test regularly if they are asymptomatic. From this date the government is also likely to end support payments worth £500 to £750 for people isolating, as well as routine contact tracing. From 31 March the government is likely to end free PCR testing for people with symptoms, apart from in hospitals and high-risk settings and for more than 1 million of the most vulnerable people. Those with symptoms are expected to be advised to take lateral flow tests (LFTs), although free tests may be limited to older age groups. The government is also likely to stop recommending LFTs on days five and six after a positive test, and to end free LFTs for asymptomatic testing. Welcome to today’s politics live blog. I’m Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking the lead today. You can contact me on Twitter (@Nicola_Slawson) or via email (nicola.slawson@theguardian.com) if you have any questions or think I’m missing something. You can also check out our dedicated Ukraine crisis blog here: Meanwhile our global coronavirus blog is here:In her article (The Parthenon marbles belong in Greece – so why is restitution so hard to swallow?, 5 February), Charlotte Higgins acknowledges that transferring the British Museum’s Parthenon sculptures to the Acropolis Museum in Athens “would not complete anything at all, since half of the stonework is destroyed, and they will never be intact again”, and that a former director of the British Museum, Neil MacGregor, had said in 2006 that “repatriation is yesterday’s question”. That view was right and remains so. The Institute for Digital Archaeology’s offer to make marble facsimiles for the British Museum is shortsighted (Letters, 8 February). Facsimiles do indeed offer extraordinary cultural possibilities, but they should not be pressed as a stratagem in an already highly politicised restitution dispute. It would be much more beneficial to make two sets of facsimiles of all the surviving Parthenon sculptures and install one on the Parthenon building itself and another in the Acropolis Museum in Athens (which was unwisely constructed on stilts above a major archaeological site in an earthquake zone). Such a project would retain the inestimable benefits of large culturally comparative museums like the British Museum and the Louvre, and help deflate regressive nationalistic calls for a kind of cultural cleansing in which all works of art are returned to their (geographical) countries of origin. Michael Daley Director, ArtWatch UK • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The recent Human Rights Watch report on the harm done to Cameroonian asylum seekers, both while they were trying to make their claims in the US and when repatriated in a blaze of publicity, should be required reading for all asylum decision-makers (African migrants deported in Trump era suffered abuse on return, 10 February). From my experience of helping Cameroonian torture survivors over the past 14 years, I have noted that Home Office decision-makers, and many judges, can fatally underestimate the degree of risk attached to the forcible return process, particularly as failed asylum seekers are viewed as having brought the country into disrepute and can be punished with imprisonment. Police have to be notified in advance of impending arrivals; incriminating items might be handed over as forms of identification (eg showing the last known address as one of the country’s prisons); asylum papers can end up in their luggage, which are then handed over to immigration officers; and many returnees will have no way of getting a national ID card. They are in constant danger of being caught without a card by the police or soldiers, and are unable to get a job, accommodation, pick up money transfers or obtain a phone card. A decision to repatriate can be a matter of life or death, resulting in a return to detention and torture, or a decision being taken to go into hiding or to leave the country again. No country, realising its mistake, can magically extract asylum seekers who have been wrongly sent back and who could well be in prison. Their only hope is to leave the country in a clandestine manner, but with less likelihood of access to funds or support and with more danger of being apprehended. Jackie Fearnley Goathland, North Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I would like to lend my support to Polly Toynbee in her call for state funding of political parties (Without state funding, Britain’s politics will always stink, 15 February). It is surely straight corruption that money can buy you privileged access to ministers and policymakers, preferment in appointments to public bodies and even a peerage. Why are those engaged in these activities not charged with corruption in public office? All big money must be taken out of politics. No business, bank or financial institution should be allowed to donate to a party, and that includes trade unions. All thinktanks and policy institutions should be required by law to name all their sources of finance, however small. I suggest that at all elections that have political parties on the ballot paper, voters are given a voucher that they can donate to any of the parties. This would have two enormously beneficial effects. First, it would encourage voting, as there would be a real incentive with the feeling of having some power over the democratic process. Second, it would make political parties engage with large sections of the electorate that they usually ignore and hopefully be more responsive to public concerns. Democracy is for all the people, not just the rich and well-connected. Dr Peter Estcourt South Chailey, East Sussex • I disagree with Polly Toynbee – backroom deals will not be eliminated by nationalising the funding of political parties. The real issue is strengthening the rules relating to party donations, and then ensuring that they are properly enforced so that we can all see who gives what to whom, and with what end in mind. We should not be surprised that in past times Unite gave money in the hope and expectation that, for example, a national minimum wage or health and safety legislation would be introduced. And equally predictably, hedge fund managers might be attracted to a party planning to reduce the burden of regulation on financial markets. Where it becomes murkier is when money changes hands off the record, breaking the chain between donors and desired outcomes. Les Bright Exeter, Devon • Polly Toynbee raises an important issue, but it is marred when she says that “Labour was always over-reliant on power-wielding union leaders” and talks of them “wielding their money bags”. The Labour party came into existence as the voice of the trade union movement, and trade union funding has always been the main source of its finances, supplemented by donations from individual socialists and socialist societies. Labour party policy was and is decided by its annual conferences. There was little occasion until after 1945 for there to be major differences between the policies supported by the trade unions at the TUC and those supported by the Labour conference. However, the 1918 Labour constitution had provided a second route for conference delegates by creating local constituency branches. It also committed Labour to socialist objectives that became a cause of conflict between the left and right of the party. Labour party history since 1945 is complicated, but the implication that the trade union movement has no right to use its financial contributions to influence Labour policy ignores the fact that the party was founded to promote the interests of the working class, and the trade unions are still its voice. Margaret Morris London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Public confidence in the Metropolitan police has fallen sharply in the five years Cressida Dick was leading Britain’s biggest force, figures published on Wednesday show. Only 51% of those in London said they believed the Met did a good job in their local area, down 17 points compared with the last survey before Dick became Met commissioner in April 2017. In the majority of London’s 32 boroughs, 50% or less said they believed the force did a good job. In March 2017, not a single borough was below 50%. Figures for police reliability, fairness and listening to people’s concerns are all down by 10 percentage points or more in the past five years. The polling is done on behalf of the mayor’s office for policing and crime and was introduced when Boris Johnson was London mayor as a way of holding the Met to account. Falling public confidence was cited by the current London mayor, Sadiq Khan, in his showdown with Dick that led to her resignation last week. Conservatives blamed Khan, who is also the police and crime commissioner for London, for the “shocking plummet in public confidence”. The new figures follow polling in December 2021. Comparing them with the figures in March 2017, the month before Dick became commissioner, shows the shift in public confidence. The poll asked whether police could be relied on to be there when needed. In March 2017, 79% said yes, but by December 2021 that figure had fallen by 20 points, with 59% agreeing. Compared with five years ago, the proportion of people who believe police treat everyone fairly has fallen 15 points, from 79% to 64%. In March 2017, 76% of respondents thought police listened to local people’s concerns, but that had fallen by 14 points in the latest figures. Some former senior Met insiders see the survey questions as a key test of the Met’s legitimacy. In the March 2017 survey, 68% agreed their local policing was good, with every London borough above 50%, the lowest being Enfield in north London at 58%. In the latest survey, 51% said they believed local police did a good job in their area, with the majority of London boroughs at 50% or below. Croydon in south London came out worst, at 43%, and Richmond upon Thames the best, at 70%. Victor Olisa, a former head of diversity at Scotland Yard, said: “It shows a clear diminishing of confidence across a whole range of measures, and fall in trust that the Met can keep people safe and solve crimes. The Met has not delivered what the people of London want or explained to them why they can’t have it.” In the latest survey, only 27% of people said they knew how to contact their local ward officers, supposed to be the cornerstone of neighbourhood policing, down from 36% in March 2017. Olisa said big changes to local policing and how the Met is organised appeared to have left officers more distant from communities. While the survey does not offer reasons for the fall in confidence, there have been a series of scandals during Dick’s term and claims that the Met leadership mishandled them, such as the murder by a serving officer of Sarah Everard. There has also been controversy over big increases in stop and search, and claims it disproportionately affects innocent black people, as well as renewed anxiety over violent crime, especially stabbings. The Met said it was committed to reforms, which were under way and would be boosted by the findings from its own inquiry chaired by Lady Casey: “There is need for real change in our organisation. More than ever before we have been looking at ourselves critically and asking hard questions to improve our culture and professional standards, and we do not underestimate the scale of the change required.” The Conservatives in London blamed Khan, in office since May 2016. Their police spokesperson, Susan Hall, said: “He has overseen this shocking plummet in public confidence in the Met police. Sadiq Khan himself has said that without trust and confidence in the police, the force cannot function.” A spokesperson for the mayor of London said: “A series of events have shattered public trust and confidence in our police. When this trust is eroded, our model of policing, and therefore public safety, is put at risk.”This piece first appeared in Down to Earth, the Guardian’s climate crisis newsletter. Sign up here to read more exclusive pieces like this and for a digest of the week’s biggest environment stories every Thursday Below is a photo of me in 2017, crowded around the TV at the climate publication I worked for, looking resigned as then president Donald Trump announced the US was withdrawing from the Paris climate agreement. I couldn’t have imagined the wild ride I was in for. Over four years, Trump agencies gutted more than 100 environmental protections for air and water pollution, biodiversity and climate change. And they did so with dramatic flair. The interior secretary rode into his first day on a horse. The head of the Environmental Protection Agency spent exorbitantly on sound-proof telephone booths and private planes. By the end of Trump’s chaotic presidency, I was exhausted. The incoming Biden administration felt like a much-needed reprieve. Biden vowed to reinstate the regulations Trump gutted and make the climate crisis a top priority. I was skeptical of what he could achieve, but I tried to muster some hope. Now, a year into Biden’s presidency, it’s clear that what little optimism I had was misguided. Biden’s climate legacy is starting to take shape, and it doesn’t look good. So far, his administration has: 1. Held the biggest-ever offshore oil drilling lease sale in the Gulf of Mexico In November, Biden offered up 80m acres of water to oil drillers. For years, the US government has regularly leased portions of the Gulf of Mexico for offshore exploration and drilling. But environmental and public health advocates had hoped that the president who campaigned on climate action would at least scale back the practice. Last month, a judge struck down the auction – ruling that the administration didn’t properly disclose and consider how the leases would contribute to the climate crisis. That court decision is one of the biggest climate victories of Biden’s administration. And it came in spite of the administration’s efforts – not because of them. Now more than 300 groups have signed on to an emergency petition to halt all new drilling in the Gulf. 2. Permitted more drilling on public lands in the West and in Alaska than Trump did in his first year Biden has approved nearly 900 more permits to drill on public land in 2021 than Trump did in 2017, according to the Center for Biological Diversity. That’s despite his campaign pledges to end new oil and gas leasing on federal lands. In November, Biden also urged drillers to produce more oil, in an effort to lower gasoline prices. 3. Failed to advance a climate legislative agenda On the campaign trail, Biden promised to cut US climate emissions in half by 2030, including by investing significantly in renewable power. But his legislative package to do so – Build Back Better – has stalled. Two Democrats – Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema – may be the main culprits for this failure, but convincing them to get on board with his agenda was always going to be one of Biden’s biggest challenges, and he hasn’t managed to do it. 4. Faltered in quickly reinstating rules Under Biden, even minor regulations that mandate more energy efficient furnaces, freezers, and lightbulbs are stuck in regulatory limbo. And he could face a significant blow this month if the conservative-tilted supreme court decides the federal government can’t write rules to curb climate pollution from power plants. Biden hasn’t followed through on the basics. And he certainly hasn’t brought the kind of sweeping and aggressive action the world’s scientists say is necessary to avoid catastrophic global heating. As the US gears up for midterm elections in November, it remains to be seen whether Biden will go any harder on environmental efforts. This isn’t the first massive failure of climate efforts at the federal level, and it won’t be the last. The lesson: policymakers and industries won’t do the right thing unless they are forced, by our decisions with our ballots and our wallets. Emily Holden is the founder and editor-in-chief of Floodlight News, a nonprofit newsroom that investigates the corporations holding back climate action. Follow it on Twitter here.If a uniformed flunkey holding aloft a vellum scroll had stood in front of Buckingham Palace and read it out for the benefit of the world’s cameras on Tuesday afternoon, the message from the official proclamation would have boiled down to this: “The royal embarrassment is over. Long live the royal embarrassment.” This week’s out of court settlement of Virginia Giuffre’s sexual assault claims against Prince Andrew is not the tidy closure of a tawdry affair. The sleazy content of the allegations and the prince’s boneheaded response to them have not merely discredited him personally – though they have done that so conclusively that only someone as obstinate as he is could think otherwise. They have also shaken the monarchy itself, and at an extremely delicate time – one that is certainly not over yet and that may continue for at least a decade. The Andrew affair is significant from several angles. Most importantly, from one perspective it is a paradigm case of a privileged man exploiting a young and powerless woman for sex and trying to get away with it (he has always denied the allegations made against him, and did not admit responsibility in the settlement). Hardly less dramatically but in an entirely different way, it is also the very public fall from grace of the respected monarch’s own son, a man who spent the first 22 years of his life as second in line to the throne after his older brother, only a heartbeat away from being this country’s next head of state. But the affair is also something else. It is a reminder that the institutions of the British state – which very much includes the monarchy itself – may be rather less enduring and secure than they often seem, and a bit more fragile and vulnerable than most of us sometimes think. There is absolutely no doubt that Andrew’s stupidity over the case did serious reputational damage to the monarchy. And no doubt, either, that this is how the Queen came to see it too. But that’s not necessarily the end of the matter. The reputational danger will clearly diminish now the lawyers have struck a deal that prevents Andrew appearing in court. But it does not disappear entirely. There may be other legal proceedings in the United States. The British media are hunting the financial settlement, said to be worth at least £12m. There are already serious questions about who, possibly including the UK taxpayer, will pay for it. Andrew, 62 on Saturday, is meanwhile doomed to live out a life of ageing notoriety, perhaps as a disgraced exile in the Gulf, like the former King Juan Carlos of Spain, but still likely to want to show up on important royal events like weddings, funerals and coronations. How much does all this really impact on the monarchy more generally? The modern monarchy has, after all, lived through difficulties before, from marital breakups, the turbulence of the Diana years and, most recently, the self-exile of the Sussexes. So you can certainly take the view that the British public’s respect for the institution is strong and resilient enough to allow it to see off yet another royal family difficulty – even one as disreputable as Andrew’s. This doesn’t, though, tell the whole story. For one thing, it ignores the institutional mentality. The monarchy has a history of being more nervous about its own position than you might think. George V, a century ago, turned a deaf ear to the pleas for exile from his first cousin, the toppled Tsar Nicholas II, after the 1917 revolution because he feared Britain’s monarchy might follow those of Germany, Austria, Turkey and Russia into the dustbin. The king’s private secretary advised him there could be an uprising against the monarchy if the Tsar was allowed in. George V also feared for the crown’s vulnerability from its own members. “David will let the whole show down, you’ll see,” he said, referring to his son, who ruled briefly and disastrously as Edward VIII in 1936. “London is dividing into Roundheads and Cavaliers; division is certain and only the Socialists can gain,” commented the diarist Chips Channon, readably wrong as always. Nevertheless, Edward’s abdication still casts a traumatic shadow over the monarchy today. The Queen has managed to protect the institution for the past 70 years, although not without challenges, notably the annus horribilis in 1992 (when a succession of family members also “let the whole show down”) and the public outpourings after the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, in 1997. Throughout these years, support for Britain’s monarchy remained strong, at well above 70%. Today, though, that has slipped. Disreputable royals like Andrew are one cause of that. The latest Ipsos Mori survey on the subject, in November 2021, showed 60% for Britain remaining a monarchy, with 21% favouring a republic and 19% don’t knows. That is still a strong position, but it is a notable decline. It has come, moreover, at a time when the Queen’s own popularity remains undiminished. In a YouGov survey last week, Elizabeth II’s favourability ratings were 84% positive against 11% negative. When the Queen eventually goes, however, things could be very different. That same YouGov survey last week shows how. In these findings, Prince Charles is on 60% positive against 32% negative (Andrew is on 6% against 86%, which tells you why they would be crazy to bring him back into the fold). Prince William, on the other hand, is on 80% against 14%, with Prince Harry 36% against 56%. It is not hard to see what will start to happen after the Queen’s death, and perhaps even before it. Newspapers that have always had it in for Charles will commission polls asking if the public would prefer William to succeed. The public will say yes. The monarchy will find itself sliding into becoming the object of controversy from which Elizabeth has, by and large, insulated it. Its vulnerability will be exposed and tested, not least among younger people. If you want to make that prospect a little spicier, imagine it happening at about the same time that the future unity of the new monarch’s kingdom is itself under challenge. Suppose Northern Ireland is facing a referendum on unification, or Scotland a vote on whether to go independent. Neither is at all unthinkable within the next decade. It will be hard for the monarch, in theory a force for unity, not to be drawn in; hard too for the public and for politics, where an anachronistic taboo on discussion of the monarchy has existed for too long, not to be drawn in too. Hard – but also good. The Andrew affair may have started life as a scandal about one man’s behaviour. It could all too easily become a story about the kind of country we choose to be. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistEvery month the story is the same. The annual inflation rate goes up and the chancellor puts out a statement saying he understands life is tough for the British public. The only real difference between this month and last was that, in the interim, Rishi Sunak announced his package of measures to soften – but by no means fully offset – the blow from the huge increase in energy costs households are facing in April. The whopping 54% increase to the average domestic bill will alone add 1.6 percentage points to the annual inflation rate, making the latest figures released by the Office for National Statistics for the cost of living in January something of a temporary respite. Even so, there was still a rise in the annual rate – as measured by the consumer prices index – from 5.4% in December to 5.5% last month. The figure was actually a bit worse than it looked, because without a temporary fall in petrol prices it would have been higher. Elsewhere, the January sales were less generous than a year ago. As usual, clothing and footwear retailers and shops selling household goods dropped their prices in the new year but the bargains were less generous this January. Clothing and footwear inflation rose from 4.2% to 6.3% because outlets dropped their prices by 4.9% in January 2021 but by only 2.9% last month. Inflation will rise further in the coming months. As motorists are now discovering, January’s drop in petrol prices has been reversed. The temporary reduced VAT rate of 12.5% for the hospitality sector will expire in April, the same month energy bills go up. One other factor is that based on a survey of what households are actually spending money on each month, the ONS has made changes to the weightings of the various goods and services it includes in its inflation basket. Greater weight is being given to items analysts expect to rise fastest. Two other things will concern Bank of England policymakers. The first is that core inflation – the increase in the cost of living excluding volatile elements such as food and fuel – has continued to rise, hitting 4.4% in January. The second is that producer prices – which provide a guide to inflationary pressures at an early stage in the pipeline – rose at an annual rate of 9.9% in January, up from 9.3% in December. Inflation is already running at its highest level in almost 30 years. Even on the assumption that there is no more bad news in the meantime, it will peak at between 7% and 8% in the spring. There will be more “I feel your pain” messages from the chancellor. And pressure on him to offer more tangible support. The rise of crypto means tougher scrutiny Even though Meta (formerly Facebook) has scrapped plans for its Diem stablecoin, it is clear cryptocurrencies are now a permanent feature of financial markets. Banks and hedge funds now buy and sell crypto assets as a matter of course and there is already an array of complex derivatives that involve crypto products for investors to choose from. Crypto assets, in other words, are becoming increasingly interconnected with the traditional financial system. However, it is by no means obvious how robust they would prove in the event of an unexpected run on them. Structural vulnerabilities, including a lack of reserves, might quickly appear. If this all sounds eerily familiar that’s because history is in danger of repeating itself. The buildup to the global financial crash of 2008 was marked by the rapid growth of under-regulated new financial instruments which only a few people purported to understand and were sold to punters who didn’t really know what they were buying. Despite all the hype around bitcoin, at $2.6tn (£1.9tn) the crypto market is still relatively small, but it grew by 3.5 times in 2021, according to the latest report from the Financial Stability Board, the risk-monitoring watchdog for the G20 group of developed and developing countries. The FSB has noticeably toughened up its stance, and rightly so. Having been asleep at the wheel in the early 2000s, those responsible for supervising the global financial system – central banks and regulators – need to avoid making the same mistake twice. Regulators have no wish to put an end to the innovation that led to crypto assets, and couldn’t even if they wanted to. They also know the financial risks could snowball in the comings and the time to put in place the necessary regulatory safeguards is now, before it is too late.Millions of Sky TV and broadband customers in the UK will pay £43 a year more from April while Sky Mobile customers face the reintroduction of £2-a-day roaming charges in the rest of Europe, after the company announced a series of inflation-busting price increases. Sky’s Essential broadband package will increase 10% to £27.50 a month from 1 April, while the Superfast service rises 9% to £30.50 a month. The company, which has more than 12 million UK customers, said the average TV and broadband customer will pay an additional £3.60 a month from April and that the average price increase was below 5%. However, the price of some services is rising by as much as 14%. The announcement came on the same day official figures showed inflation rose to a 30-year-high of 5.5% in January as prices continued to surge across the board. On Tuesday, the regulator Ofcom said 20% of UK households had struggled to pay their TV, internet and phone bills in the last year, with some having to cancel services or cut back spending on essentials such as food and clothing to make payments. A Sky spokesperson said on Wednesday: “We know price increases are never welcome so we aim to keep prices as low as possible while still delivering the content customers love, the flexibility to choose the right package, and our leading customer service.” The company said the exact increase customers faced would depend on their plan and whether they were in a contract. HD television will increase by £1 to £8 a month while call rates (UK landlines and UK mobiles) will rise by 2p a minute to 22p. Sky Mobile will reintroduce roaming charges of £2 a day for its UK customers who visit the rest of Europe after 3 May. The EU ban on roaming charges between member states no longer applies to people with UK mobile phones because of Brexit. Ernest Doku, a telecoms expert at Uswitch.com, said: “Sky does not base their mid-contract rises on inflation, but any hopes that customers might be spared the pain of increases have been dashed. For many this will be an unwanted burden during a time when households are feeling the pinch from bill hikes across the board. “Broadband customers still in the minimum term of their contract can leave penalty-free if they act within 30 days of receiving their notification.” January’s inflation figures mean Virgin Mobile and O2 customers’ mobile phone bills will increase by 11.7% because they are linked to the retail prices index, which reached 7.8% last month. The increase has been set at 3.9% above RPI. “Should you find yourself in financial difficulty, don’t suffer in silence. Raise the issue with your provider and you may be able to negotiate a better deal, or switch on to a social tariff if you meet the criteria,” Doku said.Britain’s hard-pressed households have been warned to expect a fresh squeeze on their living standards in the coming months after the annual inflation rate climbed for a 13th month to its highest point in almost 30 years. Economists said they expected the government’s preferred measure of the yearly jump in the cost of living – the consumer prices index – to rise from 5.5% in January to almost 8% in April when household energy bills will soar by hundreds of pounds. The latest figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) showed that the least generous January clothing and footwear sales since 1990 were responsible for the 0.1 percentage point increase in the annual inflation rate last month. Prices actually fell on the month but by a smaller amount than in January 2021. Rishi Sunak said the government understood the pressures people were facing with the cost of living, but the chancellor was warned by a leading thinktank that rising inflation meant it would cost the Treasury an extra £11bn this year to service the UK’s national debt of more than £2tn. Isabel Stockton, a research economist at the Institute for Fiscal Studies, said interest payments on index-linked debt were calculated using an alternative measure of inflation – the retail prices index – which is running at 7.8%, considerably higher than anticipated in last October’s budget. “As a result we now project that central government spending on debt interest this financial year will come in at around £69bn, some £11bn higher than the £58bn forecast in the October 2021 budget and £27bn above the £42bn forecast in the March 2021 budget,” Stockton said. City economists had expected CPI inflation to remain at 5.4% in January and said the latest increase elevated the chances of the Bank of England raising interest rates for a third successive time when its monetary policy committee meets next month. Business and consumer groups said the sharp rise in inflation would harm living standards and push more firms towards insolvency, while Labour and unions said the government was failing to tackle the UK’s worsening cost of living crisis. The CBI business lobby group said the government needed to react by cutting taxes on investment to boost productivity and by allowing businesses to award sustainable annual wage rises. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said extra energy costs and tax rises in April would force families to make savings elsewhere, meaning “business revenues will fall, and the [economic] recovery will be choked off”. On Tuesday, official figures showed that a rise in annual wage growth in December failed to outpace inflation. With inflation expected to keep rising over the coming months, the Resolution Foundation thinktank said Britain was on track for the biggest squeeze on living standards in six decades. Sunak defended the government’s response to the “global challenge” of high inflation, saying the Treasury would provide millions of households with up to £350 to help with rising energy bills. Suren Thiru, the chief economist of the British Chambers of Commerce, said tightening monetary policy too quickly risked undermining confidence and the wider recovery. “[It] will do little to curb the global factors behind the current inflationary surge,” he said. “More needs to be done to limit the unprecedented rise in costs facing businesses, including financial support for those struggling with soaring energy bills and delaying April’s national insurance rise.” Despite January’s rise in inflation, the ONS said prices for goods and services decreased by 0.1% that month after restaurant and hotel prices – which played a large part in the inflationary increase before Christmas – fell back. The rising costs of some household goods also pushed up inflation but were offset partly by cheaper petrol and diesel prices in January after record highs at the end of 2021. Most economists expect inflation to fall in the second half of the year after reaching a peak above 7% in April, when the energy regulator, Ofgem, will raise the price cap on default tariffs by 54%, adding more than £600 to annual bills. But the cap could be raised again in October unless the cost of gas and petrol on international markets drops as expected in the summer. Last month, the Bank of England said inflation would peak at more than 7% in the spring but then decrease over the next two years to its target rate of 2%. Pat McFadden, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said the latest figures showed the cost of living crisis was not going away any time soon. “With inflation expected to rise even further, and working people already feeling the crunch, the Tories should have taken action by now,” he said. “Instead, the chancellor’s buy now, pay later scheme on energy bills loads up debt for future years, while his tax rises will only make matters worse.”Google announced on Wednesday that it plans to limit the amount of personal information shared on Android, the world-leading mobile phone operating system used by more than 2.5 billion people around the globe. The shift comes a year after Apple curtailed the amount of personal data shared by users of its mobile operating system – a change that sent shock waves through the digital advertising world and contributed to a collapse in Facebook’s share price. In a blogpost Anthony Chavez, vice-president of product management, Android security and privacy, noted that advertising plays a “key role” in allowing most mobile apps to be free but added that “the industry must continue to evolve how digital advertising works to improve user privacy”. Android’s operating system runs on about 72% of mobile devices worldwide compared with Apple’s rival iOS, which runs on about 26.9% of devices. The change is likely to upend the digital advertising market – limiting the massive amounts of data that app companies collect from their users. But it also comes at a time when Google’s parent company, Alphabet, is coming under ever greater scrutiny from regulators around the world over its dominance of digital advertising. The news is likely to trigger concerns that the Android changes will further cement Alphabet’s dominance in mobile ads. In an apparent swipe at Apple, Chavez said the changes would be made over the next two years and in conjunction with the industry. “We realize that other platforms have taken a different approach to ads privacy, bluntly restricting existing technologies used by developers and advertisers. We believe that – without first providing a privacy-preserving alternative path – such approaches can be ineffective and lead to worse outcomes for user privacy and developer businesses,” wrote Chavez. While the industry may argue over its execution, Apple and soon Google’s privacy policies are one of the few sweeping and US-wide restrictions on how consumer data is collected and used. There are no federal laws regulating the collection and distribution of personal user information. Last year Apple updated its mobile system to force apps to ask for users’ permission in order to track them around the web. The company has long positioned itself as a champion of privacy and its chief executive, Tim Cook, has regularly clashed with Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg over the ethics – and value – of unfettered data sharing. The clash came to a head earlier this month when Zuckerberg blamed Apple’s changes for a disastrous set of earnings that led to a record-setting fall in Facebook owner Meta’s share price. Johana Bhuiyan contributed to this report.Government investigators say the former US interior secretary Ryan Zinke misused his position to advance a development project in his Montana home town and lied to an agency ethics official about his involvement. The interior department’s inspector general said in a report made public on Wednesday that Zinke continued working with a foundation on the commercial project in the community of Whitefish, Montana, even after he committed upon taking office to breaking ties with the foundation. The report also says Zinke gave incorrect and incomplete information to an interior department ethics official who confronted him over his involvement and that Zinke directed his staff to assist him with the project in a misuse of his position. The Great Northern Veterans Peace Park Foundation was established by Zinke and others in 2007. Zinke and his wife were in negotiations with private developers for the use of foundation land for a commercial development project. Zinke is a candidate in the June Republican primary for an open Montana congressional seat, a position he held before joining Trump’s cabinet. He stepped down from his role as interior secretary in the Trump administration in December 2018 following a series of scandals in which he was accused of using his position for personal gain. On Wednesday Zinke’s campaign called the report “a political hit job” and said his family’s involvement in the land deal led to the creation of a children’s sledding park. Investigators referred the matter to the Department of Justice for potential prosecution but they declined to pursue a criminal case, according to the report. The investigation into the land deal was one of several focused on Zinke that began when he was in Trump’s cabinet. In another case, investigators found that he violated a policy that prohibits non-government employees from riding in government cars after his wife traveled with him, but he said ethics officials approved it. Zinke was cleared of wrongdoing following a complaint that he redrew the boundaries of a national monument in Utah to benefit a state lawmaker and political ally. Under Zinke’s leadership, the interior department sought to advance oil and gas drilling and mining on or near public land, rolled back protections for threatened species and shrank national monuments. “Zinke’s days of plundering our lands and enriching himself and his friends are over,” said Nicole Ghio, senior fossil fuels program manager for Friends of the Earth, said at the time he stepped down. Trump had praised him saying he had “accomplished much during his tenure”. Associated Press contributed to this reportUkraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, toured the country to mark a newly declared “National Unity Day”, as cyber-attacks on the Ukrainian defence ministry stretched into a second day. A key Zelenskiy ally also attacked western media for their coverage of the threat of a Russian invasion, saying fear-mongering reporting was as bad as Russian propaganda and was causing damage to the Ukrainian economy. Ukrainians were asked to fly the national flag and sing the national anthem on Wednesday, to bolster spirits on the day US government briefings had warned a Russian invasion might start. After the early hours of the morning passed without any military action, there was a lacklustre response in the capital to the National Unity Day call-up, with journalists almost outnumbering the sparse crowd gathered on Maidan, the central Kyiv square, to sing. Other events included unfurling a 200 metre-long national flag at the sports stadium, and flashmobs in some cities, but none drew more than a few hundred people. TV stations launched a marathon of ‘patriotic’ programming. US president, Joe Biden, says up to 150,000 Russian troops, well over half its ground forces, are gathered along Ukraine’s borders, and could move into the country now with little notice. The head of Nato warned on Wednesday that he had seen no evidence to support Russian claims it had pulled back troops from the border. Moscow says the troops assembled for routine training missions, and has dismissed claims that it is planning an invasion, though it has promised it could “counterattack” if provoked. On Wednesday, Zelenskiy observed military exercises in the western Rivne Oblast region, and was also due to visit frontlines in the east of the country, where Russia has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014. In Rivne he also warned there was no evidence Russia had started drawing down troops along Ukraine’s borders, despite Moscow’s claim of redeployment. “Honestly, we are reacting to the reality we have, and so far we do not see any withdrawal of troops. We only heard about it. So far, these are just statements,” he said. The Ukrainian leader has regularly called for calm in the face of increasingly frantic western intelligence briefings about the risk of imminent military confrontation. But his latest comments were a reminder of the delicate balance he is trying to strike. He is a relative political novice, who must stave off complacency, avoid looking weak and vulnerable, keep the economy running at a time of terrifying uncertainty, while also ensure his government doesn’t make any missteps that could give Moscow a pretext for intervention. Cyber-attacks on the defence ministry and leading banks, which began on Tuesday, also continued on Wednesday. Moscow denied any role. The already fragile Ukrainian economy has been badly knocked by the crisis, with embassies and many foreign citizens leaving Kyiv, and the government forced to make emergency insurance arrangements to keep international flights landing. David Arakhamia, head of Zelenskiy’s Servant of the People party, claimed western media outlets were doing more damage to Ukraine than Russian state propagandists. “Blatant fakes on CNN, Bloomberg, Wall Street Journal … We need to investigate this, because these are elements of a hybrid war,” he said, estimating that “hysteria” about a possible war is now costing the country $2bn to $3bn a month. Iryna Gorlach contributed reportingThe booming crypto assets market could pose a serious threat to financial stability if regulators fail to take action, a global watchdog has said. The Financial Stability Board (FSB), which monitors financial authorities in 24 countries, is concerned that the scale and structural vulnerabilities of crypto markets – as well as increasing interconnectedness with traditional financial systems – have the potential to cause significant disturbance to the global economy. “Although the extent and nature of use of crypto assets varies somewhat across jurisdictions, financial stability risks could rapidly escalate, underscoring the need for timely and pre-emptive evaluation of possible policy responses,” the Swiss-based body said in a report. “Systemically important banks and other financial institutions are increasingly willing to undertake activities in, and gain exposures to, crypto assets. The prevalence of more complex investment strategies, including through derivatives and other leveraged products that reference crypto assets, also has increased. “If the current trajectory of growth in scale and interconnectedness of crypto assets to these institutions were to continue, this could have implications for global financial stability.” The report estimated that crypto asset market capitalisation grew 3.5 times in 2021 to a value of $2.6tn (£1.9tn). It noted that crypto assets remain a small part of the overall financial system, but likened the risk to the sub-prime mortgage exposure that sparked the financial crisis of 2007-8. “If financial institutions continue to become more involved in crypto asset markets, this could affect their balance sheets and liquidity in unexpected ways,” the FSB continued. “As in the case of the US sub-prime mortgage crisis, a small amount of known exposure does not necessarily mean a small amount of risk, particularly if there exists a lack of transparency and insufficient regulatory coverage.” The report examined the vulnerabilities of three aspects of crypto assets markets, including unbacked currencies such as bitcoin; stablecoins such as tether, which is backed by reserve assets; decentralised finance (DeFi) and crypto asset trading platforms. All exist online only and are not regulated by a centralised body. Of particular concern is the structure of stablecoins, which leaves consumers vulnerable to high credit and operational risks, liquidity mismatch and sudden runs on their reserves. Unbacked currency also carries the risk of high price volatility. Other concerns include the environmental impact of energy-sucking mechanisms used for certain crypto assets, as well as public policy issues, such as its use for money laundering, ransomware and cybercrime. The FSB has no binding regulatory jurisdiction over countries, but rather monitors the financial system and advises policymakers on best practice. Among its members is the Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey. Regulators including the Financial Conduct Authority have previously warned over the risks in buying cryptocurrencies, such as ones promoted by celebrity influencers including Kim Kardashian West. The FSB promised to continue to monitor developments and risks in the crypto asset markets, as well as explore the supervisory implications of unbacked assets, in order to help member states address the associated threats to financial stability. “Given the international and diverse nature of the crypto asset markets, authorities globally [need to] prioritise cross-border and cross-sectoral cooperation,” the report concluded. “Efforts to enhance monitoring and to minimise regulatory arbitrage through further cooperation and information sharing are needed to keep pace with crypto asset developments.”As 16 February – the day when some briefings had forecast Russia would invade Ukraine – came and passed without incident, pundits in Moscow lined up for their chance to dunk on the western media. “What a sad celebration we have today,” said Olga Skabeeva, the host of the state media talkshow 60 Minutes, while standing on a stage emblazoned with the logos of the Daily Mirror and the Daily Mail. “The day of no invasion of Ukraine, or perhaps as they say in Ukraine, the day when Putin once again hasn’t attacked.” Western leaders led by Joe Biden have gone public with what they claim are Russian plans to launch an invasion of Ukraine, hoping that exposing the Kremlin’s alleged moves in advance could avert a war. But announcements of a date and, in the case of some tabloids, the exact time when Russia could launch the potential attack set up a big target for Russian officials and media to ridicule. The Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova, who enjoys prodding foreign media, wrote a “request to the mass disinformation outlets of the USA and Britain – Bloomberg, the New York Times, the Sun etc – announce the schedule of our ‘invasions’ for the coming year. I’d like to plan my vacation”. A day earlier, she wrote: “February 15, 2022 will go down in history as the day of the failure of western war propaganda. Humiliated and destroyed without firing a shot.” Little has changed on the ground near Ukraine’s borders, however. After the announcement of a “partial withdrawal” of Russian forces by Vladimir Putin on Tuesday, only two units have officially departed from Crimea for their home bases. Meanwhile, analysts from the Conflict Intelligence Team told the Guardian they had identified a new shipment of TOS-1A rocket artillery being unloaded at Kursk, in southern Russia. US reports have mostly said this week marks the beginning of a window when Russia could launch an operation, rather than predicting the day it would take place. In Russia, coverage of this buildup is less focused on the movement of tanks and Iskander missiles than on the information battle, where the main aggressors are seen as western officials and media reporting breathless predictions of all-out war or false-flag attacks. Leaks from unnamed US officials about invasion routes or analyses of the state of the Ukrainian ground (ice or mud) have been ruthlessly mocked in Russian media. The Russian foreign ministry issued a report last week calling out foreign media, including a Guardian article about arrivals of tanks and artillery near Kursk for its “one-sided presentation” of Russia’s undeclared and largely unexplained military buildup. It isn’t just Russia lining up to attack western media. In Ukraine, where officials have complained about disruptive leaks and over-the-top reporting, the head of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s Servant of the People parliamentary faction said western “hysteria is now costing the country $2-3bn every month”. “I think that when this phase ends in two-three weeks, we should have a retrospective analysis how the main mass media have begun to disseminate information even worse than Skabeeva and [Vladimir] Solovyov [another Russian TV host],” said David Arakhamia, naming outlets such as CNN, Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal. “We should study this because they are elements of hybrid warfare.” The Reuters news agency set up a livestream of Kyiv’s Maidan Square, apparently to broadcast a potential attack. On Wednesday morning the feed showed light traffic on Khreshchatyk, the downtown main street, and the stop-and-go of cars at intersections. Street sounds blended into a calming white noise. More than 2,000 people were tuned in as a drone flew over the square carrying a Ukrainian flag. As her guests laughed on, Skabeeva turned to the feed. “The livestream of Putin’s invasion was run simultaneously on Britain’s Reuters agency and the American CNN but the invasion didn’t take place,” she said.Grief can feel like drowning. And in Morgan Lloyd Malcolm’s play about a swimmer with the challenge to cross the Channel, it is voluminous. Not a natural athlete, she’s doing it to satisfy the dreams of her much-loved dead sister. Steady and determined, she battles against the endless waves while remembering moments from their shared 90s youth, reciting poetry or making lists to pass the time. “I’m doing this for her,” she pants, going on to order her top 10 90s songs and the top 10 nights she’s had a good time but ended up sad. Though never appearing, the spirit of her sister is inescapable. As the swimmer, Stacey Ghent gives a marathon performance. Doing her best with an elongated script, she twirls, breaststrokes and breathes to render the difficulty of the task ahead. Flooded with sincerity, as memories from her past bleed into her present, her fight to complete the 21-mile swim becomes all the more draining. But even with such ardent physicality, we get webbed in the weight of Lloyd Malcolm’s tendency towards repetition. Too slowly paced, the reveal of the cause of the swimmer’s sister’s death is neither unexpected nor particularly heartbreaking. The onstage presence of the swimmer’s also dead mother (Shenagh Govan) can feel overdone too; a shame as Govan’s spiteful ghostly presence is initially a feature that shows the swimmer’s body dysmorphia to be, uncomfortably, generational. So, it is Grace Smart’s majestic underwater set we rely on to keep our attention. Tall and shadowy, the swimmer hangs, drooping, inside a netted dark cylinder. Trapped within its separated barriers, her isolation from the rest of existence is enlarged. Supported by wheeling oceanic projections designed by Gillian Tan, we are transported to the depths of the sea. Forever ebbing and flowing, its continuous movement is unending. Directed by Chinonyerem Odimba, the result is a transfixing picture of the mental and physical anguish of grief. But at times, the design is not enough to keep the drama swimming. When the Long Trick’s Over is on tour from 18 February to 10 March.Meta chief executive Mark Zuckerberg has promoted the company’s top policy executive, Nick Clegg, to president of global affairs, Zuckerberg said in a post on Wednesday, reducing his own role in the company’s policy decisions. Clegg, who previously served as Britain’s deputy prime minister, had joined Facebook as vice‑president for global affairs and communications in 2018. He was instrumental in the establishment of the oversight board – a regulatory group that was formed in 2020 to make decisions independent of Facebook’s corporate leadership. Clegg’s promotion is the latest public shift for the company, which has made a number of substantial changes in recent months as it refocuses its efforts on building out the metaverse – a digital world where users can meet in virtual reality. In a post on his personal Facebook page, Zuckerberg said Clegg’s new role would give him more authority to respond to regulatory issues in the new metaverse world. Clegg will “lead our company on all our policy matters”, Zuckerberg wrote – including forming policies with international governments and “making the case publicly for our products and our work”. He added that the new role would put Clegg “at the level” of himself and Sheryl Sandberg, who is the company’s chief operating officer. “As Nick takes on this new leadership role, it will enable me to focus more of my energy on leading the company as we build new products for the future, and it will support Sheryl as she continues to focus on the success of our business,” Zuckerberg wrote. Clegg joined the company in 2018, when Facebook was facing intense pressure over its policies during the 2016 US presidential election. . He also helped the company weather controversy around Facebook’s role in the persecution of the Rohingya in Myanmar, and most recently the revelations made by whistleblower Frances Haugen. As Meta moves forward with its plans for the metaverse, it will face intense scrutiny from regulators about how it can avoid such pitfalls in the future. In her own post, Sandberg echoed Zuckerberg’s sentiment about the need to be proactive about regulation. “The next few years will be a crucial time for our company and our industry as new rules for the internet are written all over the world, and as we set out on our journey to help build the metaverse,” she said. “Nick’s calm and principled leadership will continue to be an asset for Meta in the months and years to come.”Prince Andrew will not be welcome in any role supporting victims of sex trafficking and shows a sense of entitlement in thinking he has something to offer, according to the Labour MP Jess Phillips. Phillips, a former Labour leadership contender who campaigns for women’s rights, said the idea that Prince Andrew could help support victims of trafficking was “ridiculous” after he came to a multimillion-pound civil settlement with Virginia Giuffre, who had accused him of sexually assaulting her on three occasions when she was 17, which he denied. In a joint statement on the settlement, Prince Andrew had pledged to “demonstrate his regret for his association” with the sex offender financier Jeffrey Epstein, by supporting the “fight against the evils of sex trafficking, and by supporting its victims”. But Phillips said this was inappropriate, even aside from Giuffre’s allegations, given some of his lawyers’s arguments during the case. “His response to the case throughout broke every myth and stereotype, from slut shaming to referring to [Giuffre] wanting a payday,” Phillips said. “The behaviour that has been displayed throughout the last four years does not speak to somebody who could be an ally to victims of sexual violence.” Phillips also said it was not the responsibility of campaigners and charities working to end violence against women “to offer any redemption”. “We’ve got a lot on without rehabilitating princes,” she said. Phillips said the statement had almost certainly had to be agreed with Giuffre’s lawyers but the reality of his words were that they “speak of entitlement”. “What exactly has Prince Andrew got to offer victims of sexual violence? Does he have any skills? I heard, in genuinely good faith, people working with military charities saying he would turn up to things and have something to contribute. But – even without the accusations against him, unproven as they may be – why do they think we need his help like a white knight on a horse? I can’t see him being welcome.” Many in the sector suggested charities would prefer not to have a public association with the prince and questioned whether it was appropriate for him to offer. Jayne Butler, the chief executive of Rape Crisis England &amp; Wales, said offers to support victims and survivors of abuse “do feel cynical when Prince Andrew’s legal team demonstrated so much disrespect for Ms Giuffre and a complete disregard for how their victim-blaming actions would affect other victims and survivors”. “We would suggest that Prince Andrew instead considers looking into supporting prevention work aimed at perpetrators, rather than suggesting he is in any way placed to support victims,” she added. Hera Hussain, the founder and head of Chayn, which supports survivors of gender-based violence, said Prince Andrew could “donate anonymously if he truly cares about these causes but he absolutely, irrevocably, should not, under any circumstances use these donations to absolve himself from his conduct outside of the trial or rebuild his image”. “That would be charity-washing. He should not associate himself with any campaign or charity that works on this very critical and poorly resourced cause,” she added. One member of a leading organisation said they would be “very surprised” if any charity that supports victims – outside of Giuffre’s Speak Out, Act, Reclaim (Soar) – agreed to accept funds or other support directly from the prince. “It’s not a judgment on his guilt, but it’s important for charities to be seen to do the right thing.” Several leading charities that support survivors of sex trafficking declined to comment on Prince Andrew’s pledge. Some pointed to the prince’s daughter, Princess Eugenie of York’s involvement in the sector, suggesting that many charities would be unwilling to speak out for fear of undermining her work or alienating other royal patrons. She founded the Anti-Slavery Collective in 2017, an organisation whose mission is raising awareness, including of people in forced sexual exploitation.The Dallas Cowboys paid a multimillion dollar settlement to members of their cheerleading squad after allegations that a senior team executive filmed them in the AT&amp;T Stadium locker rooms, according to documents obtained by ESPN. In a report published on Wednesday, ESPN said that the team paid a total of $2.4m in the settlement, which involved four cheerleaders. One of the women alleges that she saw Richard Dalrymple, the Cowboys’ longtime senior vice president for public relations and communications, covertly filming them with his iPhone while they undressed after an event in 2015. Dalrymple used his security keycard to enter the locker room through a back door, but says he was unaware the cheerleaders were present. In documents obtained by ESPN, Dalrymple is also accused of taking an “upskirt” image of Charlotte Jones Anderson, a senior executive at the team who is also the daughter of Cowboys owner Jerry Jones. The second incident is alleged to have occurred at the 2015 NFL draft. Dalrymple has denied the allegations against him. “People who know me, co-workers, the media and colleagues, know who I am and what I’m about,” Dalrymple said in his statement released on Monday. “I understand the very serious nature of these claims and do not take them lightly. The accusations are, however, false. One was accidental and the other simply did not happen. Everything that was alleged was thoroughly investigated years ago, and I cooperated fully.” The Cowboys said they investigated the allegations but found no wrongdoing, despite the settlement. “The organization took these allegations extremely seriously and moved immediately to thoroughly investigate this matter,” said Jim Wilkinson, a communications consultant for the Cowboys. “The investigation was handled consistent with best legal and HR practices and the investigation found no evidence of wrongdoing.” ESPN says that Dalrymple was issued a formal written warning in October 2015, although the team has not said what the warning was for. Dalrymple continued to work for the Cowboys for another six years, before he retired after 32 years as Jerry Jones’s chief spokesman. His retirement came a few weeks after ESPN started interviewing people for its investigation. The four cheerleaders involved in the settlement either declined to comment to ESPN or did not respond to interview requests. ESPN says that the terms of the settlement included a nondisclosure agreement. However, one former cheerleader not involved in the case said the alleged incident was known about at the time. “It hurt my heart because I know how much it affected the people who were involved,” the former cheerleader said. “It was a very ... shut the book, don’t talk about it, this person is going to stay in his position ... They just made it go away.” The treatment of cheerleaders has come under scrutiny several times in recent years. In 2018, the New York Times reported Washington’s NFL team required its cheerleaders to go topless during photo shoots and act as personal escorts for team sponsors. In 2020, the Washington Post made further allegations involving the team’s owner, Dan Snyder, with a former team employee saying that a video was made of cheerleaders accidentally exposing their breasts during a film shoot in 2008. In 2016, the Guardian reported on the poor conditions some NBA cheerleaders work under.After the ignominy and anger caused by the controversial conclusion to last season’s finale in Abu Dhabi, acting to rebuild trust in the FIA as Formula One’s governing body should have been paramount. Yet so far this week the organisation has instead delivered little more than disbelief and disappointment. Where clarity and decisive action were required, insiders paint a picture more akin to a drunk lurching toward an unknown destination, babbling meaningless entreaties. Dealing with the fallout from the interventions in Abu Dhabi by race director Michael Masi that ultimately ensured Max Verstappen took the title by overtaking Lewis Hamilton on the final lap has been the single most important task facing the FIA. It is also the biggest test facing the newly appointed FIA president, Mohammed Ben Sulayem. On Monday an update on its two-month investigation presented to the teams and F1 was described as inconclusive and sorely lacking in detail. Ben Sulayem was swiftly wheeled out to make his case. “The integrity of the FIA will always be intact. I am elected to do that, but also to have a fair motorsport: that’s my duty,” he said. “We can only go forward. This is important for the FIA, for the integrity of the FIA and for the sport.” If integrity is the aim, the FIA must publish its report findings in full and publicly. If there were failings so great that structural changes are necessary – which they surely are – then the FIA must stand up and own those failings as an organisation. If the FIA believes the system worked adequately according to the regulations the world body should have the courage of its convictions and show the marking of its own homework. Angry fans deserve at least transparency and honesty, anything else and regaining their trust that the sport is run fairly will be all but impossible. Senior figures within F1, however, believe the report’s findings will not be made public. Instead the FIA will present only the organisational changes expected to be announced later this week: that the structure of race direction will change, the way of officiating will change, there will be the employment of more people and technology to support decisions, and that they will be insulated from pressure being applied to them during a race. Having asked the FIA whether the report would be published and the reason why not if that was the case, it declined to reply. Sharing information, it seems, has no part to play in this particular pursuit of integrity. It is not a good look for F1 or the FIA and if the faith of fans in the governance of F1 has been severely shaken, the handling of events since has not been widely admired within the sport either. After Monday the reaction from some figures in the paddock was scathing. The investigation has been ongoing for over two months and presenting the F1 Commission with what little they had was described by senior sources as “crazy”, “mad” and reflective of how the FIA is still floundering to deal with last season’s finale in Abu Dhabi. “They may well say in the next few days: ‘This is what we are going to do, here are our findings’ but I wouldn’t put money on it,” one source said. “It sounds to me like they are all at sea.” Another said: “They have had two months and done nothing to reassure people, media, broadcasters, the teams. To turn up to a meeting like that and be very light on the detail was mad.” For all the protestations that the new structure is just being finalised, this too does not seem guaranteed. Another senior source related how in only the past week several different potential different scenarios were all still emerging from the FIA. “They don’t know what they are doing, people in the same organisation are saying different things, it’s just a mess,” they commented. At the heart of this mess still resides Masi. He was present at Monday’s meeting – extraordinary enough given his actions were expected to be a major topic of discussion – and was described by multiple observers as appearing to be shattered, to have been through the wringer. A far cry from the engaging and personable man that was liked and respected. He too has been let down. If the FIA believes he was culpable it should have done the decent thing and removed him, swiftly. Better still backed him by taking on responsibility for what happened as an organisation. Taking the heat from him in what has become for many personal and acrimonious. To leave him twisting in the wind, “to let the birds pick at him was unforgivable”, noted one observer. Masi may last the week, he may not, with the World Endurance Championship race director Eduardo Freitas touted as a successor. Certainly the sport appears committed to making changes in pursuit of what is a widely held belief among most teams – that rules cannot be changed according to which part of the race it is, that they are followed and are clear. If that is the conclusion and the purpose of the changes, why not make the rationale that led to them open to all? Obfuscation can only intensify the sense of unease at how F1 is run and that the FIA has something to hide. Trust, once lost, is hard to regain and the FIA has the chance now to be both bold and brutally honest. If it does so, the FIA might just draw a line under Abu Dhabi.Wales secured a comfortable 3-1 victory against the defending champions Scotland in the opening game of the 2022 Pinatar Cup in Spain. Although Pedro Martínez’s side scored first, the return of familiar defensive failings and a standout performance from Jess Fishlock meant Wales progressed to the semi-finals. On Saturday they will play Belgium, with Scotland facing Slovakia. Before then Martínez’s squad must contemplate where their defensive performance went so wrong. Kayleigh Green and Fishlock caused the Scotland back four considerable distress. They targeted their opponents’ right flank, where the right-back, Sophie Howard, and right-sided central defender, Lisa Robertson, struggled to remain disciplined. A swashbuckling run from the Wales captain, Sophie Ingle, culminating in a pass round the corner to Fishlock, left the pair in disarray. Fishlock had her shot blocked but it was the blueprint the Wales attack needed to begin stretching Scotland’s defence, which Green did moments later with a header that Jenna Fife tipped over. Scotland’s response was to switch tactics and channel their attack down their right. The effectiveness was immediate. Christy Grimshaw’s cross was headed in by Lana Clelland to open the scoring in first-half stoppage time, yet minutes later they conceded when Jenna Clark’s tackle on Green brought a penalty converted by Fishlock. Any Scotland hopes of a more solid display in the second half were snuffed out by repeatedly playing out from the box when opportunities were sparse. This led to possession being lost in dangerous zones, and Fishlock made the most of the next Scotland kerfuffle, scoring from six yards after a backheel by Natasha Harding, before Harding beat Fife at the near post from Green’s cross to make it 3-1. Although Scotland had promising spells, chiefly via Caroline Weir down the left, they were outnumbered in midfield and created problems for themselves, allowing Wales to threaten from almost every attack. After Saturday’s matches, both teams will play a third and final game of the tournament on Tuesday.British authorities are worried that the current threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine may attract far-right extremists from the UK, who could travel to the country seeking weapons training and military experience. Counter-terrorism police were positioned at the departure gates of at least one main British airport this week, where they quizzed travellers flying to Ukraine about their identity and reasons for travel. The checks came after at least half a dozen known neo-Nazis travelled to Ukraine from the US and a European country this week, security sources said. Last autumn, Kyiv deported two American men with links to neo-Nazi groups in their homeland, BuzzFeed reported. The Security Service of Ukraine (SBU) said at the time that the men “tried to join one of the Ukrainian military units in order to gain combat experience, which the representatives of the group planned to use in illegal activities”. Western leaders have warned that Russia may be planning an invasion of Ukraine, after Moscow massed more than 130,000 troops – at least 60% of the country’s ground forces – along its borders. Western intelligence officials floated this week as a possible time to launch the attack, even as Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, urged calm. In Kyiv and other cities, civilians have been buying weapons – legal with a permit in Ukraine – and taking first aid courses in preparation for violence potentially surging to their doorstep. But potential recruits to the far right would probably be looking to join paramilitary groups fighting on the frontline in the country’s eastern Donbas region. Russia has armed and funded an insurgency there since 2014, and though the conflict is largely frozen, exchanges of fire continue. US officials have warned that Russia could be preparing a “false flag” incident in the region which could be used as a pretext for a military intervention. In 2014, when Russian proxies attacked in the east, the Ukrainian government took all the help it could get, including from far-right extremists. Over time, these battalions were integrated with the country’s army and national guard. The most notorious far-right grouping is the Azov Battalion, a paramilitary force which uses Nazi-linked symbols and has had many members who have professed far-right extremist views. It was accused three years ago of actively seeking British recruits by Hope Not Hate, a leading anti-fascist watchdog. In recent years political and media concern about foreign recruitment of violent extremists has focused predominantly on Islamist radicals seeking to join groups such as Islamic State. However, far-right radicals also pose a serious threat to their home societies if they return with combat experience. The US is seeking the extradition of former US soldier Craig Lang from Ukraine to stand trial over the 2018 murder of a Florida couple, after he returned from time spent with far-right groups in eastern Ukraine. FBI director, Christopher Wray , warned in 2019 about increasing numbers of white supremacists seeking military experience abroad. “We are starting to see racially motivated violent extremists connecting with like-minded individuals online certainly, and in some instances, we have seen people travel overseas to train,” he told Congress. Canadian journalist Michael Colborne, who in January published a book on the far right in Ukraine, said if war did break out, battles could serve as both propaganda and training opportunity for the far right. “In the worst-case scenario Azov will get even more opportunities to present themselves as the ‘true defenders of the homeland and the avant garde of the revolution’. If it comes to capturing Ukrainian cities, I’m afraid we will see far-right guerrilla fighters in the streets,” he said in a recent interview with Marker, a website created by the Far-right Violence Monitoring Group. Asked about the counter-terrorism checks at airports, the Home Office said it did not comment on policing operations.“No man is truly great who is great only in his lifetime. The test of greatness is the page of history” – William Hazlitt. For Pep Guardiola the question is: does he need to overcome a so-far fatal flaw of overthinking selection and win the Champions League for Manchester City in order to be ranked in the all-time managerial pantheon? Or does a CV that already includes two Champions League titles with Barcelona and three Premier League titles and a domestic treble for City make a nonsense of the debate? This is the fascination as his team roll through another Champions League campaign which, if it ends in triumph, will surely finally silence his naysayers. City’s 5-0 obliteration of Sporting on Tuesday was the latest evidence of the ruthless winning machine Guardiola has built. He is assured of a place in the Premier League managers’ hall of fame, but the doubters put an asterisk next to the Barcelona Champions League wins because he was able to select Lionel Messi. The thinking is that if you take away arguably the best footballer of all time then Guardiola is a manager with a self-defeating inability to stop tinkering when it truly counts, a flaw that proved costly in May’s Champions League final defeat by Chelsea. Then, Guardiola’s XI became a collector’s item for not including his first-choice holding midfielder, Rodri, or Fernandinho. The exclusion of João Cancelo, his playmaking full-back, was a puzzle too. Another selection oddity came when he dropped his kingpin creative force Kevin De Bruyne for the Champions League quarter-final first leg at Tottenham in 2019. End result: no away goal – the method by which City were eliminated after a 4-4 aggregate draw. Has he learned from these selection faux pas? That is the question now that Guardiola’s team are a virtual shoo-in for a quarter-final berth after their rampant night in Lisbon. Afterwards at Estádio José Alvalade, Guardiola emphasised, as he likes to, that there can be no guarantees. But his squad are the Champions League favourites for a reason and no opponent will wish to be drawn against them. Just as clear is the bigger-picture stuff he points to when the question of him not having claimed the Champions League with City is put to him: that the fact his side are always “there” as contenders for the big prizes should be the true measure of his achievements for the club and (by inference) of his race as a manager. One way of assessing what Guardiola constructs at City is the length of his tenure. In the summer it will be six years since he replaced Manuel Pellegrini. A half-decade and more at any elite club in today’s boom-and-bust managerial merry-go-round is a relative aeon and casts Guardiola as a throwback to the all-powerful manager who serially accumulates silverware. The last of these was Arsène Wenger, who four years ago ended a 22-year tenure at Arsenal, his exit written up as the final sighting the phenomenon of the manager who sticks around long enough at a club to create his own, gilded era. Another example, of course, was Alex Ferguson, who started at Manchester United in 1986 and exited in 2013 after 13 titles and two Champions League victories. Guardiola insists he will not remain at City as long as Ferguson did across town. He may not need to because he seems intent on piling up trophies at dizzying speed. Whereas Ferguson needed seven years to claim his first league title at United, Guardiola took two. Guardiola, like Ferguson, successfully defended that first crown and his three titles have come in fewer seasons than United’s first under Ferguson. The latter, though, walked into a club in serious disarray and required time to bring it under his control, and he remains the manager par excellence: a one-off genius. Although Guardiola took over a team that had been champions only two years before, his relentless pursuit of excellence is certainly Fergusonian. The kind of performance they put in against Sporting, champions of Portugal, has become par for the course. But the bar set by Guardiola for his side should not be taken for granted. Under him City are occupying rarefied air but the stratosphere is yet to be reached. A team featuring the glittering talents of De Bruyne, Rodri, Cancelo, Phil Foden, Bernardo Silva, Kyle Walker, Rúben Dias and Ederson have to become champions of Europe to seal immortality. Lead them there and Guardiola will join them. Fail and the question may linger about just how great he is.Police in Ottawa have warned they will begin breaking up blockades that have gridlocked traffic, angered residents and plunged Canada’s capital into a crisis that has rippled throughout the country. For 20 days, protesters and large semi-trucks have blockaded sections of downtown Ottawa, including Parliament Hill, the seat of the country’s government. The protests, which began as a demonstration against public health measures including vaccine mandates, have morphed into a broader anti-government movement as more fringe elements, including far-right and nationalist groups, became a growing presence. On Wednesday, officers began handing out leaflets warning protesters to leave the area immediately or face the possible loss of their vehicle licenses. “You must leave the area now,” the leaflet read. “Anyone blocking streets, or assisting others in the blocking streets, are committing a criminal offence and you may be arrested.” The warnings by police were largely met with disdain: protesters tore up the leaflets or tossed them on the ground. On Monday, the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, invoked legislation giving his government sweeping powers to end the “Freedom Convoy” protests. Ottawa’s deputy police chief, Steve Bell, said he believes the police now have the necessary reinforcements to bring the blockade to an end. But the police’s failure to prevent the protests in the beginning, and then to rid the city of the trucks over a three-week period, has baffled and angered residents of Ottawa and onlookers across Canada. Ottawa’s police chief, Peter Sloly, resigned on Tuesday as the force admitted they have little to show for the C$14m (US$11m)spent since the protests began. “I’ve watched in disbelief as this carnival of chaos has been allowed to continue,” said Diane Deans, chair of the Ottawa police services board, during a meeting on Tuesday. Despite local bylaws prohibiting the transport of fuel, protesters brazenly wheeled wagons and modified sleds full of diesel and propane past police – a day after the federal government invoked the Emergencies Act. The perceived apathy or impotence of the police when dealing with the convoy activists has also underscored what activists and academics say is a double standard in how officers respond towards Indigenous or Black-led protests. On Tuesday, video of Royal Canadian Mounted police embracing protesters at a dismantled blockade in southern Alberta laid bare the stark contrast. Only months before, the RCMP faced criticism for beating anti-logging protesters, ripping off their masks and using pepper spray on them. And in September, Toronto police violently disbanded protests supporting people living in a homeless encampment. Akwasi Owusu-Bempah, a sociology professor at the University of Toronto who specializes in policing and social inequality, said recent events show police are capable of using restraint during protests. “I know that that same level of restraint is not exercised at other times and with other populations,” he said. “There are some very clear differences between how a largely – although not wholly – white protest group is being policed here, and how, for example, Black and Indigenous people are policed when they’re exercising their right to peaceful protest,” he said. But while class and race may play a role in the recent lack of enforcement in Ottawa, Owusu-Bempah suspects that broader national security concerns could be playing a role in decision making. Officials have said they suspect that some Ottawa protesters have access to weapons, prompting a cautious approach over fears of escalation and violence. Earlier this week, police in Alberta seized a significant cache of weapons – including 13 long guns, handguns, body armour, a machete, a “large quantity” of ammunition, and high-capacity magazines – from a blockade near the border town of Coutts, Alberta, the same location where the video of the police embracing protesters was filmed. Four people were charged with the attempted murder of police officers. But Hayden King, head of an Indigenous-led policy thinktank, points out that Indigenous protests are rarely treated with a similar level of deference. “When it comes to Indigenous demonstrations, there does seem to be a disproportionate amount of force used. It’s not uncommon to see reconnaissance, and snipers on rooftops,” said King, executive director of the Yellowhead Institute and a member of Beausoleil First Nation. The protesters in Ottawa, as well as Coutts and those who blockaded the Ambassador Bridge last week, are overwhelmingly white. In instances where police believe Indigenous protesters could be armed, King says the response is often “overwhelmingly disproportionate” and includes the presence of assault rifles and dogs. He points to the 1995 Ipperwash Crisis, where police fatally shot Dudley George during a violent confrontation with Indigenous protesters. While Ottawa’s erstwhile chief had taken the job with hopes of reforming police and emphasizing the importance of de-escalation, King worries that the opposite outcome is more likely once the protests are inevitably broken up. “I imagine that police will use … this example as the justification for more funding, more militarization. And once that happens, after the tractor convoy leaves Ottawa or Toronto or wherever it is, police will be left with these resources. And they’ll use them against Indigenous people and against homeless encampments and Black activists,” he said. “The consequence of all this will be increased militarization of police, which will translate to even more disproportionate uses of force against Indigenous people.”“Stonehenge: built by immigrants,” reads a sign designed by the artist Jeremy Deller – a pithy reminder of an archaeological truth: that populations have been more mobile than is often convenient to believe in our modern age of borders and the nation state. Stonehenge was indeed built by “immigrants” – by the descendants of those who had crossed to Britain from continental Europe, bringing farming techniques with them, around 6,000 years ago. And from the medieval period, when mythographer Geoffrey of Monmouth claimed that it had been built by the wizard Merlin, to our own era of the druids, new age travellers and tourists who have worshipped, revelled and marvelled there, it has continued to accrue fresh new meanings and associations as each generation projects its own desires on to it. But one of the most intriguing points made by the curators of the new British Museum exhibition The World of Stonehenge is that the monument had a long and dynamic history of development and change before it began the second phase of its life as a ruin. The Wiltshire downlands around Stonehenge were, it seems, already special to the Mesolithic people who drove wooden stakes into the ground there before Doggerland, a territory that connected Britain to the continent, was subsumed into the North Sea around 8,500 years ago. Later, 5,000 years ago, the origins of Stonehenge itself were established when a mighty circular ditch and bank were built, with wooden posts or stones set just inside it. Not long afterwards, these were removed, and huge bluestones quarried in the Preseli Hills in Pembrokeshire were, remarkably, transported all the way to Wiltshire and set up there. Later still, around 4,500 years ago, came the erection of the giant sarsen stones. These prehistoric time periods are hard to wrestle with; archaeology can show us only a flickering, evanescent glimpse of the lives of the peoples of the distant past. The British Museum’s exhibition covers a span of 12,000 to 3,000 years ago. To give some context to those dizzying aeons, it is worth remembering that earliest surviving texts about these islands come from only around 2,000 years ago, when classical writers such as Diodorus Siculus and Tacitus described Britain’s misty climate and the terrifying behaviour of its chilly, gelatinous, grey seas. What can we know about the people who built and used Stonehenge? Their stone circles often align with solstice sunsets or sunrises, so it is possible to infer that the sun was an important part of their cosmology. They valued beautiful things, and devoted time and skill to creating highly polished, elegantly shaped mace heads and axe heads – and, later, golden ornaments. Some of them travelled surprising distances – the “Amesbury archer”, who was buried nearby in around 2,300BC, had probably grown up in the Alps. But what of their desires, their passions, their beliefs? Mostly, they are irrecoverable. The generations of humans, as Homer wrote, are like leaves – they die away, forgotten, and are replaced. To consider the deep past is an exercise in wonder. It should also, perhaps, be one of humility.In the end there was nowhere left to hide, and there were no good options remaining. Since 2015, Prince Andrew has sought to discredit allegations of sexual abuse made against him by Virginia Giuffre, who claims that as a teenager she was repeatedly forced to sleep with him by the sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein. The prince has repeatedly denied this and, in a car-crash interview with BBC Newsnight, said he had no recollection of ever meeting her. As the screws tightened and Ms Giuffre filed a civil damages claim last year, his lawyers accused her of seeking a “payday”, questioned her mental health and tried to have the lawsuit thrown out on technical grounds. All in vain. But it was only when the Duke of York’s back was against the wall, and cross-examination under oath before a jury loomed, that he threw in the towel on Tuesday and settled. The amount to be paid by the prince remains undisclosed, but Ms Giuffre’s lawyers have previously suggested that it would need to be large enough to represent “a vindication” of her claim. The accompanying statement by both parties contains no admission of wrongdoing on Prince Andrew’s part, but the formerly dismissive prince recognises his accuser’s bravery in standing up for herself and her status as a victim of sexual abuse. He states that he never intended to malign her character. This was anything but a legal score-draw. The settlement represents a major victory for an abused young woman from a modest background. Ms Giuffre’s determination to hold the wealthy, powerful and connected to account for their actions has been spectacularly validated. For Prince Andrew, on the other hand, it seems unlikely that this deal will deliver the kind of closure he must crave. Ms Giuffre’s lawsuit will not now cast a shadow over the Queen’s forthcoming platinum jubilee celebrations – a consideration which appears to have been a significant factor in the decision to settle. Future criminal charges are also rendered extremely unlikely. But the reputational damage to the monarch’s favourite son has been done. The damning verdict already delivered in the court of public opinion will only have been confirmed by Prince Andrew’s decision not to fight in an actual one. From the sustained nature of the friendship with Epstein – which continued even after a warrant was issued for his arrest over trafficking allegations – to the initial haughty indifference to Ms Giuffre’s claims, the prince’s behaviour has been that of a man who believed himself too powerful and too protected to be brought down. In that he was mistaken, and this misplaced, tin-eared hauteur contributed to his fall. The royal family has, in effect, cut him loose; the military titles and royal patronages have already gone and will not be restored. A campaign is under way to remove the title of Duke of York. Rightly, there is no comeback to public life in prospect. Prince Andrew’s future thus looks likely to play itself out in a purgatorial twilight, haunted by the grave allegations he chose not to refute in court. The terms of the settlement submitted to the New York judge, Lewis Kaplan, state that he will show his regret for his friendship with Epstein by supporting the fight against sex trafficking. But while the prince’s substantial donation to the charity set up by Ms Giuffre to support victims’ rights will be welcome, a more personal route to atonement is complicated by the fact that he has not admitted to any wrongdoing. The existential price of this settlement – more costly than the millions to be paid out to shut the case down – is a permanently stained reputation and a blocked path to public rehabilitation. It is a fate that Prince Andrew has brought upon himself.A former Post Office operator’s wrongful conviction over missing funds “massively contributed” to his early death, his widow has said. On an emotional third day of evidence in the inquiry into an IT scandal at the company, former Post Office workers said their lives “fell apart” and they were left feeling “worthless” and shunned after being wrongfully convicted. Some have called for the company’s former management to be jailed. Julian Wilson was one of more than 700 post office operators prosecuted between 2000 and 2014 based on information from the Horizon IT system, installed and maintained by Fujitsu. He ran a post office in Astwood Bank, Worcestershire, where auditors found more than £27,000 missing in the branch accounts. After being suspended in September 2008 and charged with false accounting and theft, he was left little choice but to take a plea deal to avoid prison, said his widow, Karen, and he was sentenced to community service and given a confiscation order for the missing money. After that he was unable to find work, their assets were frozen and she ended up pawning her belongings including her engagement ring to get by. Her husband “couldn’t face it” and “just hid himself for about a year”, she said, and he would sometimes “just fall apart and talk about suicide”. Wilson died of bowel cancer in 2016. His conviction was overturned in April 2021. His wife had promised him to fight to vindicate him. “He was only 67. I never said that this did kill him but it did massively contribute, definitely.” Earlier in the day the inquiry heard from William Graham, 53, who managed the Riverhead sub-post office near Sevenoaks. He was convicted for the concealment of supposed losses of £65,521 in January 2011 and received a suspended prison sentence. He was one of 39 former workers to have their convictions quashed by the court of appeal in April 2021. Fighting back tears, Graham told the inquiry his conviction had left him feeling worthless. “I visited the area with my wife and we were basically told ‘we shouldn’t be speaking to you, we shouldn’t talk to you, we shouldn’t be seen to be talking to you’,” he said. “Anyone I had on Facebook, social media, anything like that, immediately went. As soon as I was accused of theft, not even found guilty of anything, it was all my old customers on there … I just felt worthless, I felt worthless to my family, I felt they all saw me as a guilty person and, on paper, I was.” He paid tribute to his wife for standing by him through the ordeal. “If it wasn’t for her, I probably wouldn’t be here now. I would have got to a stage where I felt like I wouldn’t want to be here. I wanted it all gone.” Harjinder Butoy, 45, ran the Sutton-in-Ashfield branch in Nottinghamshire with his wife until he was arrested, charged and jailed for three years and three months in 2008 for stealing £208,000. When the guilty verdict came in, Butoyhe said, “I just fell apart”, adding that he “wasn’t prepared for it”. Gillian Howard, 62, who took over running New Mill Post Office in West Yorkshire after her husband had a stroke, said she had contemplated suicide when the branch was audited on 27 May 2010. “I talked to myself and I thought about my family … I knew I had to return and face whatever they were going to find and I didn’t know what they were going to find. I suspected a shortfall but I hadn’t counted it, I’d just balanced.” Howard pleaded guilty to fraud in relation to an alleged £45,850.05 shortfall, receiving a six-month community sentence order. She found out she was being prosecuted on the morning of her daughter’s wedding, which she said was the “worst day of my life”. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. For more information visit www.samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.My friend and colleague Roy Collins, who has died aged 73, was one of the most gifted, and probably the most underrated, of the happy band of Fleet Street sports journalists who travelled the world in the last decades of the 20th century. Roy was chief sports writer of the start-up mid-market tabloid Today throughout its near-decade of existence (1986 to 1995). Today was a pioneer of new production methods but struggled for profile in a crowded market, so too few people appreciated his sharp eye, fluent and witty style and wide sporting knowledge. Among his peers, though, Roy was considered very special: even in a profession full of characters he stood out as an instinctive contrarian and glorious madcap. In looks, build and character he had more than a touch of Basil Fawlty and his bar-room anecdotes of the latest outrage he had suffered tended to be detailed but always riveting. He was born in London, son of Charles, a typesetter, and Lilian, who died when he was 14. Roy’s schooldays were short but he gravitated into journalism and proved a natural. He trained on the Southend Evening Echo and left for a job that never materialised. Since Roy’s old post had been filled, the editor contacted a mate on the People, a Sunday paper with a massive sale in 1975, and recommended him. Starting with a downpage report on “a dreadful game” between Fulham and Blackpool, he moved rapidly up the pecking order before landing the starring role on Today. And though football was always his No 1 sport, he was a good judge of them all. Matthew Engel, as the Guardian man, sat next to Roy at the Mike Tyson-Buster Douglas fight in Tokyo in 1990, boxing’s biggest shock. Matthew recalled: “It was about round two and Roy said, ‘I reckon Douglas is winning.’ He picked that up much quicker than me and I suspect quicker than almost anyone.” When Today folded he went back to freelancing, which included seven years as the Guardian’s football feature writer. He brought with him the best skills of popular journalism including a well-filled contacts book (he ghosted George Best’s autobiography) and an unwillingness to take no for an answer. But he fitted perfectly into this paper’s more detached and stylish approach and might have made a fine successor to David Lacey as the No 1 correspondent. Instead he left in 2003 just as PR men became ubiquitous, making candid interviews with footballers near-impossible. Roy married Sheila Love in 1987 and she survives him, along with their daughter Lucy and granddaughter Eva. In 2010 Roy and Sheila moved to Spain. By then he had been diagnosed with leukaemia, which bedevilled his last years, but he remained on good form and still very much himself: surrounded by expats who were overwhelmingly Remainers, Roy voted Leave. Typical.Accusations of greenwashing against major oil companies that claim to be in transition to clean energy are well-founded, according to the most comprehensive study to date. The research, published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal, examined the records of ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell and BP, which together are responsible for more than 10% of global carbon emissions since 1965. The researchers analysed data over the 12 years up to 2020 and concluded the company claims do not align with their actions, which include increasing rather than decreasing exploration. The study found a sharp rise in mentions of “climate”, “low-carbon” and “transition” in annual reports in recent years, especially for Shell and BP, and increasing pledges of action in strategies. But concrete actions were rare and the researchers said: “Financial analysis reveals a continuing business model dependence on fossil fuels along with insignificant and opaque spending on clean energy.” Numerous previous studies have shown there are already more reserves of oil and gas and more planned production than could be burned while keeping below the internationally agreed temperature target of 1.5C. In May 2021, the International Energy Agency (IEA) said there can be no new fossil fuel developments if the world is to reach net zero by 2050. Oil companies are under increasing pressure from investors to align their businesses with climate targets. But their plans have faced scepticism, prompting the researchers to conduct the new research, which they said was objective and comprehensive. “Until there is very concrete progress, we have every reason to be very sceptical about claims to be moving in a green direction,” said Prof Gregory Trencher, at Kyoto University in Japan, who worked with Mei Li and Jusen Asuka at Tohoku University. “If they were moving away from fossil fuels we would expect to see, for example, declines in exploration activity, fossil fuel production, and sales and profit from fossil fuels,” he said. “But if anything, we find evidence of the reverse happening.” “Recent pledges look very nice and they’re getting a lot of people excited, but we have to put these in the context of company history of actions,” Trencher said. “It’s like a very naughty schoolboy telling the teacher ‘I promise to do all my homework next week’, but the student has never worked hard.” The new study, published in the journal PLOS One, found mentions of climate-related keywords in annual reports rose sharply from 2009 to 2020. For example, BP’s use of “climate change” went from 22 to 326 mentions. But in terms of strategy and actions, the researchers found “the companies are pledging a transition to clean energy and setting targets more than they are making concrete actions”. Chevron and ExxonMobil were “laggards” compared to Shell and BP, the researchers said, but even the European majors’ actions appeared to contradict their pledges. For example, BP and Shell pledged to reduce investments in fossil fuel extraction projects, but both increased their acreage for new exploration in recent years, the researchers said. Furthermore, the analysis found Shell, BP, and Chevron increased fossil fuel production volumes over the study period. None of the companies directly releases data on their investments in clean energy, but information they provided to the Carbon Disclosure Project indicates low average levels ranging from 0.2% by ExxonMobil to 2.3% by BP of annual capital expenditure (capex). Separate analysis by the IEA indicates that investment in clean energy by oil and gas companies was about 1% of capex in 2020. “Until actions and investment behaviour are brought into alignment with discourse, accusations of greenwashing appear well-founded,” the researchers said. A spokesperson for ExxonMobil said: “The move to a lower emission future requires multiple solutions that can be implemented at scale. We plan to play a leading role in the energy transition, while retaining investment flexibility across a portfolio of evolving opportunities, including for example carbon capture, hydrogen and biofuels, to maximise shareholder returns.” A Chevron spokesperson said: “We are focused on lowering the carbon intensity in our operations and seeking to grow lower carbon businesses along with our traditional business lines. We are planning $10bn in lower carbon investments by 2028.” Shell’s spokesperson said: “Shell’s target is to become a net zero emissions energy business by 2050, in step with society. Our short, medium and long term intensity and absolute targets are consistent with the more ambitious 1.5C goal of the Paris Agreement. We were also the first energy company to submit its energy transition strategy to shareholders for a vote, securing strong endorsement.” A spokesperson for BP said: “In 2020 BP set out our new net zero ambition, aims and strategy, and in 2021 completed the largest transformation of the company in our history to deliver these. Because this paper looks back historically over the period 2009-2020, we don’t believe it will take these developments and our progress fully into account.” Trencher rejected the charge that the analysis was out of date: “We included the documents that were published during 2021, so the so-called data gap is only about six months and we don’t find any evidence of any new actions that would change any of our findings.” “Unfortunately, the way the energy markets are structured around the world, fossil fuels still enjoy many [regulatory and tax] advantages and renewables are still disadvantaged,” he said.Scientists have modelled thousands of possible futures, and found that different social attitudes could make the difference between a temperature increase of just 1.8C or 3.6C by the end of the 21st century. Researchers dived into how the complex interactions between social factors, such as public opinion or adherence to the status quo, will affect the global heating trajectory by 2100 and found that there were five main possible outcomes. None of them meet the 1.5C Paris agreement target, but almost all achieve 0.5C less heating than the standard models, which don’t account for changes in social factors. “This paper looks across a lot of different disciplines in order to try and document some of these relevant feedback processes,” said Frances Moore, assistant professor in environmental science at UC Davis, and lead author of the paper, published in Nature on Wednesday. “Because these social factors are not independent of each other. If they are connected together, that’s going to lead to different behaviour rather than if you just look at any one piece of the system independently.” These findings suggest scientists should start making projections which also account for climate policy and social change in their calculations, says Moore. But it is sometimes complicated for scientists to factor elements such as social and political response into their projections. Often each aspect is examined in disciplinary silos, and not as a complex web of interactions which can quickly stymie a change of directions. “You have a little bit of a change and then there are connections in the system, and they either amplify or dampen that change,” said Moore. “These can drive some complicated dynamics where you can get fairly sudden changes, like these kind of tipping point-type changes, when it suddenly changes in ways that were not necessarily simple extrapolations of what you’ve seen before.” That’s why standard energy models often miss the mark and underpredict the rate at which renewable energy will grow in the future, for example. Moore and her team modelled 100,000 possible future global heating scenarios: in some models the researchers set institutions to have higher bias towards the status quo, or more responsiveness from the public, or decreasing costs of policy after policies are implemented, and so forth. Approximately 48% of the model runs paint a picture of what would happen if we continued on the path we’re on: global emissions would peak in the early 2030s, declining to zero by 2080, and temperatures in 2100 would have risen by 2.3C in comparison with pre-industrialisation temperatures between 1880 and 1910. Then, just over 5% of model runs represent “too little too late” or “delayed recognition” case scenarios, in which public opinion is too hard to change, political institutions are unresponsive, global emissions peak in 2050 and policies are delayed until after that – temperatures in 2100 are up to 3.6C higher than pre-industrialisation. In contrast, the “aggressive action” case scenarios, about 28% of model runs, results in a deep support for climate policy and plenty of emission-reduction technologies by the end of the 2020s, leading to zero global emissions by 2060. In 2100, Earth would be just 1.8C warmer than pre-industrialisation. Although there’s a lot of social science theory to back up these models, there’s still a very wide degree of freedom in the system. “Part of the problem is that there’s been very little attempt to actually put probabilities over these outcomes, because what typically happens in climate science is you kind of define an emissions trajectory, and you don’t really say how likely is that emissions trajectory over others,” said Moore. So although even the most aggressive action scenario fails to meet the Paris Agreement target to limit heating to 1.5C, there is a substantial probability of meeting the 2C Paris agreement target. None of these models take into account the growing use of carbon-fixing technologies though, so projecting how those will grow into the future, and adding that to the models, might also help meet some more ambitious targets, Moore said. “It’s an important scientific question, to understand how society is embedded in this climate system and what these couple feedbacks between society and climate are,” Moore said. “But it’s also important for adaptation planning.”France is expected to formally announce within days a phased withdrawal of its military forces in Mali after almost a decade, following months of diplomatic crisis between the two countries. The departure will mark an end to a fraught nine-year mission in Mali that French governments have argued is integral to regional security as well as preventing jihadist threats in Europe. Yet over the course of the mission, popular support in the Sahel for the withdrawal of France’s Barkhane military force, alongside smaller deployments from other countries, has gradually grown and the planned scaling down of France’s 5,000-troop presence in the region, about half of which is in Mali, had already been announced last year. Relations between France and Mali’s military leaders, aiming for a reset in ties with the former colonial ruler, have also suffered a bitter breakdown. France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, on Monday signalled that a total withdrawal of troops from Mali was forthcoming. “If the conditions are no longer in place for us to be able to act in Mali, which is clearly the case, we will continue to fight terrorism side by side with Sahel countries who want it,” he said. The formal announcement is expected at a two-day EU and African Union summit in Brussels beginning on Thursday. A French withdrawal could trigger the further departure of European military forces which make up the “Takuba taskforce”, according to documents seen by Reuters, suggesting France would “commence the coordinated withdrawal of their military resources from Malian territory”. A European diplomat also told the news agency it was “no longer a question of if they leave, but what happens with the troops, what happens to the UN peacekeeping force and what happens to the European Union missions”. Successive coups in Mali, first in 2020 when President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta was deposed, and again last year when the interim government was taken over, have upended historically close ties between successive Malian governments and France. The military regime of Colonel Assimi Goïta, who led both coups, has been subject to sanctions by regional west African leaders and the EU, drawing widespread criticisms for failing to agree a quick transition to democratic rule. The military rulers have said they plans to return power to a civilian government by 2026. The growing presence of Russian mercenary forces belonging to the Wagner Group have also fuelled tensions with France. In Mali, as well as Burkina Faso and Niger, popular resistance to the presence of French forces have led to significant anti-French protests, drawing several thousand in the Malian capital, Bamako. While France’s military has played a significant role in the counter-terrorism effort in the region, including training and supporting Malian forces, alleged abuses by French troops have sparked anger. An airstrike on Bounti Village by French forces in January 2021 killed 19 people and three armed men at a wedding, according to the UN and local community groups. Yet France have disputed the findings, insisting that it targeted terrorists. According to Nathaniel Powell, an analyst at Oxford Analytica, France’s military mission in the Sahel has had mixed results and its wider defence goals have suffered. “France’s overall security policy in the Sahel has been a massive failure and Barkhane is one the reasons for that. There have been tactical successes but [an] overall failure of foreign policy,” he said. Support for unpopular governments in Mali and the west African region, some of which have suffered military coups in recent years, have further undermined efforts to improve security and stability, he added, while French opposition to any negotiations between governments and the jihadist groups, has also fuelled popular upset at France. “Even if the negotiations don’t have a significant chance of success, it sent the message that France was an obstacle to resolving this and the sense that France is restricting governments from doing what they want to do.” Last year, President Emmanuel Macron reiterated that negotiations with terror groups, to end the crisis, would not be countenanced by France. “We cannot carry out joint operations with powers that decide to discuss with groups that, at the same time, shoot at our children. No dialogue and no compromise,” he said last June. Yet support for negotiations among some regional governments has persisted. A condition for negotiation by JNIM, a network of terrorist groups in the region, has been the removal of foreign forces. The possible exit of French forces may provide a greater opportunity for negotiations to take place. Yet according to a diplomat in the region, France is not likely to immediately withdraw its forces from Mali, giving time for diplomatic tensions between the two countries to ease. “You might see a situation in a few months time, when things may have calmed down, that France feels it can slow down this withdrawal if things get better.”South Africa have told the southern hemisphere’s governing body they are exploring their option of joining the Six Nations after 2025 as plans for a major overhaul of the global calendar gather pace. With powerbrokers of the global game due to meet next month to finalise plans for a ground-breaking biennial world competition, it has emerged that South Africa put Sanzaar on notice towards the end of last year. The Springboks have been increasingly aligning themselves with the northern hemisphere in recent years with the Bulls, Sharks, Stormers and Lions all joining the United Rugby Championship. On Wednesday Sanzaar revealed how the South Africa union had committed to the Rugby Championship until 2025 – in line with broadcast arrangements. That signals a significant sea change, however, because less than 18 months ago, a similar commitment was made until 2030. Last month the Six Nations chief executive, Ben Morel, said he was “extremely cautious” about expansion but the financial benefits are obvious for all parties and South Africa are said to be in talks with the private equity firm CVC, which has acquired stakes in the Six Nations, the Premiership and the URC. “They [South Africa] did put us on notice they were exploring their options – that was well before Christmas,” the Sanzaar chief executive, Brendan Morris, said. “We’ve got a number of international and local broadcast deals that are extended to 2025. There was never any cause for alarm that we were never going to meet those obligations. “We’re coming out of the worst three years in living memory of financial impact. Everybody has to do their due diligence in exploring what competitions to be involved in, and what provides the best opportunity for the best commercial outcome.” The Six Nations insisted its focus remains on revamping the July and November Test windows with key talks to take place next month. Those discussions could result in a new‑look world competition to be held every two years from 2024. The Rugby Football Union chief executive, Bill Sweeney, will be central to those discussions and though previous attempts to launch a World Nations Championship were consigned to failure in 2019 there is collective optimism that the biennial tournament – with a grand final in the November window – can get off the ground. The premise is largely similar to the World Nations Championship though it is being driven by the Six Nations unions and their Sanzaar counterparts. World Rugby is working closely with the unions and facilitating discussions but it is not taking the lead as was the case three years ago. According to a report in the Sydney Morning Herald, the competition would take place in non-World Cup and British &amp; Irish Lions years with the Six Nations and four Sanzaar teams joined by another two – potentially Japan and Fiji. All nations would accrue points throughout the Six Nations, Rugby Championship as well as the summer tours and November Tests. However, rather than teams such as England touring one southern-hemisphere side in the summer – as Eddie Jones’s side do in Australia in July – they would tour multiple countries, as the Rugby Championship sides do in November. “If we can work together for an outcome that produces a global champion every two years, engages our fanbases more than we do now and throughout the year, and provides a pathway for rugby’s emerging nations to improve and progress, then we can be in a much better position to grow our game and take it to the next level,” Morris told the Sydney Morning Herald. Some of the same stumbling blocks remain. The World Nations Championship effectively failed due to fears over introducing promotion and relegation to the Six Nations and again there is a push for the new competition to have two tiers and potential movement between them. Player welfare would also be an issue but the RFU is optimistic there would be less resistance from the Premiership clubs than in the past given a more collaborative approach with PRL. The Premiership, meanwhile, is to drop asymptomatic Covid testing with immediate effect in line with the rest of the elite game in England. The current testing protocols for Jones’s England squad will remain in place, however, to stay aligned with the rest of the teams in the Six Nations.The veteran activist Sarah White, who has died aged 80, was for more than half a century a stalwart of initiatives dedicated to anti-colonialism, anti-racism and multiculturalism. Co-founder with John La Rose in 1966 of New Beacon Books, the UK’s first black bookshop and publishing company, where she worked until recent years, she was also a founder member of the International Book Fair of Radical Black and Third World Books in the early 1980s, and a trustee and secretary, from 1991 onwards, of the George Padmore Institute, a home for documents relating to the black presence in Britain. Born in Welwyn, Hertfordshire, Sarah grew up in a family steeped in politics and the arts. Her mother, Dorothy (known as Dodo, nee Swinburne), was politically active with the Liberal party in Hampstead, north London, where Sarah was raised, while her father, Eric Walter White, was the Arts Council’s first literature director, as well as being a translator, editor, poet and author. Sarah attended Badminton school for girls in Bristol as a boarder in the 1950s, and went on to study the history of science and Russian at the University of Leeds (1959-62). Her political activism began as an undergraduate when she joined the Communist party of Great Britain, and she spent a year in Moscow (1963-64) on a course for teachers of Russian as a foreign language. Returning to London, she undertook a PhD at Imperial College London on the reception of Darwinism in Russia. During that time Sarah became involved with an anti-colonial exhibition and began doing voluntary work with the African National Congress, which had an office in Earl’s Court in London. Not far away was the West Indian Students’ Centre, where Sarah met John in the mid-60s. Together they built a partnership that, on a professional and personal level, lasted for more than four decades until John’s death in 2006. Sarah developed a close relationship with Michael and Keith, John’s sons from his marriage to Irma (nee Hilaire), and in 1966 Sarah and John started New Beacon Books in their flat in Hornsey Lane, near Crouch Hill in north London. The fledgling book service and shop took shape in the front rooms of premises where the couple variously lived, and Sarah would often use her moped to deliver items for sale at meetings and events. When she and John moved to their final residence, a whole room was completely shelved with books and made accessible to the public, at Albert Road in Finsbury Park. This was in 1968, shortly before the birth of their son, Wole, named after John’s friend, the Nigerian author and activist Wole Soyinka. In 1973 the bookshop found its current, dedicated home at 76 Stroud Green Road in Finsbury Park, close enough for Sarah to walk from home trundling a trolley-full of work. At the new headquarters, which also operated as an informal community hub, Sarah’s skills in production and proofreading were deployed to develop New Beacon’s publishing list, featuring titles by writers that included Wilson Harris, CLR James, Erna Brodber, Mervyn Morris and Ngugi wa Thiong’o. Using her training as a science historian, she also worked for many years on a part-time basis as the Soviet science consultant to New Scientist magazine, but by the mid-90s was focused almost entirely on the day-to-day running of the shop, with help from her fellow director Janice Durham and various volunteers. Sarah’s direct involvement continued until 2016, and although the shop was recently faced with closure, a successful crowdfunding venture appears to have guaranteed its future. Aside from New Beacon Books, Sarah was involved in a number of other related projects, including, in the late 60s, the Caribbean Artists Movement, set up by John with the poets Edward Kamau Brathwaite and Andrew Salkey to provide a platform for artists, intellectuals, writers and musicians to meet through events and conferences. In addition she lent her support to the Black Parents Movement, founded in 1975 to challenge police misbehaviour towards black youths. For the International Book Fair of Radical Black and Third World Books, collaboratively created by New Beacon, Bogle-L’Ouverture Publications and Race Today Publications in 1982, Sarah played a pivotal role behind the scenes – and particularly on its organising committee – until it was discontinued in 1995, being replaced by other associated ventures. With the 1991 establishment on the floors above the New Beacon bookshop of the George Padmore Institute – chaired by John, with input from others such as the academic Gus John, the poet Linton Kwesi Johnson and the psychiatrist Aggrey Burke – Sarah was closely connected with the development of archive collections held there to document the struggle of people of African, Caribbean and Asian descent in Britain. She served as trustee/secretary of the Institute until she fell ill in 2021. Down the years Sarah also co-edited several publications for the Institute and for New Beacon, including, with Roxy Harris and Sharmilla Beezmohun, A Meeting of the Continents (2005), documenting the history of the book fairs. Never one to foreground herself but valued for her selflessly committed contribution to racial equality, educational and social justice campaigns, Sarah had a sharp memory and intellect. Her cheery disposition was allied to great energy and a ready, distinctive laugh. She is survived by Wole. • Sarah Swinburne White, activist and publisher, born 5 April 1941; died 4 February 2022The US and the UK have sought to fend off a feared Russian invasion of Ukraine in part by going public with an unusual amount of intelligence, hoping to rob Vladimir Putin of the element of surprise. There have been regular briefings in Washington and London – sometimes from national security officials who do not often talk to the press – going into detail about potential Russian military tactics, regime change plots, and “false flag” operations Moscow is allegedly planning to provide a pretext for invasion. Derek Chollet, the state department counselor, said on Wednesday that the US and its allies wanted to warn of Russia possibly carrying out such operations in Ukraine “in order to hinder their ability to do so”. “We are trying to be as forthcoming as possible, to say that’s their play and what could be coming,” Chollet said. In doing so, the US and UK are trying to beat Russia at what has largely been Moscow’s game in recent years – or at least to provide better opposition. “I think it’s the west getting a little more savvy on using intelligence in an actionable way,” John Sipher, a veteran of the CIA’s clandestine service, said. “It’s what we used to call – when the Russians did it – information warfare, and it’s something we’ve never got very good at. “What’s interesting is this information isn’t meant for Americans or British citizens. It’s meant for one consumer: Vladimir Putin,” Sipher said. “He’s the one who knows whether it’s true or not. So if we put out intelligence that the Russians thought was secret, and Putin knows it’s true, he’s got to decide how it has consequences for what he was trying to do, and how it’s affecting his strategy.” US and British officials have repeatedly said the ultimate decision to attack or not will be Putin’s alone, and even he may be leaving it to the last moment to make up his mind. If the decision is indeed on a knife-edge, the thinking goes, any small factor, such as taking away the surprise element and the satisfaction of catching the west off guard, could make a difference. “We’re in an information war with the Russians and we have been for some time,” Angela Stent, director of Georgetown University’s center for Eurasian, Russian and east European studies, said. “I think the Russians have been taken by surprise. I think they didn’t realise how much the US and Britain knew about this, but also that they would put it out there publicly. So I think it’s possible that this has had the impact of making Putin maybe rethink some things he might do.” On Wednesday, the US State Department claimed Russia was attempting to create a “pretext” for invading Ukraine with unsupported claims of “genocide” and mass graves in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. Russian media published articles and photographs this week of purported secret mass graves in the region and on Tuesday, Putin claimed that Kyiv was committing “genocide” there. State department spokesman Ned Price claimed that Moscow was making the claims as an excuse for invading Ukraine. “There is no basis of truth to any of these allegations,” Price said. Fiona Hill, a former senior director for European and Russian affairs in the national security council, and co-author of a Putin biography, contrasted the current approach to the western response to past Russian operations, such as the attacks in Britain on the defectors Alexander Litvinenko and Sergei Skripal. “We never really kind of revealed what we knew about what they were up to, and then they were able as a result to take advantage of all the grey zones and the uncertainty and spin their own narratives,” Hill said. Going public also serves a domestic political purpose, especially for a US administration that has been widely criticised for failing to predict the collapse of the Afghan government and Taliban takeover last year. If there is a Russian attack, no one will be able to say the Biden White House was taken unawares. The flip side of that is if Putin does not attack, US and British intelligence will be accused of crying wolf and getting it wrong once more, especially as neither has shown evidence for their assertions. The Kremlin is already taunting the western media for reporting US and allied claims of imminent war. Another downside is that the deliberate alarmism is publicly alienating the government in Kyiv, which argues it is seeding panic among Ukrainian citizens and would-be foreign investors, insurers or trade partners. “This hysteria is now costing the country two to three billion dollars every month. We can’t borrow in foreign markets because the rates there are crazy. Many exporters refuse,” David Arakhamia, the head of the Ukrainian president’s Servant of the People party, told a local talk show, accusing western media of being more damaging than Russian propagandists. If Putin’s aim was not to carry out an invasion, with all the costs that would inflict on Russia, but to create an air of long-term crisis, then US and British amplification of the threat risks serving his purpose, argued Oksana Antonenko, a director of the global political risk team at the UK-based Control Risks consultancy. “The tactic only works if it’s a short term crisis,” Antonenko said. “But if we assume that what we’re facing at the moment is Putin’s long term strategy of applying pressure on Ukraine and managing confrontation with the west, then it is something which has a very high cost.”