The world is spending at least $1.8tn (£1.3tn) every year on subsidies driving the annihilation of wildlife and a rise in global heating, according to a new study, prompting warnings that humanity is financing its own extinction. From tax breaks for beef production in the Amazon to financial support for unsustainable groundwater pumping in the Middle East, billions of pounds of government spending and other subsidies are harming the environment, says the first cross-sector assessment for more than a decade. This government support, equivalent to 2% of global GDP, is directly working against the goals of the Paris agreement and draft targets on reversing biodiversity loss, the research on explicit subsidies found, effectively financing water pollution, land subsidence and deforestation with state money. The authors, who are leading subsidies experts, say a significant portion of the $1.8tn could be repurposed to support policies that are beneficial for nature and a transition to net zero, amid growing political division about the cost of decarbonising the global economy. The report calls for governments to agree a target to eradicate environmentally harmful subsidies by the end of the decade at the biodiversity Cop15 gathering in China later this year, where it is hoped a “Paris agreement for nature” will be signed, and for companies to reveal the subsidies they receive as part of environmental disclosure reporting. Christiana Figueres, who was head of the UN climate change convention when the Paris agreement was signed, welcomed the research. She said the subsidies were creating huge risks for the businesses receiving them. “Nature is declining at an alarming rate, and we have never lived on a planet with so little biodiversity,” she said. “Harmful subsidies must be redirected towards protecting the climate and nature, rather than financing our own extinction.” The fossil fuel industry ($620bn), the agricultural sector ($520bn), water ($320bn) and forestry ($155bn) account for the majority of the $1.8tn, according to the report. No estimate for mining, believed to cause billions of dollars of damage to ecosystems every year, could be derived. Lack of transparency between governments and recipients means the true figure is likely to be much higher, as is the implicit cost of harmful subsidies. Last year, an International Monetary Fund report found the fossil fuel industry benefited from subsidies worth $5.9tn in 2020, but the vast majority of this figure comes from the hidden costs of failing to make polluters pay for the deaths they cause and global heating. “Subsidy reform allows us to improve the price signals so that we are not protecting income in more polluting industries,” said Doug Koplow, founder of the organisation Earth Track, which monitors environmentally harmful subsidies, and co-author of the report, along with Ronald Steenblik, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s former special counsellor for fossil fuel subsidy reform. “It creates space for alternative and cleaner forms of energy to enter the marketplace.” A draft target in the UN biodiversity agreement for this decade calls for $500bn a year in subsidies to be reformed, but The B Team and Business for Nature, which supported the research, have said this must be strengthened. The world has never met a target on halting biodiversity loss, and the failure to act on subsidies was highlighted as a major issue from last decade’s targets. Eva Zabey, executive director of Business for Nature, said businesses were often unaware of the extent of explicit and implicit subsidies they benefit from, but could use their influence to call for change. “Many businesses are benefiting from these environmentally harmful subsidies. This cannot be a taboo topic. We need to speak using facts and understand where the financial flows are going,” she said. “Typically, the subsidies were established with good intentions in mind. We need to level the playing field because right now, some are benefiting from a head start when it should be the other way round. It’s a wicked problem.” Last year, a UN report found almost 90% of subsidies given to farmers every year are harmful, damaging people’s health, fuelling the climate crisis, destroying nature and driving inequality by excluding smallholder farmers. Elizabeth Mrema, the UN’s biodiversity head, said the report was critically important. “The report highlights how redirecting, repurposing, or eliminating subsidies could make an important contribution to unlocking the $711bn required each year to halt and reverse the loss of nature by 2030 as well as the cost of reaching net zero emissions,” she said. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresThe number of British 18-year-olds aiming to go to university directly from school continues to increase at a record pace, according to figures that show a surge in applications this year. The number of school-leavers applying for undergraduate courses starting in September increased by another 5% at the initial January deadline, faster than the age group’s demographic growth and after two successive years of steep rises in applications. According to the Ucas university admissions service, 320,000 sixth formers have applied for university places so far, compared with 306,000 in 2021 and almost 50,000 more than at the same stage in 2019. The latest figures cap a decade-long increase in the proportion of school-leavers opting for higher education. In England alone, 44% of all 18-year-olds applied in January, the highest on record. Ten years previously, in 2013, just 33% did so. There were also record rates of applications among students in Wales and Northern Ireland, while those in Scotland were second only to the rate recorded last year. The number of applicants from disadvantaged areas has also continued to rise, with 28% of 18-year-olds from areas with the lowest educational attainment applying, compared with just under 18% in 2013. Clare Marchant, Ucas chief executive, said universities had made greater use of online recruitment events such as virtual open days, as well as advertising courses on social media, during the Covid pandemic. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, which represents most secondary schools, said the rise in applications from disadvantaged areas was a testament to the hard work of teachers during the pandemic. “However, it needs to be remembered that far fewer disadvantaged young people enter higher education than their more advantaged peers, and that this gap is particularly stark at the most selective universities,” Barton said. Applications by international students through Ucas remained flat, thanks to a continued fall in the number of students from the EU applying. Since the UK’s formal exit, students from the EU face paying higher fees, and their numbers have slumped from nearly 17,000 applicants in 2019 to 10,000 this year. However, stronger growth among non-EU applicants has led to nearly 43,000 applications. 12% more students from China applied for courses, making a total of 14,500, and another 3,000 from Hong Kong. Last year also saw a sharp increase in the number of mature students aged over 21 applying for first degree courses. But as fears around the post-pandemic labour market receded, applications have fallen this year by 17%. The increased application rate among sixth formers in England suggests that the appetite for higher education remains undimmed, despite the government’s efforts to talk up the benefits of alternatives such as apprenticeships or other training. Michelle Donelan, the universities minister for England, said in a speech that, from next year, universities would be asked to include credit card-style smallprint on advertising for courses, including how many students go on to graduate-level jobs. “Just like a credit card advertisement including information about APR, university adverts will reflect the need for students to understand where a course can take them,” Donelan said. Donelan also announced that Ucas was to reform the use of personal statements by students as part of their university applications, amid concerns that the statements favoured more advantaged students.The Post Office and the government need to speed up compensation payments to workers who were victims of the Horizon IT scandal, according to a report by an influential group of MPs. MPs from parliament’s Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) committee have expressed concerns about the time taken to make settlements to former Post Office operators who were wrongfully convicted as a result of errors in the company’s computer accounting system. They have warned that compensation needs to be concluded urgently, as many of the former Post Office workers affected by the long-running scandal are elderly, some have already died while awaiting redress, while others remain at risk of losing their homes. The committee began holding hearings in 2020 about the Horizon IT scandal, one of the biggest miscarriages of justice in British legal history, and has now published an interim report. The committee has paused its hearings as the public inquiry into the scandal has got under way. In recent days, the inquiry has heard the moving testimony of people prosecuted by the Post Office about the impact of their wrongful convictions on their lives, and the resulting financial hardship. The public inquiry, chaired by the retired high court judge Sir Wyn Williams, is part of an investigation into the scandal. Between 2000 and 2014, the Post Office prosecuted 736 post office operators – an average of one a week – based on information from the Horizon IT system, which was installed and maintained by Fujitsu. A group of 555 former workers won a high court battle against the Post Office in December 2019, when a high court judge ruled that Horizon’s system contained a number of “bugs, errors and defects” and there was a “material risk” that shortfalls in Post Office branch accounts were caused by the system. Dozens of former Post Office workers have since had their convictions for theft, fraud and false accounting quashed by the court of appeal. Some of the convicted workers were sent to prison, others lost their livelihoods and their homes. Many went bankrupt, and some died before their names were cleared. The group of 555 who brought the legal action were awarded £57.75m, but the vast majority (£46m) was swallowed up in legal costs, leaving only about £20,000 in compensation for each person, which MPs said the victims view as “inadequate”. At the time of the high court verdict, the government decided this group could not apply for compensation through another scheme, known as the historical shortfall scheme (HSS). The MPs condemned how this had led to the “perverse situation” that workers who were part of the legal action faced receiving less compensation than others. “It is clearly entirely unacceptable that the group of 555 victims who first brought this scandal successfully to court are being left in a worse position than those who are being compensated thanks to their action,” said Darren Jones, chair of the committee. “There is no valid reason to exclude the 555 from being fully compensated and the chancellor must come forward with the required funding now.” The MPs expressed concern that over 570 sub-postmasters who were wrongly convicted as a result of Horizon have not yet come forward to begin the process of overturning their convictions, despite attempts by the Post Office to contact them. They are calling on the government to create an independent body to serve as a “trusted first point of contact” for those who were wrongly convicted. The Post Office has previously said it cannot afford to foot the huge clean-up bill for the scandal and the government, the service’s only shareholder, has confirmed the taxpayer would step in.New guidance on political impartiality in the classroom is confusing and likely to scare teachers in England away from tackling important subjects such as climate change and racism, according to education unions. The guidance issued by the Department for Education says that recent historical events “which are particularly contentious and disputed”, such as “many topics relating to empire and imperialism”, should be taught “in a balanced manner”. The DfE’s guidance singles out the Black Lives Matter movement, saying that while teachers should be clear “that racism has no place in our society”, the demands of campaigning organisations such as BLM “go beyond the basic shared principle that racism is unacceptable”. In teaching of scientific facts around climate change, teachers are told they should not provide balance in the form of misinformation or unsubstantiated claims. However, the guidance goes on to state that “where teaching covers the potential solutions for tackling climate change, this may constitute a political issue”. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, said: “I don’t want there to be any barriers – real or perceived – to teachers’ vital work in this space, which is why I am reinforcing that no subject is off-limits in the classroom, as long as it is treated in an age-appropriate way, with sensitivity and respect, and without promoting contested theories as fact.” But Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said that the guidance “does not so much clarify existing guidance as add new layers of mystification and complexity to it” for teachers and school leaders. “This could induce such a level of uncertainty and caution in schools about ‘political issues’ that they are less likely to engage with them,” Bousted said. “The losers in the DfE’s 34-page game of obfuscation about what is and is not a ‘political’ issue will be the students who are denied the opportunity to engage with the most challenging issues of our time. “The warning lights that the government is flashing around climate change, racism, world poverty and the legacy of empire as topics of exploration are more likely to decrease students’ engagement with learning than to stimulate it.” The DfE guidance – which contains no new statutory requirements and is based on existing legal duties – avoids defining “political issues”, stating that ethical debates are not political issues if they are “shared principles that underpin our society”, such as freedom of speech or challenging racism. Instead, school leaders and teachers are told to use “reasonable judgment to determine what is and is not a ‘political issue’”. The guidance also warns against reliance on teaching material provided by external agencies. In one scenario of teaching about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the document says teachers need to ensure that any external resources used are impartial. When teaching younger pupils about “significant” political figures, “including those who have controversial and contested legacies”, schools are advised “to focus on teaching about what these figures are most renowned for and factual information about them if teachers think pupils may not be able to understand the contested nature of more complex analyses of their lives, beliefs and actions”. More complex discussions about controversial figures “might be reserved for older pupils who are more likely to be able to understand and engage in this debate”. The Association of School and College Leaders said it would be “studying the guidance carefully to understand its implications”. “The vast majority of teachers are very good at managing these discussions in a way that is balanced and impartial. We welcome anything which helps them to navigate this difficult territory. However, we are keen that this should not be over-prescriptive as it could have the unintended consequence of deterring open discussions,” the ASCL said.Repeated heading and accidental head impacts in football cause changes to blood patterns in the brain, potentially interfering with signalling pathways, according to a study of players in Norway. The peer-reviewed research, published in the Brain Injury journal, is the latest item in a growing body of evidence pointing to the dangers of heading. It discovered “specific alterations” in levels of microRNAs in the brain upon analysing blood samples from 89 professional players in the country’s top flight. MicroRNAs are molecules that help to regulate gene expression, through which DNA instructions are converted into products such as proteins, in bodily fluids. The findings suggest that, given the change in levels, they may be able to be used as biomarkers to detect brain injury. Blood samples were taken from players after accidental head impacts in matches and after specifically designed training sessions. Forty-eight of the players, drawn from three teams, took part in a session that included repetitive heading drills from set pieces and similar scenarios; they also undertook one that involved other high-intensity exercise, with no head contact allowed. The results found specific changes in certain microRNA levels whose numbers were unaffected by the other high-intensity exercise. Accidental head injuries were found to alter the levels of eight microRNAs that high-intensity exercise did not affect, and repetitive headers were found to change six. The upshot is that, as well as potentially detecting brain injury, microRNAs may also be able to differentiate injury severity. Stian Bahr Sandmo of the Oslo Sports Trauma Research Centre at the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, which led the study, said: “This is a relatively small sample-size exploratory study but future findings expanding upon our research could ultimately lead to an improved understanding of the potential hazardous effects of repetitive head impacts.” The risks involved with heading have become a major talking point in football. New guidance was issued in July to limit players in the Premier League and Football League to 10 “higher force” headers in training sessions, although there is doubt over whether those guidelines are being followed and Nuno Espírito Santo publicly admitted ignoring them during his short time as Tottenham manager. Concussion substitutes have also been trialled in English football, allowing two replacements for players who have sustained head injuries.Most Covid deaths in Australia have affected migrants, with people born in the Middle East suffering the highest death rate, data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show. Despite just 26% of Australians being born overseas, new ABS data shows there were 2.3 Covid-19 deaths per 100,000 people born in Australia, compared with 6.8 for those born overseas. Experts say Australia’s reliance on migrants to undertake essential, insecure work and a failure to engage migrant communities early in pandemic planning is a key reason for this. The ABS data also supports previous data gathered throughout the pandemic that found deaths are higher in older populations and those with pre-existing conditions. Almost 70% of death certificates in Australia reported pre-existing chronic conditions such as dementia and diabetes, according to the data which analysed 2,639 deaths where people died with or from Covid-19 from the start of the pandemic to 31 January 2022. The ABS expects to receive further data for this period once it receives information from the jurisdictional registries of deaths. The data shows many of the hardest areas hit by the pandemic, such as in Sydney’s south-west, were also areas with high migrant populations. People born in the Middle East had the highest death rate at 29.3 deaths per 100,000 people. Dr Margaret Heffernan, a behavioural researcher with expertise in cross-cultural communication and vaccination, said numerous factors led to the high deaths among those born overseas that had little to do with their country or origin, but a lot to do with failures in the way they were treated in Australia throughout the pandemic. A failure of the federal and state governments to engage people from migrant backgrounds early during pandemic planning, or to communicate health information through appropriate avenues and in the correct language, led to a slow pandemic response in many areas with high migrant populations, she said. “The mediums of communication used did not sufficiently support their needs,” Heffernan, who is with RMIT University in Melbourne, said. “Then we get down to socioeconomic factors, and we know that many migrants are in the casual workforce, and therefore risk of exposure through their work is high because they often have multiple jobs in essential industries. “We then look at housing for many of our migrants. Many live in high-rise towers without adequate ventilation, so no balconies or windows they can open, and often very large numbers of people live together in some of the suburbs most affected by outbreaks. “Finally, the vaccine rollout was slow to get organised and to bring the vaccine to some of our most vulnerable people including migrants in aged care, and we also know from research that vaccine hesitancy can be an issue among migrant populations because of their cultural values towards health and wellbeing and the fear of what components are in the vaccine.” Cultural and linguistic diverse health promotion expert Daniel Reeders said migrants were doing the jobs other Australians often did not want to do, “where it’s very hard to protect yourself”. “We were slow to recognise the role of workplaces as the major driver of new transmissions,” Reeders, a PhD researcher with the Australian National University, said. “When I look at those data based on country of birth, what I’m seeing is people who have exposure to the so-called ‘dirty jobs’ that middle-class, Anglo-Saxon Australians usually don’t want to do, things like the meat processing, age and disability care, and hospital cleaners and porters. They are jobs where it’s very hard to protect yourself from close contact with your staff on high-density work floors and that combined with slow proactive health outreach programs drastically increased migrant exposure to infection.” Covid was the underlying cause of death for 2,556 Australians in the pandemic up to 31 January. This is more than 96% of deaths related to Covid, leaving just 83 people who died with – but not due to – Covid. The distinction between dying with or due to Covid has been controversial, with some vaccine and lockdown sceptics claiming that deaths were being overreported. Throughout the pandemic the statistical definition of a Covid death was a death of a confirmed case unless there is a clear alternative cause that cannot be related to Covid, such as trauma or a car accident. This caused confusion as more than 90% of deaths due to Covid had other conditions also listed on the death certificate. Of the 83 people who died with Covid up to 31 January, cancer was the most common underlying cause of death at almost 40%. Almost 40% of all Covid-related deaths up to 31 January were in more disadvantaged areas of Australia. The least disadvantaged areas saw less than 10% of the total deaths in the pandemic to this point. The ABS “indexes of socioeconomic disadvantage includes measures of income, education, employment and housing. Guardian Australia has previously reported that Covid outbreaks have repeatedly and disproportionately hit more disadvantaged groups. This was true during the 2020 Melbourne outbreak and the 2021 outbreak in New South Wales. These areas often also have lower access to social infrastructure such as health, education, early childhood, culture and emergency services. They also have disproportionately large households, overcrowding and low access to public open space. The shadow minister for multicultural affairs, Andrew Giles, said: “Where you were born shouldn’t determine your health outcomes.” “The disparity in Covid mortality rates between those born in Australia and migrants is shocking and getting worse,” he wrote on Twitter in response to the ABS data. “This has to be unacceptable. The Morrison government must start listening.” Heffernan said she agreed the deaths are unacceptable, but that her response to Giles and other politicians is: “If you’re also speaking for those constituents, what did you do about it? “What were you doing during 2021 to make sure their voice was heard, that they weren’t getting incorrect information, and that they were getting access to prevention? “I would ask any politician who is representing these communities, what did you personally do?”This morning as I was intricately pinning my school hijab around my head, I was thinking of how privileged I am to be able to wear my hijab to school. But it shouldn’t be a privilege, it is my right. It shouldn’t be something that Muslim women everywhere have to continue to fight for day after day. I feel for my hijabi sisters all around the world. What would I do if I had to choose between getting an education and wearing my hijab? Recently, a young Muslim student wearing a hijab in the Indian state of Karnataka was taunted by a mob of male anti-Muslim protesters. Watching the footage, I felt disgusted and scared, seeing a young hijabi woman like myself being assaulted, while doing absolutely nothing wrong. Simply trying to get an education. Just last week, shockingly close to home, a hijabi high school student in New Zealand was filmed as other school students forcibly removed her hijab and proceeded to share the video of the taunting on social media. The hijab these women wear is demonised by many in their communities, countries, and unfortunately all around the world. This Islamophobia is devastating, but unfortunately, Muslim women being the subject of hatred and abuse is nothing new. Malala Yousafzai, women’s rights activist and Nobel peace prize winner, tweeted: “Refusing to let girls go to school in their hijabs is horrifying.” This statement seemed like any humane response to such an appalling incident. However, scrolling through the Twitter comments, I was taken aback by how prominent anti-Muslim rhetoric is. One read: “Regressive practises of the Middle Ages belong to the Middle Ages.” Another one wrote: “Wearing hijabs in schools creates differences.” As a young Muslim woman who wears hijab, I know that Islamophobia is common, whether it’s in Australia, India or around the world. However, the sheer dominance of Islamophobic views displayed in comments like these startles me. The legislative discrimination in many countries against the rights of Muslim women to wear the hijab is equally frightening. What Muslim women are experiencing is known as “gendered Islamophobia” and is the hatred we receive with our intersecting Muslim and female identities. While this worldwide vilification of hijabis occurs, we’ve been simultaneously fed lies regarding the acceptance of hijab and the “progression” we are making. Last month Vogue France shared an image of Julia Fox wearing a balaclava and headscarf. The image was posted with the caption “yes to the head scarf” – in a country that actively undermines the right of women to wear the hijab. The since-edited post sparked outrage, and rightfully so, with this double standard. While we may try to convince ourselves that we are different in Australia, the truth is unfortunately Islamophobia is widespread here too and hijabis such as myself are the biggest target. I’ve experienced Islamophobic Twitter comments against me: “Dress and look like a real Australian” and “Perhaps if these people could attempt to assimilate rather than try and impose on us what they allegedly fled from.” My family and I have been yelled slurs at by random people on the street, mocking our religion. These encounters are devastatingly the norm among my Muslim community, with many hijabis having experienced this hatred. A report by the Australian Human Rights Commission last year showed that 80% of Muslims in Australia have experienced discrimination. From the perspective of a 14-year-old hijabi, I am urging you to stand in solidarity with us – to call out racist behaviour and attacks on hijabis anywhere you see it. Do not turn a blind eye to Islamophobia, especially on innocent hijabi targets. Advocate for our rights on social media and educate yourself about the hijab. What Muslim women like myself need is the recognition that this anti-hijab rhetoric is anti-human rights. Action needs to be taken against policymakers in nations such as France and India, where they are oppressing hijabis. In Australia, we need better representation of Muslim women in all spheres – media, politics and literature. To all the women around the world who are constantly being judged on what you do or do not wear, I see you. To my beautiful hijabi sisters around the world who are banned from wearing the hijab, I see you. To my hijabi sisters in India or elsewhere who are denied an education because they wear the hijab, I see you. To my hijabi sisters in France or elsewhere who are denied from playing the sports they love because they wear the hijab, I see you. If the time comes where I ever have to choose between wearing my hijab and getting an education I truly hope the people of the world see me, I hope they see my struggle and I hope they share their outrage, as I am today. • Anhaar Kareem is a 14-year-old student at Al Noori Muslim school in Sydney’s westAustralia’s jobless rate hovered at 13-year lows last month even as disruptions from the Omicron Covid strain kept staff at home, slashing hours worked by many. The country’s unemployment rate was 4.2% in January, unchanged from December when the measure sank to a 13-year low, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said on Thursday. The result was in line with market economist forecasts. The economy added 12,900 workers and the participation rate edged 0.1 percentage points higher to 66.2%. Most notable though was the slump in time worked, with hourly employment sinking a seasonally adjusted 8.8% or 159m hours. NSW and Victoria, which saw the sharpest spike in Covid cases and the related furloughing of workers and close contacts, led the drop in hours worked, diving 13.5% and 13.2%, respectively. Western Australia, which maintained its border restrictions, posted a 1.7% increase in hours worked. The drop in hours was the most since April 2020, during Covid’s first wave. CBA said the reduction in NSW was a record decline. Queensland led states in jobs added, with 17,400 more positions in January ahead of WA’s 8800. NSW shed 22,800 jobs, while Victoria’s lost 8800. As for jobless rates, Victoria’s 4.07% in seasonally adjusted terms was the lowest on record for that state, the ABS said. The ACT had the nation’s lowest rate at 3.2% ahead of WA at 3.7% and Tasmania and Northern Territory both at 3.8%. South Australia, which goes to the polls next month, had the highest unemployment rate at 4.8%, with Queensland at 4.4% and NSW on 4.2%. Bjorn Jarvis, head of ABS’s labour statistics unit, said a 4.9% drop in hours worked in January 2021 had mostly reflected people jumping at the chance to grab annual leave after lockdowns eased. This year though, the 8.8% drop reflected Covid-related sick leave. “Nationally, and in New South Wales and Victoria, the number of people who worked reduced hours because they were sick was around three times the pre-pandemic average for January,” Jarvis said. “January is the middle of summer and usually only about 90,000 to 100,000 people in Australia are away from work sick for an entire week,” he said. “In January 2022 it was about 450,000 people [or] 3.4% of employed people.” CBA economist, Stephen Wu, said the jobs figures were likely understating the strength and tightness of the labour market, and added to mounting evidence of rising wages growth. The ABS will release the December quarter wage price index on 23 February and the CBA forecasts it to have increased by 0.8% compared with the previous three months, taking the annual rate of wages growth to 2.4%. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive, Andrew McKellar, said the continued jobs growth last month was “a very reassuring sign”. “It’s clear businesses have worked hard to retain their employees despite difficult circumstances, which is demonstrated by stability in the unemployment rate and further increase to jobs numbers,” McKellar said. “The ultra-low unemployment figures make clear that further emphasis is needed to boost workforce participation,” he said, adding that this should include more investment in skills and the establishment of “an ambitious skilled migration program to plug widespread workforce shortages”.Restrictions introduced to curb the spread of Omicron across Australia’s two most populous states will be eased over the next week as cases continue to drop in New South Wales and Victoria. The changes, similar across both states, will begin to take effect from Friday. However, the lifting of the indoor mask mandate remains another week away. In Victoria, from 6pm on Friday, density limits at hospitality and entertainment venues will be removed, dancefloors can reopen and QR code check-ins will no longer be required in retail settings, schools and many workplaces. In New South Wales, from 12.01am Friday, density limits will be scrapped, QR codes will remain only for nightclubs and music festivals with more than 1,000 attenders, and singing and dancing can resume at venues other than at festivals. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, also announced the recommendation to work from home would be lifted, returning it to the employer’s discretion. However, masks will still be required until 25 February. “These changes are measured and proportionate to the circumstances we find ourselves in and are particularly due to the efforts of everybody across our state,” he said. Victoria has not changed its work-from-home advice, with the state’s premier, Daniel Andrews, telling reporters he expected further restrictions would be eased next week. “We’re confident that we’ll be able to get to a situation next Friday where masks are off in the office and the advice changes – the advice drops, people will then be free and in fact, we’ll be encouraging them to go back to the office,” he said. Under the NSW plan, Friday 25 February will see the indoor mask mandate removed except in select venues including public transport, airports, hospitals and aged care facilities. Masks will still be encouraged in indoor settings where it is difficult to retain a safe distance and for customer-facing retail workers. Perrottet said he did not want “restrictions in place for any longer than necessary” but would not hesitate to reintroduce measures if the situation changed. Perrottet also flagged the government could bring forward the resumption of usual weekday train services from 28 February to coincide with the expected uptick in commuters as workers return. “If we need to make some changes based on the decisions today, we will,” he said. Non-urgent elective surgery will also return across all NSW public hospitals from next week. NSW Health deputy secretary, Susan Pearce, asked for patience as the services return due to furloughing of staff, with about 1,800 healthcare workers still off due to infection of isolation. “It will not occur at the same rate throughout our hospitals,” she said. Andrews said Victoria’s settings would be “as close as they can be” to those in New South Wales. “That sense of unity, that sense of consistency has served us well right throughout this summer and we’re keen to keep that going,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Victoria will keep check-in requirements in place in venues where proof of vaccination is required, including bars, restaurants and cafes, hairdressers, beauticians and other personal care services, as well as some community and entertainment venues. Health minister Martin Foley said when the density quota was announced on 6 January, only 12.7% of Victorians aged 16 and older had their third Covid-19 vaccine, compared to 52.2% on Thursday. When dancefloors were closed on 10 January, 818 Victorians were hospitalised with Covid-19 compared to 401 now. “In relation to the next set of measures, the public health advice is clear that we just need to see the next few days to see this trend stabilise and continue,” Foley said. Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief Paul Guerra said while Thursday’s announcement was good news for hospitality operators and nightclubs, a plan was desperately needed for office workers. “The many CBD businesses that rely on weekday trade from office workers have been screaming out for a signal of when and how they can return, and they continue to languish while the bills mount up,” he said in a statement. “The Victorian Chamber is encouraging the state government to urgently remove the ‘strong recommendation’ that people work from home, remove the requirement to wear a mask at your desk and fund a voucher stimulus scheme for weekday hospitality and accommodation to help our city, suburbs and regions to roar back.” Victorian Opposition leader Matthew Guy said the government did not go far enough with the easing of restrictions. “What Victorians got was the removal of QR codes in settings where the public has already stopped using them, and the continuation of the mask rule that is suffocating our CBD,” he said. Several other Victorian changes were also announced on Thursday, including that international arrivals will no longer need to obtain a permit to enter the state, and the hotel quarantine period for unvaccinated travellers will be reduced from 14 days to seven days. NSW will also halve the length of hotel quarantine for unvaccinated international arrivals from Monday 21 February. Hospital worker “bubbles” will be removed, although health services can continue to use them at their discretion, while rapid antigen testing requirements in industries such as meat processing will go from mandatory to “recommended”. A twice-weekly rapid testing program for school and early childhood staff and students, however, will continue until the end of the term. Education minister James Merlino said modelling from the Burnet Institute showed the program had prevented 21,000 Covid-19 cases at Victorian schools. “That modelling shows that will prevent a further 61,000 cases in students and 150,000 cases in the community,” he said. The government will provide a further 24m rapid antigen tests to schools and early childhood education centres, in addition to 15.6 million tests already provided. The government will also distribute a further 60,000 air purifiers to schools by 1 June. Victoria saw 18,825 students and 1,934 teachers infected since the start of the term. Meredith Peace, the Victorian branch president of the Australian Education Union, said the surveillance testing program, along with mandatory masks indoors for all staff and students in year 3 and above and the rollout of air purifiers, had provided school communities with confidence. “While we don’t want anyone to get Covid-19, what it is doing is making sure that those people aren’t either at work or school,” she said. “There are obviously multiple cases in some schools but we haven’t seen any strong evidence of it multiplying over a number of days, when you compare that with what we saw in terms of outbreaks in school communities last year.”Russia is continuing to send troops to what is now the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war, contradicting Moscow’s claims of a drawdown on Ukraine’s border, Nato’s secretary general has said. Hours later a senior US official told reporters that Russia’s claims of withdrawal of some troops were “false” and that Moscow had “increased its troop presence along the Ukrainian border by as many as 7,000 troops”, many of them arriving in the past 24 hours. “Every indication we have now is they mean only to publicly offer to talk and make claims about de-escalation while privately mobilizing for war,” the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said. Despite suggestions from Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, that a “partial” withdrawal was in effect, Jens Stoltenberg said Russian military capability was only increasing in number and strength. In a warning shot to the Kremlin, Stoltenberg, a former prime minister of Norway, announced that the military alliance was considering deploying further battle groups in eastern and central Europe. They would complement those established in 2014 in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, led by the UK, Canada, Germany and the US. The French government has offered to lead a force in Romania. “We will have advice from the military commanders within weeks and we will make a decision after that,” Stoltenberg said during a break in talks between Nato defence ministers in Brussels. “What we see today is that Russia maintains a massive invasion force ready to attack with high end capabilities from Crimea to Belarus. This is the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war.” The British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said the UK was doubling the number of personnel in Estonia and sending additional equipment, including tanks and armoured fighting vehicles. Four additional UK Typhoon jets landed in Cyprus on Wednesday in order to patrol the skies of eastern Europe. In reference to a series of cyber-attacks that have knocked the websites of the Ukrainian army, the defence ministry and major banks offline, Stoltenberg told reporters: “What we see is that Russian troops are moving into position and we saw the cyber-attack. And these are the kinds of actions and measures that we expect will come in advance or bigger military intervention into Ukraine.” The potential deployment of further battlegroups risks antagonising Putin but the alliance is seeking to emphasise to Russia that its aggression will only lead to a larger Nato presence to its west. Stoltenberg said Nato was “prepared for the worst” while holding out hope that the signalling from Putin in recent days was evidence of a sincere desire to find a diplomatic way through the crisis. He said: “So far we have not seen any de-escalation on the ground. On the contrary, it appears that Russia continues the military buildup. “What we see is that they have increased the number of troops and more troops are on their way and so, so far, no de-escalation.” Stoltenberg said the evidence on the ground “contradicts the message of real diplomatic efforts”, and warned that Russia’s attempted leveraging of military force to force countries to acquiesce to its demands should be seen as the “new normal”. US officials repeated warnings of “false-flag” operations such as fabricated attacks, designed to provide a pretext for a Russian invasion. “We continue to receive indications that they could launch a false pretext at any moment to justify an invasion of Ukraine,” a senior official said. “That false pretext could take a number of different forms: a provocation in the Donbas; a claim about Nato activity by land, at sea, or in the air; an incursion into Russian territory.” The official pointed to fabricated stories in the Russian media in the past few days, such as a report of an unmarked grave of civilians supposedly slaughtered by Ukrainian troops, or claims that the US and Ukraine are developing biological or chemical weapons. “Each of these allegations is categorically false, and we should expect more false reports from Russian state media over the coming days,” the official said. US secretary of state Antony Blinken echoed Stoltenberg’s analysis, as the White House backed a formal demand at the OSCE’s Forum for Security Co-operation from Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia for Belarus to provide firm details within 48 hours of the scale of the Russian military force on its territory. “Unfortunately there’s a difference between what Russia says and what it does, and what we’re seeing is no meaningful pullback,” Blinken said. “On the contrary, we continue to see forces, especially forces that would be in the vanguard of any renewed aggression against Ukraine, continuing to be at the border, to mass at the border.” In a rare public statement, the UK defence intelligence chief, Jim Hockenhull, added that he had “not seen evidence” of a drawdown in Russian troops. “Russia has the military mass in place to conduct an invasion of Ukraine,” said Hockenhull. During a press conference with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, in Moscow on Tuesday, Putin had told reporters that he was undertaking “a partial withdrawal of troops from the areas of our exercises”. On Wednesday, the Russian defence ministry released footage on its Zvezda television channel reportedly showing tanks, armoured personnel carriers and mobile artillery elements of the 42nd motorised rifle division crossing the Crimean Bridge and heading away from the peninsular. Izvestia, a Russian newspaper with sources in the defence ministry, reported that the units returning to their bases were the 3rd, 42nd, and 150th motorised rifle divisions. Analysts noted, however, that two of the three of those divisions are stationed very close to Ukraine. The 3rd motorised rifle division has permanent bases to the north-east of Ukraine while the 150th motorised rifle division is garrisoned near Rostov-on-Don, just to Ukraine’s south-east. Just the 42nd motorised rifle division would be taking a longer trip back to Chechnya, if the units return to their permanent bases. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, dismissed the claims of reinforcements. She said: “Frankly, I can tell you the truth. We’re not interested in these statements made by Stoltenberg, who is either Nato secretary general or a banker, I haven’t figured out which yet. We’re no longer interested in them. He is not a person whose statements Moscow would consider serious arguments. He is a Nato has-been now.” Stoltenberg is to leave Nato at the end of September, becoming chief of the Norwegian central bank in December. The US president, Joe Biden, said in an address on Tuesday that he believed that more than 150,000 Russian troops remained near Ukraine’s borders, more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. Stoltenberg would not give a definitive number with regard to the size of the Russian presence on Wednesday, noting that the Kremlin pulled troops back and forth over time. “We are seeing that it goes up and up and up – and it continues to increase,” he said. “Of course, what we’ve seen several times over the last months is that they move in with a high number of troops and heavy equipment. Then they take most of the troops out again but the equipment stays. Then they can very easily, very quickly, send the personnel back again and they are operating up with all the capabilities in place.” He added: “It is not too late for Russia to step back from the brink of conflict and choose the path of peace. Nato has sent concrete written proposals to Russia on transparency, risk reduction and arms control. We have yet to receive a response. I reiterate my invitation to Russia to meet again in the Nato-Russia Council.” In Strasbourg, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, told that EU was ready for the fallout of conflict, including a reduction in gas supply, as alternatives had been negotiated and that Europe was “now on the safe side of winter”.Senior public servants have been accused of misleading parliament over a $1.7m contract awarded to a consultancy firm for welfare policy research the government refuses to release. The secretary of the Department of Social Services, Ray Griggs, speaking to parliament, confirmed on Thursday he was investigating whether the handling of the contract awarded to Boston Consulting Group breached commonwealth procurement rules. The admission follows an ongoing freedom of information battle between the department and Guardian Australia over the research, with the questions over the contract first raised in parliament by the Labor frontbencher Katy Gallagher 15 months ago. The bulk of the research, which Guardian Australia sought under FOI laws, remains a secret in part because the department has ruled disclosure may harm Boston Consulting Group’s business interests. There is no suggestion of any wrongdoing from BCG. Gallagher told Senate estimates on Thursday she was considering a referral to the privileges committee. Gallagher complained past answers officials had provided about the contract misled parliament about the nature of the research. “It does look to me that the committee has been misled on a number of times, through my questioning and through misleading questions on notice,” she said. At issue is a $1.7m extension to an initial contract awarded to Boston Consulting Group worth about $1.5m. The initial contract was for a report into the Disability Employment Services program. BCG’s damning report, which officials initially refused to release to Senate estimates, was eventually released to Guardian Australia under FOI laws. Before the report was released publicly under FOI, a department official had told Senate estimates the initial BCG report had no recommendations, though it was later revealed to have had more than 60. However, officials have remained tight-lipped about what the department got for the extra $1.7m, only saying it was for “additional policy research” that related to people with “partial capacity to work”. One official insisted there was no report provided by BCG. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In December, the department released to Guardian Australia about 300 slides of the “additional policy research”, which included an “executive summary” and appeared to be focused on analysis of people on working-age welfare payments. Most pages were redacted, with the department arguing release of the research may harm BCG’s business interests by disclosing its modelling methodologies. Gallagher asked in parliament how this could not have been considered a report. She has argued the contract should not have been extended without a fresh procurement process given it was clearly unrelated to the initial tender. “Officers … think that it’s absolutely OK to double, in fact, more than double” the price of one contract with an unrelated piece of work and not allow any transparency or accountability about that,” she said. “It was $3.3m of taxpayers funds … of which half of that was hidden in another contract saying it was about a mid-term review of the disability employment services program.” Griggs told Senate estimates on Thursday he was investigating the contract, including whether commonwealth procurement rules had been breached. Griggs conceded there had been “non-compliance with internal processes” and “less than better practice” with the commonwealth procurement rules. He said he had already taken a number of steps to tighten the department’s procurement processes. Griggs also promised to investigate whether the FOI decision used to suppress the research was correct. Kathryn Campbell, who was the department secretary at the time, is not accused of wrongdoing. Campbell is now the secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The social services minister, Anne Ruston, said she was sure officials would have provided information to parliament in “good faith”.Indigenous women have been birthing since time immemorial, when the lands were pure and the dreaming stories were a reality. Birthing is the first ceremonial journey we go through to leave the spirit world to come into the physical world. Our connection to our ancestors and our culture provides our people with a sense of belonging and grounds our ways of knowing, being and doing. For thousands of years Indigenous women have used traditional birthing medicines and methods while caring for women in labour, birth and postpartum periods. A continuation of thousands of years of knowledge that has been diluted and overtaken by the western models of medical care. The dispossession of traditional Indigenous birthing methodologies has led to the loss of cultural birthing practices, languages and self-determination of the oldest living peoples on the planet. But we are still here and not defeated! Indigenous maternal and neonatal outcomes are disappointing given that Australia prides itself on the delivery of safe clinical maternity care. Indigenous women are disadvantaged when it comes to culturally safe maternity care and often experience racism when accessing mainstream services, which causes distrust and disengagement. The lack of action by the Australian government to implement a midwifery-led continuity of care (CoC) model has had a profoundly negative impact on the outcomes of mothers and babies, many of which can be prevented. Indigenous neonates are twice as likely to die within the first year of life than non-Indigenous babies due to premature birth and low birth weight. According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Indigenous mothers are three times more likely to die in childbirth, at a rate of 17.5 in 100,000 births, compared with non-Indigenous women at 5.5 in 100,000. Nationally, Indigenous midwifery is in crisis, with less than 300 practising midwives. The Congress of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Nurses and Midwives is working with national bodies and government to highlight the urgency and work towards increasing the number of Indigenous nurses and midwives across the country. A 2014 study found that Indigenous women felt more comfortable and were more likely to access maternity care when they were being cared for by an Indigenous midwife because they felt a deeper connection and understanding linked to our shared intergenerational trauma from invasion. Indigenous women have described their personal experiences across most mainstream services as “racist, judgemental and not safe”. If women are feeling this way about mainstream services, then this is a systemic problem, not an Indigenous problem. If systems are not safe or approachable we cannot continue to blame women for not accessing crucial maternity care or for their outcomes. Racism within mainstream services exists and it’s partly why our women refuse to access these services. Health disparities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people remain substantial, and this is largely due to the lack of understanding and investment in Indigenous ways of knowing, being and doing. The need to acknowledge and invest in Indigenous-led initiatives, including organisational holistic models of care to eliminate the existing historic disparities, is vital to improve outcomes for Indigenous people. The good news is there are Aboriginal community-controlled health organisations across the country, leading the way regarding best practice and culturally led holistic care for their communities. In New South Wales, Waminda South Coast Women’s Health and Welfare Aboriginal Corporation have been caring for community for over 37 years, working from an Indigenous strengths-based perspective and embedding culture as the foundation of health and wellness. Our goal is to work alongside community members by providing access to cultural, spiritual, physical and emotional wellbeing programs that have been developed and informed by community. We address the social determinants of health which directly and indirectly impact a person’s wellbeing and ability to live thriving and empowering lives that create strong communities, strong women and strong families. Our birthing on country model is embedded within our broader model of care. This allows a whole-of-life approach that is individually tailored. We have been advocating for birthing on country for more than five years and it’s now time for action and investment to give our mothers and babies the opportunity for a cultural birth guided by ancient traditional ways. • Melanie Briggs is a Wodi Wodi Dharawal Gumbayngirr Waranj and a traditional birthing rites advocate for #BirthingOnCountry. Melanie is a senior midwife for Waminda South Coast Aboriginal Women’s Health and Welfare Corporation and was the first endorsed Aboriginal midwife in NSW. She is currently one of only two endorsed Aboriginal midwives in AustraliaJapan is to ease its strict border controls from next month, media reports said on Thursday, after criticism from students, workers and family members who have been in effect “locked out” of the country for up to two years. The restrictions, which limit arrivals to Japanese citizens and returning foreign residents, have affected 150,000 students, triggering accusations from politicians and business leaders that the ban is damaging the country’s economy and international image. Japan briefly relaxed the rules last year but tightened them again in November in an attempt to prevent the spread of the highly contagious Omicron variant of the coronavirus. The opening up will be incremental, however, and will not apply to tourists. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, is expected to announce later on Thursday an increase in daily arrivals from 3,500 to 5,000, as well as a reduction in quarantine from a week to three days for people with a negative test result and proof they have had a booster shot. “We are considering how to ease the border control measures by taking into account scientific evidence that has become available regarding the Omicron strain and the changing infection situations at home and abroad,” the chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, said, according to the Kyodo news agency. Kishida had appeared reluctant to relax the measures, which are popular with the public, ahead of upper house elections in July. But he has come under pressure from business leaders who said the restrictions amounted to a “seclusion policy” that would worsen Japan’s chronic labour shortage. Member of Kishida’s own party said the ban was pointless given that Omicron had become the dominant strain in Japan. “If you look at the overall situation now, they’re meaningless; you can get the virus anywhere. But as a result of having [the restrictions], [Kishida] got a lot of public support,” said political analyst Atsuo Ito. Failure to lift at least some restrictions would risk seeing Japan being “left behind by the rest of the world”, he added. Government health experts said a sixth wave of the virus fuelled by Omicron had peaked earlier this month after data showed week-on-week falls in new infections in most age groups. While new cases are trending down, Japan’s most recent wave of infections has taken a toll on more vulnerable people, with a record 236 deaths reported on Tuesday. Only about 10% of the population has received a booster jab, compared with more than 50% in South Korea and Singapore, prompting Kishida to announce a daily target of 1m third shots a day.Australia and New Zealand have reached an “in principle” deal to resettle refugees from Australia’s offshore detention regime, with negotiations due to be finalised in “the next few weeks”. The Australian home affairs department secretary, Mike Pezzullo, told a Senate committee hearing on Monday that New Zealand’s longstanding offer to accept 150 refugees from Australia’s offshore islands “would go back for a final round of negotiations”. “Subject to a number of conditions Australia would want to see fulfilled, it is an offer that is both welcomed and appreciated,” Pezzullo said. Negotiations so far have been stymied by Australia’s insistence that refugees must not be able to enter the country “the backdoor way”. Australia has previously said it is reluctant to allow refugees to resettle in New Zealand because, after five years, they could claim citizenship and would be eligible to travel without restriction to Australia: a position belied by the fact that Australia regularly prevents some New Zealand citizens from entering Australia. New Zealand, in turn, has been reluctant to put additional conditions on visas or residencies granted to refugees, with the immigration minister, Kris Faafoi, saying last year that New Zealand believed anybody resettled there should have the “full rights of New Zealand citizens” – including the right to travel to and work in Australia. That remains a sticking point, with Pezzullo confirming that there would need to be “some kind of ironclad … or firm blocking” of any “backdoor” ability for a person to use a 444 special purpose visa that would allow them long-term residency in Australia. The home affairs deputy secretary, Marc Ablong, said “the final set of those negotiations is expected in the next few weeks on the New Zealand side as to where their position lies”. New Zealand officials were tightlipped over whether this condition would be met. In a statement, Faafoi’s office said negotiations had not concluded and any agreement would need cabinet approval. “This government has confirmed, on many occasions, that it will honour the offer made under the previous National-led government to accept refugees whom Australia has detained offshore,” it said. It added that any arrangement would involve the UNHCR to help assess who should be part of New Zealand’s intake, and any refugees considered by New Zealand for resettlement would undergo assessment and screening processes, as is usual for all accepted refugees. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Nine years after Australia restarted offshore processing, and more than seven years since the last asylum seeker was sent offshore, roughly 230 people remained in offshore processing, split between Nauru and Papua New Guinea. Those people were no longer, technically, in detention camps, but their movements remained heavily restricted. According to government figures, 1,117 “transitory persons” were in Australia, brought back from offshore processing islands – mostly asylum seekers medically evacuated from the islands. This cohort may also be considered – by Australia at least – as candidates for resettlement. Logistical challenges created by Covid-19 meant New Zealand was well behind on meeting its commitment to resettle 1,500 refugees each year. According to government immigration data, the country had only taken in 414 refugees between April 2021 and February 2022. In the previous financial year, that number was 263. Meg de Ronde, the executive director of Amnesty International Aotearoa New Zealand called the in-principle agreement a “hard-earned human rights win”. “We’re relieved that for hundreds of people, the torture is nearly over and soon they will get to begin rebuilding their lives.” Mostafa Azimitabar, who was held in Papua New Guinea before moving to the Park Hotel alternative place of detention (Apod) in Melbourne, where he was evacuated for medical care, said: “This is absolutely a historical moment in Australia. The power of people is stronger than politicians. The government couldn’t resist this powerful pressure. Our consistency made this happen.”Thanks for following our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis as uncertainty continues to persist in the eastern European region. We will be closing this blog but you can follow all the latest developments on our new feed here. Estonia says battle groups are moving ahead in a likely attack to occupy “key terrain,” contradicting Moscow’s insistence of a pullback, Reuters is reporting. Mikk Marran, director general of the Estonian foreign intelligence service, said he is aware of around 10 battle groups of troops moving toward the Ukrainian border, where it estimates about 170,000 soldiers are already deployed. The attack would include missile bombardment and the occupation of “key terrain,” he added. If Russia is successful in Ukraine, it would encourage it to increase pressure on the Baltics in the coming years. The threat of war has become the main policy tool for Putin. Britain has also said it will double the size of its force in Estonia and send tanks and armoured fighting vehicles to the small Baltic republic bordering Russia as part of the Nato deployment. Britain’s defence intelligence chief has also made a series of rare public comments, adding to the west’s scepticism that Russia has withdrawn troops. Lieutenant general Sir Jim Hockenhull said more Russian armoured vehicles, helicopters and a field hospital have been spotted. We have not seen evidence that Russia has withdrawn forces from Ukraine’s borders. Contrary to their claims, Russia continues to build up military capabilities near Ukraine. This includes sightings of additional armoured vehicles, helicopters and a field hospital moving towards Ukraine’s borders. Russia has the military mass in place to conduct an invasion of Ukraine.” Venezuela’s president has pledged a “powerful military cooperation” with Russia following discussions between officials, the Associated Press reports. Nicolas Maduro told reporters during a news conference on Wednesday: We have reviewed the powerful military cooperation, and we have ratified the path of a powerful military cooperation between Russia and Venezuela for the defence of peace, of sovereignty, the defence of territorial integrity. We are going to increase all the preparation, training and cooperation plans with a military power in the world such as Russia.” Last month, Russia’s chief negotiator in talks with the US on tensions over Ukraine said he would “neither confirm nor exclude” the possibility of Russia sending military assets to Cuba and Venezuela if the US and its allies don’t curtail their military activities on Russia’s doorstep. The US dismissed the comments from deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov as bluster. Russia is a major political ally of Venezuela, which has become increasingly isolated under economic sanctions imposed by the US and the European Union. “We have walked the 21st century together, the people, the government of Russia and Venezuela and ... we have built the map of cooperation to continue walking together, united,” Maduro said. The United States has dismissed reports that Russia is in fact withdrawing troops from Ukraine’s border, instead accusing Moscow of sending more soldiers as fears of an invasion grow. Multiple reports are now coming in that appear to contradict Putin’s earlier claims of a “partial” drawdown of Russian forces, including from Crimea, after the completion of military drills in the region. A senior US administration official spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity, saying the west detected that Russia had increased its force near Ukraine by 7,000 troops, with some arriving as recently as Wednesday, and that there had been a marked increase in false claims by Russians that the Kremlin might use as pretext for an invasion. We continue to receive indications they could launch a false pretext at any moment to justify an invasion.” The official said those claims included reports of unmarked graves of civilians allegedly killed by Ukrainian forces, statements that the US and Ukraine are developing biological or chemical weapons, and claims that the west is funnelling in guerrillas to kill Ukrainians, the Associated Press reports. The official said they were not authorised to speak publicly about sensitive operations and could not provide underlying evidence for the assertions. As mentioned in the last post, US vice president Kamala Harris will also be at the Munich security conference later this week. Her schedule includes meetings with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and Olaf Scholz among others, senior administration officials told Reuters. She is expected to arrive at the conference on Friday and will also meet Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg, leaders of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, and the bipartisan US congressional delegations. British foreign secretary Liz Truss will visit Ukraine and several European countries later this week, her office said on Thursday, as she continues diplomatic efforts to deter a Russian invasion of Ukraine. The UK’s top diplomat will meet her Ukrainian and Polish counterparts during visits to both nations, although details of when the trip would happen have not yet been released. Truss will hold talks with Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba and will then deliver a speech in Kyiv where she will warn Russia it faces economic pain and global isolation if it invades Ukraine. Extracts of her speech have been released by her office: I urge Russia to take the path of diplomacy. We are ready to talk ... But we are very clear – if they decide to continue down the path of aggression, there will be massive consequences bringing Russia severe economic costs and pariah status.” Truss will also attend the Munich security conference on Saturday where foreign ministers of the Group of Seven (G7) most developed nations are set to hold talks on the crisis. Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, who this week met Russian president Vladimir Putin in Moscow, is expected to address the G7 conference, which US vice president Kamala Harris and secretary of state Antony Blinken are also due to attend. The talks will be themed around nations respecting the sovereignty of others. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as my colleagues in the US sign off. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison has just finished talks with UK counterpart Boris Johnson, with the British leader pledging a £25m (A$47m) security package as part of a defence agreement between the two nations. The two leaders met virtually on Thursday morning, issuing a joint statement where they emphasised Ukraine’s sovereignty and independence, amid Russian troops amassing on the border. The statement said: They agreed the need for de-escalation and underscored that any further Russian incursion in Ukraine would be a massive strategic mistake and have stark humanitarian cost. The leaders reiterated their commitment to support a rules-based international order free from coercion, where the sovereign rights of all nations are respected.” As part of the discussions, Johnson pledged £25m from the UK in order to strengthen resilience in the Indo-Pacific region in areas such as maritime security, state threats and cyberspace. Here’s a recap of recent developments, from Guardian reporters based around the globe: Vladimir Putin said a “partial” drawdown of Russian forces was under way near the Ukrainian border, including from Crimea, after the completion of military drills there. The Russian defence ministry shared a video purportedly showing columns of military equipment and forces leaving the area that borders Ukraine. But multiple reports say that Russian troops at Ukrainian borders have actually increased by about 7,000, according to US officials. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said Russia is continuing to send troops to what is now the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war. He said Nato was “prepared for the worst” while holding out hope that Putin had a sincere desire to find a diplomatic way through the crisis. Stoltenberg also announced that the Nato alliance was considering deploying further battle groups in eastern and central Europe. They would complement those established in 2014 in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, led by the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany and the United States. The British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said the UK was doubling the number of personnel in Estonia and sending additional equipment, including tanks and armoured fighting vehicles. Four additional UK Typhoon jets landed in Cyprus on Wednesday in order to patrol the skies of eastern Europe. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, toured the country to mark a newly declared National Unity Day. This, as cyber-attacks on the Ukrainian defence ministry stretched into a second day. Ukrainians were asked to fly the national flag and sing the national anthem. The head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, warned Russia that EU sanctions “can bite very hard” as she urged the Kremlin not to choose war. In a speech to the European parliament in Strasbourg, she said EU institutions and member states were working on a “robust and comprehensive package of potential sanctions” in cooperation with the US, UK and Canada. Russian pundits lined up for their chance to dunk on the western media as 16 February – the day when some briefings had forecast Russia would invade Ukraine – came and passed without incident. The Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova wrote a “request to the mass disinformation outlets of the USA and Britain … announce the schedule of our ‘invasions’ for the coming year. I’d like to plan my vacation”. British authorities are worried that the current threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine may attract far-right extremists from the UK, who could travel to the country seeking weapons training and military experience. Counter-terrorism police were positioned at the departure gates of at least one main British airport this week, where they quizzed travellers flying to Ukraine about their identity and reasons for travel. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, will be attending the Munich security conference in Germany on Friday to discuss Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine, confirmed the State Department. A statement from the state department spokesperson, Ned Price, said Blinken will attend the four-day conference, discussing efforts to get Russia to de-escalate and ways to strengthen European security. The US state department has claimed Russia was attempting to create a “pretext” for invading Ukraine with unsupported claims of “genocide” and mass graves in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. Russian media published articles and photographs this week of purported secret mass graves in the region and on Tuesday, Putin claimed that Kyiv was committing “genocide” there. State department spokesman Ned Price claimed that Moscow was making the claims as an excuse for invading Ukraine Follow along for more updates from Samantha Lock. Russian forces at Ukrainian borders have increased by about 7,000, per a US official who spoke with CNN. The news, which the Guardian has not independently confirmed, comes amid Russian claims that Moscow is pulling back troops. From CNN: A senior US administration official said the increase renders Russia’s assertion of withdrawal “false,” and warned President Vladimir Putin’s public openness to diplomacy was a guise. “Every indication we have now is they mean only to publicly offer to talk, and make claims about de-escalation, while privately mobilizing for war,” the official said. The new estimates would place the number of Russia forces north of the 150,000 figure President Joe Biden cited in a televised address earlier this week. Western leaders had already greeted Russia’s claims of withdrawal with skepticism. On Tuesday, Biden said during a speech in the East Room that a withdrawal of Russian troops would be “good”, but that he had yet to see any evidence that such a pullback was under way. “Our analysts indicate that they remain very much in a threatening position,” Biden said. “And the fact remains right now Russia has more than 150,000 troops encircling Ukraine and Belarus and along Ukraine’s border.” France’s foreign minister said that Russia and Europe need to negotiate a way to coexist, and it’s up to Putin to set the tone of their relationship. In an interview with the Financial Times, foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian said that Putin “can choose to make Russia a destabilizing power ... which could mean a permanent strategy of tension over the long term, or he can choose to become the actor, the partner, in a new security and stability order in Europe”. “It’s his choice. It is indeed him who has to decide,” he said. The US state department has claimed Russia was attempting to create a “pretext” for invading Ukraine with unsupported claims of “genocide” and mass graves in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. Russian media published articles and photographs this week of purported secret mass graves in the region and on Tuesday, Putin claimed that Kyiv was committing “genocide” there. State department spokesman Ned Price claimed that Moscow was making the claims as an excuse for invading Ukraine. “There is no basis of truth to any of these allegations,” Price said. Fiona Hill, a former senior director for European and Russian affairs in the national security council, and co-author of a Putin biography, contrasted the current approach to the western response to past Russian operations, such as the attacks in Britain on the defectors Alexander Litvinenko and Sergei Skripal. “We never really kind of revealed what we knew about what they were up to, and then they were able, as a result, to take advantage of all the grey zones and the uncertainty and spin their own narratives,” Hill said. Going public also serves a domestic political purpose, especially for a US administration that has been widely criticized for failing to predict the collapse of the Afghan government and Taliban takeover last year. If there is a Russian attack, no one will be able to say the Biden White House was taken unawares. Read more: In other news, satellite images taken over the last two days show that a bridge is being constructed over a river in Belarus that is located less than 4 miles from Ukraine’s border, reports CNN. The construction is being monitored by military officials in case the infrastructure could support a Russia invasion. With 16 February being discussed as an important date when it comes to a potential Ukraine invasion, here’s analysis from Politico’s Alexander Ward and Quint Forgey about why 20 February is a critical date for many experts monitoring Russia’s military actions: The Feb. 16 focus was understandable: Media reports, including here in NatSec Daily, noted how President Joe Biden told Western leaders about intelligence assessing that Russia might launch its invasion then. Importantly, though, top Biden aides never said publicly that Feb. 16 was the certain invasion day — only that Russian President Vladimir Putin’s troop buildup meant an attack could come “at any time” and possibly before the Olympics wrap up. European officials, meanwhile, downplayed the notion of an assault on Feb. 16. “We didn’t see a definitive plan with that timing,” a senior European official told us recently. Some speculated that tonight’s full moon might be a hint, allowing invading ground forces better visibility at night. But analysts told us that the obsession with Feb. 16 — that is, today — distracted attention from actual key dates. “After Feb. 20 was always the more important time frame,” said Michael Kofman, an expert on Russia’s military at the CNA think tank. “We’re looking to see what Russian forces do then.” That’s when the largest military exercise since the Cold War is scheduled to end, after which leaders in Moscow and Minsk promised Putin’s troops would head home. “Not a single Russian serviceman, not a single piece of equipment will remain in Belarus after the completion of exercises with Russia,” Belarussian Foreign Minister Vladimir Makei told reporters today, even as Western officials openly fear they’ll remain permanently. And after their meeting last week, officials in Paris said Putin promised French President Emmanuel Macron that Russia would definitely withdraw its forces from Belarus — though the Kremlin denied any guarantees were made. Read the full article here. In other news, 10 US Senate Republicans have sent a letter to Blinken requesting more info on current plans to evacuate US citizens from Ukraine, calling current safety plans for Americans “wholly inadequate”. The letter comes after confirmation from the state department that they will not be able to evacuate American citizens in Ukraine if there is a Russian invasion. The UK defense intelligence chief Jim Hockenhull said today that he has “not seen evidence” of a drawdown in Russian troops and has actually seen a buildup near the Ukraine border. “Russia has the military mass in place to conduct an invasion of Ukraine,” said Hockenhull. On the topic of countering a Russian possible invasion, here is the Guardian’s Julian Borger and Dan Sabbagh on how the US and UK are going public with a surprising amount of intelligence to counter any surprise element from Putin: The US and the UK have sought to fend off a feared Russian invasion of Ukraine in part by going public with an unusual amount of intelligence, hoping to rob Vladimir Putin of the element of surprise. There have been regular briefings in Washington and London – sometimes from national security officials who do not often talk to the press – going into detail about potential Russian military tactics, regime change plots, and “false flag” operations Moscow is allegedly planning to provide a pretext for invasion. Derek Chollet, the state department counselor, said on Wednesday that the US and its allies wanted to warn of Russia possibly carrying out such operations in Ukraine “in order to hinder their ability to do so”. “We are trying to be as forthcoming as possible, to say that’s their play and what could be coming,” Chollet said. In doing so, the US and UK are trying to beat Russia at what has largely been Moscow’s game in recent years – or at least to provide better opposition. “I think it’s the west getting a little more savvy on using intelligence in an actionable way,” John Sipher, a veteran of the CIA’s clandestine service, said. “It’s what we used to call – when the Russians did it – information warfare, and it’s something we’ve never got very good at. Read the full article here. The European parliament approved a €1.2bn loan to Ukraine for external financial needs in 2022, reported the Irish Times. The European Parliament has approved a €1.2 billion macro-financial loan to help Ukraine cover its external financing needs in 2022. MEPs backed the resolution under the urgency procedure on Monday to fast-track the European Commission’s new package, which was proposed by the European Commission in January amid looming fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine... It will be paid out in two instalments. Half of the €1.2 billion loan can be disbursed immediately to foster stability in Ukraine, if certain preconditions are met. The loan serves as “swift support in a situation of acute crisis and to strengthen the resilience of the country”, the proposal states. Ukraine’s external financing has dried up due to Russia’s military threat and the worsening economic situation in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. Read the full article here. During a press conference today, Price also said that Russia’s ongoing claims that they are de-escalating their military presence around Ukraine is false, but that diplomacy remains possible. “To be very, very clear, we have not seen that,” said Price in regards to Russia’s claims of military de-escalation. Price also said that Russian officials are spreading disinformation to provide pretext for a possible invasion, including statements about military provocations made by Ukraine or the US as well as human rights violations in Ukraine. “People must treat any and all of these claims with the appropriate and healthy skepticism,” said Price, adding that all claims made by Russian state media should be viewed with doubt unless vetted by independent media. “Russia relies on confusion. Russia relies on obfuscation. Russia relies on misinformation and disinformation to cover its tracks,” said Price. “We should all expect that and we should all be ready for that.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, will be attending the Munich security conference in Germany on Friday to discuss Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine, confirmed the State Department. A statement from the state department spokesperson, Ned Price, said Blinken will attend the four-day conference, discussing efforts to get Russia to de-escalate and ways to strengthen European security. Blinken will also be meeting with counterparts about other global issues. That’s all from me, Léonie Chao-Fong in London, for today. I’m handing over to my colleague Gloria Oladipo but before I do, here are the key events so far: Vladimir Putin said a “partial” drawdown of Russian forces was under way near the Ukrainian border, including from Crimea, after the completion of military drills there. The Russian defence ministry shared a video purportedly showing columns of military equipment and forces leaving the area that borders Ukraine. But Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said Russia is continuing to send troops to what is now the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war. He said Nato was “prepared for the worst” while holding out hope that Putin had a sincere desire to find a diplomatic way through the crisis. Stoltenberg also announced that the Nato alliance was considering deploying further battle groups in eastern and central Europe. They would complement those established in 2014 in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, led by the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany and the United States. The British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said the UK was doubling the number of personnel in Estonia and sending additional equipment, including tanks and armoured fighting vehicles. Four additional UK Typhoon jets landed in Cyprus on Wednesday in order to patrol the skies of eastern Europe. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, toured the country to mark a newly declared National Unity Day, as cyber-attacks on the Ukrainian defence ministry stretched into a second day. Ukrainians were asked to fly the national flag and sing the national anthem. The head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, warned Russia that EU sanctions “can bite very hard” as she urged the Kremlin not to choose war. In a speech to the European parliament in Strasbourg, she said EU institutions and member states were working on a “robust and comprehensive package of potential sanctions” in cooperation with the US, UK and Canada. Russian pundits lined up for their chance to dunk on the western media as 16 February – the day when some briefings had forecast Russia would invade Ukraine – came and passed without incident. The Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova wrote a “request to the mass disinformation outlets of the USA and Britain … announce the schedule of our ‘invasions’ for the coming year. I’d like to plan my vacation”. British authorities are worried that the current threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine may attract far-right extremists from the UK, who could travel to the country seeking weapons training and military experience. Counter-terrorism police were positioned at the departure gates of at least one main British airport this week, where they quizzed travellers flying to Ukraine about their identity and reasons for travel. Russia is continuing to send troops to what is now the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war, contradicting Moscow’s claims of a drawdown on Ukraine’s border, Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said. Despite suggestions from Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, that a “partial” withdrawal was in effect, Stoltenberg said Russian military capability was only increasing in number and strength. In a warning shot to the Kremlin, Stoltenberg, a former prime minister of Norway, announced that the military alliance was considering deploying further battle groups in eastern and central Europe. They would complement those established in 2014 in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, led by the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany and the United States. The French government has offered to lead a force in Romania. During a break in talks between Nato defence ministers in Brussels, Stoltenberg said: We will have advice from the military commanders within weeks and we will make a decision after that. What we see today is that Russia maintains a massive invasion force ready to attack with high end capabilities from Crimea to Belarus. This is the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war. An attack could come “at any time” by Russia, the White House said. In a briefing, press secretary Jen Psaki said There’s what Russia says, and there’s what Russia does, and we’re watching very closely what steps they’re taking but they remain amassed in a threatening way. US officials are not yet able to attribute who was responsible for a cyber attack against Ukraine. She said any Russian attack on Ukraine could be preceded by a “false flag” operation and misinformation. The UK will scrap the so-called “golden visa” scheme next week in a bid to halt the flow of Russian “dirty money” into the UK, the Times reports. The home secretary, Priti Patel, has decided to close the route because of “long-standing concerns” over abuse of the scheme by criminal groups and the super-rich from several countries, the paper writes. Under the scheme, launched in 2008, applicants provide a minimum investment of £2m in exchange for the right to live in Britain. They can later apply for full citizenship and a passport. The decision comes amid increased scrutiny of Britain’s visa rules and how tier 1 investor visas granted to the super-rich from several countries, including Russia, China and Kazakhstan, may be connected to “dirty money”. Britain has faced criticism over claims it has failed to properly monitor the billions of pounds of Russian money which has flowed into London over the past two decades. Patel has now decided to scrap the scheme altogether and is understood to have brought forward a decision on the visas due to increased scrutiny in the wake of the crisis in Ukraine, the Times writes. Hundreds of US paratroopers landed at a Polish airport near the Ukrainian border as part of a deployment of several thousand to bolster NATO’s eastern flank amid tensions with Russia, Agence France-Presse reports. Soldiers were seen disembarking from two Boeing C-17 military transport planes and boarding buses at Rzeszow Airport, located around 100 kilometres (62 miles) from the border with Ukraine. Armoured cars, military trucks, containers and dozens more soldiers were seen at a makeshift camp set up opposite the airport terminal. “We don’t know yet,” a sergeant manning a checkpoint into the camp, who declined to be named, told AFP when asked how long they might stay. The US has said it is planning to temporarily deploy around 4,700 additional soldiers to EU and NATO member Poland, bringing the US military presence in the country to around 10,000 troops on rotation. Ukraine’s candidate for the Eurovision song contest, Alina Pash, has withdrawn from the process following claims that she made a trip to Crimea, an area where Russia seized control in 2014. Ukraine’s national broadcaster had already put her confirmation as the country’s act on hold while an investigation was being carried out into a 2015 trip she made to Crimea. Under Ukrainian law, it is illegal to travel to Crimea via Russia. Pash had provided official documentation showing that she did not enter Crimea via Russia, but that is currently under scrutiny. In an Instagram post, Pash, 28, wrote: I am a Ukrainian citizen. I follow Ukrainian law and try to bring Ukraine’s traditions and values into the world. What this story has come to is not at all what I tried to convey with my song. She added: I don’t want to be in this dirty story anymore. With a heavy heart I withdraw my candidacy as the representative of Ukraine in the Eurovision song contest. I am really sorry. At an address in the eastern port city of Mariupol, President Volodymyr Zelensky vowed that his country would fight back against any invasion. Wearing a military-style olive green coat during a speech to mark what he had declared Ukraine’s “Day of Unity”, Zelensky said: We are not afraid of forecasts, we are not afraid of anyone, of any enemies. We will defend ourselves. He went on to say: We have a wonderful, strong armed forces. We have excellent diplomats, volunteer forces and national resistance forces throughout Ukraine. The strength to protect us. Protect your land. Enough force to not succumb to any provocations. Britain will double the size of the British force in Estonia as part of a Nato deployment and will send equipment, including tanks and armoured fighting vehicles, to the country amid fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. In a statement, the UK’s defence minister, Ben Wallace, said: Alongside our Nato allies, we are deploying troops and assets on land, sea and air to bolster European defences in response to the build-up of Russian military forces on the border of Ukraine. Nato and our allies have been clear that an invasion of Ukraine will be met with severe consequences. This is also from Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister, who said he was “grateful” to the UK for its support. His remarks were in response to a tweet by the UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who said the UK “remains unwavering in our support for the hard-won peace, freedom and democratic progress that has been made since Ukraine’s independence”. From Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, a day after Russia failed to attend a meeting of members of the OSCE, the world’s largest security body, to explain its military build-up near the Ukraine border: The latest Ukrainian intelligence report shows no evidence of Russia pulling back its forces from near Ukraine’s borders, the defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, told Reuters. He said Ukraine will only believe Russia is serious about defusing the current crisis if it withdraws its troops, military hardware and weapons, including forces deployed in Belarus for drills. Reznikov said: All the troops that they brought up … must return to their permanent deployment points. Then it will be clear that they have cancelled their aggressive plans Withdrawal of people is not enough – weapons and equipment must also leave According to the Ukrainian military, about 140,000 combined Russian military and pro-Russian separatist forces are currently massed near Ukraine, including 125,000 ground troops. There are 9,000 Russian troops in Belarus alone, he said. In comparison, Reznikov said Ukraine has around 35,000 troops in its eastern Donbass region, where Kyiv has been battling a Russian-backed separatist insurgency since 2014. The threat of war in Ukraine has not led to a rush of relatives of British citizens to apply for visas to come to the UK, even though UK officials now think the threat is greater than at any point. The UK urged all British citizens to leave Ukraine immediately last Friday, saying there was an imminent threat of invasion. But the number of close relatives of British citizens applying for visas to come to the UK, a proxy for the scale of any exodus, has not risen substantially in recent days. The UK is nevertheless setting up a second visa and passport processing point for those trying to leave Ukraine at Lviv, 70km from the Polish border. There is still no plan to close the embassy in Kyiv, which is being staffed by the ambassador, Melinda Simmons, and a core team. It is thought there are between 3,000 and 5,000 British nationals in Ukraine, but the embassy in Kyiv has no means of knowing how many have responded to the UK warning to leave the country, either by plane or overland. British diplomats expect a core of this group will not leave, since they are either married to Ukrainians or have longterm business interests in the country. The number of dependents of British citizens applying for visas is running at about 100 a day, not noticeably up on the normal figures. The UK has waived application fees for family members of British citizens returning from Ukraine, as well as the English language test. Separately, about 350 Ukrainians are applying for visa applicants. There is a backlog of more than 2,000 applicants. Ukrainians have access to visa-free travel in the EU so if there was a humanitarian crisis, tens of thousands could leave. There is no UK plan to lift its visa restrictions on Ukrainians. British officials insist it would be a huge catastrophe if Putin invaded, since the Ukrainian army is determined to resist, and if the invasion does not happen, Putin can still pull a series of other levers over future months. They claim the crisis has worsened since 2014, since Putin now has unrestricted access to Ukraine through a hostile Belarus border and the Black Sea. Derek Chollet, a senior adviser to the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, told reporters on a conference call that the US was not “able to verify any de-escalatory steps” taken by Russia since the Kremlin announced troops were being sent back to their bases on Tuesday. Chollet said: We see the opposite, forces continue to flow in and around Ukraine. “Our assessment remains that an attack could come any day,” Chollet added, although he said that the US view remained that President Vladimir Putin had made no final decision to invade Ukraine. In the briefing, Chollet said: There is still the opportunity for diplomacy to prevail. But he insisted there could be no concessions on a core Putin demand to block Nato membership for Ukraine, and that there was no difference between the US and Germany on the issue. He said Blinken had spoken to his German, French and British counterparts on Tuesday and that: There is no change in our common position. Russia is not going to get a veto over anybody’s future when it comes to Nato. Nato defence ministers have issued a statement on the crisis on Ukraine’s border at the end of a first day of talks in Brussels. It says: We are gravely concerned by the very large scale, unprovoked and unjustified Russian military build-up in and around Ukraine and in Belarus. We urge Russia, in the strongest possible terms, to choose the path of diplomacy, and to immediately reverse its build-up and withdraw its forces from Ukraine in accordance with its international obligations and commitments. The statement goes on describe Russia’s actions as a posing “a serious threat to Euro-Atlantic security”. As a consequence and to ensure the defence of all Allies, we are deploying additional land forces in the eastern part of the Alliance, as well as additional maritime and air assets, as announced by Allies, and have increased the readiness of our forces. Our measures are and remain preventive, proportionate and non-escalatory. We are prepared to further strengthen our defensive and deterrent posture to respond to all contingencies. Any further Russian aggression against Ukraine will have “massive consequences” and carry a “high price”. The statement concludes: We have repeatedly offered, and continue to offer, further dialogue through the NATO-Russia Council, and stand ready to engage. We strongly encourage Russia to reciprocate and to choose diplomacy and de-escalation. Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, speaking in Brussels, has gone on to describe Russia’s contesting of the fundamental principles of European security as “the new normal”, in defence of the alliance’s plans for further troops in central and eastern Europe. He said Russia had sought to amass “the biggest concentration of combat forces since the end of the cold war” to “intimidate other countries in Europe” into accepting their demand that Nato rule out future member status for Ukraine. Nato defence ministers have decided to develop options for strengthening Nato’s defences, Stoltenberg tells reporters. Nato will look into establishing new battle groups in central and south-east regions within the alliance with a focus on Romania and the Black Sea region, with military commanders reporting back in weeks about the details. Stoltenberg said: Ministers decided to develop options to further strengthen Nato’s deterrence and defence, including to consider establishing new Nato battlegroups in central and eastern and south-eastern Europe. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, is holding a press conference at the military alliance’s headquarters following talks with defence ministers. He has told reporters that Nato is considering further battle groups to complement the four in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, led by the UK, Canada, Germany and the US. Stoltenberg said the French government had offered to lead a battlegroup in Romania, adding: We will have advice from the military commanders within weeks and we will make a decision after that. The development risks antagonising Moscow but it will also be seen as a warning to the Kremlin that the aggression of recent months will be rewarded with a further Nato presence in central and eastern Europe. Stoltenberg describes Russia’s military buildup around Ukraine as “the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the Cold War.” He said Nato allies have agreed that further Russian aggression against Ukraine would have a “high cost”. Stoltenberg says Nato remains “prepared for dialogue”, adding: Nato will not compromise on core principles – the right of each nation to choose its own path and our right to defend our allies. Nato is not a threat to Russia. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, says ministers “do not see any sign of de-escalation on the ground” from Russia. He says Nato allies have welcomed all diplomatic efforts, and there are signs from Moscow that diplomacy could continue. “But so far we do not see any sign of de-escalation on the ground. No withdrawals of troops or equipment. “It is not too late for Russia to step back from the brink of war,” he added. Nato defence ministers attending talks in Brussels today gathering for a “family photo”: The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, is due to give a press conference shortly after a day of meetings with the defence ministers from all member countries. The ministers will meet again tomorrow for a full day of talks. The 27 heads of state and government of the EU member states are to hold a meeting ahead of a summit with EU leaders on Thursday to discuss the latest developments in the Ukraine crisis, a spokesman for the European council president, Charles Michel, has announced. Finance chiefs from the Group of 20 leading economies would discuss the Ukraine crisis this week but it was unclear whether they would issue a joint statement with a political signal or simply exchange views, a German government official said on Wednesday. Indonesia hosts a meeting of G20 finance ministers and central bank chiefs on Thursday and Friday. On Monday, the finance ministers of the G7 group of large western economies warned Russia of “massive” economic consequences if it chose to invade Ukraine, to whose economy they also promised swift and decisive support. It is not known whether the larger G20 group, which includes China and Russia itself, will issue a similarly harsh warning to Moscow. (Via Reuters) As you see, Bolsonaro was afforded a rather more intimate table arrangement than Macron and Scholz, both of whom were seated at the other end of a vast – and vastly more meme-friendly – table. After meeting France’s Emmanuel Macron and Germany’s Olaf Scholz over recent days, Putin is now pressing the flesh with Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro in Moscow. Flights from London to Kyiv were operating normally on Wednesday, despite claims by the US administration and others that a Russian invasion might take place in the early hours of the morning. Ryanair flight RK3677 took off at 7.30am as scheduled from London Stansted airport and landed at Kyiv Borispol airport at 12.35 local time. The plane was half full and most passengers were Ukrainians returning home from the UK. “We were rota-ed as normal,” one Ryanair steward said, adding: “Ukraine has covered the additional insurance cost.” Kyiv’s international airport was quieter than usual, with few travellers to be seen. The government of president Volodymyr Zelensky has allocated $592m (£437m) to guarantee the continuation of flights to and from the country as the crisis with Moscow continues. Earlier this week the Dutch carrier KLM cancelled flights to Ukraine after the Netherlands government issued a travel warning. Germany’s Lufthansa is considering suspending air traffic. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has surprised many Germans after appearing to stand up to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, during their tense press conference in Moscow yesterday. German commentators on Wednesday described their new leader as being typically pursed-lipped but surprisingly combative in his approach to Putin, after weeks in which he has faced criticism for showing a lack of leadership over the security crisis and of being too mild-mannered towards Moscow. Scholz, appearing to relish the subtle swipes swapped between the two of them, at one point even caused the Russian leader to raise his eyebrows when taking a dig at how Putin is able to choose how long he stays in power. Poking fun at Putin’s fear of Nato’s eastern enlargement, Scholz said it was not likely to happen during either man’s time in office. “There is the somewhat peculiar situation that it is not even on the agenda. Everyone knows that very well,” Scholz said. “It is not an issue that we are likely to encounter again in our offices as long as we hold them. I don’t know how long the president plans to stay in office,” he said, gesturing towards Putin. “I’ve got a feeling it could be a while but not forever.” Putin reacted by raising his eyebrows and smiling. The leftwing daily TAZ commented that while no one had expected Scholz and Putin to “kiss farewell” to each other, “Putin did not throw his guest out of the Kremlin and remains prepared for further dialogue. In this regard, the chancellor’s visit was quite an orderly affair. Scholz reacted to all the jibes and little malignities of his host with the necessary countenance and also made it clear that an invasion of Ukraine would have wide-reaching consequences.” It added that Scholz had even managed to utter the words “Nord Stream” – having avoided doing so until now, much to the annoyance of his western allies. The Düsseldorf-based Rheinische Post said Scholz’s visit had been a “strong performance”, in which he “did not avoid any topics of conflict, choosing clear words on the conviction of the Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny and the banning of the human rights organisation Memorial”. But Spiegel said that no one – not even Scholz’s biggest fans – had expected him to effect any major movement in the crisis. It also noted that the circumstances around their meeting – the discussion at either end of a six-metre-long table and the Kremlin’s insistence on every one of Germany’s 50-strong delegation carrying out three PCR tests in the four days ahead of the visit, followed by one by Russian authorities on arrival – “showed how fragile the situation is”. The historian and journalist Katja Hoyer tweeted that the trip to Moscow “showcased a more assertive Scholz”, while Wolfgang Ischinger, chairperson of the Munich Security Conference said that Scholz should be congratulated and could “return home having not been humiliated by Putin”. Some commentators have drawn parallels between Scholz and his predecessor, Angela Merkel. She often, particularly at the start of her chancellorship, appeared invisible at home but was able to win considerable domestic support after rising to the challenge on the international stage. Much was made in Germany of the fact that Scholz put his foot down and refused to allow Russian doctors to administer his PCR test on arrival in Moscow. Instead, a doctor from the German embassy was sent on to his plane after landing to carry it out and Scholz remained on board for 40 minutes while waiting for the result from the mobile testing laboratory, which had been brought on to the plane, to come through. The head of the European Commission has warned Russia that EU sanctions “can bite very hard” as she urged the Kremlin not to choose war. In a speech to the European parliament in Strasbourg, Ursula von der Leyen said EU institutions and member states were working on a “robust and comprehensive package of potential sanctions” in cooperation with the US, UK and Canada. These sanctions would hit Russian access to hi-tech components, she said, making it harder for Russia to diversify its economy away from oil and gas. Von der Leyen said: We are not just talking about freezing assets and banning travel for Russian individuals. Russia’s strategic interest is to diversify its one-sided economy and to close its current gaps. But for this, they need technologies in which we have a global leadership. High-tech components for which Russia is almost entirely dependent on us. Our sanctions can bite very hard, and the Kremlin knows this well. Speaking at the same debate, the president of the European Council, Charles Michel, said any aggression against Ukraine from Russia must lead to a “severe” cost and massive consequences. He acknowledged the EU would also pay a price, saying Europeans would also face “heavy” consequences, but had to be ready to assume this responsibility. Sanctions would have to be agreed unanimously by all EU member states and there are already concerns that some countries, such as Hungary, will thwart adoption of the toughest measures. In 2014 the EU agreed on wide-ranking economic sanctions against Russia in response to its support for separatists in eastern Ukraine, but only after the downing of the MH17 passenger plane that killed 298 people. MEPs are expected later on Wednesday to approve a €1.2m assistance package for Ukraine, recently proposed by von der Leyen. Nato has accused Russia of sending more troops to a massive military build-up around Ukraine, even as Moscow said that it was withdrawing forces and was open to diplomacy. At the start of two days of talks among Nato defence ministers, its secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg appeared unconvinced that the threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine had lessened, and voiced guarded hopes for diplomacy, Reuters reports. “We have not seen any withdrawal of Russian forces. And of course, that contradicts the message of diplomatic efforts,” Soltenberg said. “What we see is that they have increased the number of troops and more troops are on their way. So, so far, no de-escalation.” The Russian defence ministry has published video that it says shows tanks, infantry fighting vehicles and self-propelled artillery units leaving the Crimean peninsula, which Moscow seized from Ukraine in 2014. However Stoltenberg cautioned that Russians have frequently repositioned military equipment and troops during the build-up. “Movement of forces, of battle tanks, doesn’t confirm a real withdrawal,” he said. Nato will consider new steps to deter Russia on its eastern flank, including a likely pledge to send more troops and equipment to Nato members in eastern Europe, following a series of announcements over the past six weeks in response to the Russian threat in Ukraine’s north, east and south. Diplomats said that could involve 4,000 new troops in Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary and Slovakia. Ministers will also consider the alliance’s nuclear deterrents, although discussions are highly confidential. Russia has amassed a large stockpile of tactical nuclear weapons. “The escalation of Russian troops at the Ukrainian border is increasing and significant, and implores us as an alliance to continue to work together,” Canada’s defence minister Anita Anand said as she arrived for the meeting. An invasion of Ukraine by Russia would “shake the foundations of the international order and have severe consequences”, the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, and his Japanese counterpart, Fumio Kishida, have agreed in a call. A Downing Street spokesperson said: “The leaders discussed the deeply concerning situation on the border of Ukraine and the prime minister thanked prime minister Kishida for his offer to divert Japanese energy supplies to Europe. “Both agreed that the international community needed to stand united against an invasion of an independent country and said they would not tolerate Russia’s aggression. “An invasion would shake the foundations of international order and have severe consequences, they agreed.” For more on the UK political political reaction to the crisis in Ukraine, please follow our dedicated UK politics live blog The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has criticised the vote by Russia’s lower house of parliament asking Vladimir Putin to recognise two Russian-backed breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine as independent, calling it illegal. Enactment of the resolution would undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty, violate international law, call into question Russia’s stated commitment to continue to engage in diplomacy and “necessitate a swift and firm response from the United States in full coordination with our Allies and partners”, Blinken said in a statement. Russian military exercises are at their peak stage and the risk of Russian aggression against Ukraine will remain high for the rest of February, a senior western intelligence official has told the Reuters news agency. Speaking on condition of anonymity, Reuters reports that the official said western intelligence had established that the greatest period of risk of conflict or an unintended military incident was now. “I expect things to be really confusing and ambiguous for the next couple of weeks,” the official said. Russia claimed more of its forces surrounding Ukraine were withdrawing on Wednesday, after it announced the end to some military exercises on Tuesday. “We are at a peak period where the exercises that the Russians had announced are in their active phases,” the official said, adding that Russia would probably fire ballistic missiles eastwards from Belarus as part of its drills over the next few months. “There are no credible signs at this point that there will be any kind of military de-escalation,” the official said. Russia could now attack Ukraine “with essentially no, or little-to-no, warning”, the official said. Western intelligence also pointed to Russia’s ability to maintain the current forces in place for several more months if the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, so wished, the official said. Russia has repeatedly said it has no plans to invade Ukraine and that it is carrying out military drills on its territory. The Kremlin and senior officials have mocked western media for running with 16 February as the “invasion date” when Russia may attack Ukraine. “I’d like to ask if US and British sources of disinformation ... could publish the schedule of our upcoming invasions for the year. I’d like to plan my holidays,” Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova wrote on social media. Western intelligence had warned that Moscow could choose Wednesday to escalate an ongoing separatist conflict in Ukraine, after building up a force estimated at more than 100,000 troops near the borders. They said, however, that the date could be part of a Russian disinformation effort. Some media, citing intelligence reports, specified Russian attacks could begin early on Wednesday morning. “The night passed as usual. We slept peacefully. In the morning we started the day calmly and professionally,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said. (Via AFP) Nato chief says Russia is building up forces on Ukraine’s border UK defence secretary sceptical of Russia’s claim of withdrawal Poland plans for a possible influx of refugees from Ukraine Kremlin denies involvement in cyberattack on Ukraine Russia announces new troop withdrawals from Crimea Ukraine celebrates day of national unity Reuters reports that Lithuania’s central bank is warning the country’s banks of potential powercuts and cyberattacks. It comes shortly after the Kremlin denied any involvement in Tuesday’s cyberattacks, which hit websites at Ukraine’s defence ministry and armed forces as well as two state banks. Lithuania’s central bank has told the country’s banks to prepare for power cuts and cyberattacks as Russia’s standoff with Ukraine risks spilling over into a military conflict, according to a document and two sources familiar with the matter. Russia has amassed over 100,000 troops near Ukraine’s borders, prompting fears of an invasion. Losing electricity and internet access are among “extreme but possible” scenarios that Lithuania’s central bank told finance companies to be ready for in a letter sent to them last week and seen by Reuters. Lithuania, as well as Baltic neighbours Latvia and Estonia, shares a common power grid with Russia run from Moscow. “Increased geopolitical tension in the region leads to increased threats of cyber-attacks, including attacks on critical information infrastructure,” the central bank warned in the letter. The letter did not name any possible hackers. Despite Moscow’s assurances that it is scaling back its troop buildup, Poland is planning for a possible influx of refugees from Ukraine in case of a Russian invasion, according to the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki. Speaking as Nato said the number of Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders was continuing to grow, Morawiecki said infrastructure for refugees would be set up near its eastern border with Ukraine, but some might be moved elsewhere later. In the next few days I will be convening a team ... which will deal with issues of logistics, facilities, transport, infrastructure,” Morawiecki told reporters. “We must be prepared for the worst,” he said, adding that the team would also be tasked with securing access for refugees to health care and education. “We are helping the Ukrainians to mitigate the consequences of a Russian attack.” (Via Reuters) More in this piece from Daniel Boffey on Jens Stoltenberg’s remarks earlier that Russia is increasing, rather then decreasing, its military presence on the border with Ukraine Russia is building up its military forces on Ukraine’s border with more troops on their way, Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said, contradicting Moscow’s claims of a drawdown. Despite suggestions from the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, on Tuesday that a “partial” withdrawal was in effect, Stoltenberg warned that Russian military capability was only increasing in number and strength. The former Norwegian prime minister said Nato needed to be “prepared for the worst” while holding out hope that the signalling from Putin in recent days was evidence of a sincere desire to find a diplomatic way through the crisis. The configuration of Russia’s armed forces in the west of the country will return to normal in three to four weeks, TASS news agency has cited Russia’s ambassador to Ireland as saying. (Via Reuters) Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has said Russia would retaliate should Britain impose new sanctions against Moscow over the Ukraine crisis. Britain threatened on Tuesday to block Russian companies from raising capital in London and to expose property and company ownership if Russia invades Ukraine, a move Moscow has repeatedly denied planning. (Via Reuters) AFP has more on the Kremlin denying it had anything to do with Tuesday’s cyberattack on Ukraine, which hit websites at the country’s defence ministry and armed forces as well as two state banks. Kyiv had suggested the attack came from Russia as fears persist that Moscow is planning to invade its Western-backed neighbour Ukraine. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters: “We do not know anything. As expected, Ukraine continues blaming Russia for everything. Russia has nothing to do with any DDOS attacks. The affected sites included the Oschadbank state savings bank and Privat - two of the country’s largest financial institutions. Both resumed service later on Tuesday but the military sites remained inaccessible hours after the initial reports of the attack emerged. Ukraine’s communications watchdog pointed the finger at Moscow. “It cannot be excluded that the aggressor is resorting to dirty tricks,” the watchdog said in reference to Russia. Tuesday’s cyberattack came one month after another strike briefly took down key government websites. Nato responded within hours of the January attack by announcing a cyber warfare cooperation deal with Kyiv. The European Union also said it was mobilising “all its resources” to help Ukraine at the time. Kyiv said the damage in January had been limited and held back on apportioning blame. The European Union has urged Russia to take “concrete” steps to ease tensions around Ukraine, AFP reports. The European Council president, Charles Michel, told EU lawmakers: Russia has signalled that it may be open to diplomacy and we urge Russia to take concrete and tangible steps towards de-escalation because this is the condition for sincere political dialogue. We cannot eternally attempt diplomacy on one side, while the other side is amassing troops. Reuters just reporting that the Kremlin is saying it had nothing to do with last night’s DDOS cyberattacks on Ukraine. The Kremlin also says that recognising the breakaway east Ukraine regions would not be in line with the Minsk peace agreements. Russia has announced new troop withdrawals from Crimea as the country continues a “partial” drawdown announced by Vladimir Putin on Tuesday. But the majority of those troops would return to permanent bases that are just dozens of kilometres from Ukraine, meaning they could be redeployed quickly in case of an escalation or an attack. The new troop movements were announced by the Russian ministry of defence, which said that units from the southern military district had “completed their participation in tactical games at ranges on the Crimean peninsula and are heading to their bases by train.” Military vehicles including tanks and self-propelled artillery had been loaded on to trains and sent across a bridge from Crimea, which was annexed by Russia in 2014, to the country’s mainland, the ministry said. Izvestia, a Russian newspaper with good sources in the defence ministry, reported that the units returning to their bases were the 3rd, 42nd, and 150th motorised rifle divisions. Video released by the defence ministry’s Zvezda television channel reportedly showed elements of the 42nd motorised rifle division crossing the Crimean bridge. But as analysts noted, two of the divisions are stationed very close to Ukraine. The 3rd motorised rifle division has permanent bases to the northeast of Ukraine while the 150th motorised rifle division is garrisoned near Rostov-on-Don, just to Ukraine’s southeast. Should the units indeed return to their permanent bases, only the 42nd motorised rifle division would be taking a longer trip back to Chechnya. Ruslan Leviev, of the open source Conflict Intelligence Team, drafted a map of their permanent bases, noting that some of the troops were “being withdrawn in the direction of the border with Ukraine.” At the same time, he noted, there were more reports of heavy weaponry like TOS-1A thermobaric rocket launchers, arriving to Kursk from the Volga river city of Samara. The dubious troop movements associated with Putin’s “partial withdrawal” underline the scepticism expressed by western officials that Russia may not be preparing to reduce its pressure on Ukraine anytime soon. Ahead of a meeting of Nato’s defence ministers in Brussels, the military alliance’s general secretary, Jens Stoltenberg, said that far from there being a withdrawal of significant Russian forces, the Kremlin was building up its forces on Ukraine’s border, with “more troops on the way”. So far we have not seen any de-escalation on the ground. On the contrary, it appears that Russia continues the military build-up and we have not received a response to a written document or written proposals that we sent to Russia on the 26 January outlining the topics and items where Nato allies are ready to sit down and discuss with Russia to try to find a political path forward. Stoltenberg said Russia would not decide whether Ukraine would be a Nato member but that the alliance saw purpose in further talks. We will continue to convey a very clear message to Russia that we are ready to sit down and discuss with them, but at the same time we are prepared for the worst. And if Russia once again invades Ukraine, they will pay a high price and we will continue to expose Russian plans and actions so as to make it harder for them to conduct aggressive actions against Ukraine. Defence ministers for the 30 Nato member states will meet for two days. The Canadian defence minister, Anita Anand, says while she hopes to see evidence of a Russian troop withdrawal from Ukraine’s borders, the numbers are increasing. Arriving at the meeting of Nato defence ministers in Brussels, Anand said: The escalation of Russian troops at the Ukrainian border, including in Belarus, is increasingly significant. We look forward to seeing evidence of the withdrawal of troops on Russia’s part. But we need to prepare for any eventuality with that significant escalation of Russian troops that we have seen over the last week (Via Reuters) More on the cyber-attack, via the Globe and Mail’s senior international correspondent Mark MacKinnon My colleague Shaun Walker, currently in Kyiv, says this thread from the analyst Mark Galeotti is well worth a read. Today has been declared a national unity day by Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, with the order that at 10am Ukrainians should wave the national flags and sing the national anthem. In Kyiv, employees gathered outside government institutions to do so, but there was little public enthusiasm for the move. On Maidan, the large square that was the heart of the 2014 revolution, a small group of people sang the anthem, but were outnumbered by journalists. Kyiv has not felt like a city about to suffer invasion in recent days but nonetheless the constant warnings of invasion have taken a toll. The leading Ukrainian journalist Kristina Berdynskykh summed up the mood of many in a Twitter post: These emotional swings and psychological pressure are very tiring. Today everyone breathed a sigh of relief that we weren’t attacked. Tomorrow there’ll be information they’re moving stuff closer to the border again and it will all start again. But people will get used to this too and will just stop reading the news. Speaking in the European parliament, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has told MEPs that the Kremlin needs to show on the ground that it is withdrawing from the Ukrainian border. She said: I think diplomacy has not yet spoken its last words and we saw signs of hope yesterday but now deeds have to follow those spoken words. Von der Leyen, a former German defence minister, said Russia was threatening Ukraine because it was today a free, independent and sovereign state. The ideas of spheres of influence are ghosts of the last century. This crisis is about Ukraine but it is also about much, much more. It is about what it means to be an independent free nation in the 21st century. On the Kremlin’s apparent announcement of a withdrawal of troops and hardware from the Ukrainian border, and the vote in the Duma in support of recognition of Russian-controlled separatist states of Donetsk and Luhansk, Von der Leyen said: I truly hope that the Kremlin will decide not to unleash further violence in Europe but yesterday russia was certainly sending conflicting signals. Von der Leyen said she was concerned that Russia was weaponising gas supplies to Europe, and that the Kremlin’s reputation as a reliable supplier had been damaged. She said: We are hoping for the best but we are prepared for the worst. We now have two distinct futures ahead of us: in one the Kremlin decides to wage war against Ukraine with massive human costs, something we thought we had left behind after the tragedies of the 20th century. Moscow’s relations with us would be severely damaged, tough sanctions would kick in with dire consequences on the Russian economy and its prospects of modernisation. But another future is possible. A future in which Russia and Europe cooperate on shared interests. A future where free countries work together in peace. A future of prosperity built on the fundamental principles enshrined in the UN charter and the European security architecture since the Helsinki final act. This is my aspiration and I am sure the Russian people share this aspiration too. It is now up to the Kremlin to decide but whatever path they decide to take we will stand our ground. Europe will be united on the side of Ukraine, united on the side of peace and on the side of Europe’s people. Long live Europe. Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European commission, issues a “crystal clear” call to Russia ... A little on how talk of the supposed Russian withdrawal is going down in Australia, courtesy of Australian Associated Press. Reports of a Russian pullback from Ukraine were “unconvincing and unconfirmed”, Prime Minister Scott Morrison says. Morrison told parliament on Wednesday cyber attacks on Ukraine ran counter to reports that Russia was about to engage in a pullback. He said: Russia must unconditionally withdraw. If Russia attacks Ukraine, it will be met with overwhelming international condemnation. The world will not forget that Russia chose needless death and destruction. Earlier, a senior foreign affairs official said Australia remained cautiously optimistic about reports of Russian troops withdrawing from the Ukrainian border. But foreign affairs department deputy secretary Katrina Cooper told a Senate committee there was deep concern about the situation. Cooper said: We’re hearing suggestions that a diplomatic off-ramp is still possible. There’s grounds for very cautious optimism in terms of what we’ve seen overnight. It’s an encouraging sign we are hearing [but] those reports are coming out of Russia - we do need to drill down a little bit into that. The Kyiv mayor, Vitali Klitschko, has said that he hopes for a “last-minute” diplomatic solution between Russia and Ukraine. The former heavyweight champion of the world told LBC radio that he hoped that Russia would not invade his country on Wednesday. It is the first time in the history of Ukraine that so many Russian soldiers stayed at the border. The risk [of] aggression towards Ukraine is pretty big. We prepare for any scenario. We do not know how the situation will develop but we hope that the invasion does not happen, and that at the last minute we have a diplomatic solution. (Via PA) Good morning. Sam Jones here taking over from my colleague Samantha Lock. Looking ahead, Nato defence ministers are meeting in Brussels today amid reports that the Russian forces that have been encircling Ukraine are withdrawing. Such suggestions, however, are being met with considerable scepticism so far. We’re expecting comments from the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, in just under an hour. The Russian military has announced the return of units of the Southern Military District from exercises in Crimea. Ukraine’s Interfax news agency reports the Russian defence ministry released a statement on Wednesday, saying troops had already crossed the Crimean bridge. Units of the Southern Military District (AFD), which have completed participation in tactical exercises at the Crimean peninsula, are marching to permanent locations by rail. Military echelons will deliver military equipment and servicemen to the permanent deployment points of military units. Defense ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov added: Units of the Southern and Western military districts, which have completed the task, have already started loading on rail and road transport and will start moving to their military garrisons today. Some units will march on their own as part of military columns. A number of combat training measures, including exercises, have been carried out in accordance with the plan. As the combat training measures are completed, troops will, as always, march in a combined manner to permanent deployment points.” Britain’s defence secretary has said Russia should be judged by its actions when it comes to de-escalating tension at the Ukraine border, adding he has not seen evidence of a withdrawal of troops. Speaking in Brussels ahead of a meeting of Nato defence ministers, Ben Wallace told Sky News on Wednesday morning: We’ll take Russia at its word, but we will judge them on their actions. Until we see a proper de-escalation, we should all be cautious about the direction of travel from the Kremlin.” Wallace added that the latest intelligence shows that 60% of Russian land combat power remains on the Ukrainian border along with significant naval power at sea. Ukraine is now “fairly surrounded” by Russian troops and “it’s a force that would overwhelm Ukraine should it be deployed”, the defence secretary warned. Financial markets have been far less sceptical about the reports of Russian troops withdrawing. Stocks rose strongly in Asia Pacific in Wednesday’s session with the Nikkei in Tokyo soaring 2.2%, the Hang Seng up 1.32% and the Kospi in Seoul up 1.99%. China’s benchmark stocks were also up 0.57% and in Sydney the ASX rose 1.08%. After falling sharply on the troop reports on Tuesday night, Brent crude oil added 20c to $93.48 a barrel. Gains look like being a bit thinner in Europe though ... The Russian defence ministry has said troops in Crimea are returning to base after publishing a video showing Russian military equipment and forces leaving the region. The ministry said the video showed a column of tanks and military vehicles leaving annexed Crimea across a railway bridge after drills, adding that some troops would also return to their permanent bases, Reuters reports. Agence France-Presse also reported Russian state television showed images of military units crossing a bridge back to the mainland. The announcement comes the day after Moscow originally claimed it would withdraw troops from Ukraine’s borders. Viktor Muzhenko, Ukrainian army general and former chief of staff and commanding officer of the armed forces of Ukraine, is on message with the defence minister. He has issued a quick tweet on Russia’s pledge to withdraw troops from the region: It will be possible to talk about de-escalation when the actual withdrawal of parts of the Eastern and Central Armed Forces #РФ [Russia] from #Україна [Ukraine] will begin.” Ukraine’s defence minister has said the latest threat assessments are consistent with earlier views and do not contain anything unexpected, Reuters is reporting. Oleksii Reznikov added that a virtual meeting with all Nato defence ministers will be scheduled for Thursday while a military attache of Belarus will attend the exercises in Ukraine. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a televised address on Wednesday morning local time, addressing Ukrainians, who, in his words are “united by a single desire – to live, to live in peace”. Interfax news agency reports Zelenskiy as saying: We have every right to all this, because we are at home, we are in Ukraine. And no one will love our home the way we love. And only together we can protect our home. Happy Reunion Day, yellow and blue!” The Russian defence ministry’s trumpeted announcement that some of the forces that have been encircling Ukraine will “head for their garrisons” has been met with widespread scepticism. A group of open source intelligence analysts who reply on public domain information, including satellite imagery and a large supply of on-the-ground videos to document troop movements – are unconvinced. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, told reporters during a press conference at alliance headquarters in Brussels on Tuesday: We have not seen any sign of de-escalation on the ground ... We see the opposite. Russia’s ambassador to the European Union, Vladimir Chizhov, has denied reports of any plans to attack Ukraine in the coming month, stating that wars in Europe “rarely start on Wednesday”. When Chizhov was asked about a US intelligence report stating Moscow’s discussion on taking military action against Ukraine on 16 February, he told German newspaper Die Welt: As far as Russia is concerned, I can assure you that there will be no attack this Wednesday. There will be no escalation in the coming week either, or in the week after that, or in the coming month. Wars in Europe rarely start on a Wednesday. When you are making such claims – very serious claims against Russia in particular – you must back them up with evidence. Otherwise, they are nothing but libel. The diplomat called upon western nations to take Moscow’s security issues seriously. If our partners listen to our concerns, the de-escalation process will follow quickly. It would be beneficial for all Europeans ... and for all other nations all over the world. China may take advantage of the Ukraine crisis and do something “provocative” in Asia while western powers are focused on defusing tensions with Russia, a US general has warned. General Kenneth Wilsbach, the head of US Pacific air forces, noted that China had aligned itself with Russia in the crisis, Agence France-Presse reports. Wilsbach told reporters on the sidelines of the Singapore airshow on Wednesday: From the standpoint of will China see what’s happening in Europe and... try to do something here in the Indo-Pacific - absolutely yes, that’s a concern. I do have my concerns that they would want to take advantage. It won’t be surprising if they tried something that may be provocative, and see how the international community reacts.” Wilsbach said that when Beijing expressed support for Russia in the Ukraine standoff, he held talks with his staff and other “entities” in the region about its implications. Based in Hawaii, Wilsbach’s command would play a central role if conflict erupts in the Pacific though he did not go into specifics about what China might do during the Ukraine crisis, saying only that there were “probably a number of options” for Beijing. Hello, welcome to our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis, I’m Samantha Lock. Ukraine will today celebrate a “day of unity” after US president Joe Biden said Russia remained “very much in a threatening position” despite reports that some of its troops had been withdrawn. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy urged citizens to celebrate in light of Washington’s warning that 16 February would be the day Russia would likely launch an assault on the country. Ukraine has also vowed to resist the cyberattacks launched against the websites of the country’s defence ministry and armed forces as well as two banks, believing the activity to have Russian origins. Here’s a quick rundown of the key developments over the past few hours: US president Joe Biden warned that an invasion from Russia is “very much a possibility” but a diplomatic resolution was still possible. He also warned that despite reports from Russia that some of its troops were returning to home bases, analysis from the US has not verified that and that Russian troops continue to remain in a threatening position. Two online Ukrainian banks, Oschadbank and Privatbank, are back in operation following a suspected cyberattack. Nato defence ministers are to meet today in a bid to de-escalate and avert a war in Ukraine. Nato defence ministers including the UK’s secretary of state for defence Ben Wallace, Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg and US defence secretary Lloyd Austin, will meet in Brussels. Ukraine’s defense ministry and two banks were knocked offline on Tuesday. “It is not ruled out that the aggressor used tactics of little dirty tricks because its aggressive plans are not working out on a large scale,” the Ukrainian data security agency said. The White House said it is aware of the cyberattacks and has offered its support though clarified it has nothing on attribution concerning the attacks, US press secretary Jen Psaki told a press briefing. The attacks likely affected Ukraine’s military, energy, and other key systems according to recently declassified US intelligence, the Washington Post reports. Boris Johnson said Russia was sending “mixed signals” over its intentions in Ukraine, despite the troop movement reports. “The intelligence we are seeing is not encouraging,” he said. Russia’s refusal to participate in the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) talks demonstrates its “contempt for the commitments it freely signed up to”, the UK foreign secretary Liz Truss said. The US and European allies agreed that harsh sanctions against Russia would be the most effective way to deter Putin as Biden proposed to halt Nord Stream 2, a Russian natural gas pipeline to Europe if Russia further invades. Oil prices fell as much as 4% and stocks were in positive territory in Asia Pacific on Wednesday morning on hopes of a de-escalation of the standoff. However, Biden also warned that sanctions against Russia could cause further oil spikes. US Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer and minority leader Mitch McConnell issued a joint statement saying they wanted to send “a bipartisan message of solidarity and resolve to the people of Ukraine” as negotiations over a sanctions package against Russia stall.The use of intrusive spyware by members of the European Union is expected to face new scrutiny following revelations that the mobile phones of two more Polish citizens with close links to an opposition senator were targeted by a client of NSO Group, according to security experts. Forensic analysis by Amnesty International found that both Magdalena Łośko, the former assistant to Polish senator Krzysztof Brejza, and Brejza’s father, Ryszard Brejza, received text messages in 2019 that researchers said were technically consistent with spyware attacks by clients of NSO Group using Pegasus. In both cases, the timing of the targeting matched the appearance of Łośko’s and Ryszard Brejza’s mobile phone numbers in a leaked database at the heart of the Pegasus Project, an investigation into NSO Group by a media consortium including the Guardian, Wyborcza and Die Zeit, coordinated by the French non-profit group Forbidden Stories. The data leak is a list of more than 50,000 phone numbers that, since 2016, are believed to have been selected as people of interest by government clients of NSO Group. The consortium believes the data indicates the potential targets that NSO’s government clients identified in advance of possible surveillance. The presence of an individual’s phone number in the database does not mean the mobile phone was hacked. NSO has strongly denied that the data has any connection to the Israeli firm and said the phone numbers on the list are not targets of NSO customers. When successfully deployed against a target, Pegasus can infiltrate a mobile phone, giving the user of the spyware full access to phone calls, text messages, encrypted messages and photographs. It can track a mobile phone user’s location and turn the phone into a remote listening device. Polish authorities’ use of Pegasus first came to light in December 2021, after the Associated Press, in association with researchers at the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto, reported that Pegasus – the NSO Group spyware – had been used against at least three people, including Krzysztof Brejza. In his case, forensic analysis of his mobile phone showed it had been compromised numerous times in 2019 while he was running the electoral campaign of the opposition Civil Platform party. The attacks stopped a few days after the vote. The new revelations by the Pegasus Project indicate that a client of NSO Group also sought to hack at least two individuals close to Brejza. Amnesty International’s security lab found four suspicious text messages were sent to Łośko in April 2019, when she was running Brejza’s campaign for the European parliament. Amnesty found 10 suspicious text messages on Ryszard Brejza’s mobile between July and August 2019. Amnesty said that, in both cases, the SMS messages directed the recipient to websites that were created before the attacks in 2019 and are no longer active. The available forensic evidence did not allow security researchers to confirm whether attempts to hack either Łośko or Ryszard Brejza were successful. Poland’s Central Anticorruption Bureau, the CBA, bought Pegasus in 2017 using funds from the Ministry of Justice, according to documents presented at a Polish senate hearing by the former head of the National Audit Office. The CBA has previously declined to confirm whether it used Pegasus against any individuals, but it has said that any use of the surveillance tool would have obtained legally required consents. A spokesperson for Poland’s special services said, in response to a request for comment by the Pegasus Project, that it cannot comment on reports of methods of its “operational work” and would not comment on whether any specific individuals had been subjected to methods of “operational work”. The spokesperson said that any allegations that surveillance methods had been used against individuals for “political purposes” were false. NSO Group said in a statement: “Without referring to any specific governmental customer, a misuse of cyberintelligence tools is a serious matter and all credible allegations are immediately investigated. Unfortunately, a number of organisations with clear political agendas continue to release biased, inaccurate and incomplete reports based on scant, if any, evidence. As repeatedly stated, NSO does not operate the technology, and [is] not privy to the collected data. The company does not and cannot know who the targets of the customers are.” The company has previously said that its clients are only allowed to use its spyware to target criminals and terrorists. The company is facing intense pressure in the European parliament, where the bloc’s data watchdog has advised the use of Pegasus should be banned because of its power to intrude into the lives of its targets. In interviews with the Pegasus Project, Ryszard Brejza described being shaken up by the news that his mobile phone was targeted with the intrusive spyware, particularly since the suspicious text messages he was sent were catered to appeal to his personal interests. In one case, he received messages laced with the suspected Pegasus-linked domain advertising a holiday home on the Baltic Sea, at a time when he was about to go on holiday on the Baltic coast. Łośko, who is now a member of the Polish parliament, received suspicious SMS messages in 2019 about bullying, which researchers now say are linked to Pegasus. While she never sought out reports on bullying, Łośko recalled having conversations about bullying at the time. In a statement, Amnesty said: “These new findings increase concerns, not only for politicians, but for the whole of Poland’s civil society in general, particularly given the context of the government’s record of persistently subverting human rights and the rule of law.”When presidents Vladimir Putin and Emmanuel Macron faced each other at either end of an improbably long, white table last week, the image became a metaphor for the fraught negotiations over Ukraine. Now the table stakes have been raised after furniture makers in Spain and Italy both claimed that they were commissioned by the Kremlin to make the now famous four-metre-long table. Vicente Zaragozá, head of the furniture company that bears his name in Alcàsser, near Valencia, says he is in no doubt that the work is his. In an interview on Spanish radio on Tuesday, Zaragozá said that as soon as he saw the photograph he started examining the table for defects. “I have an eye for the smallest defects so that we can keep improving,” he said, adding that the table was made from Alpine white beech inlaid with gold leaf. However, Renato Pologna, owner of Oak, a family-run furniture business based in Como, is baffled by the Spaniard’s claims. “Look, this is a story I’ve been hearing about for the past few days,” Pologna said. “Sincerely, I don’t know what to say, because I did this work in 1995-96 and photos of the table were published in books, mostly Russian ones, which were officially published in 2000. “This man, who I don’t know, says he made this table in 2005 – therefore, something doesn’t quite add up. As proof we have all the certificates for the work done, and even the recognition of the president, who at the time was Boris Yeltsin.” The Spanish company, which ceased trading in July 2020 and whose Facebook page is in English and Russian, worked on numerous commissions to make furniture for the Kremlin and former Soviet republics from 2002-2006, among them the Uzbek president’s kitchen and dining room. Zaragozá broke down in tears as he told the interviewer: “We have made bigger and more beautiful tables, but seeing photographs of this table makes me proud that, as a Spaniard and a Valencian, I have done something worthwhile.” Pologna remains unmoved. “The books published in 2000 show the interiors of the Kremlin building where you see a photo of the table made by us,” he said. “Maybe the Spanish guy made a copy that went somewhere else, who knows. We’re talking about a table, not an aircraft. It could be that he made a copy.”Labor has ambushed the government by suspending standing orders to debate the Coalition’s firearms legislation, which then passed the lower house without opposition. The surprise tactic saw the government leader in the house, Peter Dutton, at first attempt to shut down the push before government members voted with Labor to debate their legislation in a bizarre scene in the House of Representatives on Thursday afternoon. The shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, told Guardian Australia the leadership group had decided to support the bill in line with a resolution of caucus in 2019 that, although it opposes mandatory minimums, Labor will not block bills that tackle serious crimes, such as firearms and child sexual offences. The passage of the bill is the second time in two days that Labor has sidestepped attempts by the Morrison government to wedge it on national security, after helping to pass the visa cancellation bill on Wednesday. The parliamentary tactic is designed to show-up the fact that the bills are a “test for Labor”, as the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, described the visa bill, rather than a good faith attempt to amend the laws. Labor has flagged its intention to amend the visa bill, but with just two Senate sitting days left in late March before the 2022 election, it is unclear whether either bill will progress to a final vote. The government’s firearms bill introduced on Wednesday, proposes to increase maximum sentences for trafficking and set a mandatory minimum sentence of five years in prison for firearms offences. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, said there are 260,000 illegal firearms in Australia, which criminals use to “threaten and terrorise … innocent bystanders”. “That is why it is important that we have legislation in place that would prevent the importation of these weapons,” Andrews said. On Thursday morning Keneally declined to state a position on the bill, telling ABC Radio that Labor had yet to see the legislation, adding that “keeping people safe, and organised crime and firearms are of course important issues”. Shortly after noon, the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, moved to suspend standing orders to bring on a debate on the firearms legislation. After Dutton intervened, Liberal MP Kevin Andrews in the Speaker’s chair asked the house to divide to disagree to the motion. Although at first government members gathered to the right of the Speaker’s chair to silence Burke, they then swapped sides to join Labor in voting to debate the bill. Labor members including the leader, Anthony Albanese, queried whether the rules allowed them to change sides but the Speaker, Andrew Wallace, allowed it. Wallace then gave the call to Andrews to speak on another matter, before Albanese noted that because the motion was carried the firearms bill must be debated. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor asked to speak but Dutton moved to give the bill a third reading, which passed on the voices just 19 minutes after the suspension. In the government’s account of the episode, Labor hoped to goad the government into shutting debate down but the tactic backfired. Keneally said she and the leadership group had considered the bill on Thursday. Labor decided to support the bill because it was “fairly straightforward” and consistent with the caucus position that when in opposition: “While we don’t support mandatory minimums we’re not going to let that stand in the way of achieving important outcomes to tackle serious crimes.” In 2020 Labor helped the government pass a bill with mandatory minimum sentences for child sexual offences, despite its opposition to mandatory minimums. Labor will not seek to amend the firearms bill in the Senate, Keneally said. “We can’t govern from opposition – Mr Morrison seemed quite clear in his intent to politicise national security in the context of an election, trying to manufacture a difference with the opposition when, in reality, one does not exist.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Tuesday Scott Morrison encouraged Coalition MPs and senators in the party room to sharpen the differences with Labor on national security in a bid to recover the government’s position before the 2022 election. Labor’s support for the firearms bill gives the government a clear way to pass it in the Senate in budget week, but the fate of the visa cancellation bill is still unclear. On Wednesday Hawke promised a vote before the election but appeared to concede in question time that “we have run out of time to pass the bill”. In debate on Wednesday evening, Hawke said: “I want this to be supported in the Senate. We have spoken to the crossbench, and we believe we have support.” Despite the claim, senators Rex Patrick, Stirling Griff and Jacqui Lambie have all confirmed to Guardian Australia their positions have not changed since October, when they combined with Labor and the Greens to defeat the bill.The way to Bury Castle, in the south-west corner of Bodmin moor, crosses downland with long-horned, hairy cattle. They wander among the coconut-perfumed gorse and hazel coppice, beneath golden catkins blowing sideways in the wind. In the adjoining woods, tree trunks and branches, boulders and uprooted beech are smothered in moss, luminous green against the dull leaf mould. On the hillside, fresh molehills of dark brown earth dot the sheep pastures. A narrow track leads uphill between withered ferns and glossy pennywort, which grow on degraded stone banks overhung with gnarled oak and stunted blackthorn (still there is no hint of swelling flower buds). Ahead, silhouetted against streaks of bright sky, are the rampart and external ditch of the iron age hill fort (400BC-AD50) set on a ridge extending out from the moor. Today, this ancient turfy enclosure is buffeted by a north-west wind. Braced against the gusts, we peer north towards the distinctive high tors of Brown Willy and Rough Tor, and eastward towards the grey outlines of Caradon Hill and Sharp Tor, which rise above home in the Tamar Valley. In Cardinham, to the south-west, 400 feet below this fortified lookout, the pinnacled tower of St Meubred’s church is set among hazy sunbeams that seem to draw water from the surrounding fields, and steep wooded valleys running towards the River Fowey. Across the parish there are medieval granite crosses, including Treslea, which marks the boundary of glebe land (owned by the church), and an early memorial cross, finely sculpted and dating from the ninth or 10th century. It was found in 1872, built into the external wall of the chancel. Downhill from the church, past the community tennis court and war memorial cemetery, jays screech across a soggy path into the gloomy woods that hide the bailey and reduced motte of Cardinham Castle, constructed by the Fitz Turolds, owners of 28 manors at the time of Domesday. Back in Cardinham village, around old tombstones in the graveyard, and in the gardens and hedges, drifts of snowdrops gleam in the fading light – substitutes for this winter’s absence of real snow. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryBen Roberts-Smith warned an SAS comrade he would “get a bullet in the back of the head” on the battlefield if he didn’t improve his performance, the comrade has told a defamation trial, saying he took the comment as a threat Roberts-Smith would shoot him. Roberts-Smith, one of Australia’s most decorated soldiers, carried out a sustained campaign of bullying, threats and undermining of his patrol colleague, the former colleague claimed in his evidence on Thursday. The soldier, referred to in court as Person One, remains a serving sergeant in the SAS, and a specialist in parachute operations and training. He is giving evidence in the trial of Robert-Smith’s defamation claim against a number of news outlets. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. The court heard Person One had qualified for the SAS, having initially been in the army reserves, and experienced a “negative attitude” from other members of the regiment. “I was from a reserve background, rest of the members were from a regular army background, with significantly more experience than me.” Person One said Roberts-Smith’s “harassment” began before they had deployed to Afghanistan. Person One said Roberts-Smith would hit him in the head while he was driving on the training ground, and told him he was an incompetent soldier, undeserving of a place in the SAS. “He said he was going to do everything in his power to have me removed from the team and to get one of his colleagues to replace me.” Person One told the court he was on patrol with Roberts-Smith in the Chora Valley in May and June of 2006. The patrol marched for 10 hours overnight to the top of a mountain carrying 75-kilogram packs as part of a mission to observe villages below for one or two weeks, looking for any potential insurgent activity. But on the second day, the presence of the patrol was revealed after a young Afghan shepherd was seen walking in the mountains. Person One said the young man – aged between 15 and 20 – had not seen the concealed observation post, but Roberts-Smith and another soldier chased after the man and killed him, drawing attention to the position. Person One said the man was not armed, nor wearing webbing or any other military clothing. The man appeared not to have seen the Australian soldiers, Person One said, because he did not suddenly change his pattern of movement, nor display the “dinner plate eyes” of being shocked to see enemy soldiers nearby. Person One said he believed it was best not to engage the man and give away the Australians’ position. In his evidence before the court last year, Roberts-Smith said the man was a legitimate military target who was moving suspiciously. When he shot the man, Roberts-Smith said a flare – “what you typically get when ordnance goes off or detonates” – came off chest webbing the man was wearing. In court on Thursday, Person One disputed a later-recorded logbook entry which stated the slain man was armed with an assault rifle and “appeared to be aggressively patrolling” and “ready to fire”. Person One told the court the shooting of the Afghan man attracted an insurgent attack and the patrol was engaged in a fierce firefight on the mountaintop that was ended when the Australian patrol called in US aircraft to fire on the insurgent positions. The overwatch mission was abandoned. Roberts-Smith was awarded the Medal for Gallantry for his actions during the battle. Under cross-examination, Person One agreed with Bruce McClintock, SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, that the Afghan man killed on the mountain at Chora was likely a Taliban spotter, “a legitimate target”, and that the decision to kill him was reasonable. During that battle, Person One’s machine gun stopped working because he’d failed to bring oil to properly lubricate it. He conceded in court it was a mistake: “I should have taken oil with me on the mission.” Following the Chora Valley mission, Person One told the court Roberts-Smith approached him in the soldiers’ shared team room. Roberts-Smith told him “if your performance doesn’t improve on the next patrol, you’re going to get a bullet in the back of the head”. Person One told the court he understood the threat to mean that Roberts-Smith was going to shoot him in the back of the head in battle. “It made me fearful for my own personal safety,” Person One said. “It made me lose more confidence, it made me perform worse.” Having told comrades of the comment, Person One was encouraged to report it to his commanders, which he did. After the complaint was received, Person One claimed Roberts-Smith threatened him again, approaching him in the mess line, standing close and leaning over him. “If you’re going to make accusations cunt, you’d better have some fucking proof.” Person one said Roberts-Smith would regularly intimidate him and told other soldiers he was “incompetent”, “a coward”, and “didn’t deserve to be in the regiment”. The court spent time examining Person One’s performance reviews, and the weaknesses in his performance as a soldier. While on Roberts-Smith’s patrol he was found to have significant deficiencies. Person One said he lacked confidence in his capabilities as a soldier “due to the behaviour I was being subjected to”. “The applicant [Roberts-Smith] would exaggerate my mistakes and spread rumours about me.” Person One told the court Roberts-Smith’s “harassment got so bad I was struggling with even simple tasks”. He said it cost him “years of lost sleep” and “hamstrung” his career progression. “The death threat I received from him made me fear for my safety. Not only did I have to worry about the Taliban, I had to look over my own back at people in my own squadron.” Person One was moved out of Roberts-Smith’s patrol in July 2006, shortly after Chora. His performance reviews improved considerably after that time. According to performance reviews tendered in court, Person One has since enjoyed a decorated career in the SAS, earning promotions, overseas deployments, and specialist training programs, as well as excellent feedback from superiors, described as a “fine representative of the SASR”. In his earlier evidence before the court, Roberts-Smith denied accusations of bullying. “I’ve never bullied Person One,” he said. He told the court Person One just wasn’t a “very good soldier” who wanted to cover up his poor performance. “It’s always been the case,” he said. “After the battle in Chora I said words to the effect that I didn’t think he should be in the unit and should probably be considering moving back to the regular army.” Roberts-Smith said he never threatened Person One, hit him, or swore at him. The trial, before justice Anthony Besanko, continues.A reporter who infiltrated Éric Zemmour’s presidential election team has claimed he witnessed a culture of casual racism and a covert online campaign involving a “shadow Facebook army” and repeated rewrites of the far-right polemicist’s Wikipedia page, the most viewed in France. Vincent Bresson, 27, says he spent more than three months as an increasingly trusted member of “Génération Z”, as Zemmour’s young supporters’ group is known. He said he witnessed multiple racist remarks from both volunteers and senior staff. “Officially, if you’re black or of Arab origin, Zemmour believes in ‘assimilation’: work hard, adapt to ‘French culture’, and you can be French ‘like the rest’,” said Bresson, a freelance journalist who has written for publications including Le Monde. “In reality, it seems some Zemmourists will always see you as ‘less French’. And these are supposedly the more moderate, publicly acceptable faces of the campaign. I think it poses serious questions about promises of equal treatment for all under a Zemmour presidency.” Zemmour, a media pundit who promotes the far-right “great replacement” theory that Muslim immigrants are supplanting the populations of European countries, denies he is racist but has two convictions for racist hate speech and is appealing against a third. Less than two months before the first round of voting, he is vying for third place in the polls with the rightwing Les Républicains candidate Valérie Pécresse, behind the far-right National Rally leader, Marine Le Pen, and the incumbent president, Emmanuel Macron. Bresson said in an interview he decided to infiltrate Zemmour’s campaign because “there was at least a chance he could be president”. On his first evening with a group of young activists putting up posters last October, Bresson recounts in his book, Au Coeur de Z (At the Heart of Z), published on Thursday, “one of them used the word ‘negroes’, and nobody batted an eyelid”. On another occasion, a volunteer joked of a black driver delivering campaign leaflets: “If he only knew what he was carrying”. A rare Zemmour supporter of Arab origin was told by another activist he could never sell him his flat, “not with your face”. He says he also witnessed a conversation between two senior team members who referred to black parking attendants at the Villepinte exhibition centre outside Paris, where Zemmour held his first campaign rally last December, as “Mamadou”, a Francophone African first name sometimes used in France to describe a black labourer and recognised as a racist insult. Bresson said he had targeted Génération Z as the easiest way into Zemmour’s campaign because as a “young, white, university-educated man called Vincent – a name in the Christian calendar – and brought up a Catholic, I looked like a plausible recruit”. Zemmour has claimed that if he were elected president he would ban families from giving children non-French first names, meaning people could no longer call their sons Mohammed “but would be allowed to use it as a middle name”. Bresson said he was astonished at how quickly he had been integrated into the group, progressing from late-night or early-morning flyposting expeditions to joining teams of activists trawling social media for potentially serious threats to Zemmour’s safety. He was also promoted to an “elite” list of trusted individuals tasked with sleeping at Zemmour’s campaign headquarters in rue Jean Goujon in the capital’s 8th arrondissement, acting as security guards in exchange for a signed book, photo or lunch with “Z”. “I was astonished at the lack of security,” Bresson said. “I changed my surname and invented a job in PR, but never once was my ID checked. Often, I could have searched Zemmour’s desk, for example – though I never did. I’m a journalist, not a spy.” Bresson also joined Zemmour’s highly sophisticated covert online campaign, run through Telegram chat groups by the candidate’s director of digital strategy, Samuel Lafont. “This isn’t public at all, it’s covert,” he said. “This is not transparent political campaigning.” The book describes how a “shadow army” of hundreds of Zemmour volunteers are instructed to join a huge array of diverse Facebook groups, ranging from fans of the late French rocker Johnny Hallyday through supporters of Lens or Lyon football clubs to pizza lovers, anti-vaxxers and radical protest movements. “They’re asked to pile in, as many as possible, posting pro-Zemmour content – articles, videos, links to his supporters’ website – and asking what people think of him. Flooding Facebook, commenting and reacting as much and as often as they can, constantly raising their candidate’s profile,” Bresson said. “They can copy-paste material from a central campaign site; they can post exactly the same content across 20 different groups. It’s about creating an impression of huge numbers of people, of a massive online movement.” The book also relates how volunteers are called on for mass campaigns, orchestrated by Lafont, aimed at ensuring pro-Zemmour hashtags – such as #STOPcensure (#STOPcensorship), when the candidate’s Instagram account was briefly suspended last August – trend on Twitter, attracting media coverage. Another unit, known as “WikiZédia”, is charged with editing Wikipedia entries relating to Zemmour, particularly the polemicist’s individual page, which was viewed 5.2m times in 2021, making it the online encyclopaedia’s most consulted page in France. In an online strategy document seen by Bressson, WikiZédia members are expected to make Zemmour “as visible as possible on Wikipedia” by linking to his entry and citing his views on as many subjects as possible, as well as listing his TV appearances. One activist was also engaged in online revisionism in support of Zemmour’s assertion, disproved by historians, that during the second world war France’s collaborationist Vichy régime tried to help French Jews rather than send them to death camps, Bresson writes. The activist, a respected Wikipedia contributor, inserted photos of Vichy’s leader, Philippe Pétain, and prime minister, Pierre Laval, on Zemmour’s Wikipedia page, adding that their “responsibility for the Shoah in France is debated”. Bresson cites a senior French Wikipedia administrator, Jules, as saying WikiZédia’s activities were “unprecedented” for a political party in France and contravene the website’s fundamental principles of objectivity and neutrality. Lafont on Thursday confirmed efforts to “improve” Zemmour’s pages, which he said were “skewed … by changes made by the left”, insisting this was “the Wikipedia game. It’s a participatory encyclopedia. It’s normal for everyone to chip in.” He did not comment on allegations a senior Wikipedia contributor was a Zemmour activist. Au Coeur du Z took six months from idea to publication and is published by Éditions Goutte d’Or, whose other undercover reports have also made headlines. Its manuscript was, until late last week, in the hands of one of France’s top media lawyers. One of the book’s publishers, Geoffrey Le Guilcher, said legal action against the book by Zemmour was a possibility but the company was confident there was “absolutely nothing untrue or unverified” in Bresson’s 300-page account. “This is about infiltrating for more transparency,” he said. “Éric Zemmour is the only presidential candidate convicted of racist hate speech. His campaign’s online activity is at the very least amoral. There is a very clear public interest.” • This article was amended on 18 February 2022 to remove a reference to Telegram chat groups as being “encrypted”.The Vietnamese government is routinely placing activists under arbitrary house arrest, employing tactics including stationing guards outside their homes, setting up roadblocks nearby and using superglue and padlocks to jam their doors shut, according to a report. The study by Human Rights Watch (HRW) documented cases involving 170 rights activists, bloggers, dissidents and their family members who were prevented from domestic and international travel between 2004 and 2021. The real number of those affected is likely to be higher, the report warned. Those targeted had worked on various issues, from land rights and environmental activism, to advocating for media freedom and the rights of political prisoners, to participating in anti-China protests. Detentions are often employed around sensitive political dates and anniversaries, or to prevent individuals from attending protests, court hearings and meetings with diplomats, according to the research. Dissidents are also regularly stopped from travelling abroad, and prevented from returning to the country, it found. It is so common for activists to be subjected to arbitrary house arrest that bloggers have developed a code name for the practice, the report said, calling it banh canh, after a southern dish – banh is a Vietnamese word used for cake or noodles, while canh means either soup or to guard. Activists post on Facebook that they are eating banh canh to signal that they are under house arrest. Some try to bypass restrictions by leaving their homes in advance of dates that might prompt a clampdown, or by taking alternative transport to attend events. Often, they are intercepted. In one prominent case, when then-US president Barack Obama visited Hanoi in 2016, more than half of the civil society representatives he invited to the US embassy were unable to attend. One of the invitees, Nguyen Quang A, an economist and activist, was forced into a car and driven around for hours. Others were blocked from attending or detained en route. Restrictions were also imposed during visits by Presidents Bill Clinton in 2000 and Donald Trump in November 2017 and February 2019 , when he attended the Hanoi summit between Trump and Kim Jong-un, and activists were stopped from meeting UN officials. “The Vietnamese government apparently considers it a crime for some people to attend human rights or freedom of religion events, or meet with visiting foreign dignitaries,” said Phil Robertson, deputy Asia director at Human Rights Watch. Such practices had become more common during Covid lockdowns, he added, when the authorities intensified their crackdown on dissidents. During the pandemic, while foreign governments were distracted with health crises at home, the Vietnam authorities also ramped up arrests and imposed longer sentences, said Robertson. “The government realised they could run the table, they could go after all the dissidents, try to lock up as many people as possible, and the international community would not react in a concerted way,” he said. People who are subject to travel bans or detentions are not notified or told how long they will face restrictions. A lack of judicial independence means it is often impossible to challenge the measures in the courts.When some people found out Kit Harington was playing Henry V, he says, they immediately thought of Jon Snow, the courageous moral heart of HBO’s giant hit Game of Thrones. It is still Harington’s defining role – and there are a few superficial similarities: the leadership issues, the swords, the battle; Henry’s “band of brothers” and the Night’s Watch brotherhood in the TV series. But resurrecting Snow is “definitely not what we’re going for”, says Harington, who is 35. Snow is honourable and selfless; Henry is not. Presented at the Donmar Warehouse in London, it’s a modern staging in “an alternate universe, if the monarchy were still in charge”. Harington was “very keen not to do swords”, he says with a smile, though he seems relaxed about carrying the weight of Snow’s furs, nearly three years after the show ended. “There’s an element of me always trying to get away from that comparison, but at the same time, you’re not going to, so why try? A large portion of the audience coming to this will be fans of that show, and that’s a great thing.” We speak over Zoom, Harington at his house in London, some good art on the walls. He met his wife, the actor Rose Leslie, on Game of Thrones and they have a baby son. There seems to be a lightness to Harington, at odds with the pensiveness that his face tends to settle into, and he is quick to make fun of himself. At one point a woman – at first I think it’s Leslie, but he says it’s her sister, Portia, who is also an actor – brings him a coffee, and he laughs and says: “That looks like I have things brought to me.” A couple of years ago, he went to talk to the Donmar’s artistic director, Michael Longhurst, about the possibility of him working there, and suggested the play. “The more I thought about what part I’d quite like to play,” he says … then immediately stops and adds “it’s a wonderful thing to have that choice”, wary of sounding arrogant. “But the more I thought about that play, and reread it, the more I thought, ‘That’s a really interesting one for our times.’” At drama school, Harington thought Henry was the hero, the dream role, and one of Henry’s speeches was his audition piece. “I was like, he’s the coolest character, very strong and charismatic. And in re-looking at it, he is strong and charismatic but he’s a very questionable leader. So we’re posing, I guess, the question of who is he and why are we following him?” As a leader, “there’s something very populist about Henry”, says Harington. “He has a selfish motivation towards most things he does. I’m not sure my Henry is doing it for the good of the country. I think he’s doing it for himself, and I think that can speak to certain leaders we have at the moment. Are they servants to the country? Or are they purely ambitious politically?” Centuries on, there is war looming in Europe. On the day we speak, Britain has agreed to send more troops to Poland amid growing concern that Russia is about to invade Ukraine. And the issue of England’s relationship with Europe is not so much an echo through time, as a howl. Henry invades France to bolster his power; modern-day Brits get Daniel Hannan, the Conservative MEP and Brexiter, standing on a desk in his office on the night of the referendum, reciting Henry’s St Crispin’s Day speech in celebration. Or you could talk about the current epidemic of male violence and the play’s portrayal of masculinity (though perhaps that’s less obvious in this production, in which 50% of the cast are female). “I see it everywhere,” says Harington, who has given “toxic masculinity” a lot of thought over the years, even if he bristles at the phrase, not least because of the roles he has played. “I see confused men walking the streets. I see terrible role models. I see a lot of anger, and I think we need to start dealing with that anger – we as men, but we as a society as well.” For Harington, the play became more personal than he was expecting. In 2019, he went to rehab for addiction, mostly alcohol. In an interview last year, he said it had left him feeling suicidal at points. Henry V, he says, was “a way of exorcising demons, I think. But I think all acting is in some way.” He looked at Henry as a recovering addict – as Shakespeare implies – and asked: “What happens to a person when they put down one lifestyle and cross to a different thing? And if that different thing is power, what does that look like?” Particularly, he says, because “addiction gone wrong is a very selfish trait. Even a sober addict can be a very selfish person. It’s a self-centred disease.” Harington believes he may have become an actor because of the same issues that underpinned his addiction. “This is a very addictive job,” he says. “In a week’s time, I’m going to go out, stand on stage and get applause and it’s going to be a huge rush and a high. The trouble is, I never really wanted to come down from that high. Now, I’ve learned how I do that and I’m much happier for it.” He has been sober for nearly three years, “so I’m well on my path to recovery, and all I can say to anyone thinking about it is it’s a wonderful way of living your life. It saved me, for sure.” Harington’s son has just turned one, which has prompted the actor to reflect on the last year. “I feel like a much more grounded, settled person,” he says. “I’m so grateful that I got sober before having a child.” Did Harington identify with Henry at all? “I’m going to quote Shakespeare now,” he says – before adding a deadpan “how embarrassing”. “But Henry has this one line where he says: ‘Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out, with titles blown from adulation?’. That question of, ‘Will this thing inside that’s wrong go away, if I get adulation?’ That really spoke to me.” His mother, the playwright turned artist Deborah Catesby, would take him and his brother to the theatre regularly when they were children. His father, David, a businessman, is a baronet, but although the family were “solidly middle-class”, he says, they weren’t rich. He had a state education, partly because of his mother’s politics, but also there wasn’t the money for school fees. Seeing a touring production of Waiting for Godot was a formative experience. Harington and a friend put on a scene from the play at school and he remembers the audience’s laughter. “They were probably just being polite – parents coming to see their kids’ show.” Seeing Adrian Lester as Henry V at the National Theatre while at drama school was another decisive moment. What did acting give him? “You know, I’ve noticed that my little boy loves applause,” he says, in mock horror. “He’s the son of two actors so he’s going to, isn’t he? But everything he does, he wants applause. It’s making me and Rose terrified.” But he’s the same. “It’s something about that. I think I was a show-off and I liked getting celebrated by my mother. I like attention.” In a prime example of the need to be careful of what you wish for, there can’t have been many actors as applauded or given as much as attention as Harington was in 2019, when Game of Thrones concluded. It’s easy to forget just how huge it was. Although he sometimes gets stopped on his walk to the Donmar, these days he doesn’t cause a riot. Harington is careful not to sound ungrateful, but it must have been a difficult, intense experience. Before Jon Snow, his biggest role had been in the National Theatre’s production of War Horse. Game of Thrones, his first TV role, brought extreme fandom (hundreds would camp outside hotels he was staying in), vast financial wealth and intense scrutiny, all before he hit 30. Does he look back and wonder how he survived it? “I wasn’t very well through a portion of it towards the end, so I could say that an element of me didn’t survive it,” he says. “But I think that would have happened were I in that show or not. I look at it with great fondness. I feel very privileged to have been in it and I’m continuing to get to be in the theatre, in large part, because of that show.” Any downsides are more than balanced out, he says. “There’s a baby boy downstairs, and my wife, who I met on the show. I looked at it from a perspective of tortuousness and anxiousness a lot when I was in it.” He smiles. “I’ve got no reason to be doing that now.” Henry V is at the Donmar, London, 15 February–9 April, and will be broadcast as part of NT LiveAt the police headquarters compound in the northern Afghan city of Mazar-i-Sharif, a large crowd waited in front of a wire mesh door. The entrance was guarded by a young Taliban fighter with long shaggy hair and a beard, who sat on a broken plastic chair. Beside him was a large pile of shoes and flip-flops belonging to those who had already been admitted to meet the newly appointed Taliban police chief. It was mid-October 2021, seven weeks since the US withdrawal from Afghanistan, and the Taliban were now in charge of the country. In a large office, Abu Idrees, the police chief – who has since been promoted to deputy governor of Balkh province, of which Mazar is the capital – sat on a sofa, shunning the large desk that stretched nearly the width of the room, which was a symbol of authority of the previous regime. Short and stocky, with broad shoulders and a big head wrapped in a black turban, he was flanked by his deputies and sub-commanders. Throughout the day, men – and there were only men – entered the room, squatting on the floor in front of Abu Idrees. In hushed voices, they pleaded their cases, answered summons or pledged their undying support to the Taliban regime. In theory, anyone could come and demand an audience, something unheard of under the previous government, when people had to pay bribes and pull strings to see even a low-ranking police officer, let alone the police chief himself. On the surface, it seemed little had changed in Mazar since the Taliban captured the city in mid-August. Taliban fighters, piled on the back of army and police pickup trucks, patrolled the city, while the new white flags of the Taliban emblazoned car windshields and flew from the roofs of motorised rickshaws, but in general, life went on uninterrupted. Local people still flocked to the historic blue-tiled shrine at the heart of the city; they still thronged at night around cars selling Mazar’s famous grapes, tomatoes and white aubergines; trucks laden with coal and onions still headed to the Uzbekistan border, about 50 miles north of the city, while those bringing UN food aid drove in the other direction. Even the large mural at the entrance to the city depicting the late Ahmad Shah Massoud, a commander revered for his role in resisting the Taliban in the 90s, was still standing. Around the city, girls’ schools were quietly reopening, defying the leadership in Kabul, which had ordered them shut. But under the surface, changes were unfolding in Mazar. Mazar-i-Sharif sits on some of the most important trade routes in the region. The northern part of the province borders with Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. Whoever rules Mazar controls the trade that passes through it, and its network of roads and custom revenues, official and unofficial. Mazar is also surrounded by fertile agricultural lands, watered by rivers that rise in the highlands of central and western Afghanistan, and which feed an ancient network of irrigation canals. These lands were spared the ravages of the Afghan civil wars of the 80s and 90s. The region produces cotton, flax seed oil, melons, Karakul wool and what locals claim to be the best hashish in Afghanistan. Now the severe economic crisis that followed the Taliban takeover has put half of the population of Afghanistan at risk of famine, according to the UN. When the warlords who controlled the region and their business associates fled to Uzbekistan, the UAE and Turkey, they left behind government employees who had not received their meagre salaries for months, and were forced to sell their possessions to feed their hungry families. Most of the cases brought to the police chief that October morning concerned former government employees, who complained that the Taliban had confiscated their property when they entered the city. One group of men wanted to settle a case that had been languishing in government courts for months, mired in bureaucracy and demands for bribes. A man representing the Union of the Owners of Wedding Halls complained that the Taliban were intimidating guests with their habit of inspecting halls during wedding receptions to make sure that there was no music. Every so often, Taliban fighters and well-wishers came in to greet their old comrades, who were splayed on sofas around the room. The loudest greetings were reserved for one of Abu Idrees’s commanders, a young man named Jawhar, who had big smiling eyes and brown curly hair. Seated to the right of his boss, with one foot on the sofa, Jawhar was the head of the Mazar branch of the Amr-bil-Maruf, the Taliban’s feared religious and moral police. Abu Idrees listened intently, examining the plaintiffs as he curled a lock of his beard around his index finger again and again. Occasionally, a distant look of boredom flickered across his face, which had been hardened by a decade of fighting in the mountains and hills surrounding Mazar. When he issued his verdicts – which were not open to appeal – he spoke in short, rapid sentences. His verdicts were based on the Taliban’s crude justice system, a mixture of tribal custom and ultra-conservative interpretations of Islamic law. Towards the end of the day, an old man with a close-trimmed white beard and a colourful traditional Uzbek cap squatted on the floor before the police chief. He said his son had disappeared on his way home from Kabul, after he was stopped at a Taliban checkpoint. Abu Idrees picked up a radio set and called one of his commanders, asking about the missing young man. After a few more calls, the reply of one commander came crackling through the radio set: the young man had been detained after Taliban fighters searched his car and found he was carrying bottles of alcohol. “Just judge him according to the Sharia, please,” the father pleaded. “Don’t worry, we won’t kill him,” answered Abu Idrees with a mischievous smile. “He will stay in detention while we conduct a criminal investigation, and you will be informed of our decision.” * * * Mazar, in the 1990s, was the most secular, socially liberal of Afghan cities. In the first two decades of the 21st century, it was dominated by warlords whose militias had defeated the Taliban. During this time, money surged into the city. And yet, last August, Mazar fell to the Taliban even before cities in the Taliban’s southern heartland, such as Kandahar. The reason, in large part, was local anger at the way their city had been run in the previous 20 years. After their victory against the Taliban in 2001, with the support of the Americans, local warlords such as Abdul Rashid Dostum and Atta Muhammad Noor, and other militia commanders responsible for the murderous anarchy of the civil war, were to play a significant role in the new democratic Afghanistan. They were given immunity from prosecution for their alleged human rights abuses and war crimes, and the opportunity to enrich themselves from the immense inrush of foreign aid. After he became governor in 2004, Atta proceeded to run Mazar as his fief for the next 16 years. In time, the warlords’ greed and corruption would prove to be the undoing of the city and the country. Nothing would prove a more effective recruitment tool for the Taliban. In these years after the fall of the Taliban, Mazar’s economy boomed thanks to the flow of foreign aid, which in turn fuelled a huge imports business, aided by the secure local environment. After late 2011, when Nato began using the northern route to resupply its troops in Afghanistan, almost half of Afghanistan’s imports entered through the border crossings north of Mazar. The city became a major commercial and transportation hub, with a constant stream of trucks hung with swinging bells and elaborate coloured decorations transporting goods between central Asia and Afghanistan. Atta was celebrated by the international community as a model governor, a strongman running a stable and prosperous region. The truth, according to numerous sources in Mazar, was far less flattering. Atta’s allies and family dominated government jobs, as well as police and army posts in the city and the larger provinces. A man who I will call Babak, who had been one of Atta’s commanders, told me of the corruption he witnessed in these years. “The political parties were a mess,” he told me. “Every leader or minister had their team working for their financial benefit. The generals did not care about the public, the common people were insignificant for them. The peace and prosperity of this nation was not even important for them. However, former commanders like myself, or those favoured by the warlords, would be guaranteed good jobs and material reward.” Atta and his cronies would siphon money from government contracts for building and infrastructure projects, extort a percentage of profits from thriving businesses, and levy unofficial taxes on cross-border trade. “There was not a single business that didn’t pay him a cut,” one businessman in Mazar told me. One former police officer drove me to the main checkpoint in the entrance of Mazar, where two Taliban fighters stood directing the flow of traffic. He said that during the former government’s time, the officer in charge of that checkpoint had to pay a daily “rent” of $1,000 a day to his commanders. The officer would then charge every passing truck a certain fee and make a profit. Corruption touched almost every aspect of day-to-day life of the city. * * * As a young man in the 90s, Abu Idrees had been drawn to the teachings of the Taliban. He admired what he saw as their attempts to impose order on a country ravaged by civil war, and to put an end to the rule of the warlords who had corrupted the ideals of jihad against the Soviets and turned into venal thugs. For three years prior to the American invasion, he served in the Taliban’s army in Mazar, but he never rose in the ranks, for he was an ethnic Turkmen, and the Taliban were – and still are – based in the Pashtun heartland, with commanders drawn mainly from the clans of Kandahar and the mountainous regions bordering Pakistan.(A few members of the other ethnic groups – Tajiks, Turkmens and Uzbeks – joined the movement when it first came to power in the 90s, especially in the north, where the fighting was fuelled by racial hatred and ethnic massacres took place between the different communities under the Taliban flag.) After the fall of the Taliban in November 2001, Abu Idrees fled the country, eventually settling in the Pakistani city of Quetta, where the Taliban leadership would later relocate. Defeated and demoralised, he joined one of the Taliban madrassas there, and spent the next decade living as a refugee, studying the Qur’an and the life and sayings of the prophet, under the instruction of his Taliban teachers, while scraping a living from day to day. In the years after Abu Idrees fled to Pakistan, the Taliban who remained in Afghanistan were banned from involvement in the new Afghan government. This transitional period was dominated by former warlords who had supported the US military effort, and now had little difficulty in manipulating their new US allies to achieve their own ends. In the south and the east of the country, CIA and special forces teams hunting for Bin Laden and al-Qaida operatives expanded their target lists to include former Taliban, at the instigation of warlords and local strongmen who were settling their own feuds. In these first few years, the remaining Taliban were fighting a rearguard action for self-preservation, but over time, as they gathered strength, they coalesced into more aggressive fighting cells, which in turn evolved into an organised insurgency. Early in 2013, Abu Idrees – who had by then obtained the title of a mawlawi, or highly qualified Islamic scholar – was summoned by senior Taliban commanders in Quetta. They asked him to head back to Afghanistan to organise Taliban resistance in the north around Mazar, and to expand the movement, especially among the Turkmen, Uzbek and Tajik populations. As an ethnic Turkmen, a former Talib, and a mawlawi, Abu Idrees was the perfect candidate for the job. By this point, more than a decade since their defeat, the Taliban had changed the way they presented themselves to the wider world. In 2013, they opened a quasi-embassy in Doha and made efforts to portray the Taliban as an all-Afghan national liberation movement. In truth, the leadership remained overwhelmingly Pashtun, but the organisation needed to expand the insurgency, drawing into their fold the other ethnic communities that had once formed the backbone of the resistance to the Taliban. Thirteen years after he had fled Afghanistan, Abu Idrees slipped back across the border and made a base for himself in the mountainous region outside Mazar. He found that there were already a few Taliban groups active in the area, but they were scattered, and the area under their control was limited. They were no match for the Afghan army, police and local militias. So, rather than beginning his mission with military operations, he started by spreading the word in the area, moving from one town to another – Char Bulak, Balkh, Sholgara – establishing contact with former Taliban sympathisers and recruiting new ones. “We went from house to house, and we spoke to the mullahs of the mosques and madrassas,” Abu Idrees told me. What helped him win favour with the locals was the cruelty, corruption and bigotry of the local warlords and their militias. “That is why the mujahideen succeeded here,” he said. Over the next six years, Abu Idrees and other Taliban commanders led their men on military operations, harassing government posts and attacking government officials. They set up a shadow government that was the de facto ruling power in the countryside, levying taxes from farmers and businesses and administering Taliban law. The Taliban presence in northern Afghanistan expanded, gradually encroaching on Mazar itself until, by late 2018, they were no more than a couple of miles from the city’s outskirts, where they waited while their leaders negotiated a peace deal with the US. * * * Jawhar, the head of Mazar’s religious police, who sat next to Abu Idrees in the police station when I visited, had been among the men who had fought under Abu Idrees’s command to retake Mazar for the Taliban. He came from the same area as his commander, but unlike Abu Idrees, Jawhar, now in his 30s, had spent most of his life living under the rule of the new “democratic” Afghanistan. Jawhar’s journey began when he was a teenage student in a small madrassa in Mazar, tucked down a dusty lane between walled pomegranate and mulberry orchards, and known for its extremist rhetoric. “Some of our teachers in the madrassas had connections with the Taliban, and I wanted to join,” Jawhar told me. But after 2001, he said “there weren’t many active Talibs in Mazar – only a few who showed resistance to the corruption”. These people helped inspire Jawhar to join the movement later. In 2011, Jawhar travelled to Waziristan in Pakistan, where he spent two years fighting against the Pakistani state. After the Taliban had become established in the north of Afghanistan, under Abu Idrees, Jawhar’s commander in Waziristan told him to take up the fight back home. “My target was America and Americans, but before those Americans, the Afghan army was standing in the frontline,” Jawhar told me. “If they did not have the Afghans with them, the Americans were like the blind,” he said. “So I wanted to hit, cripple, or blind this eye.” He fought in the hills and mountains in his district, not far from his home town. “We could only go to the mountains that were under the control of the Taliban. We kept moving – one night here, the next elsewhere. We were often hungry and thirsty. Sometimes villages gave us bread that we dried and ate for a month or two, or we made biscuits by frying wheat or maize, and we were eating them for months, but sometimes we had nothing but animal fodder and grass.” When Jawhar spoke about the faith that kept him alive, his large eyes filled with messianic fervour. In 2015, he and nine other Taliban were arrested, after a firefight with a militia that was supported by armoured vehicles and helicopters. He was taken to the local office of the Afghan intelligence service, where he says he was interrogated and whipped with thick cables, then tied to a chair and electrocuted. He was eventually sent to the Pul-e-Charkhi prison north of Kabul. He told me that in Pul-e-Charkhi, he recruited fellow prisoners to the Taliban and organised riots from his prison cell. After nearly three years, he was transferred to the prison at the American airbase of Bagram. Torture and mistreatment of prisoners in American jails helped turn these sites into fertile recruiting centres for future jihadis. “The memories of Bagram are hard on everyone, especially me,” Jawhar said. “We were three to five in each cell, we had no mattresses and we slept on the concrete floor. I became the imam of my cell, and the soldiers were always harder on the imams. Many times they called me to the door and then sprayed my face with pepper spray. Some [guards] tortured us for no reason, while others would find an excuse. In the end, the only reason was cruelty.” * * * While the Taliban police were issuing judgments in Mazar in October 2021, in a small hotel room near the blue shrine sat Babak, the former commander who had described to me the level of corruption in Mazar under Atta’s rule. He was wondering if the Taliban would respect their pledge of amnesty, or if the normal cycle of revenge and retribution, which had followed every time Mazar changed hands since the mid 90s, would play out as before. Babak, a Tajik, had first fought against the Taliban in 1998 when they launched a big offensive to capture the city. He commanded a small unit comprised of his relatives and fellow villagers, many of whom had previously fought against the Soviets. Babak and his men had opposed the Taliban’s hardline religious policies, but they had also viewed them as another hostile Pashtun force, after a century or more of incursions into the north. In 2001, Babak had been part of the US-backed force that defeated the Taliban in Mazar. From the late 2010s onwards, as a local government official and a commander, he had seen the Taliban make inroads into rural communities. He spoke honestly and candidly, his voice soft and subdued, as he stared at a plate of raisins on the floor in front of him, like someone trying to come to terms with a death in the family. He said the people of the region had been allowing the Taliban to come into their villages, and providing them with shelter, accommodation and ammunition, as a kind of revenge against the weak and distant central government, and as protection against the corrupt local political powers. “If you were a poor villager and didn’t have connections in the government, you would get a huge punishment for a minimal crime. Your land could be easily seized by someone with connections. But in the Taliban law, villagers were assured the safety of their lives and property. The Taliban were solving problems very quickly; that’s how they collected many people around them in the past two years, and they were even influencing my own relatives.” In 2020, after the Trump administration announced its intentions to withdraw, the Taliban campaign intensified, and the security structures of the Afghan government began to crumble. Soldiers went months without being paid their salaries, and those stationed at isolated bases were sometimes left with little military support. “When soldiers were asking for help during battles, or when they were besieged for days without food and ammunition, we would lie, and tell them that aid was on its way and that they must wait,” Babak said. “I had 100 soldiers in my group, but they were not getting their wages. Even I sometimes had to borrow money. Soldiers were forced to sell their ammunition. The Taliban were buying it. Sometimes they were even buying checkpoints or military posts from the army and police officers. They would hire someone inside bases to gather information and convince the soldiers not to fight,” he said. “In the last days, the soldiers just stopped fighting.” He paused for some time, before adding: “We were the ones who crashed the government because of the corruption. The Taliban didn’t capture it, we brought it to collapse. We couldn’t fight, we sold it.” For the first time in Mazar’s long history of war, defeat was not followed by massacres. Babak and other commanders credited the Taliban’s new pragmatism for their quick victory. “In the last few days, a new politics of diplomacy was conducted by the Taliban that affected us a lot – they declared amnesty for everyone, releasing captives and prisoners and giving them money, around 5,000 afghani [£40].” Abu Idrees said that once the warlords fled to the border, all resistance had collapsed. “When we decided to take the city, they showed some resistance, but after just two or three days, when the soldiers saw their leaders escape over the border, they left without fighting. Some surrendered, and others just went home.” * * * When I was in Mazar, there were few signs of the war that ended the US’s 20-year adventure in Afghanistan. The real scenes of the disaster engulfing Afghanistan could be found 120 miles further to the west, in small tent settlements near the border with Turkmenistan, in Faryab province. The inhabitants had fled their villages, which had been devastated by war and drought, to live here. Early one morning, blue smoke from open fires hung over a dozen or so scattered tents in one of these settlements pitched in the middle of a wasteland. Some of the tents were made of UNHCR tarpaulin, others were made of black canvas and plastic sheets sewn together. A goat or two milled about inside an animal pen, which had been constructed from a few thorny shrubs, sticks and pieces of fabric. Open latrines were scattered across the land, and a group of men gathered in front of one tent, mixing mud to build a shelter for the coming winter. The local Taliban official had informed them that they wouldn’t receive any aid until they went back to their village, but the men had no means to return, they said, and there was nothing there for them. They had spent all the money they had a long time ago. They had to rent the tents from the owner of the land, and none of their sons and daughters went to school, because they needed the children to work. The men had been working as day labourers or porters in the local market, emptying trucks loaded with wheat sacks, but the war and the subsequent freezing of Afghanistan’s assets caused the economy to collapse, affecting everyone from university professors to day labourers. Without any jobs for the men, it was now only the barefoot children who earned tiny sums each day from collecting plastic bottles for recycling. One emaciated man with deep wrinkles and sallow skin said last year he fell sick and had to go to Pakistan for medical treatment, so he took a loan from the landowner with a high interest rate. When the harvest failed again, he couldn’t pay back the loan. Pointing at his two young girls, he said he betrothed them to the landowner in return for the debt. “They belong to him now,” said the father. “He can take them now, or if he is kind, he will leave them with us until they are 12.” The two girls, eight and nine years old, stood next to each other, dressed in long blue shirts and pants. The elder sister had black eyes and a shawl wrapped loosely around her small head and shoulders. With her mop of brown hair, large eyes and crooked smile, the younger was shy and hid her face in her sister’s neck. With faces smeared in dust and feet caked in mud, they watched silently the men who ruled over their lives. Another man pointed at his daughter, who sat alone, squatting on the ground, her back resting on one of the tents. She, too, was married to pay for her father’s loan. She was nearly 12 and the family she was effectively sold to might claim her any day now. Such is the desperation of starving families, that children become the last asset. In war, as in the drought, children were the first to pay the price. Almost all the Taliban fighters I met had been recruited between the ages of 12 and 15, and they were often thrown into battle with little or no training. “I was 13 when I joined the movement,” said a young lean fighter who I met outside Abu Idrees’s compound. “I was given training for two days, and then I went with my brothers to war. We ambushed two police trucks. I closed my eyes and fired. I was very scared. When I opened them I saw nine policemen dead. It was my first time seeing dead people, but thanks to Allah, we came out victorious. After that, my elders gave me two months of military training. That was seven years ago, now I am 20 and we liberated our lands. I want to go back to my village and get married.” Back in Mazar, the lights of the shrine glittered in the early evening, as vendors lined up their new merchandise on wooden stalls: white Taliban flags, grainy posters and mugs bearing the picture of the late Mullah Omar and the Taliban’s current leader, Haibatullah, laminated cards and badges carrying the movement’s slogans. But just a few blocks away, a desperate scene was unfolding. Locals were selling their household furniture to feed their families. Sofas, fridges, kettles, stoves, gas cans, plates and pots, along with coloured mattresses and bed sheets, were all piled up in the middle of the street. One 35-year-old man, who had loaded his household belongings into the back of a motor rickshaw, told me he had run a successful car wash before the fall of the city, but now his family were hungry. All his relatives had lost their jobs, he said. He pointed at his possessions: a carpet, an electrical fan, some pots, an aluminium crutch. “These are worth 10,000 afghanis, but no one is willing to pay even 2,000.” * * * On the other side of town from Abu Idrees’s police compound, a woman named Suhaila was hiding in the house of a relative. She had recently received threatening phone calls from the Taliban, who had accused her of blasphemy, and motivating women to contravene Sharia teachings, because she had run a government department in charge of empowering women. It was the third time, in the last 30 years of Afghan civil wars, that she had to flee her home in search of safety. Suhaila’s husband, with whom she had two children, had been executed by the Taliban when they conquered Mazar in 1998. After their victory, Taliban fighters on the back of pickup trucks drove through the streets, opening fire at anything that moved. Then they began to comb the city, going from house to house, searching for men from Afghanistan’s Hazara minority, castrating and then executing them in retaliation for the slaughter of Taliban fighters the previous year. The war in the north became increasingly sectarian, as the Taliban massacred civilian Tajik and Uzbek villagers. The Taliban, who called Mazar a centre of jahiliya – a reference to the Islamic term for the age of ignorance that preceded the revelation of the Qur’an – set about exacting terrible revenge on its people. Schools and universities were shut, a severe purdah was imposed on women, and men were herded at gunpoint to local mosques at prayer time. Suhaila and her two infant daughters, along with other family members, headed into the mountains in the Charkent district, and built a shelter from tree branches, scraps of fabric and plastic sheets. She survived on meagre amounts of food aid distributed by NGO workers, scavenged wood to burn and begged the shepherds for milk. But she could see that her children were starving, so she put on her burqa and, carrying her two girls, walked back to the city. A relative told her that her home had been confiscated by the Taliban because it had belonged to an enemy commander. She moved from one relative’s house to another every few days, until a cousin found her a small room to rent. Suhaila remembers these days of Taliban rule as one long horror. After working as a cleaner, she eventually found a job with a foreign NGO distributing aid and providing widows with vocational training. Sometimes the NGO paid her in flour, as money was becoming worthless. As she walked back and forth to her room, she was often admonished by the Taliban fighters, who spat on her and hit her with sticks, because she was a woman walking alone without a male guardian. Three years later, in 2001, when the US military backed the warlords in their bid to recapture the city, Suhaila had cowered in her apartment, hugging her daughters, as bombs and shells exploded outside. When the Taliban were defeated, she emerged, feeling as if she had been released from prison. She went on to join the country’s nascent civil service. Building on her experience as an aid worker, she ran programmes with the help of the international community to distribute aid and help women build their shattered lives, now that they were free to work, and study. Her two daughters were finally able to begin attending school. Now, with the Taliban back in power, Suhaila had again gone into hiding. “Even breathing is becoming difficult for me,” she told me. While female teachers were allowed to go back to work, she said most of the government employees like herself were told to stay home. Some social workers and activists were being arrested and disappearing. Twenty-three years after the Taliban killed her husband, she finds herself in the same situation of being unable even to go to the market and do her shopping because she has no male guardian. “Whatever we had achieved as women in the past 20 years is gone.” I contacted her in her hiding place and asked her if she thought the Taliban had changed. “I am very sensitive even to the word Taliban,” she said in a voice message. “They are the same Taliban, but they are aware that if they try to implement any of their real policies, people will protest and post on social media. In their first government they didn’t care about what the international organisations or the media said, but now they are very sensitive about their public image. Activists and human rights workers are being disappeared in the middle of the night. The Taliban are desperate for recognition from the international community, so whatever horrors they do, they do in secret.” * * * One night I received a call from Jawhar, who asked me to meet him in a government compound that had become a base for his men. It was cold, and the streets were nearly deserted. A haze muffled the orange street lights, and a few Taliban fighters stood shivering at their checkpoints. When I arrived, Jawhar was sitting among dozens of other fighters, talking with another commander, a fellow former prisoner from Bagram. They were friendly and offered me hot green tea. Shortly after, Jawhar led me into a small office where he sat on a metal chair, under a white neon light. His long hair curled over his ears, and the long tail of his turban flowed between his legs. His smile showed a row of straight white teeth. I asked him about his job as the head of the religious police in Mazar. Were they going to resume their hardline policies, such as banning women from walking in the streets alone and forcing men into mosques? “No, now we are different,” he replied. “Now, we are focusing on spreading our message through the imams. We tell the people there are too many women without Islamic hijab. I told them, dear sisters, don’t come out like this. I didn’t hit or beat anyone, although I have permission to beat or handcuff or do anything I want, but I haven’t arrested a single person or used force on them. I use good language, soft behaviour, friendship and love. I told them, I came out to defend you, and my brothers and sisters, defending your dignity is my duty.” I told him I had been in Mazar for a few days, and I hadn’t seen a single woman who wasn’t wearing a hijab. “Yes, but this hijab is not good; they still show their faces,” he answered. But even according to the most conservative interpretations of the Sharia, women are allowed to show their faces and hands, I said. “Yes, but then bad things happen to men when they look at the women.” And why don’t the men not look at women? “Oh, but that is hard. Women must cover.” As an example of his soft new policies, he told me that a few days earlier, he had raided a basement where a group of people were gambling. Rather than arresting or assaulting the gamblers, he said that he had told them: “‘Before it was the Americans who were promoting such bad things, but now, my brothers, we are living in the Islamic Emirate. Come to madrassas to learn about your religion.’ I told them that it’s their first time, so I won’t say anything. The second and third time, I would be forced to behave in a way that they won’t like.” I thanked Jawhar for his time and was about to leave, when he looked at me with his small, slightly frenzied eyes, and asked me in his halting Arabic, which he had picked up from “Arab brothers” in Bagram, if I had met “brothers from al-Qaida” before. I said yes – in Iraq, Syria and Yemen. “Have you asked the leaders of the Emirate [Afghanistan] and the Taliban what they think of al-Qaida? Do you think the Islamic Emirate are supporting al-Qaida?” I said according to their public statements, they had emphasised that they were not dealing with them. Under the conditions for a peace deal with the US, the Taliban were supposed to be operating only within Afghanistan. “How can they say this? Jihad is not limited to a specific time or specific geography,” he answered. “How can you limit jihad to Afghanistan only, does the sharia approve of that?” I don’t know, I said, you are the mawlawi. We laughed. “Yes, thanks to God, I am a scholar, and while I was in prison in Peshawar, Pole Charkhi and Bagram, I read many books. I abide by the ruling of our leaders and emirs, but, from my point of view, we need to reach out to our dear brothers in Iraq, Syria and Palestine. They are our brothers, and like us, they are also mujahideen for the sake of Allah, just as I was a mujahid. I want to reach out to them, and I want to go and continue my jihad in Iraq, Syria and Palestine, but now the time is difficult, and I can’t ask our leaders for permission to travel. But all the Taliban, and myself especially, are yearning to fight the jihad against the infidel and the hypocrites like the government of Iraq, and to support our brothers against the infidels. In my heart I love them.” Then how about the Pakistani Taliban, I asked – which the leadership in Afghanistan had declared that they don’t support. “Oh, they are our brothers,” he answered instantly. “But according to the current political situation, it’s not in the interest of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan to declare its support for them openly. But they are our brothers, and we stand shoulder to shoulder, we share the same politics and intents, but we can’t declare that.” As he talked, he grew increasingly fervent. “In my heart and soul, I love mujahideen of al-Qaida, and I tell my Muslim brother to carry your sword and fight the infidels, and to follow the saying of the prophet, that jihad will continue until judgment day.” • This article was amended on 18 February 2022 because an earlier version used the spelling Mazar-i-Sherif, rather than Mazar-i-Sharif. This has been corrected. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Ever heard of the overview effect? It was coined by a space writer called Frank White to describe how looking down at our little blue planet from above can create a shift in how astronauts think about Earth: all of a sudden you realise how fragile the Earth is and how important it is that we all work together to protect it. “Looking at the Earth from afar you realise it is too small for conflict and just big enough for cooperation,” the astronaut Yuri Gagarin said. Alas, it looks like we needed to replace the overview effect with the avarice effect, because attitudes towards space seem to have shifted. Rather than making people imagine a better world, modern space exploration seems to be all about money, money, money. Elon Musk’s SpaceX has been working with a Canadian startup on plans to launch satellites with billboards on them into space so that adverts can light up the night sky. No doubt some of those ads will be for space tourism: on Wednesday Virgin Galactic opened ticket sales to the public for the first time. And by the “public” I mean that the small sliver of the public that can afford $450,000 for a joyride 300,000 feet above Earth. The real money, of course, is not in intergalactic billboards or short space trips: it’s in plundering space for resources. Apparently, the race to privatize the moon is on. Of course, many people who are starry-eyed about space mining would balk at the idea that they’re suffering from the avariceeffect: they’d argue that it’s all for the good of mankind. Take, for example, the forward-thinking folk at the Adam Smith Institute (ASI), an influential thinktank that champions free markets. To achieve peace and prosperity on Earth, we need to sell off pieces of space, “with a particular focus on plots of moon land”, the ASI recently declared in a paper. What’s the logic behind this? Well, they reckon that, as long as you’re not too bothered by the fact that global inequality contributes to the death of one person every four seconds, per Oxfam, untrammeled capitalism has done the world a lot of good. “Property rights play a key role in boosting living standards, innovation and human dignity here on Earth,” Daniel Pryor, head of research at the Adam Smith Institute, says. “The same would be true if we applied this logic to space, which presents a unique opportunity to start afresh when designing effective rules of ownership.” This ASI report, titled Space Invaders: Property Rights on the Moon, may seem a little out there but it is very on-brand for the UK-based thinktank. “We propose things which people regard as being on the edge of lunacy,” its president, Dr Madsen Pirie once boasted. “The next thing you know, they’re on the edge of policy.” That’s not hyperbole: the thinktank helped propel a range of privatization efforts in the UK during the 80s and 90s. Alan Rusbridger, the Guardian’s former editor, has described the institute as “a body which has built up a startling track record for floating ideas which end up on the statute books”. In short: don’t dismiss this paper as the ramblings of a bunch of space cadets. That said, don’t expect a McDonald’s on the moon imminently. There are a few obstacles that stand in the way of the ASI’s fantasies of intrepid capitalists plundering the cosmos. Chief among these is the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, which is the foundation for international space law. The treaty establishes that space belongs to everyone and no nation has the right to appropriate a celestial body. The Outer Space Treaty was drawn up in the early days of space exploration. It was easy for world leaders to be magnanimous about not monetizing space back then because the idea was still largely theoretical. Now that mining the moon is becoming more of a practical possibility, however, the treaty is swiftly falling out of favour and there have been a series of attempts to undermine it. In 2015, for example, the US Congress and President Barack Obama passed legislation giving American companies the right to own and sell anything they obtain from space. The US argued that this wasn’t a contravention under the Outer Space Treaty (which is not particularly detailed) because there is no claim of sovereignty involved. Donald Trump advanced the commercialization of space further during his time in office. In 2020 he signed an executive order encouraging the commercial development of space. “Outer space is a legally and physically unique domain of human activity, and the United States does not view it as a global commons,” the executive order stated. The steady commercialization of space has not passed the ASI by. “With more countries and companies competing in the space race than ever before it’s vital for us to move past the outdated thinking of the 1960s and tackle the question of extraterrestrial property rights sooner rather than later,’’ the thinktank’s report says. They are absolutely right about that: the Outer Space Treaty is outdated and is already being ignored. We desperately need to establish a framework regarding property rights before billionaires, private corporations and self-interested world leaders start auctioning off the universe. As the outraged online reaction to the ASI’s report demonstrates, not everyone is sold on the idea that giving corporations free rein to mine the moon is going to make the world a better place. It’s already well established that trickle-down economics doesn’t work. Do they really expect us to believe that wealth is going to trickle all the way down from space?A new attempt will be launched next week to force publication of the full report into whether No 10 parties broke Covid laws, with Conservative MPs urged to support the move to ensure there are “no more cover-ups and no more lies”. While more questionnaires were sent out by Scotland Yard to those who attended a dozen gatherings under investigation, a “humble address” motion was tabled in the House of Commons by the Liberal Democrats. If passed, ministers would be forced to release a specific set of documents within two days of the Met concluding its investigation. A date has yet to be set for the vote, but could come on the next opposition day allocated to the Lib Dems. It also emerged on Wednesday that the former major Tory donor John Armitage is now funding some staffing costs for the Labour frontbencher Wes Streeting, in an escalation of his opposition to Boris Johnson. Armitage, who revealed last week he had lost confidence in Johnson after giving £3m to the Conservatives, has donated £15,000 to the running of Streeting’s office. He previously donated £12,500 to Labour in March last year and £60,000 to the former MP Frank Field in 2016 and 2017. He also donated £65,000 to the remain campaign. The papers being demanded include an unredacted version of Sue Gray’s report, all accompanying evidence collected by the Cabinet Office, and a list of Downing Street staff issued with a fixed penalty notice. The move will reignite pressure on the government over the Partygate scandal, which has resulted in calls from some Tory MPs for Boris Johnson to resign. Despite the prime minister having attended some of the events under scrutiny, including a “bring your own booze” garden party organised by one of his most senior former civil service advisers, he has continued to deny any wrongdoing and has avoided a no-confidence vote. There are concerns that some details may never be known, after a leaked Whitehall memo to those investigated by Gray said the Met “will not make public the details of their investigation and therefore your line manager will not be notified”. The Lib Dem’s humble address motion was tabled and backed by all 13 of the party’s MPs. Ed Davey, the party leader, said Johnson “can’t be trusted to admit whether he or any other Conservative ministers end up being fined by the police”, and “we’ve seen time and again that his instinct is to lie, blame others or cover up the truth”. He added: “MPs from across all parties need to come together and force Boris Johnson to come clean. The public deserves to know whether our prime minister has broken the law, and for the full Sue Gray report, including any photos, to be published. “If Johnson is found to have broken the law, he must fess up and resign. No more cover-ups, no more lies.” Labour’s next opposition day is on 23 February, meaning that if the Met investigation has concluded by that point, Keir Starmer could table his own humble address motion to force the publication of documents related to the Gray inquiry. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has meanwhile written to the Cabinet Office minister Steve Barclay and the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, demanding a reassurance that Johnson and his staff have not been receiving any taxpayer-funded legal advice. Downing Street also admitted this week that no minutes were taken at the garden party attended by Johnson on 20 May 2020 that he said he thought had been a “work event”. A freedom of information request that asked for a record of discussions yielded no response, with No 10 pointing to government rules that say minutes do not need to be kept for some events, including those that are “purely informal or of a social nature”. Johnson has refused to say whether he would step down if fined by the police for breaking Covid laws but his spokesperson has suggested Downing Street will reveal if the prime minister does get a fixed penalty notice. • This article was amended on 17 February 2022. Due to an editing error, an early version referred to Frank Field as the “the late” former MP. We apologise for this.In the summer of 2019, months before the word “coronavirus” entered the daily discourse, Diljeet Gill was double-checking data from his latest experiment. He was investigating what happens when old human skin cells are “reprogrammed” – a process used in labs around the world to turn adult cells (heart, brain, muscle and the like) – into stem cells, the body’s equivalent of a blank slate. Gill, a PhD student at the Babraham Institute near Cambridge, had stopped the reprogramming process midway to see how the cells responded. Sure of his findings, he took them to his supervisor, Wolf Reik, a leading authority in epigenetics. What Gill’s work showed was remarkable: the aged skin had become more youthful – and by no small margin. Tests found that the cells behaved as if they were 25 years younger. “That was the real wow moment for me,” says Reik. “I fell off my chair three times.” A lot has happened since then. Last summer, Reik resigned as the director of the Babraham Institute to lead a new UK institute being built by Altos Labs, a contender for the most flush startup in history. Backed by Silicon Valley billionaires to the tune of $3bn (£2.2bn), Altos has signed up a dream team of scientists, Gill and numerous Nobel laureates among them. They will start work in the spring at two labs in the US and one in the UK, with substantial input from researchers in Japan. Their aim is to rejuvenate human cells, not with an eye on immortality – as some reports have claimed – but to stave off the diseases of old age that inexorably drive us to the grave. “This is a field whose time has come,” says Prof Dame Linda Partridge at University College London’s Institute of Healthy Ageing. “I think what Altos will do is hugely accelerate the process of finding out whether it is going to deliver or not. We need to see some clinical success stories.” Prof Janet Lord, director of the Institute for Inflammation and Ageing at the University of Birmingham, is enthusiastic, too. “This is not about developing the first 1,000-year-old human; it’s about ensuring old age is enjoyed and not endured. Who wants to extend lifespan if all that means is another 30 years of ill health? This is about increasing healthspan, not lifespan.” It is not the first time Silicon Valley billionaires have thrown their wealth at the ageing problem. In 2013, Google launched Calico – the California Life Company – with its own high-profile hires. With $1bn to burn, the secretive firm began studying mice, which have an average lifespan of six years, and naked mole rats, which, with a lifespan of 30 years, appear to have traded good looks for longevity. The company aims to map the ageing process and extend healthy lifespan, but has yet to produce any products. Not that this has dampened Silicon Valley’s expectations. In a microcosm shaped by big tech, ageing is framed as code to be hacked, with death merely a problem to be solved. Peter Thiel, co-founder of PayPal and the big data analyst Palantir, has poured millions into anti-ageing research, notably the Methuselah Foundation, a non-profit that aims to make “90 the new 50 by 2030”. As powerful computation is brought to bear on biology, Thiel has claimed it will be possible to “reverse all human ailments in the same way that we can fix the bugs of a computer program. Death will eventually be reduced from a mystery to a solvable problem.” There is more to death than old age, of course. From the moment Homo sapiens arose, we have been cut down by acts of violence, accidents, starvation and disease. To solve death would take far more than putting an end to ageing, but the billionaires seem less fired up about solving poverty, war, famine, infant mortality, drug addiction and so on. Partridge finds phrases such as “solving ageing” and “solving death” wrong-headed. “Apart from being silly at the moment, it raises all kinds of societal issues. I think it’s morally dubious. Huge things would percolate through society with a substantial increase in life expectancy brought about by human intervention,” she says. “We’re living longer and longer already. People are suffering from disability and loss of quality of life because of ageing. That’s what we should be trying to fix. We should be trying to keep people healthier for longer before they drop off the perch. Stay healthy then drop dead, die in your sleep. I think that’s what most people want.” Thiel, who hopes to live to 120, is one of the more adventurous advocates of anti-ageing therapies. One that caught his eye – although it is unclear if he has tried it – stems from a series of macabre experiments that found the muscles, brains and organs of old mice were partially rejuvenated when they shared the blood of a young animal. (The younger animals, in return, appeared to age.) Scientists are still trying to establish which blood components are behind the effect, with a view to slowing dementia and other age‑related diseases. But that didn’t stop a number of US firms from offering young blood transfusions for thousands of dollars – until the US Food and Drug Administration intervened, warning consumers that there was “no proven clinical benefit”. Another approach that has pulled in private funders aims to flush worn cells from the body. When cells are damaged – for instance, by toxins or radiation – they can switch into a zombie-like state known as senescence. The process has benefits: senescence can shut down cells with mangled DNA and prevent them from becoming tumours. But senescent cells cause trouble, too: they accumulate in our bodies like junk and release substances that ramp up inflammation. This, in turn, drives diseases of old age. In 2016, a Silicon Valley startup called Unity Biotechnology raised $116m from investors including Thiel and Amazon’s Jeff Bezos to create therapies that flush out senescent cells. Unity’s co-founder, Ned David, believes the drugs could “vaporise a third of human diseases in the developed world”. The evidence so far is encouraging. In 2018, James Kirkland, a researcher at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, showed that “senolytic” drugs that destroy senescent cells not only improved the physical capabilities of aged mice, but also extended their lifespans. More than a dozen clinical trials are under way in humans, targeting osteoarthritis, Alzheimer’s and frailty. In case death turns out to be a hard nut to crack, Thiel and others have hedged their bets and signed up with the Alcor Life Extension Foundation, which has been freezing bodies and brains of the dead since 1976. For about $200,000 and annual dues, the Arizona-based firm (motto: “A fulfilling life doesn’t have to end”) will keep your corpse on ice until science can reanimate you. For those of more modest means, Alcor will freeze your dead head for $80,000. Lord, at the University of Birmingham, describes the procedure as “total nuts”. Altos emerged from stealth mode last month, with the Russian-Israeli tech billionaire Yuri Milner a confirmed backer. Bezos is rumoured to be involved, too. Clearly, they mean business. The chief scientist and co-founder, Rick Klausner, is the former head of the US National Cancer Institute, while the chief executive, Hal Barron, left a role at GlaxoSmithKline that paid more than £8m a year. *** But what is it with middle-aged male billionaires and anti-ageing research? Has the penny dropped that they, too, will one day fade away? Is rejuvenation science poised to swell their fortunes further? Or – and humour me for a moment here – could this be about the greater good? Asked about the trend after Calico launched, Bill Gates was scathing: “It seems pretty egocentric while we still have malaria and TB for rich people to fund things so they can live longer,” he told an “ask me anything” forum on Reddit. Perhaps the motivation doesn’t matter. Lord says: “We’ve got an ageing population, but we are living longer without living healthier. If you are going to do something with your squillions, it’s as good a target as any.” Prof Lorna Harries, a molecular geneticist at the University of Exeter’s medical school, agrees. “There’s nothing like increasing age to make you aware of your own mortality. I think the urge to extend your life as long as possible is something that’s behind a lot of this,” she says. “But I’m glad they’re putting their money into something that I think will have very tangible benefits down the line. If you are really deadly serious about getting things into the clinic, this is not something we are going to be able to do on academic grants.” Altos’s Cambridge Institute of Science is under construction at Granta Park, a landscaped 120 acres south of the city that is home to AstraZeneca, Pfizer and Illumina, a gene-sequencing firm. The first researchers are due to arrive in May. Two more institutes are being set up in San Diego and the San Francisco Bay Area, with further support coming from Prof Shinya Yamanaka, a Nobel prizewinning stem-cell scientist at Kyoto University in Japan. One area Altos will explore is called the integrated stress response (ISR). When cells in the body become stressed by, say, a viral infection, a lack of oxygen, or the buildup of malformed proteins, the ISR can reboot the cell’s protein-making machinery. It is the biological equivalent of the IT department’s “turn it off and on again”. If this doesn’t work, the ISR tells the cell to self-destruct: the biological equivalent of chucking your laptop in the bin. In the past decade, scientists have discovered that the ISR is involved in a host of age-related diseases, including Alzheimer’s. In December 2020, Peter Walter, who will run Altos’s Bay Area institute, showed that drugs can retune the ISR and rapidly restore youthful cognitive powers to aged mice. If nothing else, Altos is good news for over-the-hill rodents. Another area in which Altos hopes to make headway is rejuvenating the immune system. As we age, our immune system weakens, leaving us more prone to cancer and infections. Part of this is driven by changes in the thymus, a gland the size of an oyster that sits between the lungs. The thymus is where the immune system’s protective T cells go to mature, but from puberty onwards it shrinks and is steadily replaced by fat. Steve Horvath, a human-genetics professor who is moving to Altos from the University of California, Los Angeles, found evidence in a small clinical study that a growth hormone, taken with two anti-diabetes drugs, can regenerate the thymus and reverse a person’s biological age. A therapy based on the work might help prevent cancer and make eldery people more resilient to infections. Central to Altos’s vision is a procedure called cellular reprogramming. With every human birth, biology demonstrates its rejuvenative powers by turning the old cells from parents into the youthful tissues of a newborn. In 2006, Yamanaka created a similar effect in the lab. He found that activating four genes in skin cells transformed them into an embryonic state, from which they could grow into the body’s numerous tissues. The work fuelled a wave of interest in growing spare parts for patients, but the procedure has its risks: activate the “Yamamaka factors” inside living animals and they can develop teratomas – tumours made due to a grim confusion of different cell types. Scientists are refining the procedure, winding back the clock just enough to make cells youthful, but not cancerous. In one landmark study, Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, a developmental biologist who will lead the Altos institute in San Diego, showed that switching on Yamanaka factors for a six-week burst rejuvenated old mice and extended their lifespan by nearly one-third. “With careful modulation, ageing might be reversed,” he says. The same trick would be hard to pull off in humans. Instead, the hope is to find new biological pathways that, when targeted with drugs, rejuvenate old or senescent cells without causing cancer. Scientists such as Reik and Gill plan to explore these mechanisms in detail, drawing on sophisticated biological clocks to measure how much they turn back time on aged cells. The beauty about targeting ageing itself is that a therapy that helps to prevent one disease might well do the same for others. “If you’ve got the rights to something that works for dementia, a huge public health problem, which you can then turn around and apply to cardiovascular disease, or stroke, or osteoarthritis, that is going to make someone a lot of money,” says Harries, who is also the director and co-founder of Senisca, a biotech spin-off of the University of Exeter that is developing “senotherapeutics” to reverse senescence. There are no guarantees of success, of course, but that is the nature of medical research. “What excites me about Altos is that it’s a new way to do science,” Reik says. “It appeals to me because you can achieve so much more in a bigger team. We want to knuckle down.”How much snow have you had this winter? Do you think you used to have more snow in the past? Well now you can check what the average annual snow quota is for your area, and compare with the rest of the UK. Using 30 years of Met Office data, the mapping and analytics company Esri UK has created an interactive map, showing the average number of “snow days” – a day with greater than half of the ground covered in snow at 9am – for locations across the UK. Topping the bill for snowy days is the Cairngorms national park in Scotland, which recorded an extreme 135 snow days in 1986, and is coated with snow for nearly a quarter of the year (86 snow days) on average. At the other end of the scale, the Isles of Scilly have less than one snow day a year, and central London has three. But underlying the 30-year average is a clear warming trend. “Our climate is changing. The UK’s 10 warmest years on record in a series from 1884 have occurred since 2002, and we do see this overall trend in the number of days of snow falling and snow lying,” says Mike Kendon, a climate information scientist at the Met Office National Climate Information Centre.Cabinet splits have emerged over the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, with Sajid Javid expected to push to retain some free testing and community surveillance of the virus in the face of a Treasury demand to slash the budget. Ministers including the health secretary and the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, are expected to meet on Thursday to discuss the strategy before it is announced next week. The Guardian revealed this week that Sunak’s Treasury is seeking to cut the budget for remaining Covid provisions by up to 90%, from £15bn this year to as little as £1.3bn in future years. The plans are likely to involve an end to all free PCR testing from March except for 1.3m of the most vulnerable people, as well as in hospitals and high-risk settings, and an end to free asymptomatic testing with lateral flow tests (LFTs). However, there is an ongoing debate over the level of funding for free LFTs for those with Covid symptoms. Whitehall sources said Javid’s Department for Health and Social Care is expected to argue for more money to fund enough testing to ensure the survival of the Panoramic antiviral drugs trial, which officials believe would need free LFTs for over-50s and vulnerable adults under 50 until at least September. The trial will be used to determine who could benefit from lifesaving Covid treatment in the future, potentially expanding eligibility beyond the current 1.3m, although no decision has yet been taken on the cost effectiveness of wider deployment. Javid is understood to have questioned whether free LFTs could be restricted to a smaller cohort such as symptomatic over-70s but was advised a bigger cohort was needed to support the trial. The health secretary is also expected to argue to keep a scaled-back version of the Office for National Statistics (ONS) infection survey, which was previously reported as likely to lose all or part of its funding. The infection survey shows the prevalence of Covid and is considered a gold standard in the world. Asked whether Javid was pushing to keep some level of free LFTs and the ONS surveillance study amid Treasury demands for a budget cut, a government spokesman said: “We do not recognise these claims. We previously set out that we’ll keep the provision of free testing under review as the government’s response to Covid-19 changes.” Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said on Wednesday that “ending free testing is a mistake, [as] Covid isn’t going away”. “It’s still important that people test if they have symptoms or if they’re going to see someone vulnerable,” he said. “If you take away free tests, that will … make it worse in the long run. It’s not good to get rid of free tests on health grounds nor is it economically the right thing to do.” The lack of settled budget for the next phase of the Covid response has caused uncertainty and low morale at the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA), the body that replaced Public Health England, incorporating NHS Test and Trace and the joint biosecurity centre. It only became fully operational in October last year but is said to be dogged by organisational hurdles and lack of clarity over its budget for the year ahead. Many of its staff are on secondment, fixed-term contracts, or consultants, with doubt over how much longer they will be needed to work for the body as testing is scaled back and contact tracing all but ended. An all-staff UKHSA call on Tuesday led by Jenny Harries, the chief executive, left workers shocked and concerned over whether their jobs would continue past March, with many having previously been told they could expect to see their roles extended to September. In comments submitted to management, and leaked to the Guardian, one worker said: “My staff don’t know if they can pay for their rent and put food on the table in less than six weeks. Having worked incredibly hard, they are dejected by lack of contract security. How can we expect them to contribute to living with Covid strategies and UKHSA transformation activities?” Another of the comments, visible to participants on the call, said: “Unfortunately good wishes and positive feedback doesn’t pay mortgages. The uncertainty is causing us to lose internal staff and affecting confidence from stakeholders.” One said it was “completely unacceptable that so many colleagues have zero clarity on their future roles” and another added: “Have speakers discussed with ministers the impact of this very last-minute decision making on their own staff?” A fifth said: “With all due respect, was the take away message that we have to wait until some time in March to find out if we have a job in April? Thanks.” Matt Hancock, then health secretary, announced the creation of the health body in March, saying: “UKHSA … will be this country’s permanent standing capacity to plan, prevent and respond to external threats to health.” A UKHSA spokesperson said: “We are immensely grateful to, and proud of, all of our colleagues who have worked tirelessly under extremely challenging circumstances throughout the pandemic, over the past two years. “As the pandemic eases, our workforce will inevitably need to reflect this, as was always planned … We will of course continue to honour all of our staff’s contracts, including notice periods, as we have always done.”Twitter’s new CEO, Parag Agrawal, is reportedly taking a “few weeks” off for paternity leave after the birth of his second child, a move that drew cheers from other fathers as a positive step towards normalizing men taking time off for childcare. The 37-year-old became CEO of the company in November when its co-founder Jack Dorsey stepped down. Agrawal’s leave was announced last week but it wasn’t immediately clear when its scheduled to begin. Twitter did not immediately respond to the Guardian’s request for further information. “At Twitter, we encourage and fully support employees taking parental leave in whatever way works best for each person,” Laura Yagerman, the company’s head of corporate communications, told the Washington Post. She added that the decision was “personal” and that the company had designed a program that is “customizable” and can include up to 20 weeks of “flexible” leave. Agrawal’s decision is being lauded by other fathers and co-workers. “Thank you @paraga for leading by example and taking paternity leave,” tweeted Ned Segal, Twitter’s chief financial officer. “I wish leaders did this when I was early in my career and becoming a father.” “Proud that Twitter and our CEO Parag Agrawal are leading the way here, ensuring ALL parents are able to take advantage of this most special time for their families,” Brenden Lee, of Twitter’s corporate communications department, wrote in a post on LinkedIn. Lee’s post drew comments from other fathers cheering Agrawal on. “Kudos to him for leading by example. I remember the guilt I felt when I took a week off following the births our daughters (who are now 7 and 9),” Jimmy Moock, a partner at a PR firm in Philadelphia, commented on Lee’s post. Agrawal’s decision is by no means the norm, with most American men taking less than 10 days off the job, according to the Department of Labor, despite the benefits for both parents and children. But it is another step in a path being paved by other tech leaders, including Meta’s CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, and the Reddit co-founder Alexis Ohanian. In 2015 and 2017, Zuckerberg took two months of paternity leave after the births of his daughters. Meanwhile, Ohanian has become a champion of the paternity leave movement. Pete Buttigieg, the US transportation secretary, also took paternity leave last fall when he and his husband welcomed their children. He faced a backlash for doing so and addressed it by saying America had a lot of “catching up” to do on the issue. The US ranks among the least generous countries in the world when it comes to paid paternity and maternity leave. While some cities and states have mandates for paid parental leave, there is no paid leave plan for mothers and fathers at a federal level.Police are investigating the death of a disabled woman in her 20s after what her national disability insurance scheme provider called a “tragic accident”. The chief executive of NDIS provider Live Better, Natalie Forsyth-Stock, confirmed to Guardian Australia on Thursday the woman had “suffered burns” on 2 February while receiving care at a private home in Orange. The 28-year-old woman, who lived with multiple disabilities, was taken to Orange Base hospital and later transferred to Concord hospital in Sydney where she died on 7 February. It is understood the woman, who has multiple disabilities, was being bathed by staff on 2 February. Forsyth-Stock declined to give specific details about the incident, citing a police investigation, but said “clearly hot water is a risk”. “We know she suffered burns, we know that she passed away after that,” she said in an interview. Forsyth-Stock said she had “apologised to the family many times” and that her “heart really bleeds” for them. “The young lady who passed away was a really beautiful person,” she said. “Everyone in the community is just devastated. It’s a terrible, terrible accident.” Asked if she was confident in the not-for-profit provider’s processes after the woman’s death, Forsyth-Stock said “clearly we will be looking at all our processes from here to see if there is anything we can learn”. “At this stage there is nothing to suggest it was anything other than a really tragic accident,” she said. “The staff were all properly trained. There was no suggestion of fatigue or anything like that. “Clearly hot water is a risk. When you’re working in people’s homes you don’t always have control of the environment. But if there are things we can learn from this, absolutely we can do this.” A NSW police spokesperson said officers were preparing evidence for the coroner. “Officers attached to Central West Police District have commenced an investigation into the circumstances of the death of a 28-year-old woman at a care facility in Orange,” the spokesperson said. “A brief of evidence is being prepared for the information of the Coroner.” Forsyth-Stock confirmed Live Better has reported the incident to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission and Worksafe NSW. A NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission spokesperson said the agency was “aware of this matter and has commenced regulatory actions”. “Our sincere thoughts and sympathies are with the family and friends of the NDIS participant,” the spokesperson said. “As this is a police matter and the subject of our own investigation we are unable to comment further at this time.” In a separate case, the commission last month announced it was suing another provider, the Australian Foundation for Disability, after a woman was found drowned in the bath of her NDIS-funded care home in Sydney in 2019.Extraordinary Escapes With Sandi Toksvig 9pm, Channel 4 Is there anything more wholesome on TV than this hour of Sandi Toksvig and Sarah Millican escaping to Devon for a weekend together? “I’ve never met anybody who, as part of their job, needs to see if something is ‘uddering up’,” Toksvig tells her companion about the ranger looking after ponies. Cue infectious laugher – which runs throughout the episode as they chatter and chill out. Future travel guests include Sara Pascoe, Sue Johnston and Philippa Perry. Hollie Richardson Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One The welcome green theme continues, with two hopefuls pitching a solution to plastic bags – but does it actually work? Elsewhere, an awkward moment for anyone who has ever slipped up over someone’s name. HR The Dog House 8pm, Channel 4 Poppy and Bron are two pups that hope never to be separated – but how easily can they find a home that will welcome them both? Meanwhile, Harry the saluki is a bag of nerves, which will make you fall in love with him all the more. Let the dog/owner matchmaking continue. HR Caroline: The Murder That Fooled the World 9pm, Channel 5 The story of a young British mother who was killed in Greece had all the ingredients it needed to captivate tabloidesque imaginations. This documentary errs on the right side of salacious as it delves into the investigation of Caroline Crouch’s death, drawing on interviews with experts and the people closest to her. Hannah Verdier The Fear Index 9pm, Sky Atlantic “Humans act in very predictable ways when they’re frightened.” This is the premise of this pacy Robert Harris adaptation, starring Josh Hartnett as a mathematical genius whose investment strategy uses advanced risk assessment to make a killing. Tonight, a plane crash leads to vast profits – and unwelcome attention. Phil Harrison First Dates 10pm, Channel 4 In the spirit of Valentine’s week, pay a visit to the romantic restaurant where 73-year-old adventure addict Mike meets fitness fanatic Coleen, and forever-single Sophie is hoping to meet a nice guy who will commit (good luck with that). HRBy the middle of the century, our planet will need to feed almost 10 billion people, according to the UN. To do this sustainably and limit global heating to 1.5C, the world must also reforest on a huge scale, say scientists, while increasing food production without converting more rainforest and wetland into farmland. It is an intractable challenge. With vast areas of forest, grasslands and savannah already lost to expanding agricultural frontiers and resource extraction in the last century, the competition for space, dubbed “the land squeeze” by the World Resources Institute (WRI), will put unprecedented pressure on Earth’s planetary boundaries. Government incentives will play an important role in reconciling the competing demands on our planet’s resources. But new research reveals at least $1.8tn (£1.3tn) of environmentally harmful subsidies is heading in the wrong direction every year, financing the annihilation of wildlife and global heating through support for cattle ranching, pesticide use, the overproduction of crops and fossil fuel extraction. “In a situation where, as a civilisation, we are dying from climate change and biodiversity loss, we should not be spending money on making the situation worse,” says Ariel Brunner, head of policy for BirdLife Europe and Central Asia. “The biggest threats to our ability to feed ourselves are climate change and environmental collapse. We have enough food. The only scenarios in which we wouldn’t have enough are linked to running out of water, soil erosion and the collapse of ecosystems.” The report, produced by leading subsidy experts for the B Team and Business for Nature, estimated that, each year, there is at least $640bn of environmentally damaging financial support for the fossil fuel industry, $520bn for agriculture and $350bn for the unsustainable use of freshwater. Examples range from subsidies for soy production in the Amazon and palm oil plantations in south-east Asia to artificially low energy prices for groundwater pumping in Iran and poor water management in California. Despite a target on redirecting subsidies in the draft UN biodiversity agreement, repurposing them will not be easy. The B Team argues that the UN target should be strengthened to eradicate all environmentally harmful subsidies – not just the $500bn drafted at the moment – and businesses must reveal the support and subsidies they receive through environmental disclosures. But there is also political jeopardy. Governments have never met a UN target on halting the destruction of nature, with failure to act on subsidies highlighted as a key failure of last decade’s targets. Recent protests in France, Kazakhstan and Nigeria over the threatened loss of subsidies are warnings to leaders on how subsidy reform can go wrong. Costa Rica is a high-profile example of how government support can strike the balance between nature and agriculture. The country’s payments for ecosystem services programme, which won the inaugural Earthshot prize last year, helped halt and reverse what had been one of the highest rates of deforestation in the world in the 1970s and 1980s, while maintaining the production of bananas, pineapple, coffee and other crops. Chile, Ghana, Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico and Peru have similar schemes where landowners are paid for environmental services, albeit on a smaller scale, helping to combat rural poverty and the climate crisis. “We have to restore ecosystems to be able to feed more people, not just for biodiversity,” says Helen Ding, an environmental economist with the WRI, who led research on repurposing farm subsidies in August last year. The research argued that redirecting subsidies to support agroforestry and low-carbon agriculture, especially among small farmers, who produce a large proportion of the world’s food supply, could improve soil quality and the ecological health of land without affecting bottom lines. “Farmers do need to receive subsidies, especially after the Covid pandemic. Rural communities have to recover from the economic shock. But we do know there are subsidies that are inefficient and are driving deforestation,” says Ding. While the postwar expansion of fertiliser and pesticide use alongside technological support lifted millions out of poverty, some well-intentioned schemes are not achieving their aims, according to the WRI report. In Malawi, the government spent about 60% of its annual agricultural budget on farming input subsidies like fertiliser after food instability in the early 2000s. Over time, the initial increase in maize yields fell while the soil was also damaged. Ding’s report argues that such schemes could be changed to benefit both farmers and the environment. Either way, the $1.8tn calculated in the new research is likely to be a gross underestimate of the true scale of environmentally harmful subsidies, say the report’s authors, Doug Koplow and Ronald Steenblik. A year after the review by Cambridge economist Prof Sir Partha Dasgupta of the failure of economics to take into account the rapid depletion of the natural world ahead of Cop26, there is little sign so-called “natural capital” has gone mainstream. The human-driven sixth mass extinction of life on Earth continues to be subsidised with public money. “We found at least $1.8tn a year in subsidies. What was equally striking to me is how much we couldn’t find out. There were no estimates of water for direct withdrawals by industry and agriculture, even though that’s just a massive use of freshwater around the world,” says Koplow, founder of the organisation Earth Track, which monitors environmentally harmful subsidies. “My hope is that this report restarts a critical conversation.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresTop story: ‘Humble address’ motion demands Sue Gray findings Hello – great that you could join me, Warren Murray, for today’s briefing. A new attempt will be made to force publication of the full Sue Gray report on whether No 10 parties broke Covid laws. If passed, the “humble address” motion tabled in the House of Commons by the Lib Dems would compel ministers to release the documents within two days of the Met concluding its investigation. A vote could take place next week, with Tory MPs urged to give their support. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, said Johnson “can’t be trusted to admit whether he or any other Conservative ministers end up being fined by the police … If Johnson is found to have broken the law, he must fess up and resign.” The papers demanded include an unredacted version of Sue Gray’s report, all accompanying evidence collected by the Cabinet Office, and a list of Downing Street staff issued with a fixed penalty notice. Despite the prime minister having attended some of the events under scrutiny, he has continued to deny any wrongdoing and has avoided a no-confidence vote. * * * ‘Ending free testing a mistake’ – Cabinet splits have emerged over the “living with Covid” strategy, with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, expected to push to retain some free testing and community surveillance in the face of Treasury demands to slash the Covid budget by up to 90%. Javid and the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, are expected to meet over it today. Whitehall sources say Javid’s health department wants enough free testing to ensure the survival of the Panoramic antiviral drugs trial. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said on Wednesday that “ending free testing is a mistake, [as] Covid isn’t going away”. Javid is also expected to argue to keep a scaled-back version of the Office for National Statistics (ONS) infection survey, which shows the prevalence of Covid and is considered a gold standard in the world. * * * UK-Australia defence deal – Boris Johnson has signed off on a £25m security package with Australia as the UK looks to build on its defence pact with Canberra. The UK investment will see £25m committed to projects in the Indo-Pacific designed to “strengthen resilience in cyberspace, state threats and maritime security”, Downing Street has said. Australia, the UK and the US have already signed up to a pact, dubbed Aukus, to develop nuclear-powered submarines for Australia. * * * ‘Political’ warning fraught for schools – New government guidance on political impartiality in the classroom is likely to scare teachers in England away from tackling important subjects, according to education unions. The guidance says recent “particularly contentious and disputed” historical events, such as “many topics relating to empire and imperialism” should be taught “in a balanced manner”. In teaching of scientific facts around climate change, teachers are told potential solutions “may constitute a political issue”. The guidance says Black Lives Matter is a movement whose campaigning goes beyond the “basic shared principle that racism is unacceptable”. Mary Bousted from the National Education Union suggested the guidance could see hugely important issues such as the climate crisis, racism and world poverty cordoned off from discussion as too political. The Association of School and College Leaders said it would study the guidance carefully. * * * ‘If you’re black, assimilate’ – A reporter has told how he infiltrated the French far-right presidential candidate Éric Zemmour’s election team for more than three months. Vincent Bresson, 27, said he became part of “Génération Z” – Zemmour’s young supporters group – where he witnessed multiple racist remarks from both volunteers and senior staff. “Officially, if you’re black or of Arab origin, Zemmour believes in ‘assimilation’: work hard, adapt to ‘French culture’, and you can be French ‘like the rest’,” said Bresson. Zemmour denies he is racist but has two convictions for racist hate speech and is appealing against a third. He is vying for third place in the polls with the rightwing Les Républicains candidate Valérie Pécresse, behind the far-right National Rally leader, Marine Le Pen, and the incumbent president, Emmanuel Macron. * * * Quick diagnosis for brain disorders – A simple test could end years of uncertainty for people with relatively common neurological conditions such as Huntington’s disease and frontal lobe dementia. Researchers say whole genome sequencing (WGS) can quickly and accurately detect the most common inherited neurological disorders, and could be implemented with immediate effect. It is already offered to people in England with rare disorders or childhood cancers. The new test uses an algorithm to compare a healthy genome with a damaged one, shortening diagnostic processes that sometimes take years. “Here in a single test, we have the capacity to diagnose the most common neurological diseases,” said Prof Sir Mark Caulfield from Queen Mary University of London. Today in Focus podcast: Prince Andrew over and out The Duke of York faces a bill of millions of pounds after settling a sexual assault case with his accuser, Virginia Giuffre. This, in effect, ends his career in public life, says royal reporter Caroline Davies. Lunchtime read: ‘Horrors done in secret’ Mazar-i-Sherif was once the most secular and liberal of Afghan cities. But 20 years of corruption and misrule left it ripe for retaking by the Taliban. Will anything be different this time? Ghaith Abdul-Ahad goes inside the Taliban’s return to power. Sport Jürgen Klopp insists Liverpool still have work to do in the second leg of their Champions League tie with Internazionale despite taking a significant step towards the quarter‑finals with a 2-0 victory at San Siro. IOC president Thomas Bach offered US figure skaters Olympic torches as holdover gifts while they await a resolution of the Russian doping case that is preventing them from receiving their silver medals. South Africa have told the southern hemisphere’s governing body they are exploring their option of joining the Six Nations after 2025 as plans for a major overhaul of the global calendar gather pace. Andy Murray crashed out of the Qatar Open as Roberto Bautista Agut strolled to a 6-0, 6-1 win in Doha. New Zealand Rugby finally has its much-craved cash injection after reaching a deal with the players union to sell a minority stake in the governing body. Repeated heading and accidental head impacts in football cause changes to blood patterns in the brain, potentially interfering with signalling pathways, according to a study of players in Norway. After the FIA failed to share the full findings of its investigation into the 2021 season finale in Abu Dhabi, the integrity of Formula One hangs in the balance, writes Giles Richards. And the Dallas Cowboys paid a multimillion dollar settlement to members of their cheerleading squad after allegations that a senior team executive filmed them in the locker rooms, according to documents obtained by ESPN. Business The booming crypto assets market could pose a serious threat to financial stability if regulators fail to take action, a global watchdog has said. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) is worried that the scale and nature of crypto markets poses the sort of risk that sub-prime mortgages contained and which sparked the financial crisis of 2007-8. Crypto assets grew 3.5 times in 2021 to a value of $2.6tn (£1.9tn). The FTSE100 is down 0.3% in futures trade while the pound is on $1.358 and €1.196. The papers The Guardian front page this morning says “Covid jab programme extended to cover all children aged five to 11”. The rollout is set to begin in April in pharmacies, GP surgeries and vaccination centres, using Pfizer/BioNTech doses. It is in line with a recommendation by the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation. The Telegraph’s lead story is about the Ukraine crisis – “Truss: Putin could drag out crisis for months”. The latter paper also carries a front-page picture of the Queen back at work, accompanying its report about police investigating an alleged “cash for honours” scheme involving an aide to Prince Charles. Other papers wrap that together with the House of Windsor’s other problems stemming from Prince Andrew. “Plutonium Jubilee” says the Metro. The Sun has “Thank God for the Queen” and “Frail monarch soldiers on”. The Mirror goes with “Royals in crisis” and “Reign storm”. The Daily Mail headline explains: “Charles facing police quiz over cash for honours”. The theme continues – the Express says “Queen faces new anguish” and the Times has “Cash for honours inquiry deepens crisis for royals”. The Financial Times offers something else on page one: “France seeks security shake-up to head off Russian threat in Europe”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAmnesty International has said attacks against its operations in Thailand were taking place against a backdrop of “growing intolerance for human rights discourse” among the country’s authorities, and warned of a clampdown on civil society groups. Amnesty has come under increased pressure in Thailand, where ultra royalists have accused it of threatening national security and interfering in the country’s internal affairs after it criticised legal cases filed against monarchy reform protesters. In November, prime minister Prayuth Chan-ocha ordered an investigation into the NGO, while royalist groups have organised petitions calling for it to be expelled from the country. On Thursday morning, a small group of protesters gathered outside the Ministry of Interior, holding signs that said “Get out from Thailand”, and submitted a letter calling for an end to Amnesty’s presence in the country, according to footage broadcast on online news. Seksakol Atthawong, a vice minister in Prayuth’s office, who has organised a petition against the NGO, said last week that it had attracted 1.2m signatures. Amnesty has provoked the anger of royalist groups by condemning court judgments against young protesters who led mass rallies calling for curbs to be placed on the wealth and influence of the royal family. Prior to the protests, which peaked in 2020, the royal family had long been considered beyond direct public criticism. It is also protected by a lese majesty law that states anyone who “defames, insults or threatens” the monarchy can face up to 15 years in prison. At least 1,767 people, including hundreds of children aged under 18, have been charged under various laws for expressing political opinions or taking part in rallies, according to Thai Lawyers for Human Rights. In November, the constitutional court ruled that the protesters’ calls for reform amounted to attempts to overthrow the monarchy – a judgment that Amnesty said was “a dangerous warning to hundreds of thousands of Thais who want to express their opinions or legitimate criticisms”. Alongside petitions against Amnesty, NGOs have also raised concerns over a proposed law that aims to regulate non-profits in Thailand. It is widely opposed by civil society groups who warn that its terms are vague, overly broad and could easily be misused. Amnesty said it could have “severe consequences” for all NGOs in Thailand. Kyle Ward, Amnesty International’s Deputy secretary general, said: “The targeting of Amnesty is taking place against a backdrop of a growing intolerance for human rights discourse among Thai authorities.” In a statement, Ward said: “We offer constructive recommendations to authorities on steps they can take to uphold their international human rights obligations. We will continue to do this independently and impartially on the basis of facts. In response to the anti-Amnesty campaign and related investigation, we continue to answer any questions the Thai government may have about our work in the country. “While we recognise that the royal Thai government has a duty to protect public order and national security, we continue to highlight that the authorities must do so in a manner that is in accordance with international human rights law, and that is proportionate, necessary and fulfils the government’s obligations to ensure and facilitate respect for human rights, including the rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly.”Campaigners are celebrating a victory in the battle for public access to the countryside, after the government agreed to cancel a deadline to register forgotten footpaths. Walkers and horse riders had been given until 1 January 2026 to apply to save any rights of way through private land that existed before 1949 but did not appear on official maps, after which they would lose the opportunity to add them to maps. A clause in right-to-roam legislation introduced by the Labour government in 2000 stated that any pre-1949 paths must be recorded by 2026 to continue to carry public rights. The Countryside and Rights of Way Act contained a provision that will extinguish those rights if the paths have not been properly recorded. In 2015 campaigners including Ramblers raised the alarm about the need to register the paths, with Dr Phil Wadey, a space satellite scientist and vice-chair of the conservation body Open Spaces Society, telling the Guardian: “These paths are all over the place. A lot of them are actually paths that are in everyday use. They are not hidden. We are not talking about paths that have fallen into disuse. There are actually people walking or riding or cycling along them. But they are not on the official map, so they will vanish if applications are not made … People won’t realise until they are gone and then it will be too late.” The deadline had already been abolished in Wales. The announcement was made by Ramblers, which campaigns for public access to the countryside, after its representatives received assurances from the government in a stakeholder meeting on Wednesday. The charity said it had identified 41,000 miles of potentially missing rights of way to be investigated and applied for in England. But it was not just countryside rights of way that were at risk. Experts have previously told the Guardian that urban alleyways were also at risk, with shortcuts behind houses under threat from homeowners extending their gardens, or fencing-off paths that had existed for decades. Jack Cornish, head of paths for Ramblers, called the U-turn “a cause for celebration”. “This welcome decision means that, with the help of our brilliant volunteers, we’ll be able to make sure the most important and useful paths are added back to the map and protected for future generations,” Cornish said. “As well as being an important part of our history, our path network makes a huge difference to our health and wellbeing. We’re more aware than ever of how good it is for us to be able to easily get outdoors into green spaces, and this is a step in the right direction for the government towards making it a reality for more people to enjoy the benefits of walking and connecting with nature.” A Defra spokesperson said: “Public access is key to connecting people with the environment to improve health and wellbeing. “The government has decided to take forward a streamlined package of measures in order to help enhance the way that rights of way are recorded and managed.”The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is considering issuing a subpoena to Ivanka Trump to force her cooperation with the inquiry into Donald Trump’s efforts to return himself to power on 6 January, according to a source familiar with the matter. Any move to subpoena Ivanka Trump and, for the first time, force a member of Trump’s own family to testify against him, would mark a dramatic escalation in the 6 January inquiry that could amount to a treacherous legal and political moment for the former president. The panel is not expected to take the crucial step for the time being, the source said, and the prospect of a subpoena to the former president’s daughter emerged in discussions about what options remained available after she appeared to refuse a request for voluntary cooperation. But the fact that members on the select committee have started to discuss a subpoena suggests they believe it may ultimately take such a measure – and the threat of prosecution should she defy it – to ensure her appearance at a deposition on Capitol Hill. The select committee did not address a possible subpoena for Ivanka Trump at a closed-door meeting last Friday, and the panel wants to give her a reasonable window of opportunity to engage with the investigation before moving to force her cooperation, the source said. The panel would also have to formally vote to move ahead with such a measure, the source said, and Thompson would probably inform the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, of the decision before formally authorizing a subpoena to the former president’s daughter. But members on the select committee are not confident that Ivanka Trump would appear on her own volition, the source said, and the discussion about a subpoena reflected how important they consider her insight into whether Trump oversaw a criminal conspiracy on 6 January. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said in an 11-page letter requesting her voluntary cooperation last month that the panel wanted to ask about Trump’s plan to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory to return himself to office. Ivanka Trump was close to the former president in the days leading up to the Capitol attack, Thompson said, and appeared to have learned the plan to have the then vice-president, Mike Pence, refuse to certify Biden’s election win in certain states was possibly unlawful. “The committee has information suggesting that President Trump’s White House counsel may have concluded that the actions President Trump directed Vice-President Pence to take would … otherwise be illegal. Did you discuss these issues?” the letter said. The letter added House investigators had additional questions about whether Ivanka Trump could say whether the former president had been told that such an action might be unlawful, and yet nonetheless persisted in pressuring Pence to reinstall him for a second term. Thompson also said in the letter that the panel wanted to learn more about Trump’s indifference to the insurrection, and discussions inside the White House about his tweet castigating Pence for not adopting his plan as a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol in his name. The letter said a persistent question for Ivanka Trump – who White House aides thought had the best chance of persuading the former president to condemn the rioters – was what she did about the situation and why her father did not call off the rioters in a White House address. The select committee said in the letter that they also wanted to ask her about what she knew with regard to the long delay in deploying the national guard to the Capitol, which allowed the insurrection to overwhelm law enforcement into the afternoon of 6 January. Thompson said that House investigators were curious why there appeared to have been no evidence that Trump issued any order to request the national guard, or called the justice department to request the deployment of personnel to the Capitol. A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment on whether the panel was considering a subpoena for Ivanka Trump or the content of the Friday meeting. Neither a spokesperson for the former president nor Ivanka Trump responded to requests for comment. But Ivanka Trump has appeared to suggest she is not prepared to appear voluntarily, and said in a statement at the time of the letter requesting voluntary cooperation that “as the committee already knows, Ivanka did not speak at the January 6 rally”.We are living in the age of the scammer. If you weren’t aware of it, just turn on your TV: there’s a rash of real-life dramas about master con artists. Netflix’s Inventing Anna – a fictionalised account of the fake heiress Anna Delvey (real name Sorokin) – is topping the streaming service’s popularity chart, while in March, Disney+ is releasing The Dropout, which dramatises the tale of health-tech fraud Elizabeth Holmes. It’s no wonder that the New Yorker’s Rachel Syme has declared a “Scam Spring”. Each of these stories is stranger than fiction, and has already spawned podcast series and investigative magazine features. But the drive to turn them into glossy, high-end TV dramas with star-studded casts suggests that we view their protagonists as more than mere tricksters: we are intrigued, even beguiled by them. Perhaps that’s because at the heart of each of their stories lies a question: did they really believe that their visions would become a reality? Or were they out to scam people from the start? The Dropout shows Holmes (played by Amanda Seyfried) being told that there is no way a pin-prick blood test to accurately detect myriad illnesses could ever work; but wide-eyed, on she continues, lying to investors – and, horrifyingly, to patients. In Inventing Anna, Delvey (Julia Garner) screams at her tech-bro boyfriend that of course her arts foundation – named after herself, naturally – will succeed, because she deserves it. There are echoes of Billy McFarland’s disastrous Fyre festival, immortalised in 2019’s Fyre: The Greatest Party That Never Happened – McFarland believed he could pull off a luxury, A-lister music festival on a Caribbean island, despite never having worked a day in events production in his life. What the now-convicted Sorokin, McFarland and Holmes have in common – apart from being venture capitalist-whisperers with a staggering level of entitlement – is that their trajectory seems to coincide with the rise of the concept of “hustle” on social media. Within this culture – which appears to be most prevalent on the image-based site Instagram, with #hustle appearing 28.7m times, shortly followed by #grind on 24.8m posts – wealth and success are prized above all, with the myth reinforced by influencers that if you just #hustle hard enough, the world is yours for the taking. The logic then follows that if you’re in poverty, disadvantaged or unsuccessful, well, that’s because you didn’t go to the lengths to get where you want to be in the future, to paraphrase Love Island influencer Molly-Mae Hague. Self-belief and positive thinking are all well and good, but left unchecked, they can push people into a distorted reality. A 2018 survey found that 53% of millennials expected to become a millionaire at some point in the future; but the real story is far more sobering: in 2019, millennials were less wealthy than people of a similar age in any year from 1989 to 2007. So perhaps it makes sense that people retreat to spaces online where dreams feel as if they can become a reality. An Instagram account such as Success Factory Global (bio: Helping YOU win the game called “LIFE”!; followers: 363,000), demonstrates how wellness-centred self-help memes are colliding with crypto-tech lad culture. Here, in posts such as “The goal is to be a legend” and “You will be the first millionaire in your family” (or, weirdly, over the top of the a picture of Cillian Murphy as murderous gangland boss Tommy Shelby in Peaky Blinders: “They will ignore you until they need you”), the message is clear: let nothing stand in your way of success. Fake it ’til you make it, just like Anna Delvey’s carefully curated Instagram image of a fine art-loving German trust fund girl – an image that made her high-profile friends and scored her meetings with investors. The prioritising of appearance over reality on social media could, perhaps, be driving the latest spate of scammers – and our fascination with them. Holmes, McFarland and Sorokin took ideas that eventually might have worked, and pushed on regardless, breaking the law in the process, when confronted with the reality that it wasn’t likely to happen. Yon Motskin, co-creator of HBO’s Generation Hustle – a sort of greatest hits of the scam world documentary, released last year – recently told Salon: “They have grown up in a different generation, right? It’s this ‘fake it ’til you make it’ generation people now. We live online, we post half-truths all the time, all day without ever thinking twice about the morals of it. So I think all these cons were an extension of that.” Meanwhile, one of Sorokin’s victims, Rachel Williams – who is fictionalised in Inventing Anna – has criticised the TV series, telling Vanity Fair it was was “dangerous”, as “hunger for this type of entertainment urges media companies to make more of it, incentivising people like Anna and making [crime] seem like a viable career path”. Of course, there will always be people out to scam others outright (as the pandemic depressingly demonstrated), and most of us would draw the line at criminality when it comes to keeping up with the Kardashians. But perhaps what these stories of scammers show, more than anything, is that rather than being surrounded by yes people, we could all do with being told “no” once in a while. Laura Martin is a freelance journalistBefore a recent trip to Málaga, I booked a Hertz hire car for a week through a broker and paid for comprehensive insurance cover. At the airport, the Hertz staff insisted this policy was invalid in Spain, and I needed to pay €197 (£167) for its SuperCover excess-waiver policy, which removes the excess in the event of a claim. I was also told the two baby seats I had booked would cost an extra €168. What started as a £372 car hire ended up costing £711 after VAT. When I complained to head office I was sent a €40 (£33) voucher. AOT, Brighton, East Sussex Car rental companies are notorious for luring customers in with budget quotes, then inflating the price with hidden add-ons. Unwanted insurance cover is a favourite extra. You can buy excess-waiver cover, which reduces the insurance excess payable in the event of an accident, for about £2 a day from a third-party broker, while some hire firms charge three-figure sums and claim a rental is not valid without it. Hertz’s response is bizarre. First it says that all the charges were correct and that you should not, therefore, have been offered the voucher. It then stated that you could keep what it calls “the partial goodwill refund” because it misunderstood your original complaint. It declined to specify what aspect of your perfectly clear grievance it didn’t understand. When pressed on the unwanted insurance, it insisted it’s optional, but took pains to emphasise the risks of refusing it. “We do not underestimate the coverage of third parties, nor do we say that they are not valid,” it says in conclusion. Unfortunately, you can’t escalate your complaint to the European Car Rental Conciliation Service, which handles cross-border complaints, because you booked through a broker. You could try a claim via your credit card issuer under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act if you can prove your hand was forced. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsRescheduled match will cost me £356 I bought three tickets for this month’s Premier League match between Arsenal and Liverpool from Seatsbay.com. The fixture has been postponed, and since we live in Germany, we can’t easily attend a rescheduled game. I asked for a refund, but Seatsbay says it would only refund 60% of the ticket price which, as I paid £890, is a loss of £356. Do I have a case?’ JM, Berlin, Germany The law is unambiguous when an event is cancelled. The customer should get a refund. Rescheduling is one of those notorious grey areas. The now defunct Office of Fair Trading ordered football clubs to refund fans in full if they could not attend a rescheduled match. However, those who buy from unofficial resellers have fewer protections. Seatsbay says its refund policy is in its terms and conditions. “Refunds will not be issued if the date changes, as we spent time and money getting the tickets,” it says. “This is not something we try to hide, or that is written in small print.” In fact, the relevant clause is a line of small print half way down the voluminous terms and conditions. According to the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), refund rights depend on the seller’s terms and conditions, but those which exclude a refund in any circumstances are likely to be unfair and unenforceable, while any deductions should be reasonable. Gary Rycroft, partner of law firm Joseph A Jones &amp; Co, says the CMA should investigate opaque fees. “In law you should not expect to be refunded booking fees if an event is postponed, but, in my view, to comply with the Consumer Rights Act, deductions should be transparent from the outset.” Seatsbay declined to tell me what its service fees are. Perhaps the real issue is the hugely inflated prices charged by secondary ticket sellers. Arsenal’s top price ticket is £97. You were charged £296. It is, in fact, illegal in England and Wales for unauthorised firms to resell football tickets. Seatsbay confirms it is not affiliated to any club. “Since we are not in England or Wales, and as transactions are not made there, there is nothing illegal,” it says. Customers who paid by credit card may be able to claim under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, or else via the small claims court. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsWhen I started in television nearly 30 years ago, to take broadcast-quality pictures out and about you needed an expensive camera requiring an Olympic weightlifting-style lift and jerk to get it on your shoulder. Now you can film astounding quality stuff on your average smartphone. Video technology has moved on beyond recognition. Sound technology, however, seems to have changed not at all. This week I filmed an edition of Winter Walks, the brilliant BBC programme in which someone is filmed, well, walking in winter. The camera technology is astonishing. I held a featherweight 360-degree camera on a stick, to capture everything from my viewpoint, while a tiny drone filmed stunning stuff from the sky. But every half an hour we’d have to stop for the poor sound man to unzip my coat and faff around changing batteries on my two radio mics, and adjust them to stop any rustling. The only other way of doing it would be to walk near me with a huge boom mic on a long pole. Either way, the sound is monitored and adjusted remotely on a heavy, pricey mixer slung around someone’s neck. This is how it’s been done for decades. The unusual thing here was that we actually had a specialist sound recordist on the job – they’re a dying breed. Usually, the camera operator somehow has to do it these days. Cuts, you see. This is bonkers, because in the edit you can find ways of working around poor pictures, but there’s next to nothing you can do if the sound’s no good. Kids – and grownups too – often show me wonderful little films they’ve made using their phones, but the poor sound always lets them down. You see the same thing on news video, often caught in high quality on bystanders’ phones, but the sound is a mess. The revolution will be televised, all right; we’ll see what’s going on clearly, crisply and sharply, but hear nothing of it very clearly at all. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistWinning tip: Strudel in the sun: Zermatt, Switzerland If you are skiing or walking near Zermatt, a visit to the 2,130-metre-high Chez Vrony in Findeln is not to be missed. It is located next to an easy ski run and is easily accessible on foot in summer months too. It is like walking into someone’s beautiful house, cosy chairs, log fires, a sunny terrace and a view of the Matterhorn to die for. My favourite time is mid-afternoon when the lunch crowds have gone, and you can sit in the sun on the terrace and enjoy homemade apple strudel with vanilla sauce, washed down with the best glühwein you’ll find anywhere in the Alps. The only difficult part is motivating yourself to leave. Jayne Pearson Skiing with sausages: La Plagne, France If you’re looking for a morning coffee stop in the La Plagne ski area with super service, delicious coffee and a sun trap terrace, look no further than Carlina in Belle Plagne. Its central location and ski-on, ski-off access makes it the destination of choice on a relaxed “food-first” ski trip. It also has a superb lunch menu with a reasonably priced plat du jour and classic French mountain meals such as diot (sausage) and tartiflette (made with potatoes, reblochon cheese, lardons and onions). If you’re in the area it’s not one to miss. Coffee is about €7 for two and dishes €16-€25 each. Marcus Standish Beer and schnitzel on high: Kitzbühel, Austria Refuel and refresh with a traditional schnitzel paired with a cold crisp beer while basking in the picturesque panoramic views of the Austrian Alps. Situated 1,800 metres up, in the heart of the Kitzbühel ski area is the Sonnenrast restaurant. Being just across from the Fleckalmbahn gondola means skiers of all abilities have access to this mountaintop eatery. The Sonnenrast offers traditional Austrian dishes along with hot and cold beverages, which can be enjoyed on the beautiful wooden terrace; this star attraction wraps around the building providing spectacular views of the mountain terrain. Dishes start at about €15. Thea A view to a hill: Hochgurgl, Austria You can almost hear the James Bond theme tune playing as you reach the Top Mountain Star in Obergurgl-Hochgurgl. Perched on a narrow ridge of the Wurmkogel peak, this glass structure with a Swarovski studded bar on a ridge at 3,080 metres really is a cafe with a view – a 360-degree panorama across the Ötztal Alps. Truly breathtaking. There is a black run down but if you don’t fancy that there is a long blue track and failing that you can use the lifts to go on foot. Ice cool! Samantha Little Barnstorming côte de boeuf: Samoëns, France A slightly tricky but doable red piste downhill, or a 40-minute snowshoe up, and you arrive at Grand Crêt 17, the 300-year-old barn that Onno and his family have spent the past four years restoring. It’s beautiful inside and out, with a breathtaking view of the Giffre valley and the landmark Criou mountain above Samoëns in the Grand Massif. Expect a delightful warm tuna niçoise, super garlicky chicken or the massive côte de boeuf, all cooked on the barbecue in summer or winter. Leave space for great puds, too. Mains are €20ish. V Young Elephant in the room: Laax, Switzerland We stumbled upon Das Elephant on a ski trip. Our snowboard crazy boys were blitzing the black runs and … well, their parents weren’t! In search of a hot drink and a radiator we were just blown away by the views from this restaurant at 2,475 metres above sea level on a mountain called Crap Masegn. The food is also superb (its signature dish is penne from the parmesan loaf but there’s also cream of rocket and wasabi soup with prawns, and slow cooked beef with polenta among menu favourites) and is mentioned by Michelin. There is also an intriguing backstory to the place: in 1992, as part of the Crap Art (a reference to the mountain’s name, not the art’s quality) cultural event, an elephant was a guest for four days on the mountain Crap Sogn Gion, leading to the restaurant being named after it. Ceri Fitzpatrick Winter warmer in a white-out: Mürren, Switzerland The restaurant at Sonnenberg will always feel like home. On one holiday to Mürren, all the ski lifts were closed due to a heavy snowfall. Undeterred, my family and I hiked up the mountain through the woods in a total white-out. After several chilly hours walking, we noticed the smell of wood smoke and spied some glowing lights through the fog. When we got to the door, the Sonnenberg’s proprietor welcomed us with warming bowls of gulaschsuppe in an otherwise empty dining room. Years later, we returned to the Sonnenberg to discover its fantastic views of the Jungfrau, something we had missed out on through all that snow. Charlotte Chalet of chocolate: Three Valleys, France A characterful 120-year-old chalet, hung with family photos, Le Corbeleys is unfailing in its warm welcome and hot, hot chocolate. Serving homemade Savoyard fare – diots €20 and blueberry tart €8.50 – this is great value in the Trois Vallées, where lunch can command silly money. Enjoy spectacular views from the large deck or cosy up inside in a nest of sheepskins and red gingham, hang your gloves to steam by the log burner and sip a vin chaud from the neat little bar. Fitting reward after burning down the rollers of epic blue run Jérusalem (formerly a red run but now reclassified). The chalet is on the plateau between Saint Martin 1 and 2 lifts, above Saint Martin de Belleville. Caroline Elderfield Doling out dumplings in the Dolomites: Val Gardena, Italy The Dolomites are the most beautiful mountains in Europe, and I’m hugely looking forward to returning there very soon. Even though it’ll be four years since I last skied in the area, I feel sure of a warm welcome at Muliné above Selva Val Gardena. It’s just off the Saslong B red piste above the romantic, ski-in, ski-out Fischburg castle. The interior perfectly exemplifies the concept of gemütlichkeit (good cheer). The food is the marvellous mixture of north Italian and Austro-German that you get in the Alto Adige/Südtirol, with lots of meat and cheese and dumplings. If I’m skiing I’ll avoid the wine list, but if I go back in the evening... Martin Lunnon Meat and gravy – yum! Near Innsbruck, Austria Growing up in Birmingham, a mixed grill was the ultimate pub lunch. Every meat imaginable, egg and chips. So when I saw mixed grill on a menu at the Bärenwirth in Patsch, just south of Innsbruck, I thought, why not? Cosy timbered restaurant with Alpine views. Bring it on! But, ugh – potatoes, slimy vegetables (yuck) and gravy. Yes there was meat, but just one kind. To be polite and not to betray my ignorance, I had to at least have a crack. And on a month-long trip around Europe, it proved to be hands down the best meal I ate. I even mopped up the gravy with the bread. Added bonus of staying in the hotel above, balcony overlooking a Tirolean church backed by not one, but two stunning V-shaped valleys. Antony T“Studies predict that with climate change, skiing will be able to take place here in its current form until 2050…” These profound words came not from an environmentalist, but from the lips of Patrick Arnaud, the manager of Serre Chevalier ski area in the French Alps. As I sat there, looking up at the snow-capped peaks behind him, with my 16-month-old son on my lap, all I could think was how close that date suddenly felt. Ask people if taking a ski trip is good for the environment and they’ll likely come back with a resounding no. First there’s the way people often access it – via short-haul, carbon-emitting flights. Then there’s the type of work that has to be done on the mountain to make it suitable for skiers – from deforestation and grooming pistes (using diesel-powered vehicles), to running chairlifts to get people back up the slopes (yet more greenhouse gas emissions). And then there’s the catch-22 in the form of snow production – with temperatures rising, more snow needs to be made artificially to keep the traditional areas open, but this emits more carbon into the atmosphere, exacerbating the problem. Yet, as I was finding out in Serre Chevalier, it doesn’t have to be this way. It started for me by ditching the plane and heading to the region’s capital, Briançon, via train. The all-electric Eurostar started my family off on a green footing straight from London (Eurostar says you can take 13 journeys on it before you produce the same amount of carbon emitted in just one flight to an equivalent airport, such as Grenoble or Lyon), before catching the SNCF sleeper train from Paris the same day. The next morning, we awoke in our cosy couchette to a panoramic view of the Alps from our beds. Despite any fears (mine and, undoubtedly, other passengers’), the baby slept well in his travel cot on the floor, while I too was rocked to sleep by the motion of the carriage. We arrived on the train at Briançon and to a well-timed bus connection to head immediately into Chantemerle, the hub of the four-centre valley. Serre Chevalier was due to celebrate 80 years as a ski resort in 2021, and when Covid hit in 2020 and tourists couldn’t come, rather than lamenting its loss the resort decided to up its environmental plans. The four centres – Briançon, Chantemerle, Villeneuve la Salle and Le Monetier-les-Bains – had already pledged to do their best to reduce their carbon footprint by 2030, but on reflection they decided to aim at producing 30% of all their electricity supply themselves by 2023. “Everyone said we were crazy, that it was impossible,” said Patrick, “but now we are on track to exceed that figure.” After dropping off my boy at nursery I headed up the mountain. Patrick had explained how ski resorts were the easiest places to convert to renewable energy. They have 300 days of sunshine a year, plenty of wind high up, and streams already piped for snow-producing cannon can be harnessed to produce hydroelectricity (this accounts for 80% of all renewables here) – they are plugged into the existing network but give electricity rather than takes it when not producing snow. And to install everything requires no cutting down of trees, as the infrastructure is there already. As I ascended higher I noticed the glinting solar panels on the roofs of the chairlifts. So effective are they in winter – thanks to the intensity of the sun reflecting off snow – that the chairlifts produce more power than they consume. As I went to the top of the mountain and began my descent on a particularly swooshy blue, I spied one of the wind turbines – another of Chevalier’s renewables – which efficiently powers yet more lifts. For my final run of the day I found myself navigating a slightly bumpy slope, part of the experimental changes at Chevalier. “Grooming accounts for 90% of our energy consumption,” Patrick said, “and 50 years ago we groomed less.” Even though most of their piste bashers have been hybrid (diesel and electrically powered since 2012 – with the plan to be electric and hydro-powered by 2030 – the resort has been asking customers if they need all slopes to be groomed quite so widely. As I bounded down the piste, screaming with glee, I decided that perhaps a little stomach lurch now and again was worth it for the greater good. Our accommodation that evening was at the Gîte Le Rebanchon (from €70 bed and breakfast) in the tiny village of Le Casset, at the northern end of Chevalier. Although located further out from the pistes, its mountain-themed rooms were comfy, and the hotel’s Eco Gite label denotes a pledge to preserve natural resources, use renewable energy and source natural, local and recyclable products. That night we walked up to Trinquet des Boussardes, a brand new Ecotable-certified restaurant, where owner Nicolas Boutard cooks fresh, seasonal and local produce on an open fire, with zero waste. We enjoyed a vegetable tartare made with a mix of greens from Hautes-Alpes farmers, followed by wood-fired, spiced mushrooms and potatoes from the Altitude Bio organic shop in Briançon. Over the next couple of days, besides more skiing – Chevalier has 81 runs spread over Briançon, Chantemerle, Villeneuve and Le Monêtier-les-Bains – there were also a number of environmentally sound activities to try. Where other resorts have introduced snowmobiles for an adrenaline rush, here there is a different sort of horse power. Ski joëring involves harnessing yourself to a horse and being pulled along at speed. Though my instructor, Fanny, was sympathetic to my lack of core strength (vital, apparently) she didn’t waste time getting the horse to gallop around the icy course – while warning that my screaming would only encourage it to go faster. Slightly more sedate was snowshoeing, which I took my son along for one evening, as it began just outside our gite. There, guide Laura took a group of us hiking into the woodland of the surrounding Ecrins national park, telling us about the two glaciers within – which were formerly one, but global warming saw it retreat and split – before bringing us to a clearing where two tipis were set for us to make our own fondue with local cheese. “We normally offer this experience in an igloo,” Laura said, gesturing poignantly at a huge mass of snow, “but it got too warm and it’s melted already.” On the final day, before my last run on the slopes (during which I would try a new, low-impact offering – a 1.1km zipline down), I took my baby to Les Grand Bains in Monêtier, pools fed by natural thermal springs. There he happily splashed in the outdoor baths while I gazed up at the slopes behind him through rising steam. When it comes to being more sustainable, Chevalier is not only attempting to produce its own electricity, but also reducing its consumption. Plans include running ski lifts slower when there are no queues (a minute longer on the lift means a 20% saving on energy used) and using snow cannon sparingly (last season, pre-Covid, they made 25% less snow with no impact on customer satisfaction). This ski region’s attitude – and marketing slogan – is “All we need is change”, and that goes from the resort switching to renewables, reducing energy use and offering sustainable accommodation and locally sourced food, to us, the skiers, doing our bit to make our favoured activity less carbon intensive. Because, as Patrick said when he revealed they were offering their blueprint for renewable conversion to competitor ski resorts, “we’re not doing this for Chevalier, we’re doing this for the planet. If all the resorts make this change, imagine the difference it would make.” I thought about that on our way to the railway station. One family committing to take a more sustainable ski trip may be akin to a single snowflake falling. But, with enough of us making the change, the cumulative results could ensure a winter wonderland survives well past 2050. The trip was provided by Serre Chevalier; rail travel by Eurostar (London-Paris return from £79) and SNCF (Paris-Briançon from €29 for a shared couchette – private option available). Buses run from the station to main ski areas. Ski passes at Serre Chevalier from €54; snowshoe and fondue excursion with Igloo Food €60 adult, €35 child. Ski joering with Ranch du Grand Aigle from €30pp; Les Grands Bains du Monêtier from €21.50 adult; zipline ride from €29In June 1802, the German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt ascended the inactive volcano Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador. As he climbed from tropical rainforest towards the snow-covered peak almost 21,000ft above sea level, he acquired a new vision of nature, interwoven with “a thousand threads”. It was like taking a journey from the equator to the poles: an entire world of diversity collapsed on to this single mountain, a “microcosm on one page”. Here Humboldt began to develop the notion he called Naturgemälde, a scarcely translatable word that implies a unity or wholeness in nature. Humboldt is often credited with the idea of an ecosystem as a web of interdependent living species, each playing a part in supporting the whole. But as conservation biologist Thor Hanson says in Hurricane Lizards and Plastic Squid, Chimborazo also opened the intrepid German naturalist’s eyes to another profound realisation: climate, not mere geographical location, “dictated what grew where, and similar vegetation should occur in any place where temperature, humidity and other conditions were the same, regardless of geography”. The corollary – when climate changes, ecosystems must change too – is the topic of Hanson’s book. The simplest outcome is a shifting of boundaries separating different climatic zones: as temperatures rise, temperate flora and fauna will move poleward. If that were all there was to it, climate change would rearrange but not otherwise perturb the mosaic of life that Humboldt identified. But it isn’t so straightforward. The responses of the natural world to the changes that human activities have induced in our climate range from the alarming, such as species extinctions, to the creative. The natural world is resilient, but to different degrees in different places and among different organisms. What’s more, timescales matter: adaptations feasible over the slow climate shifts that have happened naturally in the distant past might not be managed in the face of today’s rapid warming. Nature is doing what it can, but it is confused and often imperilled. It’s a somewhat guilty pleasure, then, to revel in Hanson’s globetrotting exploits, some of them conducted under the constraints of the pandemic. We are taken from the rainforests of Costa Rica to the Arctic ice of Franz Josef Land and the coral reefs of Indonesia. The range of species he investigates and the climate responses they exhibit are sometimes dizzying, but some general features emerge. When confronted with a climate shift – warmer ocean or air temperatures, say, or altered patterns of rainfall or melting ice – organisms have several options. They can migrate to where the original conditions still prevail, or they can try to adapt their behaviour to the new. In some cases they can evolve: Darwinian natural selection is often imagined to happen slowly over millennia, but it can take place much more quickly (as the coronavirus reminds us). As they decimate populations, sudden and extreme changes in climate are a brutally selective filter. The “hurricane lizards” of the title are those individuals in a species of Caribbean lizard whose stronger grip, thanks to larger toe pads, allowed them to survive more frequent hurricanes by clinging to trees and shrubs. Another option is that organisms find niches in their existing habitat where the original conditions persist: so-called refugia, such as slopes sheltered from the sun. Whether this is a viable long-term solution is not clear – but it has so far sustained populations of rabbit-like American pikas in the western Rockies, which find their preferred cooler conditions preserved in the cold air that gathers over scree slopes, even while the snowpack elsewhere retreats. But amid these diverse strategies, the ecosystem as a whole may still be disrupted. It’s no good one species adapting to stay put if its main food source has migrated elsewhere. And as climate change moves the boundaries of the seasons, the delicate interlocking of growth patterns may be thrown out of kilter. “Timing is everything in ecosystems,” Hanson writes. “If plants at the foot of trees have not finished their bloom and growth before the trees overhead come into leaf and block much of the sunlight, they’re in trouble.” Hanson supplies abundant reason to marvel at nature’s ingenuity, but also to fear for it in the face of the drastic changes we are generating. He reminds us that our own responses, as we try to adjust to wildfires, heatwaves and sea level rise, are a part of that story too. “It’s now a running joke that every biologist in the world is studying the effects of climate change,” he writes. “Some of them just don’t know it yet.” It’s a good joke, but nothing to laugh about. • Hurricane Lizards and Plastic Squid is published by Icon (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe Winter Olympics have been plunged into further controversy after Beijing 2022 spokesperson Yan Jiarong dismissed human rights violations among the Uyghur Muslim population as “lies” and insisted Taiwan was part of China. Yan, a former member of the Chinese delegation to the UN general assembly, referred to “so-called forced labour” in Xinjiang in response to one question, before saying China was against the “politicising of sports”. She again intervened when a question was raised regarding the IOC’s position on reports of concentration camps and forced labour in Xinjiang. “I think these questions are based on lies,” Yan said. “Some authorities have already disputed such false information with a lot of solid evidence. You are very welcome to refer to all that evidence and facts.” Internment camps in Xinjiang was a major issue before the Games, with the US warning of a genocide in the region before leading a diplomatic boycott by several countries, including Britain and Canada. Those countries, and human rights groups, say that more than one million Uyghurs are subjected to forced labour and reeducation, and in some cases even sterilisation. The subject has largely taken a backseat in the past fortnight, as athletes’ concerns about Covid isolation camps and then the failed drugs of 15-year-old Russian skater Kamila Valieva have captured more of the public’s attention. But it was reignited in a remarkable final joint press conference held by the International Olympic Committee and the Beijing organisers, during which Yan dismissed questions about the issues in Xinjiang. Asked after the conference whether she had meant her lies comment, she said: ““Yes, yes. But this is not the relevant department. The foreign ministry and other ministries have released lots and lots of facts and data to refute these kind of allegations.” Meanwhile, the IOC presidential spokesperson Mark Adams said none of its uniforms were made by workers or from raw materials from the region. He added that Yan’s view was “not particularly relevant to the press conference or the IOC”, saying the organisation was “very concerned about protecting human rights within our sphere of the Olympic Games”. “We leave it to other organisations, the United Nations, other organisations, to look at other aspects outside of what is happening here,” he said. “The Games themselves bring a great deal of benefit to the world in terms of showing how people can work together and bring a shared feeling about what the world could be like. “Even administrations around the world who have boycotted these Games politically understand the importance of having ways of reaching out, talking and having areas of cooperation. “Bringing the world together is even more important at a time like this when there is such dispute and there can be areas of discussion and debate.” The IOC has repeatedly said the Games should be free from politics, but when asked about Taiwan, Yan again stressed the Chinese government’s position, saying: “There is only one China in the world.” The Taiwanese authorities, led by the Democratic Progressive party, however, claim the island is an independent nation. Yan said: “Taiwan is an individable part of China. This is a well-recognised international principle and well recognised in the international community. We are always against the idea of politicising the Olympic Games. IOC has 206 members including People’s Republic China National Olympic Committee, including Chinese Taipei, the original Olympic Committee.”An EU action plan to deal with fishing practices that trawl the ocean floor is set to trigger a row between conservationists and a new industry alliance that says it is fighting for Europe’s culture and identity. About 32% of Europe’s fish are caught by industrial fishing vessels that rake the sea floor with enormous nets in a process called bottom trawling. Studies indicate that these nets can suck up to 41% of all invertebrate life from the sea floor and cause grave damage to marine environments such as cold water coral reefs and seagrass beds. Bottom-trawling is already banned by the EU at depths of more than 800 metres but the European Commission has promised to implement whatever restrictions it deems necessary to further limit the practice, which it called “the most damaging activity to the seabed”. A delayed package of recommendations and announcements now expected in the spring could include a ban on bottom-trawling in marine protected areas (MPAs). The fishing industry, however, is preparing to fight back with the formal launch of the European Bottom Fishing Alliance (EBFA) later this month. Formed in response to a petition signed by 150,000 people in December calling for an immediate ban on bottom trawling in MPAs, the alliance unites fishing associations across 14 countries. The group argues that bottom trawling is “very sustainable” because of certification schemes such as the one run by the Marine Stewardship Council and because vessels already have to comply with environmental constraints imposed by the EU’s common fisheries policy. New trawling curbs could create a supply squeeze with the potential to price many common fish species such as sole, turbot, plaice, halibut and shrimps out of European menus, EBFA says. “We don’t want to see an industry catering for the rich,” said Ivan López, chair of EBFA, who runs a trawling business in Spain. “It would not be fair if fish became a luxury product.” Seafood is a “culture and identity” issue in Spain, he added. Others are critical of these arguments. While trawling restrictions could raise prices for a period, said Joachim Claudet, a senior scientist at France’s National Centre for Scientific Research, “ecosystems would recover quite quickly if we stopped trawling, and that would mean there would be more fish to catch with more sustainable practices.” Rebecca Hubbard, programme director of the Our Fish campaign group, described the new industry offensive as “a desperate greenwashing initiative in defence of the indefensible”. The issue is escalating into a battle, said Nicolas Fournier, campaign director of the Oceana conservation group, which argues for practices such as long-line fishing, and eating more locally-caught and less threatened species. “If we are to seize this opportunity to tackle bottom-trawling, it’s basically now or never,” he said. Brussels has pledged to establish protected areas for at least 30% of Europe’s seas but, under EU law, MPAs have specific objectives, such as protecting seabirds, crustaceans or other marine features. Their effectiveness is contested, however. Fournier said that their benefits often exist mainly on paper and that shipping, dredging, oil and gas drilling, aquaculture, harbour developments and windfarms can still be permitted in MPAs. One tenth of Europe’s waters have marine protected status but more than 2.5m hours of bottom trawling took place within them in 2020, according to research by Oceana. “In some areas, bottom trawling is prohibited in order to protect the seabed, but many other [MPAs] focus on other features and therefore don’t regulate bottom trawling,” said one EU official, who did not want to be named. “It’s a nonsense that ‘protected’ areas can allow trawling, which is one of the most damaging human activities at sea,” Claudet said. The EBFA cites studies by the University of Washington academic Ray Hillborn to support its case for allowing bottom trawling in MPAs on a case-by-case basis – in areas where seabirds are being protected but the seabed is not, for example. However, “if seabirds are eating fish or organisms from the seabed, you can’t treat them in isolation from the rest of their ecosystem,” said Prof Clare Bradshaw of Stockholm University. A European Commission spokesperson said it had to weigh any new measures against the economic effects they could have on an industry sector that makes up a quarter of the EU fishing fleet. “We will not aim for a blanket approach by banning all gears in all waters,” the official said. “Instead, we will look at how best to protect the seabed and work on the basis of science to see how to balance the decisions.” Some research also suggests that beyond biodiversity loss, sedimentary disturbances from bottom trawling may cause more CO2 releases than the world’s entire aviation fleet. All of which creates newfound uncertainty for an EU fishing sector which, critics say, has been accustomed to punching above its weight in Brussels. Fishers, like farmers, carry significant lobbying clout but many believe they have lost out in debates over catch limits and Brexit, and could now bump up against further restrictions. “We feel that the green deal is pushing too much on to the fisheries,” said Lopez. “We feel the argument is too skewed in one direction on the [environmental] issue,” he added, “and it’s not ours.”That is where we will leave the live blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: Two Liberal MPs, Bridget Archer and John Alexander spoke on indulgence in support of a commonwealth integrity commission. Former Asio boss Dennis Richardson warned of “artificial division” on China. NSW reported 9,995 new cases and 14 deaths; Victoria recorded 8,501 new cases and nine deaths, Queensland recorded 5,665 new cases and 38 deaths; WA reported 177 new cases; SA reported 1,440 new cases and three deaths; the NT reported 1,045 new cases; the ACT reported 537 new cases and 1 death; and Tasmania reported 680 new cases. NSW will ease Covid restrictions, scrap density limits and encourage people to return to offices. Elective surgeries in metropolitan public hospitals in NSW will also return from 21 February. Density limits have been scrapped and QR code check-in requirements will be eased in Victoria from tomorrow. The Moderna vaccine has been approved for children aged six and over. The Therapeutic Goods Administration announced it will join Pfizer as a vaccine recommended for children. The jobless rate was unchanged in January, remaining at its 13-year-low of 4.2%, the ABS announced. Prime minister Scott Morrison spoke with his British counterpart, Boris Johnson, this morning, reaffirming “the unique relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom”. Australia’s largest coal-fired power plant, Eraring power station in New South Wales, will close in 2025 – seven years earlier than scheduled, Origin Energy announced. A major ocean swim on Sydney’s eastern coastline has been cancelled following Wednesday’s fatal shark attack at Little Bay beach. In a continued escalation of the China debate, Liberal senator James Paterson has directly criticised former ASIO boss Dennis Richardson. Paterson told Sky News that although Richardson had a “very long and very distinguished career in the public,” there were issues the Liberal party still disagreed with him on: Probably the best example of that is [Chinese telco] Huawei. It’s been publicly reported that in 2011, when he was secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, he went on leave from DFAT to negotiate on behalf of the Canberra Raiders a lucrative sponsorship agreement from Huawei for the Canberra Raiders. And in 2018, when the Cabinet was considering whether Huawei should be allowed to be involved in the 5G rollout, he publicly advocated that they should be involved in the 5G rollout. Now we had very good advice from our intelligence agencies that the national security risks of Huawei being involved in the 5G rollout could not be mitigated, and it is one of the best decisions our government has made, and I stand by it even if Dennis Richardson disagrees. Earlier today, Opposition leader Anthony Albanese accused the PM of trashing Australia’s “national interests”. You can see the video of his comments below: So, treasurer Josh Frydenberg has commented on today’s unemployment figures, saying Australia’s economy shows “remarkable resilience.” Frydenberg added that he was particularly pleased to see female unemployment figures fall: Australia’s economy continues to show remarkable resilience, with our labour market holding firm and Covid-19 failing to derail our world-leading recovery. Despite the challenges posed by the Omicron variant, Australia’s unemployment rate remains at a 13-year low of 4.2%. It’s particularly pleasing to see a record number of women in work with the female unemployment rate falling to a record low of 4%, the participation rate at a record high and more than one million additional women in work since we came to government. At the same time, the RBA is forecasting the unemployment rate to have a 3 in front of it later this year, for the first time in half a century. A tight labour market is putting upward pressure on wages, with both Treasury and the RBA having upgraded their wage forecasts. Today’s figures stand in stark contrast to the state of the labour market when Labor left office, when the unemployment rate was 5.7% and rising. A vote for Labor and Anthony Albanese is not a risk-free choice, it’s a risky choice that will lead to higher taxes, fewer jobs and a weaker economy. With the Australian economy having outperformed all major advanced economies during the pandemic, only the Coalition can continue to keep our economy strong. A major ocean swim on Sydney’s eastern coastline has been cancelled following Wednesday’s shark attack that killed 35-year-old Simon Nellist. Organisers of Sunday’s planned Malabar Magic Ocean Swim decided to call the event off as a mark of respect for the Nellist who was attacked while swimming at Little Bay Beach. Event director Robert Lloyd extended his condolences to all who knew him. Lloyd said: Out of respect for the swimmer and his family, and following wide consultation with Randwick Council and experienced, senior Surf Life Saving personnel, we believe that cancelling the 2022 swim is appropriate. The Malabar Magic is a community event and we respect the local Malabar and broader Randwick communities. We acknowledge and thank the many first responders and surf life-saving personnel who protect and patrol our beaches. And as always, Mike Bowers was on hand to capture the magic, this time to see the Mace the leave the house of representatives once more. Parliament returns on 29 March for the budget. The government is still not collecting data on how many people with disability in Australia have died with Covid-19, more than a year after it was criticised for failing to do so by a royal commission. Senate estimates on Thursday heard on there were 61 National Disability Insurance Scheme participants who had died with Covid since the start of the pandemic. But that data covers only a small fraction of the 4.4 million people in Australia who have a disability, even excluding NDIS participants who don’t receive services from a registered provider. While many of those people would not be more susceptible to Covid, some would be, and the Greens senator Jordon Steele-John, who lives with cerebral palsy, highlighted the inadequacy of the current data collection. He told Senate estimates on Thursday: If I die of Covid-19 next week, very possible – immunocompromised, reduced lung capacity ... I will be not be counted by the Australian government [as a person with disability who died with Covid-19] because I’m not an NDIS participant ... The very least the government could have done two years in would been to ensure that if we did die, that we would be counted. Ruston said she was happy to “take on board” Steele-John’s concerns about data collection. The disability royal commission issued a new “statement of concern” on Thursday indicating the pandemic “continues to expose the underlying inequities, discrimination and exclusion” people with disabilities face in Australia. Under questioning from Labor’s Katy Gallagher, Ruston said she planned to address the commission’s concerns in detail once she had the chance to examine its statement. Estimates heard 72% of people in NDIS residential disability settings had received a booster dose. Among the broader NDIS population aged above 16, 61.8% had received a booster. The royal commission has repeatedly criticised the government response to the pandemic for people with disabilities. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has announced that a state funeral will be held for rugby league immortal John Raper, which will be held at the SCG on Monday. In a statement, Perrotet says Raper’s family accepted the offer of a state funeral by the NSW government “in recognition of his remarkable contribution to the sport of rugby league.” Perrottet said Raper, who died last week aged 82 after a long battle with dementia, was regarded as one of the greatest rugby league players ever: A state funeral is a worthy tribute for Johnny Raper who was one of the most loved players in the history of rugby league. It’s only fitting that family, friends and supporters gather at the SCG in recognition of his achievements and life. The event will be an outdoor seated event, with gates opening at 9:45am for a 10:30am start. Western Australia has recorded 189 new cases overnight, 12 of which were travel related. There are currently 547 active cases in the state. Following Rudd on the ABC was Tasmanian Senator Jacquie Lambie, who said she was “appalled” by the “argy bargy” in Parliament this week: I am quite appalled by some of the argy-bargy that has gone on in the house in the past week. You can smell an election coming up, no doubt about that. For we have seen what happened to Sam Dastyari with those political donations. We saw the Aldi brown paper bags coming into play. We saw the dinners that everybody goes to that they don’t account money for. You wouldn’t have a clue whether that was coming from Chinese agents are not. Nobody knows. The first thing we should be doing in this country and whatever has been calling for is fixing our political donations which is still not fixed. They are so open. You can’t tell me that overseas money is not coming through backdoors. Rudd has gone on to defend his record on China, and at the same time, attacked the PM for being “a past master of conflating fact with fiction”: Mr Morrison is a past master of conflating fact with fiction. And creating a fictional political narrative when the national security policy establishment in this country, who are not affiliated with Labor or with the Liberals, have said that frankly, there is no foundation to this case. On the historical record, let me simply remind your viewing audience of just some facts. You referred to our defence commitments as reflected for example in a defence white paper in 2009, a decade ago. I’m the prime minister who recommended in response to the China challenge, that we doubled the Australian submarine fleet. What was Liberal Party‘s response at the time? To accuse me of being an old cold warrior, and that we have got the whole notion of the China challenge radically wrong. But it goes beyond that. On the actual record, it’s Liberal Party in government which sold the port of Darwin, a principal piece of defence infrastructure in the high north of Australia, to China. It’s the Liberal Party’s former trade minister who immediately having left parliament went to work for the Chinese on that particular project. It was Liberal Party in government which signed off and gave in on a whole bunch of basic Australian economic interests when it ticked off on a free-trade agreement with the Chinese. It’s the Liberal Party in government that embraced a comprehensive strategic partnership with China, something we refuse to do. And it was the Liberal Party in government, through the defence minister, who rejected the quadrilateral security agreement with India and Japan and the United States. So former Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing and was initially asked his thoughts on question time and the politicisation of national security. As usual, Rudd did not mince words, calling it the “politics of deflection”: The Liberal Party is politically desperate. They’re behind in the opinion polls, they know that. This is all the politics of deflection away from their record of Covid, on vaccines, on boosters, 700-plus aged care deaths as well as their appalling performance in terms of debt deficit numbers which make the nation’s eyes water. Rudd also added his support to the former Asio director general, Dennis Richardson, saying that no one in Australia benefits from this: The bottom line is, what Dennis has just said is really important. He said there’s only one country advantaged by an artificial division in Australia, a bogus division on national security policy, and that is the People’s Republic of China itself, which across the world has exhibited an interest in democracies dividing on the question of China, good or bad. Right now, on the essentials, we have frankly a bipartisan national security and foreign policy position on China. The government knows that, the opposition knows that – this is all election politics, because it’s creating a distraction agenda from the real stuff which is what working families are concerned about. The Federal govt has extended biosecurity zones in the Northern Territory for another two weeks to 3 March. Northern Land Council (NLC) Chairman, Samuel Bush-Blanasi, welcomed the move, saying that “these Biosecurity Zones will help slow the spread of Covid out bush and give us more time to get more people their second and third jabs, and to get vaccinations for our kids five years old and up.” Bush-Blanasi stressed the need for people and communities to work within the chief health officer’s guidelines and rules at all times in order to keep everyone as safe as possible. These are really tough times and we haven’t seen the worst of Covid. We all really need to stay strong, stay safe and care for our families. The most important thing that everyone can do is to get vaccinated. Now that most adults have got their jabs – and if you haven’t you should – the next step is to make sure our kids are vaccinated. Bush-Blanasi referred to the hard work that some traditional owner groups and Aboriginal service agencies have been doing to provide local isolation centres but stressed the need for these to operate within NT Health and CHO guidelines and rules. We call on the NT government, the National Indigenous Australians Agency and other organisations – including mining and energy companies - to provide further support for these local initiatives and work with the NLC to do so. South Australia has recorded 1,440 new cases overnight, and three deaths. It’s a slight drop from yesterday’s 1,600 cases, with 221 people in hospital with the virus, 13 of which are in intensive care. Good afternoon, and a quick thanks to Tory Shepherd for her excellent job today and this week - its been a rough one! Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, to take you through the afternoon’s news. My tank is empty, my cup runneth dry, and so I’m going to hand you over now to my excellent colleague Mostafa Rachwani. That’s it for parliament until the end of March – but we’re in a de facto election campaign, so the news will not stop. Thanks for reading! “Experts say Australia’s reliance on migrants to undertake essential, insecure work and a failure to engage migrant communities early in pandemic planning is a key reason for this.”: Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 63 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: one Cases: 537 In hospital: 47 (with three people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 14 Cases: 9,995 In hospital: 1,447 (with 92 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,045 One person in ICU Queensland Deaths: 39 (27 previously unreported) Cases: 5,665 Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 680 In hospital: 16 (with two people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: nine Cases: 8,501 In hospital: 401 (with 78 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 189 Mike Bowers brings you rogue MP Craig Kelly asking about sonic weapons, the prime minister looking unimpressed, and Labor leader Anthony Albanese shaking Joel Fitzgibbon’s hand (after Fitzgibbon gave his valedictory speech earlier). I missed this. Seems an apt end to the session. Tomorrow, senator Marise Payne will become the longest-serving female senator in Australia’s history, and the longest continuing serving female member of the parliament. Prime minister Scott Morrison and opposition leader Anthony Albanese have congratulated her. And that’s a question time wrap. Labor’s Madeleine King asks Morrison about a 2017 trip he took to Beijing where he signed a memorandum of understanding and had discussions about an agreement on the BRI initiative. Morrison says the government’s policy is to not sign up to the BRI, and it never will. He says dialogues on closer economic cooperation had “not occurred for many years ... and a lot has happened in the last five years”. Since then, he says, “Australia has been subject to economic coercion by the Chinese government”. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is denied leave to table the letter that Josh Butler wrote about below. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor asks prime minister Scott Morrison if he agrees with former Asio director Dennis Richardson who said: The government is seeking to create the perception of a difference between it and the opposition on a critical national security issue that is China, seeking to create the perception of a difference where none in practice exists. That is not in the national interest. That only serves the interest of one country and that is China. Morrison says he respects Richardson, that his government is setting a “high bar” on national security while the Victorian government signed up to China’s belt and road initiative. He says: I wish it were true there was stronger bipartisanship [for] that to happen the Labor party have to lift their game. They have to show the same strength and resolve this government has faced and shown in standing up to those who would seek to coerce us and bully us, not to have an each-way bet on it, to say one thing over here and one thing out the other side of their mouth, but to have the resolve, to have the steely resolve to stare these sorts of things down and work with our allies and partners. Western Australia has recorded 189 new Covid cases. There is no one in hospital. Labor’s Tony Burke is asking about the Reserve Bank’s prediction low wage growth will continue until 2023. He asks if that means it’s “deliberate” this “decade-old government” is keeping wages low. (Labor’s using that phrase a bit, possibly hoping people will think “it’s time” for a change of government). Prime minister Scott Morrison says “no, that is not what it means”. He says: If you want higher wages in this country you need a strong economy, strong businesses, a strong economy which has strong trading arrangements with the rest of the world ... you get higher wages when you invest in the skills development of Australians. Labor’s treasury spokesman Jim Chalmers says the federal government spent $3.3m on economic comeback advertisements that had to be pulled. He asks: “Shouldn’t the government’s priority have been actually securing the recovery instead of claiming credit prematurely with taxpayer-funded marketing and spin that had to be canned?” Morrison says “jobs and jobs and jobs, that is the answer”, and refers again to the latest employment figures. He says: Jobs have been our response to the pandemic ... we have seen the labour force continue to grow. We have 1 million more women in work. We have the lowest rate of unemployment of women of 4%. Now (and his voice is starting to sound a little husky) he’s back on Covid death rates, etc. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews is sticking to the increasingly dominant election campaign theme: Coalition STRONG Labor WEAK. Deputy opposition leader Richard Marles asks Morrison about last year’s bushfires. He brings up those pesky texts where former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian reportedly said Morrison was more concerned with politics than people. Morrison says his job is to keep people in jobs, and spruiks the latest employment figures (see Peter Hannam’s article for those numbers). He says: That is my job ... to get Australians into work, diminish or they have the hope of a stronger future because they are living in a strong economy that is getting stronger as we come out of this pandemic. He goes on to say it is his job to keep Australians safe, then launches into the usual speech about standing up to bullies, about Aukus, about everything, it seems at this stage, except China (except it really is about China). Labor’s Libby Coker is comparing the government’s lack of support for a pay rise for aged care workers with the $20bn in jobkeeper funds that went to companies that still turned a profit. Prime minister Scott Morrison says jobkeeper saved 700,000 jobs when Australians were “looking into the abyss of the pandemic”. He says: This government stood up and we put jobkeeper in place and the very next morning when hundreds of thousands of Australians were going to lose their job and not know how they were going to put food on the table for their families, and businesses who had worked for decades to put their businesses in place were fearing that their businesses were going to fall over. This government stood up. This government stood up with the single largest income support program, a partnership between business, the government and the financial sector to save this country’s economy. Mayo MP Rebekha Sharkie has asked home affairs minister Karen Andrews why refugees are still stuck in Park hotel when they are not security risks. Andrews says some cannot be released into community detention for “various reasons” including character grounds or health issues, and that the government is dealing with a backlog from when Labor was in power. She says: What we have committed to as a government is to work to make sure that as many of those people are resettled as we can possibly manage in the shortest possible amount of time. So we are working with the United States on the resettlement program so that as many people can transfer to the US and be resettled as soon as possible. It is on the public record now that we are working with New Zealand to look at resettlement options so as many people as possible can resettle as soon as there is an arrangement that is in place. Health minister Greg Hunt says it’s “utter hypocrisy” of Labor to ask because opposition leader Anthony Albanese has previously said the decision is up to the Fair Work Commission. Clare O’Neil is up asking why prime minister Scott Morrison isn’t supporting a pay rise for “exhausted” aged care workers (the Fair Work Commission is considering this, but the government hasn’t backed it). Morrison says he called a royal commission into aged care, and is spending $17bn on aged care, including on workforce issues. O’Neil points out that she was specifically asking about wages. (Someone sighs heavily). Morrison takes it back to the workforce and the $17bn. He says: On the particular issue the member raises, as she will know, that is actually in front of the Fair Work Commission, and I am not aware of a different policy between the government and the opposition, whatever the Fair Work Commission decides on this matter, the government will support those arrangements. Labor’s Kristy McBain is asking about aged care homes that have had to close in her electorate, and others that the health department have said will close. Health minister Greg Hunt says where a facility closes, somewhere another facility opens. But he is aware of the specific facilities closing. He says: The Department of Health was today meeting with the council, with representatives of the state government and representatives of the community. While this is a particular decision of a particular provider, we have stepped in to intervene immediately. The federal government has given $808,000 to the regional council for infrastructure, he says. Labor leader Anthony Albanese is really enjoying whipping out the receipts lately. On Thursday afternoon, as the government continues trying to create what some intelligence experts called “artificial” differences between the two major parties on national security, the Labor leader dipped into the archives to fish out this letter from October 2021: Labor is trying to stress that its position on national security is fundamentally identical to the Coalition, including on China-related issues around human rights and trade. The government had also tried to criticise Labor for not backing the Aukus pact more strongly, but Albanese is trying to show that even Scott Morrison has conceded there was a “bipartisan approach” on important security issues. The latest peek into Albanese’s letterbox comes after he released a letter from the PM over the religious discrimination bill last week, and his attempts to table a 31-year-old university economics essay into parliament. And (with ALL of that!) it’s question time. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese has started with a question about aged care, asking prime minister Scott Morrison to “fix this crisis”. Health minister Greg Hunt says the government has focused on protections in aged care. “We recognise that each loss in this pandemic is a tragic loss for those that are affected,” he says, before going on to (again) compare Australia to other nations and (again) reeling off statistics about PPE. The United States has said it is “absolutely confident” that Australia’s commitment to the US alliance will remain strong regardless of the Australian election outcome. The US assistant secretary of state for the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Daniel Kritenbrink, also said the US was “reassured that these principles that we hold dear and our vitally important alliance transcends politics and any one party”. Kritenbrink made the comments during a phone call briefing on US secretary of atate Antony Blinken’s recent travel to Australia, Fiji and Hawaii. Blinken and other US officials met with Labor’s Anthony Albanese and Penny Wong while in Melbourne. Because this matter is politically fraught in the current environment, I will include my full question and Kritenbrink’s full answer: Q: Daniel Hurst from Guardian Australia. “Thanks for taking my question, Assistant Secretary Kritenbrink. The US delegation, while in Australia, met with both sides of Australian politics. There’s an election coming up here. Obviously, I’m not asking you to comment on the election. But how confident are you that Australia’s commitment to the US alliance, its commitment to Aukus, and its commitment to cooperate with the US on strategic challenges will remain strong regardless of the election outcome?” Kritenbrink: “Thank you for your question. Absolutely confident is my answer. Of course, we were delighted to be in Australia. We were delighted to reaffirm with our Australian allies that our alliance is the anchor for peace, security and stability in the Indo-Pacific. And we reaffirmed that in our meetings with with the prime minister, with the foreign minister and others, but as is often the case when we visit our democratic partners, we also had the opportunity to meet with the opposition. “And we came away reassured that these principles that we hold dear and our vitally important alliance transcends politics and any one party and we came away absolutely confident that whomever the Australian people select as their new leadership, as their next leadership, in the upcoming election, we’re confident that the US-Australia alliance will endure and remain as strong as ever.” Given the government has been thundering about its bills being a test for Labor, you might wonder why the firearms bill just sailed through with Labor support. The shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, told Guardian Australia the leadership group had decided to support the bill on Thursday morning. Keneally described the bill as “fairly straightforward” and said Labor’s vote was consistent with the caucus position adopted in 2019 that, when in opposition, “while we don’t support mandatory minimums we’re not going to let that stand in the way of achieving the important outcomes to tackle serious crimes”. Labor will not seek to amend the bill in the Senate. Keneally said: We can’t govern from opposition – Mr Morrison seemed quite clear in his intent to politicise national security in the context of an election, trying to manufacture a difference with the opposition when, in reality, one does not exist. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews claims prime minister Scott Morrison has “clearly done the right thing” by ratcheting up the national security and China conversation, even as intelligence experts warn against the government’s approach. But Andrews refused to endorse the incendiary “Manchurian candidate” insults the prime minister lobbed at Labor in parliament on Wednesday, claiming she was focusing on issues “at a higher level”. Andrews, whose home affairs portfolio has carriage over national security and foreign interference, was asked at a press conference about comments from Morrison and defence minister Peter Dutton this week, who have sought to claim Labor leader Anthony Albanese was Beijing’s “pick” for the coming election. Andrews said: The prime minister has clearly done the right thing by indicating where there are points of difference between the Labor Party and the Coalition government. What he is doing is emphasising those differences. Labor argues its approach on national security and foreign interference is near-identical to the Coalition, including China-specific issues around Hong Kong, Taiwan, human rights concerns and trade. Asio director-general Mike Burgess has warned several times this week about the “politicisation” of his spy agency, and stressed foreign interference issues affected both sides of politics. Former intelligence chief Dennis Richardson today criticised the creation of “artificial” partisan differences on national security, saying it was not in the national interest. When asked by journalists about those concerns, Andrews conceded there was “a range of views that are circulating at the moment” and that there would be “other people that will have their own views”. Asked whether Labor deputy leader Richard Marles was a “Manchurian candidate”, as alleged by Morrison in question time, Andrews responded “I’m not going to comment on that, my interests are quite frankly at a higher level... the national security interests of Australia are first and foremost.” On facing independent candidate Allegra Spender at the election, Sharma says he doesn’t buy Climate 200 director Simon Holmes à Court’s claim he won’t influence the candidates he is backing financially. Labor MP Kate Thwaites says voters are looking elsewhere (such as towards independent candidates) because “the Morrison government is clearly not addressing the issues that most people in the community are feeling at the moment”, for example, on climate change. Liberal MP Dave Sharma tells the ABC he doesn’t believe Labor’s Richard Marles is a “Manchurian candidate”, as he was called by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, yesterday. But Sharma declines to comment on Morrison’s characterisation. He says: [Morrison] withdrew the comment and I believe he stands by that withdrawal. I think certainly things that Richard Marles has said and done ... including on his most recent visit to Beijing should be open to scrutiny. I don’t want to live in an Australia where we can’t debate certain things because the spy chiefs tell us not to. They need to be careful not to interfere in what is the domain of elected representatives. Five thousand complaints about rapid antigen tests have been made to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. The ACCC is investigating the tests after complaints about overpricing. Some of the complaints received have been referred to the police, AAP reports. A lot of “rogues” were knocked out by new laws that made it illegal to on-sell a test for more than 20% profit, chair Rod Sims said. Returning to the NSW Covid update, NSW Health deputy secretary, Susan Pearce, has announced that elective surgeries in metropolitan public hospitals will return from 21 February. It comes as waitlists for elective surgeries blew out to around 100,000 people, with over 6,500 overdue for non-urgent surgeries. Pearce told reporters the decision comes as NSW crosses the 50% third-jab rate, but warned that there were still over 1,800 healthcare workers off work due to Covid infection or isolation: It’s really pleasing today to know with pretty good confidence that we will hit 50% of our population above 16 with a booster shot. One thing I would like to make clear about that is that it will not occur at the same rate throughout our hospitals. It’s a significant reduction in the number of health staff that were furloughed previously ... so we’ve been looking closely at how we safely return to elective surgery in our hospitals. The Northern Territory has recorded 1,045 new cases, with one person in intensive care and 21 people requiring oxygen. There are currently 6,977 active cases of Covid across the NT. Mike Bowers brings you the Icac whisperers: The Coalition’s firearms bill has just passed a third reading in the House of Representatives. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor wanted to speak on the bill, but Peter Dutton immediately moved for the third reading. It passed on the voices, so no division, and Labor has sidestepped another wedge by waving legislation through the House – presumably because it knows the government is out of time to bring it to the Senate, or Labor can block or amend there. The bill increases maximum sentences for trafficking and sets a mandatory minimum sentence of five years in prison for firearms offences. This is controversial, because Labor has a longstanding opposition to mandatory minimums. The federal government has listed three new organisations on its list of terrorist groups, as well as extending that proscription to the entirety of Hamas. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews announced on Thursday that the government had listed Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, Hurras al-Din and the National Socialist Order (formerly known as Atomwaffen Division) “as terrorist organisations under the Criminal Code and intends to list the entirety of Hamas”. She said: The Government has also re-listed Abu Sayyaf Group, al-Qa’ida, al-Qa’ida in the Lands of the Islamic Maghreb and Jemaah Islamiyah as terrorist organisations under the criminal code. Andrews called the organisations “violent extremist groups listed” with “deeply disturbing” views. Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham and Hurras al-Din – also known as al-Qa’ida in Syria – are Sunni Islamist extremist groups based in Syria. National Socialist Order is a racist violent extremist group based in the United States, with an objective to initiate a global ‘race war’. Andrews said: Terrorist organisation offences include penalties of up to 25 years’ imprisonment. Labor’s Tony Burke has successfully suspended standing orders to bring on debate on the Coalition’s firearms legislation, which it introduced to the lower house on Wednesday. This is a stunt to show that the government doesn’t actually want to pass this stuff, it just wants to wedge Labor. Somebody moved that Burke’s motion be disagreed to, resulting in a bizarre division where at first the Coalition was voting to shut Burke down, but then switched sides to vote with Labor. The vote wasn’t even recorded, because there were so few people voting aye to shut it down. The government tried to move on to other business, but as opposition leader Anthony Albanese pointed out, the suspension of standing orders was successful, so they’re debating the firearms bill. The bill was then read a second time. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor wants to speak on the bill. People will be encouraged back into the office and singing and dancing will return as part of a staggered easing of the New South Wales Covid measures. Premier Dominic Perrottet also announced the density limits would be scrapped across the state from Friday. He said: This is the new reality. We don’t want restrictions in place for any longer than necessary. From tomorrow, QR check-ins will only be required at nightclubs and festivals with more than 1000 people attending. Singing and dancing will also be allowed in all settings other than music festivals - which will be added to the list from 25 February. People will no longer be encouraged to work from home when they can and returning to work will be up to employers to decide. From next Friday, masks will only be required on public transport, in a variety of healthcare settings, in indoor music venues with more than 1000 people and at prisons. What is the poverty line in Australia? Is there a minimum of income people need not to live in poverty? “It’s not a simple yes or no question,” social services minister, Anne Ruston, told Senate estimates earlier this morning. The answer came under questioning from Greens senator Janet Rice, who noted the 2019 Senate inquiry into the Newstart payment (now called Jobseeker) recommended Australia adopt an official poverty line. “You make it sound like there’s some magical number,” Ruston added. Rice told estimates that there were a range of poverty line measures that were acknowledged in Australia: Acoss recommends the poverty live should be set at 50%-60% of median income. 50% is $457 a week for a single person. The Henderson poverty line is higher, it’s $581 a week, and then there [are] other definitions that are even higher. Rice said it was “extraordinary” that Ruston was “not willing to even acknowledge there was a minimum level of of income that people need not to be in poverty”. Ruston insisted Australia’s welfare system was “comprehensive and targeted” and noted Australians enjoyed other benefits outside the welfare system such as free healthcare and education. Asked if the rate of Jobseeker – $630 a fortnight – was enough, Ruston insisted it was “adequate for [its] purpose”. Keen estimates observers might know this is not the first time the government has been less than keen to discuss poverty in Australia. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has offered his condolences to the family and friends of the swimmer who was killed by a shark on Wednesday. “It’s a reminder to us all about the fragility of life,” he said. He confirmed authorities were trying to track down the shark. Two Liberal MPs have spoken on indulgence in support of a Commonwealth integrity commission, in the wake of the government conceding this week that it won’t have time to legislate it. Independent MP Helen Haines first spoke on the matter on indulgence, accusing the prime minister, Scott Morrison, of playing “the public for a patsy”. She said: The prime minister’s laughable excuse that he cannot legislate his integrity commission proposal because the opposition won’t support it is totally absurd. She also accused Morrison of misleading her, saying he had initially suggested he wanted to work on the issue in a bipartisan way: The facts are clear. He had no intention of working on this in a bipartisan way. I’ll never stop bringing this to the attention of this house even in the dying days of this parliament. Liberal MP Bridget Archer – who crossed the floor last year to support Haines’s bill – said it remained her view that legislating an integrity commission was still “one of the most important things” parliament needed to do: I do believe that this issue needs to be debated. It is also clear that this parliament is running out of time to be able to legislate an integrity bill. Archer said there needed to be a multipartisan approach, and urged cooperation in the next parliament. She said: We must not allow this issue to just be lost in the politics and in the tribalism of the politics that can go on in this place and outside it. This is such an important issue. It’s fundamental to the trust and confidence that we need from the Australian people to do our jobs. And so I would urge cooperation and collaboration from all parties on all sides to take this forward in the next Parliament. John Alexander, the Liberal MP for Bennelong, also echoed this view, saying: We must stop bashing heads, and put our heads together. We need our leaders and parties to come together on this issue, because a solution will need to outlive a three year parliament and will need to outlive governments. For too long, this has been a political football. We need a federal Icac so we can take action, to take the first step to regain the respect of Australians who need to have confidence that we are all acting with integrity and honesty that they rightly expect of us. Independent MP for the seat of Mayo, Rebekha Sharkie, also spoke in favour of an integrity bill, saying she had been calling for such a body for the past six years. Bob Katter also spoke, as did Labor’s Mark Dreyfus, saying Labor would legislate an integrity commission “with teeth” if it formed government. Birmingham criticises Labor for its tactics in Defence Senate estimates, saying it doesn’t “seem terribly interested in actually pursuing questions relevant to the actual investment the government is making” in defence. Keneally counters: The Labor party is taking heed of the advice of people like the Asio director general [Mike Burgess] who says the weaponisation of national security makes his job harder, makes it harder to keep our country safe. I ask you again, do you consider using terms like Manchurian candidate is legitimate? Birmingham says he has “already rejected your assertion in regards to the public debate that is there” and he says the contrasting of statements and positions “are not unusual things to occur” and are an important part of democratic debate in the lead-up to an election. Asked whether he has any shame, Birmingham says for decades “we’ve seen different occasions in which national security is featured as part of our democratic election debates”: When Australians go to vote, making the decision as to who is best placed to manage the safety and security of our nation is one of the key decisions that Australians have to make at that time. Keneally ends this bracket of questions with the observation: I never thought I would say this, but the Senate and the nation miss the day when leaders like Mr Brandis were here who stood firm on their values. Cue stony silence from Birmingham. He doesn’t look comfortable. Senate leader Simon Birmingham insists the government is not “confecting” national security divisions, when confronted with a past comment by George Brandis. Brandis, the former Coalition attorney general who is now the Australian high commissioner to the UK, said in a valedictory speech to the Senate in February 2018: I have heard some powerful voices argue that the coalition should open a political front against the Labor Party on the issue of domestic national security. I could not disagree more strongly. One of the main reasons why the government has earned the confidence of the public on national security policy is there has never been a credible suggestion that political motives have intruded. Were they to do so, confidence not just in the government’s handling of national security but in the agencies themselves would be damaged and their capacity to do their work compromised. Nothing could be more irresponsible than to hazard the safety of the public by creating a confected dispute for political advantage. To his credit, the prime minister [Malcolm Turnbull at that time] has always resisted such entreaties. Labor’s Kristina Keneally asks Birmingham if he agrees with Brandis. The minister replies “I do”, but then adds: “Before you then leap to the next question, I don’t believe that anything is confected.” Keneally: “You have got to be kidding me. You believe phrases like ‘Manchurian candidate’ is not politicising national security?” Birmingham argues that having debates that highlight differences in track records “are all legitimate and fair”. Labor senator Tim Ayres: “You have lost your way.” Birmingham: “Senator, I’ll consider the context of the words I use when I when I’m using them.” I know, I linked this earlier! But am giving it a boost up the blog because Liberal MP John Alexander has joined his colleague Bridget Archer to call for a federal Icac. More to come: In community affairs estimates, Labor’s Jenny McAllister is asking about problems with the Escaping Violence program, a $145m trial set up by the government to “help women establish a life free of violence” with a payment of up to $5000 on offer. It was announced as part of the government’s “landmark $1.1bn women’s safety package” in the May budget. The department has revealed that the program has received 6067 applications, with 4000 of these still waiting to be processed. Just 77 applications were assessed as “urgent” and received cash immediately. Social services minister, Anne Ruston, said the wait times were “not acceptable”. McAllister is also asking about a document released by the department which is mostly redacted, including guidelines for the program. The department is saying the redactions were based on advice ensuring financial safety of clients and “women’s safety risks”. McAllister said the sector had raised on many occasions problems about how the program was running, and without the information being released by the department, it was difficult to assess. She said: The sector says that the eligibility criteria is too tight and the process is not realistic and doesn’t reflect the experience of their clients. The information provided does not help me deal with the complaints that come to me about how this program is working. Ruston said the program was a trial, and feedback was welcome. She said: That’s exactly the purpose of a trial, is to make sure that we are constantly reviewing and making sure that we deal with issues as they come up. She was engaging with the sector to deal with what she acknowledged were some problems with how the program was running. She said: I have been talking to the sector around these issues that they have seen and improvements that they would like to see made, and in some cases some misinformation that is out there. I’m quite happy to acknowledge that there are many improvements that need to be made to this program to make sure that it is delivering what I expected to deliver. One person has died in the ACT, bringing the territory’s Covid death total to 32. There have been 537 new cases recorded, with 47 people in hospital and three in intensive care. The latest Temperature Check from Graham Readfearn is in. He checks out the “eye-watering” figures News Corp claimed it would cost if there were no more coal and gas projects: Defence resumes after that brief interruption. Simon Birmingham is asked about the warning by Asio’s current director general Mike Burgess against the politicisation of national security (it doesn’t help the job of security agencies). Kristina Keneally asks: Why is the Morrison-Joyce government making the job of our intelligence agencies like Asio more difficult by politicising national security? Birmingham replies: Senator Keneally, I just don’t accept the premise that you are putting there. The fact is that Australia is a democracy and a robust democracy. And we do have an election in a few months’ time and the track record of your party on national security and defence investment and our party’s [record] on national security and defence investment is fair game in a democracy ... [with] an election coming up. We don’t seek to politicise it unnecessarily, but we won’t shy away from drawing contrast where there is contrast. Birmingham goes on to say: It is in the national interest in a democracy, which is what we are all defending here … for us to ensure Australians understand the differences … The differences are there to be highlighted. Tim Ayres asks whether the government is mounting the “elaborate argument” that the statements of Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton have really “got something to do with defence capital and sustainment and personnel expenditure over the last 20 years”. Keneally adds that that suggestion is laughable. Birmingham has gone back to citing Albanese’s inclusion of the word “some” in a single response to a recent question as evidence Labor wants China to keep in place some of the trade actions against Australia. Keneally says that claim “is ridiculous and you know it”. The jobless rate was unchanged in January, remaining at its 13-year-low of 4.2%, the ABS has just announced. The result was in line with market expectations. The economy added 12,900 jobs last month, with the participation rate nudging higher to 66.2%. Monthly hours worked fell, though, by 159m or 8.8%, signalling the scale of Omicron-linked disruptions. Bjorn Jarvis, head of labour statistics at the ABS, noted that in a pre-pandemic year about 90,000 to 100,000 people would be off ill in January. This January, at times, the tally of those off work reached 450,000. He said: Nationally, and in New South Wales and Victoria, the number of people who worked reduced hours because they were sick was around three times the pre-pandemic average for January. Western Australia was the only jurisdiction with a usual low number of people working reduced hours in January because they were sick. You might remember yesterday that there were several different numbers and a bit of argument over exactly how many people had sadly died in aged care due to Covid this year. Within the space of a few hours, health department officials said it was 691; health minister Greg Hunt said it was 711; while Labor claimed it was 743. Considering the scrutiny rightly being applied to the Covid situation affecting some of the most vulnerable Australians, it’d be good to get some clarity – so we went to the health department for an official response and confirmation. A department spokesperson responded that as of 5pm on 15 February, the latest statistics they had, there had been “711 Covid-19 related deaths associated with aged care facilities in 2022 reported to the Department of Health”. Labor claimed their 743 number – which was repeated by Anthony Albanese and aged care spokesperson, Clare O’Neil, – comes from comparing health department statistics from 31 December, 2021 and 15 February, 2022. On 31 December, the statistics showed 915 deaths in aged care – compared to 1658 deaths reported on 15 February. That’s a difference of 743, which is where Labor got their number from. The health department said those numbers “reflect data reported to the Department at that time” but noted that “there is often a lag in the reporting of deaths”. The department spokesperson said: In this instance there have been deaths reported in early 2022 which occurred in 2021. The department has included these deaths in updated 2021 data reported through the weekly snapshot. The Defence estimates committee hearing descends into acrimony. Government Senate leader, Simon Birmingham, is asked about comments by former Asio chief and former defence secretary Dennis Richardson that the government is seeking to create the perception of a difference between it and the opposition on a critical national security issue when none in practice exists, and that only serves the interest of China. Birmingham replies: Senator, I have enormous regard for Mr Richardson, but I don’t agree with with his starting premise there. Birmingham goes on to claim that points of difference have been created by Anthony Albanese’s statements. Labor’s Kristina Keneally presses Birmingham on why the government is “manufacturing” differences with the opposition when it only plays into China’s interests. Birmingham: I don’t accept that. Labor senator Tim Ayres interjects: Grubby, reckless and shameless. You utterly debase yourself with this stuff. Chair Eric Abetz suspends the committee briefly. The Disability Royal Commission has today issued a Statement of Ongoing Concern for the safety, health and wellbeing of people with disability during Australia’s Omicron wave, saying the pandemic “continues to expose the underlying inequities, discrimination and exclusion” people with disabilities face in Australia. It’s the latest in a series of damning criticisms from the royal commission into the government’s response to Covid. They have included a scathing report on the vaccination rollout for people with disabilities, which the commission called “seriously deficient”, and another that slammed the government for its “serious failure” to have any Covid plan for disabled people in the first year of the pandemic. Today’s statement heralds a forthcoming paper, due in March, that promises to examine “the de-prioritisation of people with disability and lack of regard for their health and wellbeing during the pandemic”. It will also look at issues regarding access to vaccinations and boosters for people with disability and their carers, lack of safety provisions including PPE and rapid antigen tests, and the “severe disruptions to disability services and essential supports” that have occurred due to staff furloughs. Chair of the commission, Ronald Sackville QC, said: The pandemic continues to expose the underlying inequities, discrimination and exclusion that people with disability experience in the delivery of fundamental services and supports. The more virulent Omicron variant, combined with the significant easing of restrictions across many states and territories late last year, has created problems for people with disability similar to those identified in [previous reports]. As mentioned in the blog earlier, the Moderna vaccine has been approved by Australia’s drugs regulator the TGA for children aged six and over, joining Pfizer as a vaccine recommended for children. The Moderna jab still needs a final approval from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation before being rolled-out. The Moderna mRNA Covid-19 vaccine, also known as ‘Spikevax’, is given to children aged 6-11 in two 50 microgram doses, half the adult dose. Moderna chief executive, Stéphane Bancel, said the TGA authorisation for children 6-11 years old in Australia “is an important milestone for Moderna as it is the first regulatory authorisation for the use of our vaccine in this age group”. She said: We are grateful to the TGA for their diligence and the government of Australia for its continued confidence in our mRNA platform ... We are grateful for the opportunity to provide protection against Covid-19 to this important age group, keeping children safe and able to continue life as normally as possible. Moderna’s vaccine was studied in the ongoing Phase 2 ‘KidCOVE’ trial, a randomised, observer-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and effectiveness of two 50 microgram Spikevax doses given to healthy children 28 days apart. The study population was divided into three age groups; 6 to under 12 years, 2 to under 6 years, and six months to under 2 years. Data submitted to the TGA demonstrated that children 6 to under 12 years produced a similar immune system response following vaccination with Moderna to those aged 18-25 years old who were given two 100 microgram doses. Simon Birmingham has just delivered a fairly prescriptive description of bipartisanship: The government welcomes and I welcome bipartisanship when it occurs. Bipartisanship is an outcome of the opposition clearly, unconditionally supporting positions of the government of the day. He notes the joint intelligence and security committee demonstrates bipartisanship. But he says defence spending is an example of differences. Birmingham sites opposition leader Anthony Albanese’s comments about standing up for Australian industries: “How much resolve will we show in the face of coercion?’ Birmingham tries to interpret Albanese’s comment that included the use of the word “some” as a lack of resolve (Albanese has called on China to scrap all of its trade actions against Australia). The secretary of the defence department, Greg Moriarty, says “national unity” can contribute to Australia’s national resilience. In defence estimates, Labor senator Kristina Keneally points to past evidence from former Dfat secretary Frances Adamson that projecting a sense of bipartisanship and unity is a powerful message. Asked if he agrees, Moriarty says: I believe that Australia’s national resilience is an important contributor to our overall defence posture: national resilience depends on national unity to a certain extent. Could stoking division could serve Beijing’s interests? The Coalition’s Simon Birmingham cuts in to say the question is “inviting him to give commentary”. Moriarty: If I could answer more broadly … of course adversaries will seek to sow division. Over many centuries that has been the case in a variety of circumstances and Australia’s national resilience is an important part. Moriarty says the government and Defence have been rolling out initiatives to “build that national resilience”. He says resilience is bolstered when our society more broadly is able to resist coercion, when society is committed to Australia, and when people have faith in national institutions and the rule of law. Birmingham talks about defence funding cuts under Labor. Moriarty criticises China over the militarisation of features in the South China Sea, saying that is a way of asserting Chinese national views about its territorial claims and its ambitions. He says China’s incursions into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone are designed to pressure Taiwan. Labor MP Joel Fitzgibbon is retiring at the election and has delivered his valedictory speech. Mike Bowers snapped the member for Hunter as he was congratulated by people from all sides: 680 new Covid infections have been recorded in Tasmania. Sixteen people are in hospital with the virus, and two are in intensive care. AAP reports it’s the fourth consecutive day the numbers have risen, about a week after school returned. Market eyes will be on the ABS’s labour figures, due to land at 11.30am. In January, the 4.2% jobless rate for the month of December created a stir, not least because it was the lowest in more than 13 years. Economists are tipping the rate to remain unchanged for January at 4.2% but it’s actually a tricky month to pick, given the Omicron disruptions and many people off sick or as close Covid contacts. Westpac predicts the economy added 30,000 more jobs last month, compared with a median estimate by the market of no change. Westpac also predicts the jobless rate will drop to 4% for the month, as does CBA. The RBA and the federal government are both forecasting the unemployment rate to drop below 4%. If it starts with a “3” that would be the first time since 1974. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, who flew to a regional gathering of treasurers and central bankers in Indonesia overnight, might be expected to break from the argy-bargy and gado-gado, particularly if the numbers are strong. On the other hand, if they are very strong, expect investors and economists to bring their predictions of a rate rise sooner. Yesterday, the forecast in the short-term bond market was for the RBA to lift rates to 0.25% by June, with more to come before the end of 2022. The Moderna vaccine has been approved for children aged six and over. The Therapeutic Goods Administration has announced it will join Pfizer as a vaccine recommended for children, AAP reports. The Moderna jab will still need a final approval from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation. Australia and the UK have announced a supply chain resilience capacity building initiative after the call between Scott Morrison and Boris Johnson. We are told this initiative will “support the capacity for [the] Indo-Pacific to identify and respond to supply chain disruptions”. It will aim to help partner governments, initially in the immediate region, predict possible supply chain disruptions and build resilience against those disruptions: The first phase of the project involves developing joint guidance material for partner governments, building on existing UK and Australia supply chain resilience frameworks. Victoria’s education minister, James Merlino, is now announcing rapid antigen testing will continue at Victorian schools until the end of term one. He says the government will provide an additional 24m tests to parents and teachers. Under the current program, rapid antigen testing is strongly recommended for all primary and secondary school students and staff, twice weekly at home before school or childcare. Students and staff at specialist schools have been recommended to test five days each week due to the higher risk of severe illness for medically vulnerable children. Merlino says modelling by the Burnet Institute has found the program has prevented more than 21,000 Covid-19 infections. Density limits have been scrapped and QR code check-in requirements will be eased in Victoria from tomorrow. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, has announced the current density limits in place for hospitality and entertainment venues will be eased from 6pm on Friday. Indoor dancefloors will also be able to reopen as part of the changes. People will no longer need to check in at retail businesses, schools and workplaces but QR codes will remain for proof of vaccination purposes at hospitality and entertainment venues. Andrews said further announcements on the return to offices, mask requirements and support for CBD businesses would be made within a week. Defence officials confirm they are still in the process of negotiations with Naval Group and Lockheed Martin regarding the ending of the French submarine project, and won’t talk about the dollar figures likely to be involved. On to Aukus now: Vice admiral Jonathan Mead, the head of the nuclear-powered submarine taskforce, says delegations from the US and the UK are in Australia now to progress the nuclear-propelled submarine plans. Mead says he will host a joint steering group in Adelaide next week – the third such steering group meeting. He says: We are making very good progress. A $1.7m contract handed to a consultant for research on welfare policy is under investigation after a government department’s top bureaucrat found it hadn’t complied with internal tender processes. The bulk of the research, which Guardian Australia sought under FOI laws, remains a secret because the department has ruled disclosure may harm Boston Consulting Group’s (BCG) business interests. Labor frontbencher Katy Gallagher, who first raised the issue in parliament 15 months ago, told Senate estimates on Thursday it appeared department officials had repeatedly misled the Senate about the matter. Gallagher, who previously told parliament the contract looked “dodgy”, said she was considering a referral to the privileges committee. At issue is a $1.7m extension to a contract awarded to Boston Consulting Group, which officials have refused to release or explain in detail. The original contract, worth about $1.6m, was for a report into the Disability Employment Services program. BCG’s damning report, which officials initially refused to release to Senate estimates, was eventually released to Guardian Australia under FOI laws. Officials have declined to give much detail about what Boston Consulting Group were paid to do for the extra $1.7m, except to say it was “additional policy research” that related to people with “partial capacity to work”. One official earlier insisted there was no report provided by BCG. However in December, the department released about 300 slides of research, including an “executive summary”. Still, most pages are redacted, with the department arguing release of the research may harm BCG’s business interests by disclosing its modelling methodologies. Ray Griggs, the secretary of the department of social services, told Senate estimates he was investigating the tender, including whether commonwealth procurement rules had been breached. Griggs conceded there had been “non-compliance with internal processes” and “less than better practice” with the Commonwealth procurement rules. Griggs said he had taken a number of steps to tighten the department’s procurement processes. He also promised to investigate whether the FOI decision used to suppress the research was correct. Queensland is reporting 39 deaths, but explains they were not all in the past 24 hours. Another 27 deaths were provided to Queensland health by Births, Deaths and Marriages and date back to mid January. 5,665 new Covid cases have been recorded. Bit of news around on the energy front, with Origin Energy bringing forward the timing of the closure of its Eraring power plant (see Adam Morton’s piece on that earlier in the blog). At 2880 megawatts, it’s the biggest single power station in the country. Matt Kean, NSW energy minister, is telling a media conference that the NSW government is going to spend $84m to accelerate the state’s renewable energy plans. Kean is talking up the value of a big battery Origin plans for the site to ensure stability of the grid. “This was not NSW’s decision,” Kean says, adding that the state’s Electricity Infrastructure Roadmap will be able to respond “to keep the lights on and put downward pressure on prices”. Origin had planned to shut Eraring in 2032 and will now do so in 2025, it told the ASX today. As we noted last week when AGL brought forward closure dates of its Bayswater and Loy Yang A coal-fired power plants in NSW and Victoria respectively, there’s a gap between the projections of the Australian Energy Market Operator’s timetable and individual companies. Origin’s announcement today closes some of that gap. Hospital executives are appearing at Victorian state parliament’s pandemic declaration accountability and oversight committee. Prof Andrew Way, chief executive of Alfred Health, told the inquiry the hospital had 3,100 people on the elective surgery waitlist. Way said it was unclear if “further waves” of the virus would cause increased pressure on the state’s hospitals. The Australian government is continuing to promote its projection of a 35% cut in emissions by 2030 – even though it has resisted calls to upgrade its formal target – amid ongoing international pressure for countries to act consistent with keeping “1.5 degrees of warming within reach”. The joint statement after Boris Johnson and Scott Morrison’s call this morning insists that both countries are committed “to taking action this decade, with nationally determined contributions reflecting their highest possible ambition”. The statement says the two leaders “reaffirmed the two countries’ shared commitment to drive ambitious action to address climate change and its impacts, including through implementation of the Glasgow Climate Pact and the Paris Agreement, to keep 1.5 degrees of warming within reach, strengthen adaptation and resilience, and mobilise finance”. Then there is a statement of the targets and projections as they now stand (remember the Nationals vetoed the idea of formally increasing the 2030 target last year): The UK has committed to reducing its emissions at least 68% by 2030 on 1990 levels and Australia has committed to reducing its emissions 26-28% by 2030 on 2005 levels, and is on track to achieve a reduction of up to 35% on 2005 levels by 2030. The two prime ministers “agreed to continue to work together to reach net zero by 2050 and agreed to accelerate the development of technologies essential for reaching this goal through our Clean Technology Partnership, and with other countries through the Glasgow Breakthroughs, Mission Innovation and the Clean Energy Ministerial”. Australia is hosting an Indo-Pacific Clean Energy Supply Chain Forum in mid-2022. Boris Johnson and Scott Morrison’s statement included some criticism of China. The two leaders “expressed grave concerns about credible reports of human rights violations in Xinjiang, and called on China to protect the rights, freedoms and high degree of autonomy for Hong Kong enshrined in the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law”. Johnson and Morrison “underscored the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait, and expressed support for Taiwan’s meaningful participation in international organisations, as a member where statehood is not a prerequisite and as an observer or guest where it is”. They also said countries should be able to exercise their maritime rights and freedoms in the South China Sea consistent with the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, and “reiterated their strong opposition to any unilateral actions that could escalate tensions and undermine regional stability and the international rules-based order, including militarisation, coercion, and intimidation”. On Myanmar, Johnson and Morrison voiced “grave concerns” about the situation after last year’s military coup and “called for the immediate cessation of violence against civilian populations, the release of all those arbitrarily detained, including Australian Professor Sean Turnell, and unhindered humanitarian access”. Boris Johnson and Scott Morrison also argued that, since the announcement of Aukus in September, “all three partners have made significant progress in their collective endeavour to provide the Royal Australian Navy with a conventional-armed nuclear-powered submarine capability at the earliest possible date”. The joint statement of their phone call says Johnson and Morrison welcomed the entry into force earlier this month of an information-exchange agreement that paves the way for the three countries to discuss the matter in more detail. There’s an attempt to reassure others about nuclear non-proliferation (an issue criticised by China, and known to have been of concern to regional partners like Indonesia): The agreement demonstrates the commitment of the three Aukus partners to operating according to the highest standards of nuclear stewardship, in line with their long-standing global leadership on non-proliferation. Johnson and Morrison also “welcomed the presence in Australia of UK and US officials to provide expert advice on the many facets of nuclear stewardship needed to operate a nuclear powered submarine capability”. They said they were also making “significant progress” on collaboration on other advanced capabilities. Officials from Australia, the US and the UK are meeting this week in London to discuss cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies and additional undersea capabilities: The prime ministers expressed their determination to continue to work closely together, in lockstep with president Biden, to make Aukus a success, and looked forward to the next set of trilateral discussions at the end of the month in Australia. “Tax cuts planned to take effect in 2024-25 are highly regressive and would pay male beneficiaries twice as much as women.” Peter Hannam reports: Boris Johnson and Scott Morrison “discussed their countries’ shared commitment to promoting peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific”, according to the joint statement of their call. They agreed that, together with partners, they would “ensure a free, open, inclusive and prosperous region”. he statement said the UK had committed £25m to strengthen regional resilience in areas including cyberspace, state threats and maritime security. On trade, Johnson and Morrison said they were committed to the UK/Australia free trade agreement “entering into force as soon as possible so our exporters, producers, workers, businesses and consumers can enjoy the benefits of this gold standard deal”. There is no mention in the joint statement about concerns of Australian wine exporters that their gains will be eroded by the UK’s tax plans. The leaders discussed critical minerals and “confirmed their commitment to a free, fair, inclusive and rules-based trade and investment environment and opposed the use of economic coercion” - without mentioning China by name. The statement welcomed progress in the UK joining the CPTPP regional trade pact. On security and defence, Johnson and Morrison “committed to build societal awareness and resilience to foreign interference and strengthen our collective toolkits to detect, disrupt and deter current and future hostile activity by state actors, including the use of misinformation and disinformation”. Prime minister Scott Morrison has spoken with his British counterpart, Boris Johnson, this morning. In a joint statement issued afterwards, they said they had “reaffirmed the unique relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom, built on shared values and common interests, and sustained by the deep bonds between our peoples”. (It doesn’t sound like that would be put at risk dependent on the outcome of the Australian election, but I digress.) The statement says the two leaders “reiterated their commitment to support a rules-based international order free from coercion, where the sovereign rights of all nations are respected and disputes are settled peacefully and in accordance with international law”. Here is the passage of the joint Morrison/Johnson statement regarding Russia: The prime ministers discussed the concerning situation on Ukraine’s border. They emphasised their unwavering commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity within its internationally recognised borders. They agreed the need for de-escalation and underscored that any further Russian incursion in Ukraine would be a massive strategic mistake and have a stark humanitarian cost. We’ll have more details of this call shortly. Some fireworks at Senate estimates: South Australian senator Rex Patrick is unimpressed with defence officials answering questions about the future frigates program. He says: Please don’t try and snow job us. Patrick disputes previous evidence given to the committee about a lack of weight problems with the ships and says: That tells me you lied to this committee. The chair, Eric Abetz, calls for a withdrawal of the lie claim. Patrick is undeterred: I’m considering a privileges committee referral … I’m not going to withdraw that and I’m happy to substantiate it. Abetz says in that case, he will hand questions over to Kimberley Kitching. Defence is up at estimates today, beginning with a focus on the $45.5bn future frigates project. Sheryl Lutz of the Department of Defence says the first ship is expected to be delivered in 2031 and the final ship in 2044. Ships are usually operational one to two years after delivery. Labor is asking questions about a report suggesting the program was complex, changing and uncertain. The Australian newspaper reported a Defence “Engineering Team Assessment” of the frigates program, undertaken last November, raised problems with the “immature” British design. The government’s contract is with shipbuilder BAE Systems. Lutz says: “All changes are being tracked very closely.” Labor’s Kimberley Kitching asks whether there are any problems managing the design changes. Lutz: “There’s a defined process.” The departmental official notes “there are a whole lot of ‘what ifs?’” but says that’s what the experts are required to do, so all issues can be managed. Is the weight a problem? “That is now under control.” More than a quarter of all primary healthcare nurses – nurses who work outside hospitals, including in aged care – say they are planning to leave their job, according to new national data. As a result, Australia is at risk of not having enough suitably trained primary healthcare nurses to staff aged care homes, general practices and other primary healthcare settings in coming years, the Australian Primary Health Care Nurses Association says. The survey of 1,061 primary health care nurses by Apna found: More than four in five (80.4%) primary healthcare nurses said they felt exhausted at work More than four in five (86.7%) primary healthcare nurses said they felt stressed at work More than three-quarters (78.8%) of primary healthcare nurses said they felt burnt out at work Nearly three-quarters (72.9%) of primary healthcare nurses said they worked too much More than three-quarters (76.4%) of primary healthcare nurses said they worked overtime More than one in four (28.73%) primary healthcare nurses are planning to leave their job within the next two to five years. Apna president Karen Booth said while health authorities had recruited extra staff and provided extra resources to help with hospital admissions, they had forgotten the primary healthcare sector: Primary health care nurses work in general practice, in our schools, in community or correctional health, in rural and remote areas without a hospital, and in the resource-stretched aged care sector. The latest moves to bring forward booster shots and end Covid restrictions were the final straw. This has severely impacted the primary health care nurse workforce, with thousands of sick nurses furloughing, leaving an intolerable workload on those nurses who remain. Nine people with Covid have died in Victoria, and 401 people have been hospitalised; 78 are in intensive care. The state recorded 8,501 new cases. Fourteen people with Covid have died in New South Wales. In the past 24 hours there were also 1,447 hospitalisations, with 92 people in intensive care. The state has recorded 9,995 new Covid cases. Australia’s largest coal-fired power plant, Eraring power station in New South Wales, will close in 2025 – seven years earlier than scheduled, Origin Energy has announced. The company has given regulators the required three-and-a-half-year notification period that it plans to shut the giant black coal generator. It said the decision reflected “the rapidly changing conditions in the national electricity market, which are increasingly not well suited to traditional baseload power stations”. It follows the rapid rise of solar and wind power. Renewable energy now provides more than 30% of the electricity in the national grid and is forecast to reach more than two-thirds of all power – at a minimum – by 2030. The announcement follows AGL last week saying it would bring forward the closure dates for the Bayswater coal generator in NSW and Loy Yang A in Victoria. Here’s the latest from that Little Bay shark attack: Speaking of not being politicised ... here’s Amanda Meade on ABC managing director David Anderson’s new book: I mentioned that character test legislation earlier – proper name and link here: migration amendment (strengthening the character test) bill 2021). Paul Karp has set out here what it is, the concerns Labor has, and what it has to do with the punting of Novak Djokovic: Former Asio boss Dennis Richardson has also been on ABC television this morning. He said: Seeking to create the perception of a difference, when none in practice exists, for straight-out party political purposes is something that we have not seen an Australian government do for decades, and it does not serve the national interest by any objective standard. It in effect only serves the interests of one country and that is China ... the national interest is served by our body politic having a unified position on an issue as critical as China. Want to catch up on the anti-corruption bill? Sarah Martin has the latest here on both the government’s proposed legislation (or “exposure draft”) and independent MP Helen Haines’ version: For some more context around those comments from Dennis Richardson, here’s Katharine Murphy and Daniel Hurst’s piece on current Asio boss Mike Burgess warning about the politicisation of intelligence. Burgess (unusually) spoke up again last night on 7.30, saying Asio is apolitical and it’s “not helpful” when politicians politicise its work: Former Asio boss Dennis Richardson says there’s an attempt to create an “artificial division” on China. Richardson tells ABC radio it’s been well known for many years that China seeks to intervene in politics in Australia, and that the government and the opposition have long stood together: Up till now they have been, that’s why I find it puzzling that a government would appear to go out of its way to ... create the impression of a difference where none exists. And the government is quite happy for you and I to be talking about this right now. It suits their political purposes. China will seek to use this division against the national interest, Richardson says. It’s “dangerous” and “best avoided” and it has been decades since a government has done this. He expects the government will keep doing this, then “pick up the pieces and put it back together after the election”. Kristina Keneally is asked why Labor waved through the character test legislation, which will make it easier for the government to deport people. She says Labors want to “fix” that bill, and that it’s not clear at this point what powers it gives the government that it doesn’t already have: It would have some unintended consequences on particularly our relationship with New Zealand, but also in relationship to individuals potentially who’ve been living in the country quite peacefully and successfully for decades. Prime minister Scott Morrison should “think carefully about this risky rhetoric he is running”, shadow home affairs minister Kristina Keneally says. The federal government has pledged to keep hammering Labor over China, despite intelligence officials warning against the tactic. On ABC radio, Keneally says officials also warn that Beijing benefits from the perceived division, and that foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has said bipartisanship is an asset to the country. She says: This is a desperate act from a desperate prime minister who is seeking to use national security in a domestic political context. And that has been called out by the Asio director general [Mike Burgess] when he said the politicisation of these issues makes his job harder, not easier. It’s the last sitting day of the week until the end of March, and the all-important pre-election budget. Debate will continue over the character test legislation – although there are now doubts it will pass before the election, with the government and the opposition at odds over potential amendments. Labor waved it through the house on Wednesday but is likely to push for changes in the Senate. There’s also a firearms trafficking bill that the government will use to prove its “tough” credentials. Scott Morrison has vowed to keep hammering Labor over national security – despite security chiefs warning against the tactic. The prime minister has been going hard on Labor over China, accusing it of being soft. But even foreign affairs minister Marise Payne agrees there’s bipartisanship on the issue and Asio boss Mike Burgess has said – more than once – that it’s not helpful to politicise national security. And while it’s deeply unlikely any federal anti-corruption legislation will make it to the table, that won’t stop it being discussed. Senate estimates, the so-called “nerd Olympics”, also rolls on. Sydney beaches are closed after a fatal shark attack, which is tragic (and the stuff of nightmares). United Australia Party boss Clive Palmer, who had to pay damages over his unauthorised use of Twisted Sister’s We’re Not Gonna Take It in 2019, is now bankrolling ads with the tagline “Tell them they’re dreaming”. Fans of The Castle will be digging a hole. Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst, Paul Karp, Josh Butler and Mike Bowers will bring you all the news from Canberra. Our crack team across the country have got you covered elsewhere. How’s the serenity?Leading shark scientists have called for calm after the tragic death of a male swimmer at a beach in Sydney’s east on Wednesday. Dr Vanessa Pirotta, a marine predator researcher at Macquarie University, said the incident at Little Beach had shaken the community because of its sheer randomness. “It’s not every day you hear of a shark incident like this was,” she said. “That’s why there’s so many people talking about it, and the fact people have seen it first-hand means there’s a lot that plays on people’s minds.” Swimmers have been warned against entering the water at 13 of Sydney’s beaches, from Bondi in the east to Cronulla in the south, after the remains of a 35-year-old man were found on Wednesday afternoon. New South Wales police are continuing to scour the water looking for the shark responsible, while the NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI) deployed six SMART drumlines on Thursday morning from Little Bay beach to Long Bay. Surf lifesavers were using drones and jet skis to check the immediate area. Pirotta said the community’s shock was understandable, but it was also important to remember sharks still played an “important ecological role” in Australia’s marine environment. She said there was no need for beachgoers to feel there was a heightened risk swimming in the coming days. “Remember people do swim in the water every day, and this unfortunately has resulted in a tragic, uncommon event,” she said. “Beachgoers will be thinking about their actions which is completely normal … my advice is adhere to swimming between flags and where there’s surveillance in areas well patrolled.” The attack was the first shark-related fatality in Sydney waters since 1963. On Thursday afternoon the Department of Primary Industries confirmed the species responsible was likely to be a great white shark at least three metres in length based on provided footage. Pirotta said the shark could have been passing through the area for a number of reasons including following prey as well as favourable currents or water temperatures. “Unfortunately it’s an opportunistic incident,” she said. “If we look at white shark distribution in Australia, they’re known to be found along the coastal areas as well as shelves and continental areas. “[But] shark incidents like this do not happen every day, this is why we’re so taken aback.” The average number of shark incidents in Australia has risen to 12.5 a year in the past decade compared to 6.5 during the 1990s, but still remains relatively low and fatalities have decreased. According to the Australian Shark Attack File maintained by Taronga Conservation Society there were 17 unprovoked shark attacks in 2021. Of those, three were fatal, 11 caused injury and three people were unharmed. The odds of being killed by a shark in Australia are one in 8m, similar to that of being killed by a kangaroo. The increase in shark incidents is linked to Australia’s growing population, rather than more sharks. In fact, there has been a significant decline in coastal predators in the past 50 years. According to a 2018 study conducted on the east coast, the number of great white sharks had declined by 92%. Dr Leonardo Guida, shark scientist at the Australian Marine Conservation Society, said shark bites were traumatic incidents which “while rare, require[d] thoughtful, evidence based action”. “First of all we want to extend our sympathies to the friends and family of the swimmer who died in this tragedy, first responders and to those who witnessed it,” he said. “Empathy, respect and clear communication are crucial – it’s an emotionally charged event for local communities and the feeling of anger is perfectly understandable.” But he said installing drumlines or using shark nets to catch and kill sharks were less effective at improving safety compared to the use of newer technology like drones and warning systems. Queensland has reduced the number of beaches where shark nets and drumlines are used to 86 beaches, as it trials new technology including drones and smart drumlines. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Last year, the Humane Society International found nearly 80% of sharks caught on drum lines in the Great Barrier Reef marine park in 2020 died, despite an administrative appeals tribunal ordering the government to move to a nonlethal program. In NSW, a shark management program was expanded last year to place drumlines that provide real time alerts at 170 beaches and use shark-spotting drones at 50 beaches. Western Australia’s shark culling program was abandoned in 2014 after an evaluation by the state’s Environmental Protection Authority. “Baited hooks and dead animals caught in shark nets can attract more sharks to the area,” Guida said. “We have the tools and knowhow to modernise and improve beach safety standards that benefit humans and wildlife alike.”On 15 September 2021, Sidy Keita from Ivory Coast and Didier Martial Kouamou Nana from Cameroon, boarded a dinghy from Turkey to Greece. Despite making it to the Greek island of Samos, their bodies were found days later, washed ashore in Aydin province, on the Aegean coast. Interviews with more than a dozen witnesses, analysis of classified documents, satellite imagery, social media accounts and online material, and discussions with officials in Turkey and Greece, have helped piece together what happened over five September days during which the two men died, likely victims of a pushback by the Greek authorities. What happened to these men, who left their homes to escape political oppression and for a better life overseas, has been investigated by the Guardian, Lighthouse Reports, Mediapart and Der Spiegel. The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has frequently denied that pushbacks occur. But there is mounting evidence that would-be asylum seekers are being illegally removed from Greek territory before having the chance to lodge asylum applications. Keita, 36, left Ivory Coast after taking part in protests against president Alassane Ouattara. He arrived in Turkey in March 2020. Kouamou, 33, a mechanic in Cameroon, landed in Turkey last year, hoping to join his brother who had been living in France since 2014. Like many before them, both men went to the Basmane district of Izmir, a known spot for people who want to be smuggled into Europe. They were among 36 who then boarded a dinghy from near Kusadasi on the Turkish coast in the early hours of 15 September. According to testimonies, the boat arrived at the north-eastern shore of Samos around 7am, just as the sun was rising. The area, Cape Prasso, is a peninsula with steep hillsides and perilous drops to the water. Lawyers working for the Human Rights Legal Project (HRLP) on Samos, 10km from Cape Prasso, received a text from an unknown number informing them of the dinghy’s arrival, with photos taken from land of a Greek coastguard vessel spotted in the area. At 10.25am, the HRLP emailed local police, the UN refugee agency UNHCR, a member of the European Commission based on the island and the Reception and Identification service for asylum seekers on Samos, informing them of the arrival. The HRLP email, seen by the Guardian, asks that the arrivals be provided with the necessary assistance to register as asylum seekers on the island as prescribed by law. There was no reply. Shortly after the dinghy arrived, witnesses describe hearing what sounded like shots being fired. In a panic, the people on the dinghy split up, scrambling up the hilly terrain to hide where they could. Eight managed to escape into the countryside but the other 28, including a baby, young children and a pregnant woman, were apprehended by the authorities. That afternoon, it is claimed they were loaded on to a coastguard boat, driven out to sea and cast adrift on two life rafts, a well-documented form of pushback by Greek authorities. Jean* and at least two others were allegedly strip-searched and beaten. Jean said at least one woman was subjected to an internal physical search by officers looking for money. “The police beat us with the greatest violence,” he said. “I was punched in the face and in the stomach. I was crying.” Pascaline* said she was robbed of her money and her baby was thrown into the life raft “as if you were throwing a garbage can”. “We have to denounce this because it’s inhuman. They hit people in front of us, they traumatised the children.” The two rafts were picked up by the Turkish coastguard a few hours later. The pregnant woman had gone into labour on the raft and delivered her baby shortly after being rescued. Of the eight people who initially escaped the authorities in Samos, four would make it to a refugee camp on the island, while the other four were picked up. One woman was apprehended outside a monastery, given a bottle of water and cast out to sea on her own. She was rescued by the Turkish coastguard on 17 September. After sleeping in the forest overnight, Keita, Kouamou and another man, Ibrahim*, were apprehended on 16 September. Ibrahim, a former member of the Cameroonian navy, said they were stopped on a road by people identifying themselves as police officers. They were asked for ID and stripped of their phones and money before being put into a car and taken to a port. Ibrahim said they were then loaded on to a speedboat, which he identified as a Rafnar, a vessel used by the coastguard on Samos. After half an hour, the boat stopped and Ibrahim says that, one by one, the men were pushed into the water. “I resisted,” he said. “They beat me properly before throwing me into the water.” He said he swam desperately, the waves helping push him towards the Turkish shore and on to the beach a few hours from Kusadasi. He said he cried out thanks to God before vomiting. According to Ibrahim, Keita’s body washed up soon after. Friends said neither Keita nor Kouamou could swim. Ibrahim tried resuscitation but it was too late. Ibrahim planted a stick in the sand next to Keita’s body and started walking along the coast. He was picked up by Turkish police on 18 September, and described to them the events which led to Keita’s death. “They pushed all of us into the sea,” he told the authorities. “They did not provide us with a raft or boat.” He said Kouamou had disappeared beneath the waves. Later that day, Keita’s body was found by the Turkish coastguard. Two days later, they found Kouamou on the same beach. Ibrahim later identified both bodies in the morgue in Izmir. Medical documents state that Keita drowned and that Kouamou’s body had been found in the sea, close to shore. While it is impossible to fully verify Ibrahim’s story, two Greek officials with direct knowledge of coastguard operations, who spoke on condition of anonymity, confirmed that what he described had happened before, usually to smaller groups of asylum seekers. The rationale is to avoid using life rafts, which are expensive; any public tender for their replacement might raise questions. Both officials said refugees are usually provided with lifejackets before being told to swim back to Turkey. Since December, the Turkish coastguard have recorded 11 rescues of people in similar circumstances. Over tea in Izmir in October, Ibrahim said he believed it was partly down to God that he survived. “The sea is my friend, I have no fear,” he said. He has since made it back to Greece, where he has registered as a minor. The Guardian cannot verify his age. Months later, he is still haunted by what happened. “I feel like I left a part of me in the water,” he said. Dimitris Choulis, a HRLP lawyer, is filing a lawsuit pressing for criminal charges to be brought against those involved in the pushback on behalf of some of the 36 people who made that journey on 15 September. “What is very dangerous for our democracy is having police officers overstepping the law,” he said. “My hope is, as a Greek lawyer, to restore the rule of law in the island of Samos, because this is what seems to have been lost.” Lorraine Leete, from the Legal Centre Lesbos, added: “Pushbacks constitute atrocities against the humankind for which Greece and the EU will have to respond sooner or later, given the hard and accumulated evidence of crimes committed at their borders.” Kouamou’s body was returned to Cameroon, thanks to savings from his older brother, Séverin. He leaves behind a wife and two young children. “The news of his death broke us all,” said his aunt, Marinette. “His death left me traumatised to have lost such a good son.” Keita’s family could not raise the money to bring him back to Ivory Coast, and he lies in an unmarked grave in Izmir, thousands of miles from home. In a statement, the Greek police authorities said: “The Hellenic police authorities, following a strict disciplinary legal framework, investigate every piece of information which is communicated to them and concerns alleged incidents of ill treatment at the borders, including allegations for unprocessed returns (pushbacks), in order that the foreseen by law penalties are imposed and similar behaviours are avoided in the future. The allegations on the breach of the principle of non-refoulement do not meet reality and in fact undermine the work of the Hellenic police at the operational border areas.” The Hellenic Coast Guard said in a statement: “The practices described and attributed to operational assets and personnel of the coastguard do not correspond with our operational processes in deterring non-authorised border crossings, or dealing with third country nationals during the surveillance of sea borders.” *Names have been changedIt is fitting that Rangers’ highest-profile European occasion in more than a decade falls this week. Valentine’s Day marked 10 years since the club tumbled into administration, sparked by a series of events Rangers would rather forget and those in charge of Scottish football would be well advised to remember. There is some wonderful, exaggerated nonsense said and written about Rangers’ rise from the bottom domestic tier to champions – their economic scale is untouched by 40 of 41 other Scottish clubs – but recent seasons have seen credibility restored against foreign opposition. The Rangers of 2022 will relish a Europa League meeting with Borussia Dortmund while mindful of more meaningful hurdles ahead. The reawakening of Celtic under Ange Postecoglou is such that Rangers, having won the title with six matches to spare last March, find themselves embroiled in a domestic scrap. Rangers’ recent decline was painfully exposed by a 3-0 Old Firm trouncing this month. The scoreline flattered Giovanni van Bronckhorst’s team. Having supposedly identified domestic cups as a key area for improvement in 2021-22, Rangers were comfortably bundled out of the League Cup by Hibs. It would of course have been hard to maintain last season’s extraordinary levels of consistency, but building on success was a reasonable expectation. Rangers fans have cause to ask precisely why this has transpired from such a position of power, not least given the depressing weakness of all but one domestic opponent. Borussia Dortmund v Rangers: a tie for those who once regarded such fixtures as the norm. The winning of Scotland’s Premiership last May understandably triggered euphoric scenes around Ibrox. Pieced together, life should be pretty rosy for followers of the club. Yet this is a team who, seemingly rejuvenated by Van Bronckhorst’s arrival to replace Steven Gerrard, led the league by six points on Boxing Day. They now trail by one with Celtic holding the footballing momentum in Glasgow. The significance of this goes far beyond who takes delivery of a flag: the likelihood of automatic Champions League entry for this season’s champions means, in fiscal terms, this should be the most valuable title in Scottish history. Van Bronckhorst can enjoy the limelight here in Dortmund for the first leg even if his main role is to return what was a 2/1-on bet before a ball was kicked. Now, astonishingly, Rangers are the underdogs. Ross Wilson, the Rangers sporting director, is never shy about trying to drum up positive publicity. Wilson was on club media outlets to herald a job well done in the January transfer window 24 hours before Celtic’s derby win. The reality is that Rangers’ transfer model has been highly questionable for some time, glaringly emphasised when Malmö turfed them out of this season’s Champions League. The sale of Nathan Patterson, an academy graduate who barely featured in the first team, scarcely masks the failure to prevent steep value loss on others. There is, of course, Aaron Ramsey. The signing of the midfielder on loan from Juventus is a coup but Rangers have sleepwalked towards the point where this caffeine boost was sorely needed. They would have been better off signing a defender – Rangers can be laughably weak at the back – but presumably market forces dictated otherwise. In another bizarre public intervention, on Tuesday Ramsey’s agent, David Baldwin, used social media to describe an inoffensive column as “stupid”, “disrespectful” and “rag journalism”. Rangers and their online warriors lapped up the sentiment. Not only was it unimpressive in respect of the pile-on it inevitably triggered towards the person who wrote the piece, it suggested unease rather than relaxation. Ramsey, 31 and having last played 90 minutes in October, will complete the season against clubs such as St Johnstone, Dundee and St Mirren. It was not meant to be this way when he signed a £400,000-a-week deal in Italy in the summer of 2019. Aside from Ramsey – who we are entitled to believe can influence games in Scotland – there are other reasons for Rangers optimism. The temperamental Alfredo Morelos has returned to his prolific best. That the team rebounded from an embarrassing evening at Celtic by dismissing Hearts and Hibs suggests there is no problem with morale. Celtic’s rebuild has been so swift that there is no guarantee they will not wilt as the season goes on. In Europe, under Gerrard and Van Bronckhorst, Rangers have reached levels that add to their reputation as a team. The true challenges, though, are far closer to home. Dortmund are a free hit.On Sunday an Olympic spokesperson actually put out a statement explaining that the Games’ flame in the Bird’s Nest stadium hadn’t gone out. “The flame is fine,” they said when approached by USA Today, whose photographer Rob Schumacher published a shot that suggested it was very much not. Somewhere else in the Olympic village, irony keeled over and died. I’ve had one eye on the vaguely dystopian spectacle of these Games, a hyperreal propaganda-spectacular played out, in part, on phoney snow and against the backdrop of an abandoned steel mill. The other has been reading about what IOC president Thomas Bach calls the “boycott ghosts of the past”, and in particular the story of Rudi Ball. The Olympic boycott movement really began in 1936, before the infamous summer Games in Berlin, and the less well-known winter Games held in Garmisch-Partenkirchen in Bavaria earlier that same year. There was no formal boycott in the end, despite all the many calls for one, because the IOC – and in particular its future president Avery Brundage, who was then running the American Olympic Committee – overrode everyone else’s concerns and accepted the Nazi party’s reassurances that everything was (here’s that word again) fine. Years later, researchers at the Simon Wiesenthal Centre would prove that Brundage’s construction firm received a contract to build the new German Embassy in Washington because of his “friendly attitude to German sports”. Not that he needed the sweetener, “any more than Bill Clinton would need a bribe to support Hillary”, said Brundage’s biographer, Allen Guttmann. So the decision about whether or not to boycott those Winter Games became a personal choice. Many, like British skier Peter Lunn, refused to attend the opening procession, while others, such as the two-time Olympic bobsled champion Billy Fiske, refused to go to the Games at all. Rudi Ball, though, found himself facing an even more difficult decision. Ball, who was born in Berlin in 1911, was the star turn on the Berliner SC ice hockey team that won the German national championship for six years in a row between 1928 and 1933, and was one of the best players on the national side that won the bronze medal at the Lake Placid Olympics in 1932. He was also half-Jewish. Which meant he shouldn’t have been facing a decision at all, since, from 1933 onwards, the Reich Sports Office had introduced an “Aryans only” policy in all German sports organisations. Ball moved to St Moritz after that, in what the papers described as “self-exile”, and then to Milan, where he played for the Diavoli Rossoneri, who won the Italian national championship, and the prestigious Spengler Cup in St Moritz, in 1935. By then, he was playing better than ever. Of course, when it came to whether or not he would be picked to play for the German national team again at their home Olympics, the pressing question wasn’t his form. Ball died in 1975, and the details of exactly what happened in those few weeks were lost with him. The story goes that the German captain, Gustav Jaenecke, told the authorities that he would refuse to play unless Ball was selected. This is the version presented in Tom McNab’s play 1936: Berlin, and elsewhere. The Nazis certainly used Ball as part of the PR campaign they ran to ward off the threat of the boycott. “All German athletes who fulfil the Olympic conditions will be welcome,” said the secretary general of the German Olympic Committee, Dr Carl Diem. “We have already included the Jewish sportsman Rudi Ball as a member of the ice hockey team.” Ball’s brilliant performance in Germany’s first match, a 1-0 defeat to the USA, was reported around the world. “Nazis Cheer a Jew” was one headline, “Brilliant Playing of Rudi Ball Moves German Fans to Applause” another. It was also reported that Ball had been coerced into playing. A “highly reliable source” told a reporter from the Australian Jewish News that Ball “is taking part in the Olympic Games against his own will”. Ball himself hinted that this may have been the case in an interview he gave to the Canadian foreign correspondent Matthew Halton, who asked him how he “could bear” to play for Nazi Germany. Ball, who always referred to the Germans as “they”, rather than “we”, told Halton that refusing to play wouldn’t have done German Jews any good, “and it might have done them harm”. Halton wrote that he couldn’t repeat some of their conversation, which, his son David Halton later suggested, was “certainly a code that Ball feared to say the worst of what was happening”. Ball’s mother and father were still living in Berlin at that point. And here we get a real hint of why Ball made the decision he did. It has been suggested that Ball struck a deal with the Nazi regime in which he agreed to play on the proviso that his parents were allowed out of the country. And, when you look through the emigration records, there they are, Leonhard and Gertrude Ball, on the passenger list for the SS Windsor Castle, sailing from Southampton to Cape Town on 3 July 1936. They didn’t come back. Ball joined them after the war, which he spent back in Germany, playing for his old club, SC Berlin. In his last interview, given in 1970, Ball was asked whether he was a forgotten man, and if the sport owed him more recognition, “I am the one who owes hockey,” he replied, “it saved me and my family from the holocaust.”The independent MP Helen Haines has left open the possibility of again attempting to legislate her federal integrity commission before the election, as another Liberal MP breaks ranks to support a “multi-partisan” approach to the vexed issue. After the prime minister, Scott Morrison, confirmed this week that the government would fail to deliver on its election commitment to introduce its own bill for a federal anti-corruption body, Haines told parliament that the government had played “the public for a patsy”. “I will never stop bringing this to the attention of this House, even in the dying days of this parliament,” Haines said. “The prime minister’s laughable excuse that he cannot legislate his integrity commission proposal because the opposition won’t support it is totally absurd. “The legislating of a federal integrity commission was a character test for this prime minister and his government, and I stand here today saying he has failed that character test.” Haines also accused Morrison of misleading her over the issue, saying he had initially suggested he wanted to work on the issue in a bipartisan way, but this had not happened. She said the government had undertaken “fake consultation” on its bill, which was released as a draft in November 2020 and underwent an extensive public consultation process last year. “The facts are clear. He had no intention of working on this in a bipartisan way,” she said. The Liberal MP Bridget Archer – who crossed the floor last year to support Haines’s bill – said it remained her view that legislating an integrity commission remained “one of the most important things” parliament needed to do. However, she cast doubt on the ability for Haines’ bill to be supported before the election, with just one sitting week for the federal budget remaining before the election. “I do believe that this issue needs to be debated. It is also clear that this parliament is running out of time to be able to legislate an integrity bill. “I’ve continued to have those discussions over summer, and they had been met in good faith. But I don’t think that we are going to get there in this term of parliament,” she said. “I would just urge all parties to put the politics aside and come back here to the 47th parliament in good faith and get this done.” The outgoing Liberal MP John Alexander, who told Guardian Australia he would consider crossing the floor to support Haines’s bill if it again came to a vote before the election, joined Archer, Haines and other crossbench MPs on Thursday to call for a multi-partisan approach to the issue. “We must stop bashing heads, and instead put our heads together to work our way forward,” Alexander said. “This is too important to play politics with, because we’ve seen what happens around the world when people lose trust in their elected representatives. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “So let’s form a team. A team is a group of people who come together with a common goal. Let’s form a team to represent Australians, to ensure honesty and integrity as the foundations for those who represent us and those who seek to lead.” This week, Morrison defended the government’s failure to progress the bill, attempting to blame the Labor party for not supporting the bill. “We’ve tabled our legislation for that integrity commission. The Labor party don’t support it, and that’s why it’s not proceeding.” But the decision to shelve the legislation has angered many Liberal MPs, particularly those fighting off challenges from independents in Liberal-held metropolitan seats who have made integrity a key campaign issue. The Liberal MPs Jason Falinski and Celia Hammond previously told Guardian Australia that the government should introduce the bill before the election to kickstart debate on the issue and fulfil the government’s election pledge.The imperious Canada women’s team completed a buzzsaw run through the Olympic tournament with a comprehensive victory over their defining foes, seeing off the United States in Thursday’s gold medal game by a 3-2 scoreline that flattered to deceive. The latest instalment in one of world sport’s most hotly contested rivalries was largely one-way traffic for the half-hour the outcome truly hung in the balance. Marie-Philip Poulin, known as “Captain Clutch”, scored twice as the defending world champions opened a three-goal lead behind an aggressive forechecking attack and a standout effort by in-form goaltender Ann-Renée Desbiens, who finished with 38 saves. “This is redemption,” said Poulin, whose double marked her sixth and seventh goals in four career Olympic gold medal games. “It’s just so good. It’s a great feeling. It was one hell of an effort.” Canada got off to a flying start, firing six of the first seven shots on goal until appearing to draw first blood after eight minutes when Natalie Spooner found the back of the net after a failed zone clearance. The goal was disallowed for offsides on a USA replay challenge, but Canada took control with a goal that stuck through Sarah Nurse 5 seconds after play resumed. Poulin doubled the advantage before the period was out, capitalising on a gruesome USA turnover in their defensive zone. While the stat sheet at the first intermission suggested an evenly matched affair beyond the score, the well-drilled Canadian defense were limiting their opponents to mostly speculative shots on target while peppering away from closer range on Alex Cavallini, who finished with 18 saves. The gold medal was all but in hand after Poulin struck again midway through the second period with an assist from Nurse, whose 18th point of the tournament extended an Olympic record. The Americans pulled one back on an unassisted short-handed goal from Hilary Knight right before the second intermission, but were repeatedly thwarted by Desbiens and could not get any closer until Amanda Kessel’s largely cosmetic goal on a power play with 12.5 seconds left in the game. Canada closed the show easily from there, putting the finishing touches on a seven-game Olympic masterpiece where they outscored their opponents by a 57-10 margin. A mob of red sweaters came together in celebration at the final horn as the stunned Americans looked on before several hundred spectators and volunteers at Wukesong Sports Centre, the eye-catching 15,384-seat arena where LeBron James and Kobe Bryant led USA men’s basketball team to a redemptive gold when the Olympics last came to town in 2008. “I don’t think we played up to our potential,” Knight said. “We came up short. We did not get the puck to the net enough.” That Canada’s women will be at or near the top of the global scene remains one of the death-and-taxes certainties in sport, but the road to gold was uncommonly turbulent. After falling short of the gold in Pyeongchang four years ago for the first time in 16 years with a penalty-shootout defeat to the US, the Canadians bowed out to Finland in the semi-finals of the 2019 world championships, marking the first time in 25 appearances at the Olympics or worlds they failed to reach the final. Change came quickly. Parry Pearn was dismissed as head coach less than three months later, replaced by Troy Ryan. Also out were the longtime goaltender Shannon Szabados and defender Laura Fortino. It all paid off at last year’s worlds as Canada hoisted the trophy for the first time since 2012. In Beijing they breezed through the group stage, including a 4-2 win over the US in a dress rehearsal for the final, before trouncing Sweden (11-0) and Switzerland (10-3) in the medal rounds. Finland took the bronze for the third time in the past four Olympics with a 4-0 win over Switzerland on Wednesday “It is insane,” said the Canada forward Sarah Fillier, the team’s youngest player at 21. “I can’t stop shaking. ” Canada and the United States have combined to win every global title since the first official world championships in 1990 and the inaugural Olympic tournament in 1998, facing off in the final in all but two of them. Their meetings remain weighted with significance even as the ill-temper and general spiciness that defined the rivalry has given way to a collegial professionalism and mutual respect in recent years. Their overwhelming dominance was thrust to the fore last week after a widely panned op-ed in the Toronto Star made the argument that women’s hockey doesn’t belong in the Olympics due to a competitive shortfall beyond the Big Two. But one wonders if the unassailable supremacy of neighboring countries that share the world’s longest international border can work as an asset and not a drawback. For years the Canadian and US national teams have been waiting for their “1999 moment” – a nod to Brandi Chastain’s celebration to win the Women’s World Cup – that sort of societal inflection point where on-field success within a parochial sports world breaks through to a new level of popularity in the cultural mainstream. If the powers that be were smart, the US and Canada would meet in an annual best-of-seven series – a fixture with a trophy beyond the current promotional tours where they meet for exhibitions – that would keep this rivalry in the general public’s eye. That is a conversation for another day. For now Canada can celebrate holding the Olympic and world championships at the same time for the first time in nearly a decade. “It feels very good – 2018 was very hard,” Poulin said. “You take some time to reflect on what you need to do better as a group and personally. It really pays off. When you surround yourself with good people, good things happen.”Anthony Albanese has rounded on Scott Morrison at the end of an ugly week that saw the Coalition weaponise national security, with the Labor leader stating if people wanted to identify a “Manchurian candidate” in parliament they should look at the prime minister. Albanese’s insult followed a significant public intervention on Thursday by Australia’s respected former spy chief Dennis Richardson. Richardson said the Morrison government was serving China’s interests, not Australia’s, by politicising national security and “seeking to create the perception of a difference [between the major parties] when none in practise exists”. Richardson’s critique of Morrison and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, prompted the chair of parliament’s intelligence committee, Liberal senator James Paterson, to return fire, arguing the retired bureaucrat had publicly advocated in 2018 that the Chinese telco Huawei should be involved in the Australian 5G rollout. Paterson described Richardson as a “distinguished” former public servant. But the Liberal senator told Sky News the government’s decision to exclude Huawei from the 5G rollout was “one of the best decisions our government has made – and I stand by it even if Dennis Richardson disagrees”. Richardson did not argue for unrestricted Huawei involvement. In 2018, Richardson suggested that Australia should follow the UK’s lead and establish a cyber-security unit to manage risks and safeguard Australia’s national interest, rather than banning the Chinese company outright. The suggestion was Huawei could perhaps be involved in non-sensitive areas. Richardson told Guardian Australia on Thursday night: “James Paterson is being loose with the truth by a long margin. He ought to check his facts and get them right before he makes public comments about individuals.” The high octane roiling follows several days of Morrison and Dutton attempting to paint Labor as being soft on China and weak on national security. The hyper-partisanship culminated in Morrison on Wednesday branding Labor’s deputy leader, Richard Marles, a “Manchurian candidate” – an observation he later withdrew. The phrase “Manchurian candidate” refers to a politician being used as a puppet by an enemy power. Albanese told parliament on Thursday there were few public figures better qualified than Richardson to deliver the assessment he did. The Labor leader said the former bureaucrat had “the quadrella”. By that, he meant Richardson had been the head of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Department of Defence, the director-general of Asio, and Australia’s ambassador to Washington. Albanese said former Liberal prime minister John Howard had appointed Richardson to Asio and sent him to Washington. Albanese then used Richardson’s criticism of the hyper-partisanship to turn Morrison’s insult back on the prime minister. Gesturing in Morrison’s direction in the chamber, Albanese declared after question time: “If you are looking for a Manchurian candidate, he sits over there.” Albanese told the chamber he had been engaged with Australia’s most important security ally, the US, for more than 30 years. “I’ve never been to a rally for Donald Trump, and what we’ve seen here this week is the importation of Trumpian rhetoric, where truth doesn’t matter and facts don’t matter,” he said. As the parliament descended further into uproar, the US reiterated it was “absolutely confident” the alliance with Australia “transcends politics and any one party” – undercutting Morrison’s effort to achieve product differentiation with Labor. The US assistant secretary of state, Daniel Kritenbrink, who is responsible for the State Department’s Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, was asked on Thursday how confident he was that Australia’s commitment to the US alliance, the Aukus security deal and cooperation on strategic challenges would remain strong regardless of the election outcome. “Absolutely confident is my answer,” Kritenbrink said. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and senior US officials met with both sides of Australian politics in Melbourne late last week. In a teleconference with journalists on Thursday, Kritenbrink said the US viewed the alliance with Australia as “the anchor for peace, security and stability in the Indo-Pacific”. “We also had the opportunity to meet with the opposition and we came away reassured that these principles that we hold dear and our vitally important alliance transcends politics and any one party,” Kritenbrink said. “We came away absolutely confident that whomever the Australian people select as their new leadership, as their next leadership, in the upcoming election, we’re confident that the US-Australia alliance will endure and remain as strong as ever.” The comments were carefully worded not to express any preference when it comes to the choice facing Australian voters, but they give no indication that Australia’s top ally is concerned about the implications of a change of government. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, who joined Albanese for the meeting in Melbourne last week, said Australia’s close relationship with the US was “underpinned by bipartisanship”. Morrison persisted with his political attack despite the cross-currents. He continued to assert Albanese was “the Chinese government’s pick at this election,” while characterising him as a “weakling” and “diminishing by the day”. Dutton also declared defence spending “was a mess” when the Coalition came to power. He told parliament voters should ignore “the rhetoric that is being pumped out by the backroom bullies of the Labor party” and instead look at how Labor had “cut spending to the bone” when last in office. But Albanese sought to undercut the attack by tabling a letter Morrison sent him four months ago. In the letter, Morrison thanked Albanese for supporting Aukus and “for the bipartisan approach the opposition has taken in this vital national endeavour”. In an acrimonious Senate estimates hearing on Thursday, senior government frontbencher Simon Birmingham rejected the proposition that the Coalition was furthering Beijing’s interests. “I have enormous regard for Mr Richardson, but I don’t agree with his starting premise there,” the finance minister said. Birmingham argued points of difference between the parties had been created by Albanese’s own public statements, such as when the Labor leader included the word “some” when calling on Beijing to scrap its trade actions against Australian export sectors. The committee hearing was suspended after the Labor senator Tim Ayres accused the government of mounting a “grubby, reckless and shameless” line of attack, telling Birmingham: “You utterly debase yourself with this stuff.” Birmingham denied the government was making the job of Australia’s intelligence and security agencies more difficult, saying “we don’t seek to politicise it unnecessarily”. Birmingham said the track records of each party on national security and defence spending were “fair game” in a “robust democracy” and the Coalition “won’t shy away from drawing contrast where there is contrast”. The secretary of the defence department, Greg Moriarty, was cautious to steer clear of the escalating political dispute, but made a general comment that Australia’s “national resilience depends on national unity to a certain extent”. “Of course, adversaries will seek to sow division. Over many centuries that has been the case in a variety of circumstances,” Moriarty said.The murder trial of constable Zachary Rolfe has heard evidence for the first time from a direct witness to the shooting of Kumanjayi Walker. Rolfe, 30, shot Walker, 19, during a deployment to Yuendumu, a remote community about 300km from Alice Springs, on 9 November 2019. The court has heard Walker was shot three times by Rolfe, but the first shot is not subject to any charges. It occurred only moments after Walker stabbed Rolfe with a pair of surgical scissors. The crown prosecutor, Philip Strickland SC, has previously told the Northern Territory supreme court that after the first shot had been fired, another officer struggled with Walker and eventually gained control of him, pinning the arm that had been holding the scissors under Walker’s body. Rolfe then placed his left hand on his colleague’s back and pressed his right hand, holding his Glock semi-automatic handgun, against the left side of Walker’s body, Strickland said, before pulling the trigger twice in quick succession, in what Strickland said was known as a “double-tap” designed to ensure maximum damage. It is the second and third shots that are subject to the murder charge. If a jury finds Rolfe not guilty of murder, he faces a charge of manslaughter, and if he is found not guilty of that charge, a further charge of engaging in a violent act causing death. The police officer has pleaded not guilty to all charges. David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, said he would defend his actions as being reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and his colleague, constable Adam Eberl. Edwardson said Rolfe was acting in self-defence, and to defend the life of Eberl, when he fired the second and third shots, and his training had emphasised that “edged weapon equals gun”. Walker had a propensity for violence and had attacked Rolfe in a dark and confined space, he said, with the police officers having to make decisions without the “luxury” of being about to consider tactical options “frame-by-frame”. On Thursday, senior constable Anthony Hawkings told the Northern Territory supreme court he saw Rolfe holding his police-issued Glock handgun “very close” to Walker’s body before he shot him for the second and third time. He had not seen the first shot fired by Rolfe, but when he looked through the doorway of a Yuendumu property known as House 511 he noticed that Walker was on his side, Eberl was struggling with him, and Rolfe was crouching over the pair with his gun in his right hand. Soon after, Rolfe fired two shots, Hawkings said, clarifying that he had only looked into the doorway for a “matter of seconds”. He did not see Walker holding the scissors, nor go into the room. After the shooting he kept watch over the doorway to prevent other people entering, he said. While extensive body-worn camera footage of the shooting has been played to the court, it is the first time someone who witnessed the shots has given evidence. The court has previously heard that Rolfe fired the second shot 2.6 seconds after the first shot, and that there was 0.53 seconds between Rolfe’s second and third shots. Hawkings, Rolfe and Eberl were part of a team deployed to Yuendumu from Alice Springs to deal with several community issues, including the arrest of Walker, a fugitive who had threatened other officers with an axe three days earlier. Like other officers who have given evidence during the trial, Hawkings was asked extensively about any briefing or information he received before deploying at Yuendumu. Conflicting accounts have emerged about what information was provided to the officers, the extent of planning before their deployment, and the purpose of their duties on the night of the shooting. The shooting during an attempted arrest occurred only 15 minutes after the officers left the station, which the prosecution alleges was inconsistent with a plan which the officer in charge of the station said she had emailed to officers to arrest Walker early the following morning. Hawkings said he could not remember seeing any email relating to his deployment to Yuendumu, or having an extensive briefing. He said he believed the only notes he had made in his police notebook about the deployment related to the time he arrived at the station from Alice Springs, but he could not be sure as he had misplaced the notebook. He did recall seeing a map of Yuendumu at the station, but could not recall who gave it to him. When shown CCTV footage of some of the officers at Yuendumu station picking up a document prior to leaving, he could not recall what the document was. Strickland has previously told the court that the case against Rolfe relied not only on his actions during the shooting, but the “context” and the “steps leading up” to it, including the plan. On Thursday, the court also heard from a family member of Walker who said the Warlpiri man had planned to surrender to police. Louanna Williams, Walker’s auntie, said he visited her after he had threatened officers with an axe and told her he planned to hand himself in after the funeral of a family member. The funeral was held on the day Walker was killed. Williams said Walker also told her he was “comfortable” having her brother, senior Aboriginal community police officer Derek Williams (who was not involved in the events around Walker’s death), arrest him, and denied any involvement in a series of break-ins in Yuendumu. Local police suspected Walker had been involved in the break-ins, which had prompted medical staff to evacuate from the town – one of several reasons used to justify the deployment of Rolfe and other officers from Alice Springs. Leanne Oldfield, Walker’s adopted mother, said the funeral was for her uncle. Walker had been close to her uncle, she said. Minutes before the shooting, she had been sitting outside 511, the house where she lived with her partner and Walker, she said. Walker had been looking at a family photo of his cousins and an aunt in a swimming pool, and laughing, she said, before he went inside the property. “He was looking at the photo, then after – then he went inside,” Oldfield said. “Soon as he went inside, I seen the police coming through the gate.” The trial continues.The fate of three key federal government MPs remains in the balance after the New South Wales Liberal party again rejected their endorsements, while the federal executive has given the fractious state division a 10-day deadline to “rectify” its problems or face intervention. On Thursday the state executive of the NSW Liberal party again rejected a proposal to endorse the preselection of federal ministers Sussan Ley and Alex Hawke, as well as key moderate Trent Zimmerman, amid an ongoing factional war within the party. The proposal, which required the support of 90% of the 27-member executive to pass, was put forward despite having been previously rejected, and again raised suspicions of a looming federal intervention in NSW amid an increasingly bitter internal dispute over the nomination of candidates for key seats at the federal election. After reports on Wednesday that the NSW division may soon become in breach of its constitution, the NSW division agreed on Thursday to request a limited federal intervention that would see the existing state executive reappointed. But when the federal executive, led by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, met on Thursday night, it instead issued a warning to the state executive to endorse the three MPs by 28 February or face a wider takeover. . Legal advice presented to a state division meeting on Wednesday said it would be in breach of its constitution if it continued to operate beyond the end of February without holding an annual general meeting. The suggestion had been bitterly opposed by members of the party’s right faction, with the Liberal senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells warning party members that any bid to invite federal intervention was part of a “manufactured controversy” designed to install candidates against the will of members. On Thursday the state executive came to a form of compromise, voting to allow the federal executive to intervene only to reappoint the existing state delegates until the end of March when it is scheduled to hold the annual meeting. The wording of the motion, which passed by 18 votes to four, was specifically aimed at limiting the scope of intervention amid a growing suspicion among the moderate and right factions that the move is aimed at giving the federal body the power to install candidates. The decision is likely to be fiercely contested by sections of the NSW division, particularly the party’s right faction, which has resisted the public pressure from Morrison to endorse the sitting MPs as the state party attempts to come to a compromise on a swathe of NSW preselections. Figures within the NSW right have signalled they are willing to take the matter to the state’s supreme court if the federal branch does intervene. The failure of the motion to re-endorse Ley, Hawke and Zimmerman comes amid frustration from the moderate and conservative factions that a compromise deal has not been presented to state executive for a vote. This deal would give Morrison the pick of candidates in Dobell and Eden Monaro, allow plebiscites in the Senate, Bennelong and Parramatta, endorse sitting members and install Alex Dore into Hughes. Although the deal was negotiated more than three weeks ago, it remains in limbo because the centre right and the moderate-controlled branches are concerned about Dore being parachuted into Hughes. Party sources suggested that regardless of the outcome of Thursday’s ballot, federal intervention was now increasingly likely, with the state division also preparing for the likelihood of a supreme court challenge against such a move. At Wednesday’s meeting, the right’s Matthew Camenzuli presented legal advice suggesting the federal takeover was unnecessary. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The ability of the federal executive to intervene may also be legally contestable, with an unwillingness of some members of the federal body to get involved. In an email sent to members late on Wednesday, Senator Fierravanti-Wells, who is fighting for a ballot of members to go ahead which she believes would secure her senate position, said the move was “intended to advance the position of a handful of factional players”. “There is a very small group within our party who want to deliver certain seats to their preferred candidates, trampling on the rights of the membership and thereby obstructing the constitution,” Fierravanti-Wells said in the letter. “By failing/refusing to carry out their obligations these few people are creating such delay in NSW preselections that they can then mount an argument that the NSW division is dysfunctional and that plebiscite preselections be substituted with automatic endorsements. They create the dysfunction, and then use it as an excuse to get what they want. “These few people are working hard to create a situation where preselection of candidates by plebiscite of members is destroyed. They are afraid that your opinion will be different from theirs, and their preferred candidate or even themselves, will not get endorsement.” She singled out the prime minister’s representative on state executive, the immigration minister Alex Hawke, for failing to “carry out his party functions as a member of the nomination review committee in a timely manner.” Hawke was contacted for comment.Every day, in social media groups with hundreds of thousands of members, a debate rages about the best way to treat Covid with laundry lists of unproven medicines. What is the right dose of the anti-parasitic drug ivermectin? When should it be taken? Should it be combined with hydroxychloroquine? With the antibiotic azithromycin? What about Pepcid, hydrogen peroxide, colloidal silver? Vitamin C? Take it all, one user tells people. And chew a lemon peel, says another. Two years into the pandemic and we now have a range of safe and effective vaccines and treatments that are readily available in much of the world. Yet millions of people have chosen to reject vaccines and rigorous medical research in favour of unproven treatments and pseudoscientific home remedies. There’s no single reason that explains why people from varied backgrounds in numerous countries have latched on to these treatments with such fervour. But there is clearly a desperate demand for a quick fix to the pandemic. There is also a near limitless supply of medical misinformation telling people that such a solution is available but nefarious forces are intent on keeping it from the public. The mass belief in unproven treatments is often spurred on by a vast ecosystem of medical hucksters profiting from unsound treatments, and media influencers ready to insert their dubious claims into pre-existing political battles. In the US, for instance, Republican lawmakers and conservative media have attacked public health officials advising lockdowns while championing unproven drugs as miracle cures. One of the first times hydroxychloroquine appeared in mainstream media was on Fox News host Tucker Carlson’s primetime show, where a cryptocurrency investor falsely claiming to be affiliated with Stanford University School of Medicine announced the drug as “the second cure to a virus of all time”. The show did not run a correction. Although they are often presented as secret cures, hidden away by mainstream medicine and media, some of these drugs are well known and commonly consumed for other conditions. Many are even the subject of numerous clinical trials. Take ivermectin, which is approved for use to treat parasites in both animals and humans. Ivermectin was extremely widely used in Latin America during the first months of the pandemic as regional health agencies recommended it as a potential Covid treatment, but misinformation claiming that the drug was a cure-all led people to clear out supplies and resort to taking unsafe versions of ivermectin formulated for animals. Health officials stopped recommending ivermectin after scrutiny over the science behind it, and frontline evidence cast doubts on its effectiveness. But instead of falling by the wayside in favour of more promising drugs, a combination of US culture war politics and pundits caused ivermectin use to explode across North America and the United Kingdom. A fringe doctor whose medical activist group has affiliated with anti-vaccine organisations appeared in a viral YouTube video touting the drug, then months later sat for a sympathetic interview on Joe Rogan’s top-rated podcast. In September, as the ivermectin craze was in full swing, Dr Patricia Garcia, Peru’s former health minister, told me that she watched in disbelief as the rest of the world appeared to be replicating her country’s mistakes. None of this would have been possible without social media platforms allowing medical misinformation to spread at an unprecedented speed and scale, while influential media figures such as Carlson and Rogan act as megaphones for fringe actors and junk science. It’s an ecosystem that fosters deep distrust, both of traditional media outlets and public health officials. But the supply of medical misinformation is only one side of the equation. Within groups dedicated to unproven Covid treatments, believing in these drugs has become its own form of identity. In addition to asking for dosage recommendations or links to telehealth sites for prescriptions, people develop echo chambers that provide a sense of community while attacking outsiders as brainwashed or part of a vast conspiracy. They talk about how they can’t trust doctors, or the media, or family members. All they have left is each other. The online communities promoting ivermectin and other unproven Covid treatments are filled with what appear to be average people misguidedly trying to help one another, giving medical advice or offering comfort. When someone posts that they are sick, they’re met with a flurry of well wishes, and also pseudoscience remedies. In one recent post, two men promised they would pray for each other’s loved ones who had been intubated after contracting Covid. “Alternative medicine” communities are certainly full of scam artists with financial incentives to spread medical misinformation, and far-right extremists attempting to radicalise others, but many people in these unproven treatment groups simply appear desperate for someone to tell them that things are going to be OK. Conspiracy movements tend to consume people who are at their most vulnerable, in times of great distress, often regardless of their intelligence or profession. The pandemic has taken a deep emotional toll on millions of people, and similarly appears to have left many distrusting of public health officials and susceptible to misinformation. One study published last month in the Journal of American Medical Association found that people experiencing symptoms of depression were more than twice as likely to express opinions that contained medical misinformation. There’s little reason to think that the demand for unproven treatments and pseudoscience cures will go away soon. The anti-vaccine movement has become more militant. Covid-19 will not be eradicated. The financial and political incentives for pushing medical misinformation will remain. There will still be people whose deep distrust and belief in conspiracies means that they will reach for whatever paste or pill or placebo they have been told will work. Some will recover and praise these unproven treatments as lifesavers. Others won’t get the chance. This article was amended on 18 February 2022 to correct the name of Stanford University School of Medicine, which had been given as Stanford Medical University in an earlier version. Nick Robins-Early is a journalist based in New York. He reports on extremism, disinformation, tech and world newsToo often, political journalism is the art of asking the wrong question. We can preoccupy ourselves wondering whether or not a particular tactic will work. These are valid enough deductions, but the whole exercise can read like theatre criticism. At the moment, there is only one question to ask, and it’s this. Is it right for Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton to weaponise national security in the run-up to an election they evidently fear they could lose? If you ask the correct question, the answer is simple and clear. The answer is no. Unequivocally, no. Given there is no concrete evidence of significant policy differences between Labor and the Coalition on China – at least none that I’m currently aware of – Morrison and Dutton puffing themselves up like mini-me McCarthyists imperils the national interest. By turning question time into a treason tribunal – staging a daily Judge Judy session to unmask the sleeper agent in our midst – Morrison and Dutton are actively stoking societal anxiety. Given the current climate, that behaviour creates material risk. You don’t have to take my word for it. In fact, please don’t take my word for it. Let me hand you over to Australia’s domestic spy chief, Mike Burgess. He’s rebuked the partisan grubbiness twice, publicly and politely, in the space of a week. That level of public intervention from the Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation is highly unusual. After Morrison and Dutton ignored the first rebuke by Burgess (what would he know after all?), a former spy chief, Dennis Richardson – one of the most respected former public servants in the country – entered the fray. Now retired, he can be more direct than Burgess. Richardson told the ABC on Thursday morning: “What is unusual in this case is that the government is seeking to create the perception of a difference between it and the opposition on a critical national security issue, that is China – seeking to create the perception of a difference when none in practise exists”. “That’s not in the national interest. “That only serves the interests of one country, and that is China.” Let Richardson’s latter point settle in your mind for a moment. I’ll repeat it again, because politics is so noisy at the moment it can be hard to sort signal from noise. Richardson said the current political debate is serving China’s interests, not Australia’s. As excoriations go, that one was pretty succinct. The context for Richardson’s observations can be stepped through quickly. The intelligence community believes Beijing is taking an interest in the outcome of the looming Australian election. Burgess revealed in his annual threat assessment a “recent” meddling plot had been disrupted. Burgess also warned that “angry and alienated Australians” could turn to violence after being exposed to “an echo chamber” of extremist messaging, misinformation and conspiracy theories during the coronavirus pandemic. The Australian federal police commissioner Reece Kershaw noted this week maintaining public order in Canberra over the past two months had been “challenging”. He added police were also “aware of increased espionage and foreign interference threats”. Recent history tells us foreign interference is easier to execute in an environment of societal divisions and low levels of trust in institutions. On Thursday morning, Richardson exposed the monumental irony of the increasingly hyperbolic and incendiary posturing of Morrison and Dutton. The two men currently pretending that only they can keep Australia safe in a dangerous world (unlike those alleged Manchurian candidates opposite) are amply demonstrating their appetite for partisan recklessness. It also needs to be noted, in the context of recent leaks and persistent internal division, that Morrison’s rhetoric has crept up in increments over the past few days to match Dutton’s. Almost like there was an undeclared leadership contest going on inside the government. Almost like, after comprehensively messing up the religious discrimination deliberations last week, Morrison feels suddenly vulnerable to the wrath of government conservatives. Almost like he needs to prove something. Whatever the motives of these two individuals – this much can be said. The two men who claim to be the only reliable custodians of Australia’s national interest are currently imperilling it to win an election. To hang on to power. Which is apparently more important than any other consideration. Whatever it takes. Whatever it costs. This behaviour is beyond reckless. It is beyond disgraceful. It is amoral and corrosive. And it needs to be called for what it is.Even in the age of social distancing, Record Store Day survived during the pandemic. After the 2020 edition was cancelled – it was scheduled for what became the middle of the UK’s first lockdown – the organisers staged separate release “drops” later that year, and again in 2021. You may have seen eager shoppers queueing outside record shops of all sizes up and down the country, wearing face masks as well as the usual thick coats and scarves to brave the pre-opening hours chill; perhaps you saw an obligatory news puff piece about how “vinyl is back” as the David Bowie and Prince estates scraped together yet another previously unreleased artefact. This year, on 23 April, it’s a return to business as usual as record stores around the world celebrate the 15th annual Record Store Day (RSD) with help from Taylor Swift, its starriest ambassador yet (who’s releasing a seven-inch to mark the event). But what was once a shot in the arm for physical retail is now an albatross around the neck of the establishment it purports to help. I run an independent record shop that predates both RSD and the internet. In the early 2000s, when physical record shops were decimated thanks to the rise of illegal downloads, RSD pumped millions of pounds through tills and undoubtedly turned a new generation on to the world of physical music. RSD is a remarkable event and its early years should be remembered as the revolution they were. But 15 years is a long time in technology and retail. Peer-to-peer filesharing pre-empted the digital download and the streaming model. Plucky music blogs evolved into multimedia digital outlets. Even the most idiosyncratic physical record shops now reach a global audience via the internet. Record Store Day, meanwhile, hasn’t adapted to the modern realities of selling physical music. Critics have long derided the event’s penchant for novelty discs and lack of discerning curation. This year, RSD offers 411 new releases, a fact that should leave those in the physical music business seething. Thanks to Brexit and the pandemic, we simply can’t make enough records. There is an international shortage of the various components required in vinyl manufacture, as well as a backlog exacerbated by last year’s pop-heavy release schedule. The issue is not going away. Whereas vinyl would typically take 12 weeks to produce, we’re now looking at nine months for a short run of 12-inch vinyl. (Don’t even mention the shortage on coloured vinyl, the lifeblood of RSD.) New pressing plants opening in Middlesbrough and Gothenburg are cause for optimism, but even their added capacity pales compared with demand. And yet, these 411 records – among them, yep, four Bowie releases and one Prince – will be ready and awaiting sale on 23 April. When I first got a glimpse of the sheer scale of what was in production, I suggested on social media that the best thing for the whole record community would have been to take a year out. Inevitably, many people responded, “If you don’t like it, don’t take part.” But this is perhaps the greatest modern mistruth of RSD. Even shops that opt out altogether are suffering long term thanks to continued stock delays and shortages which are exacerbated by the RSD production schedule. The logistics of the celebration now affect every month of the year, riding roughshod over carefully planned campaigns. We have online customer pre-orders that were placed 12 months ago for albums that have been delayed so frequently that it feels futile to set a new hypothetical release date. The administrative ramifications are hugely consuming for shops and the economic impact for independent artists and labels is devastating. Instore tours – crucial for promotion and first-week sales – have been cancelled and rescheduled; artists are missing out on the chart positions they should expect; entire summer touring schedules are being scrapped because there is such uncertainty about when the physical product will materialise. The job of the record shop in its simplest terms is to sell records. We are part of a long established musical ecosystem and now, in no small part due to RSD, we are becoming ever more impeded in fulfilling our duties. Will there be shops to celebrate when the racks are threadbare and retail prices continue to rocket? I hope RSD can reconfigure itself as a genuine friend to record shops. The event needs to be postponed until these catastrophic production logjams are alleviated and the organisers must consult with shop owners about the best way to help them celebrate this unique culture in the future. It’s ironic that the other 364 days in the record shop calendar now play second fiddle to RSD. • Rupert Morrison is the owner of Drift Records in TotnesAaron Rodgers’ future The Rodgers Saga rolls into a third offseason. Prior to the Super Bowl, ESPN reported that the Green Bay Packers were now willing to go “all in” to keep the quarterback, pushing up to the limit of the salary cap for next season and beyond. The Packers are, the report suggested, looking to mirror the latter days of the Saints’ Drew Brees era, pushing cap pain down the line in order to squeeze extra juice out of the roster now. It feels like 10 years too late. The Packers’ plan doesn’t hold much water, either. OverTheCap.com chronicles each team’s ‘effective’ salary cap, which looks at how much cap room a team is able to finagle by redistributing the money in the current contracts on its books. For instance: the Saints are currently $70m(!) over the cap. But New Orleans structure contracts in a way that they’re able to activate triggers that kick the money down the line. Their ‘effective’ cap, once they shuffle their options and renegotiate deals, will be closer to $30m under the cap by the time free-agency rolls around. Things are different in Green Bay. The Packers don’t have the same flexibility. Even with the potential to rework contracts, their effective cap comes out right around dead even – and that’s before they work out deals with their upcoming free agents. We should know Rodgers’ answer soon. He has set the upcoming franchise tag deadline as his limit for making a decision. By then, Rodgers and the Packers will know the future of Davante Adams, Rodgers’ top receiver and an impending free agent. Coming off back-to-back MVPs, the Packers quarterback steps into the offseason with an unusual amount of power. He has teased that he could walk away from the game altogether. While, over in Denver, the Broncos have hired anyone and everyone with a connection to Rodgers – his former offensive coordinator, a former college coach, his gardener – in a bid to tempt the quarterback to request a trade. The most likely outcome: Rodgers demands a move. Are they retiring? After 72 hours of will-he-won’t-he speculation, Tom Brady formally announced he was walking away from the game after his 22nd season … or is he? Speculation continues that Brady could return for one last dance. “I’m super content and happy [with the decision],” Brady said on the latest edition of his Let’s Go! podcast. “All you can do is take it day by day, nothing’s promised for us.” Brady could return to the Bucs for one final season. But the team’s salary cap constraints mean they will have to retool the roster with or without Brady. If he does return, Brady may jump to another title contender. San Francisco – the team Brady tried to join during his lone round of free agency – have been rumored as a potential spot, or he could return to the AFC East with Miami, where he has set up his post-retirement home. Brady isn’t the only future Hall of Famer who could be set to step away. Reports swirled prior to the Super Bowl that Aaron Donald would retire if the Rams won the title, something the team duly achieved. Donald may have to hang around for an extra three or four years to compile the kind of numbers and hardware that puts him among the most accomplished players ever. But his peak years – which is all of his years – already put him among the best to ever play on his side of the ball. Donald walked into the league with the potential to be its most dominant defender, and, if he walks away, he will leave at the height of his powers. In eight seasons, Donald: Won defensive rookie of the year in 2014 Won three Defensive Player of the Year crowns Made the 2010s all-decade team Was named a first-team All-Pro seven times, and a Pro Bowler in all eight seasons Missed only two games in eight years, neither of which were injury related Forced 48 fumbles, and totaled 150 tackles for loss Registered 98 sacks, a total that matches Von Miller. Was the decisive force in swinging a Super Bowl with a two-play sequence for the ages. If you are carving the Mt Rushmore of defensive players alone, it starts with Lawrence Taylor, Reggie White, and Donald. Feel free to argue over the fourth spot. What else is there left to achieve? Players race to be the No 1 overall pick As one season closes, another begins: Draft season! In a down year for quarterback prospects, the race to be the No 1 overall pick is wide open. Jacksonville could look at any number of options: selecting one of college football’s preeminent pass-rushers (Aidan Hutchinson, Michigan; Kayvon Thibodeaux, Oregon), adding an offensive lineman (Evan Neal, Alabama; Ikem Ekwonu, NC State; Charles Cross, Mississippi State), or trading the pick for extra assets. There is no sure-fire top prospect. It’s a pick-your-flavor year. If the Jags do not fall in love with one of the top edge-rushers or linemen, then they will auction the pick to the highest bidder. The question is whether or not anyone else loves one of the iffy quarterback prospects enough to pay the price required to leap all the way to the top of the draft. Ownership scandals Nestled within the Super Bowl extravaganza was a report of mounting consequence: The league is investigating Miami Dolphins owner Stephen Ross after former head coach Brian Flores alleged in a lawsuit that Ross had offered him $100,000 a game to lose. If the NFL finds conclusive evidence that Ross did indeed offer Flores money to throw games, it’s expected that the other owners will force Ross to sell his team. Ross has denied the allegations and his defense is expected to be that he was joking. You know the classic joke, right? The one about a multibillionaire owner who offered his employee $100,000 a game to throw them. Speaking of incompetence and arrogance, over in the capital Daniel Snyder, the owner of the freshly-titled Washington Commanders, could finally be on his way out, too. The league has spent the better part of two years trying to shadow box allegations that Snyder presided over a corrosive workplace culture, one of sexual harassment, sexual abuse, and other forms of workplace misconduct; an investigation that Snyder did his utmost to block and manipulate. The league commissioned an ‘independent’ report on the allegations. The number of pages released from Robert Mueller’s report into Deflategate: 243. The number of pages released following the investigation into the Ray Rice scandal: 96. The number of pages of the Wilkinson report into Washington and Snyder: Zero. Zilch. Nada. Still: The recommendations from the report led to Snyder handing off day-to-day operation of the team to his wife and the team to pay a $10m fine. New allegations in front of a congressional hearing have forced the league back into action. Initially, Snyder announced that he had launched a further investigation into himself. Roger Goodell and the league’s owners called Snyder’s bluff, squashing Snyder’s investigation and firing up another investigation of their own. The league’s rumor mill has long believed that Snyder – the NFL’s great embarrassment in a crucial market – will, at some point, be ousted by the league’s other owners. But Snyder is infamously litigious and has deep enough pockets (and enough of a motive) to tie the league and its owners up in litigation for years, with the potential of embarrassing the league and its owners publicly. Now, however, with the government involvement, the league may be able to force Snyder to sell. After years of stability in the ownership ranks, the Dolphins, Commanders, and Broncos could all change hands over the course of the next six months.The Mars weather is beautiful today, and an astronaut is about to suffocate to death under the cloudless blue sky. The trouble starts after three crew members leave the safety of the Hab, their pressurized six-person living station, and venture outside to do some routine work. They trudge along in 35lb spacesuits, breathing air pumped by fan and watching the jagged red landscape through their fishbowl-like glass helmets. As they head back to the station, one astronaut, Aga Pokrywka, begins acting strangely. Her movements are sluggish. She stops walking. The radio crackles. “Aga, are you all right?” the crew’s commander, Sionade Robinson, asks. The Hab is only a few dozen yards away, but Pokrywka can’t seem to go further. She collapses on to the red clay. Robert Turner, the crew’s medical officer, radios the Hab: “Astronaut down, astronaut down!” The three crew members inside begin emergency protocols. Two don spacesuits, grab a stretcher and enter the airlock. They must wait five painstaking minutes for the air pressure to adjust. If they don’t, they may be torn apart when they step into Mars’s thin atmosphere. After the agonizing wait ends, the rescue party rushes to Pokrywka and rolls her on to the stretcher. They run toward the Hab, maneuver her body into the cramped airlock, and begin the countdown all over again. A crew member inside, Kay Sandor, holds a timer against the airlock window: “Five … four … three … two …” They get Pokrywka inside and on to the ground and remove her helmet. After a while, she starts to revive. “Patient stabilized,” someone says. Everyone relaxes. After a beat, Pokrywka asks: “Did I win my Oscar?” ••• It is hard to imagine that anyone would volunteer to live with five semi-strangers in a tin can in the desert. Yet hundreds of people from around the world apply for the chance to come to the remote wilderness of south-east Utah and pretend to colonize Mars. Crews at the Mars Desert Research Station (MDRS) conduct research to understand what humans may face when visiting or settling the red planet. And, in a sense, the crew members are the research. For two or three weeks, they live like Martians. They wake each morning in bedrooms slightly larger than coffins. They gather in a small common area to eat breakfast – usually a surprisingly edible meal made with dehydrated food, bacteria cultures and harvested greenhouse plants – and watch the sunrise through portholes. Each crew member is allotted one 90-second shower every three days. Operated by the non-profit Mars Society, the MDRS is an analog space station. The crews there have no communication with the outside world except for a brief window every 24 hours when off-site personnel simulating ground control make contact. No one is allowed to go outside without donning a spacesuit, or before going through airlock procedures. The station is surrounded by one of the most stunning landscapes on Earth, but crew members are allowed to interact with it only while confined, in effect, in a diving bell. Knowing all this, I headed to the MDRS expecting my hosts, the members of Crew 238, to resemble the cast of The Thing, the clammy 1982 sci-fi film about an Antarctic research station riven by paranoia, at the phase shortly before the flamethrowers come out. On the way to Mars, I stopped to gas up in Hanksville, Utah, a tiny roadside hamlet whose main attraction is a convenience store built, missile-silo-style, into the side of a mountain. Due to an epidemic of sign theft, the miles-long dirt road to get to the station, Cow Dung Road, is unmarked. This may be for the best, as the station has an occasional trespassing problem – tourists, sometimes bearing drones, show up uninvited and disrupt the simulation. (The Mars Society asked me to remind readers that the station is a private research facility and closed to the public.) Arriving at the MDRS is a slightly surreal experience: the small white compound, framed by windswept desert devoid of a single tree or shrub, really does look like a settlement on an alien planet. When I knocked cautiously on the airlock door, I heard a flurry of pleasant, multinational voices – a German accent followed by a British one, and then by an unflappable southern American drawl straight from The Right Stuff or Apollo 13. My astronaut hosts turned out to be an affable group: earnest, collegial and not visibly suffering from the kind of nervous breakdown that one might expect of a group of six sharing a single, bucket-powered dry toilet. After a week “in sim”, they were eager for a visitor and pressed me for news from outside. “In my daily life I produce – ironically, perhaps – Big Brother,” PJ Marcellino, the executive officer and crew journalist, said. “So I guess observing people gave me this weird foray into small-team dynamics.” In addition to working as a protocol producer on the reality TV show, Marcellino is a political scientist by training, a documentarian and an amateur writer of speculative fiction. Ranging in age from 37 to 74, the other crew members had similarly eclectic career backgrounds – art, nursing, engineering and as a business professor. None have held space-related day jobs, though Turner, a paramedic from Tennessee, has attended Nasa launches as an observer. The Mars Society reviewed their individual research applications and matched them as a crew. Crew 238 started planning their mission more than two years ago, but only met in person when they arrived. Touring the MDRS doesn’t take long. The Hab is deliberately cramped, to replicate the size of living quarters that could conceivably be delivered to Mars by rocket, and the rest of the facility is similarly utilitarian. Covered walkways connect the Hab to several outbuildings – a greenhouse, a telescope, a lab and a mechanic room fashioned from the belly of a decommissioned Chinook helicopter. The facility has a small fleet of electric dune buggies. An array of solar panels provides much of the MDRS’s energy, which, like water, is strictly rationed. The only neighbors are the program’s on-site director, who lives in a trailer nearby, and a desert rat occasionally seen scavenging. Over lunch – lentil soup, Verdean chili, homemade bread and an apple crumble made from dried food – the crew members talked about what attracted them to space. One common denominator: science fiction. Two members of the crew were born behind the iron curtain – Pokrywka in Poland and Simon Werner, the crew engineer, in East Germany – and Marcellino was raised by leftwing parents in Portugal after the fall of the rightwing regime. Where North American sci-fi novels tend to emphasize individuality and the importance of technological innovation, they said, the Soviet sci-fi they grew up reading was more interested in the political and social aspects of future life. Everyone disputed the perception of space travel as an expensive boondoggle. “We spend billions on our militaries – on fighting each other,” Werner said; by comparison, he argued, space exploration was a drop in the bucket and one that could very well be crucial to humanity’s survival. Marcellino rejected the idea that there is a dichotomy between space travel and solving needs here on Earth. High-efficiency fuel, he said, was an example of a space technology that could be vital to alleviating the Earth’s climate crisis. Werner and Marcellino also defended private space programs such as SpaceX, arguing that the interest that tech billionaires have taken in space exploration was a mostly positive development. (Elon Musk has contributed money to the Mars Society, which is funded by a mixture of membership dues, individual donations, grants and crowdfunding campaigns. MDRS crews are also charged a fee to help cover the cost of the program.) Public space programs “have as a rule struggled with financing”, Marcellino said. “It’s hard for politicians to justify the funding.” Only tech billionaires such as Musk and Jeff Bezos can afford to test rockets over and over, he said, and they are willing to do it at their own expense. The crew members all told me that they did not expect to participate in a staffed mission to Mars and were just trying to lay some groundwork for whoever does. “I think we need to equip ourselves for the fact that we may not live to see the results of the things we’re working on,” Pokrywka said. ••• The Mars Society has its origins in frustration. In the early 1990s, an American aeronautics engineer and inventor, Robert Zubrin, became convinced that direct exploration of Mars was not only possible but decades overdue. “I was 17 when we landed on the moon, and if anyone had told me then that I’d be 61 and we’d have not landed on Mars – or even that people were not going to the moon any more – I would have thought they were nuts,” Zubrin told Business Insider in 2013. “We were on the brink of opening up space, and we just stopped.” Zubrin has prosecuted his argument in a series of emphatic books – The Case for Space, Entering Space, The Case for Mars, How to Live on Mars – that sketch what a mission to Mars might look like, rebut common political and technological criticisms, and make a philosophical case for space exploration. In 1998, Zubrin and others founded the Mars Society, which has no affiliation with Nasa. “The Mars Society view has always been that there is nothing preventing a human mission” within a decade, a representative told me. “That was the case 10 years ago and it’s the case today.” Based on current technological trends, any journey to Mars would probably take six to nine months. Including the roundtrip voyage, even a short stay on Mars would require a group of human beings ready to spend a long time frighteningly far from home. One dilemma, Robinson told me, is that the kinds of personalities that would be most attracted to a Mars mission – people who are novelty-seeking, thrill-seeking, extremely accepting of risk – are also those who would be most restless during the day-to-day reality. Marcellino added: “I think there’s been an evolution of personality types from extreme type-A people who like to break records” – think Chuck Yeager – “to people with the social and cooperative skills to endure a nine-month space voyage.” Hence the importance of analog space stations. The Mars Society also maintains a base in the Canadian Arctic, though the one in Utah sees more use, for practical and cost reasons. Nasa and other groups have tried similar projects on a Hawaiian volcano and in a cave in Spain. Much of what we know about long-term isolation comes from personnel stationed on submarines or in remote outposts in the Arctic or Antarctic. Space advocates believe that such case studies have limited application. Those sailors “were bored”, Zubrin told Business Insider, regarding US navy personnel stationed in Antarctica. “They didn’t want to be there. They wanted to be in San Diego where they can go out on the pier on Friday night and pick up girls.” By contrast, he argued, scientists and engineers who volunteered for long-term space missions would be highly motivated. Overwork, not boredom, would be a greater risk. The crew members I met at the MDRS seemed to partly bear out that observation; they worked hours each day and told me they were anxious about not finishing their research before leaving. Either way, however, there’s a huge difference between a few weeks in small-group isolation and, say, two years. A study completed in 2013 – which confined six men at a facility in Russia, under simulated Mars conditions, for 520 days – found that the men became lethargic and seemed to be tired even as they slept more. In 1991, members of an experimental theater troupe undertook an audacious project to create a completely self-sustained ecosystem. At the Biosphere 2 facility in Arizona, a mixed-gender group of eight volunteers were enclosed in a giant terrarium, with water, plants and animals, for two years. Tensions ran high; food, and eventually oxygen, ran low. The mission was only completed with the aid of emergency supplies smuggled in. In 1994 a second group tried, but were forced to end their mission early because of a power struggle in the Biosphere’s ownership. Astronauts to Mars will live with the danger of fires, meteor impacts, radiation poisoning and solar storms. Air will need to be expertly managed to avoid astronauts choking on the carbon dioxide in their own breath, and months of low gravity will weaken them before they even arrive. Depending on the relative positions of the two planets, communications between Mars and Earth will take as long as 20 minutes. “Think of how stressful Zoom delays are,” Marcellino said. “Your brain starts to fry. Extrapolate that to four to 20 minutes, perhaps in an emergency situation.” If an emergency strikes on Mars, help or extra supplies will take months to arrive. Humans there will need to prioritize collective survival above all else, a principle that the MDRS emphasizes in emergency simulations. In a common scenario, some astronauts are contaminated by radiation while outside the station; their comrades inside have to decide whether to let them in. During one such simulation, a contaminated woman pleaded to be let inside, but another crew member – who was also her actual husband – voted to let her die, arguing that it was necessary to protect the rest of the crew. The simulation supervisor praised the husband’s choice. (No word on whether the marriage survived.) And even the most rigorous training can’t always prevent human error or mechanical failure. During Crew 238’s simulated emergency, Pokrywka, who was designated to play possum, was “saved”, but afterward Turner admitted that his suit kept malfunctioning during the rescue operation. “I think I died,” he said, casually. “My airflow collapsed.”Russia’s claim to be withdrawing troops from the border with Ukraine seems to be a “disinformation campaign” and the troops are instead making their final preparations to invade, a UK defence minister has said. James Heappey, the armed forces minister, said Moscow was continuing to deploy thousands more soldiers to the region and building bridges across rivers that could be used as part of a military incursion into Ukraine. Despite brief hopes of a respite in tensions after Vladimir Putin’s announcement on Tuesday that there would be a “partial” drawdown of forces, some Nato countries remained sceptical about how many of the roughly 130,000 troops had really been withdrawn. There have been suggestions that the Kremlin has deployed a further 7,000 soldiers to the border, and Heappey said: “Worryingly what we’ve seen over the last 48 hours is not the reversal that has been announced in Moscow.” He said he still hoped Russia was committing a “hugely expensive exercise” that would end up being a hoax to “wind us up”, but he admitted: “We’re on the threshold of a major war in Europe in which tens of thousands of people could die”. Heappey told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I fear that it is a disinformation campaign when we are seeing apparent footage of Russian troops moving away from the border. Because all of our indicators suggest that the buildup and the preparations continue.” He said that equally as challenging as an immediate invasion would be Putin’s decision to “leave this military mass in place indefinitely”, given the impact it would have on Ukraine’s internal security, political system and economy. Earlier, Heappey told Times Radio that having seen “open source intelligence”, key “combat enablers” being moved by Russia to the Ukrainian border was one of a number of indications to “suggest the final preparations are being made for them to invade”. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, will embark on another tour of European countries this week, visiting Ukraine, Poland and Germany in an effort to present a united front among western states to dissuade Russia from invading. A senior US official said late on Wednesday that Russia’s claims about withdrawing troops were false and that Moscow had “increased its troop presence along the Ukrainian border by as many as 7,000 troops”, many of them arriving in the past 24 hours. “Every indication we have now is they mean only to publicly offer to talk and make claims about de-escalation while privately mobilising for war,” the official said. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said earlier on Wednesday that Russia was continuing to send troops to what is now the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war. Stoltenberg said the military alliance was considering deploying further battle groups in eastern and central Europe, to complement those established in 2014 in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, led by the UK, Canada, Germany and the US. The French government has offered to lead a force in Romania. “We will have advice from the military commanders within weeks and we will make a decision after that,” Stoltenberg said. “What we see today is that Russia maintains a massive invasion force ready to attack with high-end capabilities from Crimea to Belarus.” On Thursday he said Nato would prepare for “the new normal” of Russia showing “a disregard for the principles underpinning European security” and threatening force “in pursuit of its objectives”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova dismissed all claims of reinforcements and criticised Stoltenberg, who is to leave his Nato post at the end of September to become chief of the Norwegian central bank. Zakharova said: “Frankly, I can tell you the truth. We’re not interested in these statements made by Stoltenberg, who is either Nato secretary general or a banker, I haven’t figured out which yet. We’re no longer interested in them. He is not a person whose statements Moscow would consider serious arguments. He is a Nato has-been now.”Mikaela Shiffrin’s nightmarish Olympics spilled into Thursday when she was unable to complete the slalom leg of the women’s combined, the latest disappointment in a Beijing Games alpine skiing’s biggest winner would sooner forget. The 26-year-old American appeared on course for a redemptive medal on the last day of individual competition in Yanqing after clocking the fifth-best time in the morning’s downhill portion, 0.56sec behind the halfway leader, Christine Scheyer of Austria, and ahead of a gaggle of contenders that included Italy’s Federica Brignone (by 0.13sec) and the Swiss pair of Wendy Holdener (0.43) and Michelle Gisin (0.44). But Shiffrin, who has won more World Cup slalom races – 47 – than any male or female skier, was left fighting back tears on the side of the course after crashing out 10 gates into the afternoon slalom, ensuring she will depart Beijing with no individual medals after managing to complete two of her five races. “My plan, well, it was quite simple,” she said. “Just make the turns, try to be clean, fresh on the outside skis. Specifically, I wanted to be calm from the start and get into my tempo and just build it from there. I just wanted to get a full run of slalom. “I don’t know if there’s anybody who ever had so many opportunities to get a medal in the Olympic Games and failed so many times.” Gisin won the gold, following the 12th-fastest downhill with the fastest slalom for a combined time of 2min 25.67sec to retain her Olympic title. Holdener finished 1.05sec behind to claim the silver while Brignone took bronze, coming in 1.85sec off the pace. Shiffrin’s disqualifications for missing gates early in her opening runs of last Monday’s giant slalom and Wednesday’s slalom were unexpected enough. After all, the Colorado native had failed to finish a race twice in four years entering the Games and 13 times in 228 starts across all disciplines at World Cup, Olympic and world championship events. Her third failure to reach the bottom of the course at these Olympics matches her total number of DNFs over the previous four years. “I didn’t make it to the finish again and … 60% of my DNF rate for my entire career has happened at this Olympic Games,” said Shiffrin, whose three Olympic medals include gold in slalom in 2014 and in giant slalom in 2018. “I didn’t feel pressure there. There’s always pressure but I didn’t feel … I just felt loose and relaxed, like I knew my plan; focused, good skiing and I was doing it and it still didn’t work.” Shiffrin’s final chance to earn a medal will come in Saturday’stomorrow’s mixed team parallel slalom, an event that debuted in 2018, when she will join her Slovakian rival Petra Vlhova as the second woman to compete in six alpine events at a single Olympics. The only man or woman to win World Cup races in all six disciplines, Shiffrin’s 73 career wins on alpine skiing’s top circuit are third on the all-time leaderboard, trailing the Swedish great Ingemar Stenmark (86) and her longtime US teammate Lindsey Vonn (82). The American’s overflowing list of accolades, including three overall World Cup titles and three Olympic medals, has made her abrupt loss of form all the more stunning. But she has managed to handle the most difficult patch of her professional life with a remarkable self-awareness, candour and brutal honesty. Shiffrin, who described her opening races at these Olympics as a failure after a ninth-place finish in Friday’s women’s super-G, attempted to focus on the upside after Thursday’s latest setback. “I’ve had a lot of support over the last few weeks, I appreciate it so much,” she said. “And I’ve also had a bit of a crap storm of: ‘What went wrong, caved under the pressure, choked’, all this stuff, and there’s probably some truth to all of it. “It feels like there’s not a lot to learn, just try to keep focusing on good skiing. What’s the phrase, take it on the chin? If I can be the biggest joke of the Games, at least someone’s smiling.” • This article was amended on 17 February 2022 to reflect the right downhill timings of Federica Brignone, Wendy Holdener and Michelle GissinAirbus has announced its highest-ever profits and a return to paying a dividend to shareholders, in a sign of the aerospace industry’s burgeoning recovery from the Covid pandemic. The European plane-maker reported a record net income for 2021 of €4.2bn (£3.5bn), in stark contrast to a steep €1.1bn loss in 2020, when the pandemic first hit. The company, which is headquartered in Toulouse, France, made revenues of €52bn, up from €50bn in 2020. The aerospace industry was one of the worst affected by the pandemic as travel restrictions led to a slump in income for its airline customers. Orders for new planes were among the first things they cancelled. Airbus cut 15,000 jobs in June 2020, including at its UK factory in north Wales, which makes wings, in response to what its chief executive, Guillaume Faury, described as the industry’s “gravest crisis”. Its US rival Boeing cut 30,000, in part reflecting the global grounding of its previous bestseller, the 737 Max, after two fatal crashes. Faury hailed the company’s “remarkable” full-year results on Thursday and said its cost-cutting had paid off as he planned the first shareholder payout in two years. He also highlighted defence, space and helicopter businesses that proved more resilient during pandemic lockdowns. “2021 was a year of transition, where our attention shifted from navigating the pandemic towards recovery and growth,” he said. “The strong financials reflect the higher number of commercial aircraft deliveries, the good performance of our helicopters and defence and space businesses, as well as our efforts on cost containment and competitiveness.” Airbus delivered 611 aircraft during the year, ahead of its target of 600, driven mainly by 483 deliveries of its single-aisle A320, its rival to the Boeing 737. Boeing managed 340 during the year, although it delivered slightly more than Airbus in January 2022 as it looked to renew its previously close rivalry. Airbus said it expected to increase production during 2022 to 720 planes, in an outlook that “assumes no further disruptions to the world economy, air traffic” or internal setbacks. It did not raise its production target for the A320 above the 65 previously announced but said it was talking to its suppliers about raising the rate. Allegra Dawes, a senior analyst at Third Bridge investment group, said she expected Airbus to “dominate the crucial narrow body market in the coming years as the 737 Max trails Airbus’s offerings in both capability and orders”. She added: “Investors will be watching the progress Airbus has made towards achieving its ambitious targets for production ramp up over the coming years. The company has called on suppliers to prepare for a production rate of 70 A320 aircraft per month by 2024. It will be a significant challenge for a weakened supply chain.”We’re just under 18 months from the 2023 Women’s World Cup, and when the USWNT run out to play the Czech Republic in the SheBelieves Cup on Thursday the team will look very different from the one that has dominated for the last decade. This is a roster largely devoid of the stars who have won two World Cups and an Olympic title in the last 10 years. Marquee names from Megan Rapinoe and Alex Morgan to Tobin Heath, Julie Ertz, and Christen Press won’t feature against New Zealand, Iceland or the Czech Republic. Just seven players from the victorious 2019 Women’s World Cup roster and four of that starting 11 are in this 23-player camp. It’s a necessary change in a program moving away from its veteran stars just as the center of gravity in women’s soccer shifts toward Europe. Indeed, public interest and financial investment has accelerated across Europe. The belief that US domestic leagues and international tournaments like SheBelieves will feature top competition for the US no longer rings true. When it first started, the SheBelieves Cup attracted European giants like England, France and Germany to the United States. Now those teams are hosting their own tournaments on their side of the Atlantic – a tour of the US is perhaps no longer the ultimate test of an international team’s ability. That’s the same in club soccer. Players looking to hone their talent with the best clubs on earth may consider life in Lyon or Barcelona. Those looking to make top dollar (or euro) may want to look at France. Historically, Canadians and Australians sought development in the US. But in recent years they’ve departed in droves to try their hand in England. Looking at those changes, the inquisitive mind may wonder how dominant the USWNT really are. One way to answer that question is to consult the Guardian’s Top 100 Women’s Footballers for 2021. The United States maintains the highest number of players of any nation on the list. You’ll need to dig past the top 50 to find most of them, though. Only three come earlier than that and the first of them (Sam Mewis) comes in at No 20. In contrast, five of the top 10 come from Spain alone. In a testament to Barcelona’s program, all of them play at Camp Nou. The Guardian’s rankings are subjective of course, but they illustrate the fact that, while the USWNT have strength in depth, they no longer have the very best players in the world. And many of the USWNT’s most prominent players – such as Rapinoe, Press, Morgan and Heath – are in their 30s. That’s where Vlatko Andonovski’s SheBelieves roster comes in. Equipped with a roster full of fresh talent – most of them with fewer than 50 caps – Andonovski says this tournament is the continuation of a trial in which players can make their case for their place in the team. It’s a trial he began in November with two friendlies in Australia. A very similar roster performed well there with standout performances from Ashley Hatch, Sophia Smith, Catarina Macario and Mallory Pugh. Andonovski called upon those names in particular (with Pugh the only one of that group with more than 15 caps), suggesting we’ll see them play a more important role going forward. The veterans left off the roster are not banished for good, though. Some, like Mewis and Lindsey Horan, are out due to injury. Crystal Dunn is expecting a child in May. Press took time away from the game to focus on her mental health. Others, though, are out due to their form. For this group Andonovski is making a point. No player – no matter their past achievements – is guaranteed a spot on the team. “They need to perform, they need to play in their markets, they need to play well in their markets, and show that they can still contribute and be valuable for the national team,” Andonovski said. Julie Ertz is navigating the long journey back to form after recovering from yet another knee injury. Andonovski referenced Ertz’s situation a few times, saying her focus needs to be at the club level first. “We all know how good she can be when she is fit,” he said. Heath is fulfilling a childhood dream trying her hand at Arsenal. She has shown flashes of her ability but is not in top form. Rapinoe, meanwhile, ranked third in the NWSL for average goals per 90 minutes in 2021, and scored key goals for the USWNT at the Olympics. But she has shown signs of slowing down with the national team. Rapinoe will turn 37 in July and if she travels to Australia for the 2023 World Cup, it may be in a leadership role, passing the torch while playing a less central role on the pitch. Rapinoe’s long-time USWNT teammate Morgan has not performed to her abilities since the 2019 World Cup. After giving birth in 2020, she embarked on a short-lived career at Tottenham Hotspur before heading back to the NWSL. While showing moments of brilliance and notching four goals for Orlando, she is far from her best. Asked about Morgan, Rapinoe, Press and Heath in particular, Andonovski told the media: “There’s a reason Mia Hamm is not in camp. We’re not calling Mia Hamm and Julie Foudy in camp.” The USWNT, then, are in an era of transition. But Andonovski is a savvy leader who understands the need to evolve. He spoke enthusiastically of a new collective bargaining agreement for NWSL that frees national team players to pursue contracts abroad. He was effusive in his support of players like Macario and Horan seeking challenges abroad in Lyon. And importantly, he’s shown an understanding for the importance of developing the future roster while holding star players accountable. The old guard may not be done quite yet, but we can look forward to a lot more of the likes of Macario, Smith, Hatch and Pugh.A convergence of dangerous weather conditions, exacerbated by the climate crisis, has set the stage for southern California to see an increase in catastrophic wildfires over the coming decades, according to a new study. Southern California, home to 23 million people, has largely been spared the kind of extreme fire escalation experienced in the northern part of the state, but models drawn up by researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles, have predicted that will change. Wildfires in southern California are often driven by dry winds, low humidity and high temperatures, and the climate crisis is creating the perfect conditions for them to burn hotter, faster and more frequently. Analyzing data from 49 climate stations scattered across the southern coast from Santa Barbara to San Diego, the UCLA study found that the region could see double the number of what scientists call “large fire days” by 2100 if greenhouse gas emissions are not curbed. Even in a more moderate scenario, where heating is slowed, the researchers’ models showed a 60% increase in high-risk days compared with the late 20th century. “Things are going to get worse,” Glen MacDonald, a professor of geography at UCLA and the lead author of the study, said. The researchers analyzed a series of variables that can increase fire risks and found certain climatic characteristics – especially how dry the air is – usually determine when the biggest blazes erupt. “From that we found that you could sort of predict when you were going to have your large fire probability in southern California,” MacDonald said. After determining the patterns most associated with wildfires, they modeled how those patterns might change in the decades ahead. They found that not only will days get drier, but those days will start to show up earlier in the spring and stick around later into the autumn, thus “extending the probability to a greater part of the year”, he added. They found these high-risk days would probably increase from the 36 days a year documented from the 1970s to the late 1990s, to 71 days a year by 2070. These conditions won’t just produce more fires – they will also affect fire behavior, making them more destructive and harder to contain. Southern California’s landscapes, which are dominated by grassland and shrubland rather than large forests, burn and recover differently from their northern neighbors. Decades of poor land management and tamping down on Indigenous practices of prescribed burnings has also left northern California’s forests overcrowded and primed for bad burns – an issue that’s less prevalent in the south. That’s partly why, MacDonald says, the regions have had such different experiences with wildfire. “It’s not like climatologically we have been dodging the bullet – but we just haven’t seen the same impact that we see in the more remote regions of northern California and the Sierra Nevada in those forested systems.” That doesn’t mean the rest of the state will be spared. A separate study released last year, led by researchers at University of California, Irvine, looked at the temperatures in the Sierra Nevada range during 450 fires that ignited there between 2001 and 2020. Their analysis shows that, as warming gets worse and temperatures continue to spike, fires in Sierra Nevada could increase by 20% or more over the next 20 years. The amount of land burned will increase even more sharply, rising by 25% by the 2040s. “Wildfires are really sensitive to small changes in temperatures,” says Aurora Gutierrez, a project specialist in UCI’s department of earth system science and lead author of the Sierra Nevada study. The researchers found that for every 1C (1.8F) rise in temperature, fire risk increases by up to 22%. Over the next two decades the region is expecting temperatures to increase by 2C (3.6F). “When it’s hot for a long time it leads to these megafires that are resistant to fire suppression practices,” Gutierrez says. “In extreme conditions like this, whatever is going to burn is going to burn – and you can’t really do much to stop it.” Fires are already exhibiting more extreme behavior, adding new challenges to containment efforts. One new phenomenon, documented in a study published on Wednesday and led by MacDonald’s colleagues at UCLA, is blazes are more likely to burn through the night. The study found that, globally, night fires have grown 7.2% in intensity over the last two decades thanks to hot, dry conditions that persist after sunset, closing what was once an essential window to tame the flames. While MacDonald sees these results as a clear call for immediate action to reduce emissions, he emphasized that the models show predictions, not guarantees. There are still ways to avoid a future with even more catastrophic wildfires. “What we are seeing with the climate system is we are loading the dice,” MacDonald says. “It’s a roll of the dice but we are loading them with more and more days where you have this high probability of a fire and that spark has a greater opportunity to occur when it’s really going to cause damage.”People who cook for a living are paid to make things you and I won’t – or feel we can’t – make at home. Their aim is to retain your custom. It follows that their recipes or tips often feel a little out of reach. It is aspirational fare. They’re still trying to knock your socks off. It is when you ask a chef what they cook for themselves after a late-night shift, or what they shove on their shelves for their toddler’s midweek tea, that you get the good stuff: the deeply relatable, the always useful, the budget-friendly. Here, then, are recommendations from cooks, chefs and foodies around the country for affordable store-cupboard staples and kitchen basics. From condiments and snacks to tipples, dry goods and spices, these lower-budget wonders taste as good as their better-known or more glamorous counterparts. Some – the wine, the pasta, the chocolate spread – have been subject to blind tastings, with no discernible differences detected. In times of stretch and squeeze, that makes these comfort supplies, in every sense of the word. It’s also a prompt to get taste-testing yourself. Brands capitalise on packaging and blurbs, so more bounty is definitely lurking in blandly marketed basics ranges. And given that, as Jack Monroe has pointed out, supermarkets are surreptitiously retiring those ranges, even as inflation and supply-chain woes hit people’s pockets in terrible ways, driving up demand for them is practically a political stance. Making sure store-cupboard staples, and nice things too, remain affordable is a necessity. José Pizarro, TV chef and restaurant owner Sainsbury’s Chickpeas, 500g, £1.20 “Always buy supermarket own-brand packets of dried pulses rather than brands. It’s the same with frozen peas (Tesco Petits Pois, 1kg, £1.40) or broad beans (Asda Freshly Frozen Broad Beans, 750g, £1.75) – go for supermarkets’ own over, say, Birds Eye.” Itamar Srulovich and Sarit Packer, chefs and cookbook authors, Honey &amp; Co Nixe Sardines in Sunflower Oil, 125g, 49p, Lidl “We don’t buy in a lot of branded food, but when we do we are particular. Mustard has to be Colman’s, Worcestershire sauce is only Lea &amp; Perrins, hot sauce is Tabasco and mayo is homemade or Hellmann’s. But we do love going to the big Lidl across the road, where everything is off-brand, and going on culinary adventures with crisps in a tube called Tingles and preserved fish from the continent. These sardines are perfect on brown buttered toast with thinly sliced onion, and a glass of chilled chenin blanc on the side.” Winemaker’s Selection Fairtrade Paarl Chenin Blanc, 750ml, £5.49, Lidl “Most fun at Lidl is the wine. They have nothing you have heard of, almost nothing over £10 and you rarely find the same thing twice so it’s completely pot luck, which adds to the adventure. We have had some really delicious bottles. The trick is to avoid anything with a vaguely familiar sound and go off-piste – unknown regions, new world, lesser-known grapes – so yes! to Moldovan riesling or South African chenin blanc. We have been pleasantly surprised more often than not, and when we weren’t, it was only a fiver … perfect weekday fun.” Jacob Kenedy, owner and executive chef, Plaquemine Lock, London Beefeater London Dry Gin, 700ml, £16 “This rather than Bombay Sapphire or Hendrick’s: delicious, straight to the point, no fuss and a better drink. It’s great in a negroni.” Jacob’s Cream Crackers, 300g, £1.30 “These, and Carr’s water biscuits, over other, more premium crackers every time.” Ben Ebbrell, chef, cookbook author and co-founder of Sorted Food online community Quixo Chicken Stock 12 Cubes, 120g, 35p, Aldi “There is a huge price difference between using basic supermarket stock cubes and fresh stock. We used the Aldi stock cubes at 6p a litre, for example, compared with a fresh pouch from Borough Broth Co at about £15 a litre. In terms of taste I think the choice of stock cube makes very little difference, plus you can keep them in the cupboard and have them to hand whenever you need them. However, it’s important to remember the fresh stock does have a place when it’s much more the focus – for instance, in a broth-based soup – and has more nutritional benefits, despite being less convenient.” Sainsbury’s House Dry White, 2.25 litres, £13 “Some people like to say you should only cook with wine worthy of drinking, but I disagree. I think it can be hard to tell once it is in a dish. We recently cooked a velouté using this wine box and another using a £25 bottle (UVC Chablis Premier Cru, 75cl), and our team struggled to tell the difference when blindfolded. However, if you are opening a bottle of wine to cook with and are going to be left with the rest to drink, I would personally use something more expensive so I can enjoy drinking what is left.” Sainsbury’s Spaghetti, 500g, 70p “I don’t think you can go wrong with using supermarket spaghetti in most dishes, and it saves a lot of money. All spaghettis have the same basic ingredient: durum wheat. It is generally how the pasta is cut that makes the difference in price and changes its texture – something that is not usually important for midweek pasta dishes.” Jeremy Lee, chef and cookbook author Sainsbury’s Pecorino Romano, 170g, £2.55 “There is always a wariness when veering off the familiar path of tried, tested and trusted ingredients. That said, cooks are curious and forever on the lookout for other things, such as a bumper bag of peppercorns for cooking, so as to keep more costly, fragrant peppercorns for grinding over a finished dish. Choosing a pecorino over a costly piece of parmesan aids the pocket too. I use it for all recipes that might call for parmesan, either thinly flaked or grated fine. Or cut in shards to eat at the end of lunch or dinner, or a lovely elevenses. There are myriad pecorino cheeses, so tasting is vital and a splendid adventure.” Gary Lee, head chef, Joe Allen, London Waitrose Extra Virgin Olive Oil, 1 litre, £5 “I use this as opposed to other, premium olive oil brands when cooking – it’s just as delicious but a lot cheaper. It’s the best way to start and finish pasta dishes.” Nick Wyborn, director of food, Incipio Sainsbury’s Wheat Biscuits, 860g, £2.75 “A cheap and cheerful version of Weetabix, these have a rustic texture but a great, wholesome flavour. At home, I reach for them as a breadcrumb replacement when in need of a crisp texture. I like to lightly crush them before dressing with a heaped tablespoon of gremolata (chopped parsley, lemon zest and garlic) and finely grated parmesan, or to form a golden crust on fillets of fish. Equally delicious for breakfast with milk and yoghurt.” Ximena Gayosso, head chef, Madera, London Asda Olive Oil, 1 litre, £3 “Rice and olive oil are an essential part of my daily diet. As much as I like to use them, sometimes prices on the market for olive oil are very high. I was happy to find this alternative. Delightful and delicate, it is of a very high quality.” Lidl Nero d’Avola Terre Siciliane, 750ml, £4.79 “My must-have when making anything spicy. Flavoursome and with a unique aftertaste, this red wine shows plum and red fruit flavours when young, with high tannins, medium acid and a strong body.” Denai Moore, singer-songwriter and host of Dee’s Table supperclub Moser Roth Sea Salt Dark Chocolate Bars, 5 x 25g, £1.49, Aldi “Aldi is the closest big supermarket to me and I really swear by this chocolate: so much cheaper than bigger brands, it strikes the perfect balance of salt to chocolate. I always keep some in the fridge and end my day with a couple of squares.” Al-Rabih Tahini, 454g, £2.69 “Tahini is an important pantry staple for me. I buy mine at my local Turkish shop. As opposed to bigger branded jars in supermarkets, it’s always fresher, smoother and more flavoursome. I love to add a drizzle on top of oats, with torn dates and seasonal fruit.” Miguel Barclay, cookbook author Natco Cumin Seeds (Jeera), 100g, £1.25 “Don’t buy those tiny glass jars (at Sainsbury’s, it is 22p per 10g). Instead, head to the ‘world food’ aisle in your local supermarket and grab an amazing-value sack.” Tesco Tortilla Chips, 200g, 76p “Not only are these cheaper than the branded version, they’re simply flavoured with just a pinch of salt, way more versatile and with none of those E numbers and strange synthetic powders.” Dan Lepard, baker, food writer and chef Belbake Cocoa Powder, 250g, £1.09, Lidl “Rich and dark, this has great intensity and a reddish colour, so is great for dusting on tiramisu or adding to a chocolate brownie with the flour to punch up the flavour. I make a jug of hot chocolate (milk thickened with a little cornflour and cocoa, sweetened with raw sugar) to keep in the fridge and microwave when I want something chocolatey at bedtime that isn’t too calorific, but comforting.” Jackson Berg, head chef, Barletta at Turner Contemporary, Margate Aldi Brioche Burger Buns, 89p for four “They deliver every time. Softer than cashmere and tastier than anything Paul Hollywood could make.” Anna Jones, cookbook author Mediterranean Direct Spanish White Beans, 580ml, £1.69 “I am a huge fan of jarred (as opposed to tinned) beans and chickpeas. I find them to be consistently more skilfully cooked and seasoned, and creamier too. The fancy branded Spanish ones can be expensive so I scour my local corner shops for Spanish or Turkish jars that are half the price.” Dunn’s River Coconut Milk, 400ml, £1 “I often use coconut milk in vegan desserts. I chill the cans, scoop off the creamy top, leaving the watery part behind, and whip the creamy bit to a pillowy fluff. I have found for this the more affordable Caribbean brands are best: they tend to have more stabilisers, which I usually try to steer clear of but for this particular use they are key.” Luís Gonzalez-Castro, Cuca supperclub Waitrose Essential Mayonnaise, 500ml, £1.10 “We use this in our arroz imperial (a classic Cuban dish of yellow rice, chicken, mayo and melted cheese). It’s made with superior oils and it’s just so much better than the mainstream favourite.” Sainsbury’s Tomato Ketchup, 680g, 90p “Heinz might be the best known, but it’s too sweet for me. I prefer more richly flavoured supermarket’s own-brand versions. Perfect as a key ingredient in our barbecue guava sauce.” Bacardi Carta Blanca Rum, 1 litre, £19.50 “Bacardi is a much better product than some of the posher and more expensive Havana Clubs. We use it for cocktails and desserts. The coconut rum is sublime.” Judy Joo, TV chef and founder of Seoul Bird, London The Foodie Market Smooth Peanut Butter, 280g, £1.15, Aldi “I like natural-tasting peanut butter and this one is made with 100% peanuts. It has just the right amount of sweetness and, importantly, it doesn’t use palm oil. It’s great value at less than half the price of Meridian, and pretty much just as good.” Nutoka Hazelnut Chocolate Spread, 400g, £1.09, Aldi “I honestly can’t tell the difference between this and Nutella. Smooth and packed with two of my favourite flavours (chocolate and hazelnut), it works amazingly with fruit and homemade pancakes. My guilty pleasure!”Alba: A Wildlife Adventure A little girl visits her grandparents on an idyllic Spanish island and spends a glorious summer rescuing wildlife. That’s pretty much all you need to know about this beautiful exploration game, designed to recall carefree childhood adventures and a treat to share with your own kids. Alto’s Odyssey Slide, flip and trick your way through a lush desert landscape in a worthy sequel to the excellent snowboarding game, Alto’s Adventure. The “endless runner” genre is extremely familiar to mobile game players, but this is such a lush, relaxing take that it deserves your attention. Crossy Road Castle A compelling and very funny spin-off from the Frogger-like Crossy Road series, this time challenging up to four players to make it through an endless series of castle environments avoiding deadly traps and enemies. Beautiful design and lots of fun with friends. Dandara: Trials of Fear + An engrossing 2D platformer in the “metroidvania” subgenre, Dandara works brilliantly on a smartphone, where its gravity-defying “point and move” traversal mechanic feels really at home. Fantasian Produced by members of the Final Fantasy team, this extraordinary mobile role-playing adventure presents a luscious world via a series of intricate handcrafted dioramas. With random battles, turn-based combat and a save-the-world story, it’s everything you want from a full-size adventure, in the palm of your hand. Grindstone An ingenious combination of tile-matching puzzle game and turn-based battle strategy sim, Grindstone challenges players to fight their way through ascending levels of a monster-filled castle, unlocking new gear and weapons as they go. Another brilliantly designed confection from Capybara Games, creator of Sword &amp; Sworcery and Super Time Force. Hidden Folks + A lovely monochrome hidden object game set in a series of busy towns that look like a quaintly European take on the Richard Scarry universe. Players need to track down specific people and objects in each location, opening doors, windows and tent flaps to reveal their targets’ hiding places. Each scene is filled with funny little interactive elements and the whole thing is bursting with character. The Last Campfire A gorgeous little freeform puzzle adventure from Hello Games, the creator of No Man’s Sky, The Last Campfire is set in an enchanted forest filled with lost souls who need to be guided to safety. The wide variety of puzzles, crammed with mazes, lifts and levers, give you plenty to mull over as you enjoy the gentle folkloric feel of the world. Mutazione A truly unique point-and-click adventure following Kai, a teenage girl who has to save the flora on a mutant-filled island, while sharing gossip with the monstrous inhabitants. The gentle pace and very mild peril give you the space and confidence to just wallow in the world and its little dramas. A wonder. The Oregon Trail The classic educational game of hardship and disease on the American frontier gets a clever and respectful update here. The aim is to guide a small group of adventurers across the wilderness to Oregon, avoiding starvation and disease en route. Careful planning and resource gathering are necessary, especially with the ever present threat of gaming’s ultimate end-of-level boss: dysentery. Sayonara Wild Hearts Imagine an interactive 1980s pop video filled with slick dance moves, cool motorcycle riders and neon-drenched cityscapes; that’s pretty much Sayonara Wild Hearts, a rhythmic music adventure offering astonishing, eye-popping sound and vision. Skate City Capturing the spirit of the classic Tony Hawks games, Skate City uses intuitive context-sensitive tricks, flips and jumps to make you feel like a skating superstar as you traverse the super stylised environments. SpellTower + One of the greatest word puzzle games ever made, SpellTower brilliantly places a familiar word discovery challenge within a Tetris-like play field, where letter tiles tumble each time you make a word. Careful planning, situational awareness and a decent vocabulary are the requirements for success – and many weeks of fun. What the Golf? This is golf, but not as your uncle in his Pringle jumper knows it. It’s more of a hilarious physics-based satire on the whole idea of spoiling a good walk, where your ball might become a car or a house or the course might turn into a football pitch or a kitchen. Perfectly ridiculous. Wurdweb Another great word game, this time a single-player variation on Scrabble, where players select words from a limited rota and then attempt to fit them on the board, ensuring they don’t build themselves into a corner. If you want a wider tactical alternative to Wordle, this is it.Consumer demand for travel insurance is returning to near pre-pandemic levels, according to the price-comparison site Moneysupermarket, but high energy prices mean it does not expect any profit from tariff switching this year. The financial services platform, which helps consumers compare deals, said revenue from its travel insurance comparisons had bounced back in the last three months of 2021. Revenues at its Travelsupermarket division reached 35% of 2019 levels in January, as further easing of coronavirus restrictions was announced. However, it said high wholesale energy prices meant there had been no switchable tariffs available to consumers since October. As a result, the London-listed company said it would not make any profit this year from customers using their platform to compare deals from energy providers, although it predicted the tariff-switching market would return in the medium term. Consumers may also face higher insurance premiums this year, according to Moneysupermarket, which said car insurance premiums were climbing, while there had been more significant rises in home insurance premiums. As a result, it said, more consumers had been searching to compare insurance prices. The company said insurance providers were still working out their strategy after the introduction of new insurance rules by the financial watchdog in January. The Financial Conduct Authority’s general insurance pricing regulations are part of efforts to tackle loyalty penalties, where policyholders who renew existing insurance policies are charged higher premiums than new customers. Moneysupermarket, known for its sometimes controversial advertising campaigns, reported a 7% fall in pre-tax profit in 2021 to £100.5m, down from £107.8m a year earlier, partly because of cost increases after acquisitions. The price comparison firm agreed a £101m deal in October to buy the cashback website Quidco, which pays a cash reward to consumers who use its site to click through to shop at specific online retailers. “The addition of cashback aligns well with our purpose of helping households save money and brings new opportunities,” said Peter Duffy, the chief executive of Moneysupermarket Group, which includes MoneySavingExpert.com.A swimmer killed in what was the first fatal shark attack off Sydney, Australia, in almost 60 years has been named locally as a British man. Friends said Simon Nellist, 35, who was engaged to be married, “loved the water” and was an experienced diving instructor. The British expatriate, who it is understood was living in the Wolli Creek area of Sydney, was reportedly training for a charity swim. New South Wales police said the search for his remains would continue at sunrise on Friday. It is believed to be the first fatal shark attack in Sydney since 1963. Della Ross, a friend of the victim, told the broadcaster 7News: “Everything that is connected to Simon, to me is connected to the ocean. The news hit us like a truck, because he really is one of the people that makes this Earth better.” Witnesses said Nellist was attacked from below at Little Bay. Emergency services were called at about 4.35pm local time on Wednesday. He is understood to have been training for the Malabar Magic Ocean Swim, due to take place on Sunday, which has now been cancelled “out of respect for the swimmer and his family”. One witness, Kris Linto, said the swimmer was in the water when the shark “came and attacked him vertically”. He told Nine News TV: “We heard a yell and then turned around. It looked like a car just landed in the water. Big splash.” The attack happened about 150 metres from the beach, which has now been sealed off. The local council shut a number of other beaches including Little Bay, Malabar, Maroubra, Coogee, Clovelly and La Perouse for 24 hours. “Our entire community is thinking of the family and friends of the victim today,” said the Randwick mayor, Dylan Parker. “This is a shocking tragedy that our area will feel for a long time.” Chris Pepin-Neff, a University of Sydney academic who focuses on policy responses to shark attacks, backed the authorities’ decision to close nearby beaches. “While killing individual sharks does not reduce the risk from shark bites, public education to stay out of the water when sharks are close to shore makes a difference,” he said.Catalan-language drama Alcarràs won the Golden Bear at the Berlin film festival as the headline awards were dominated by women. Two of the three best film prizes went to films from female directors, while both acting awards, which are gender-neutral, went to women, as did the best director award. Alcarràs, directed by Carla Simón, came away with the festival’s top prize: a drama set in the Catalan countryside, it follows the difficulties of a farming family after their landowner decides to replace their peach trees with solar panels. It is the second feature from Simon, after the well received Summer 1993, released in 2017. The third place jury prize went to acclaimed Mexican drama Robe of Gems, a debut feature from director Natalia López Gallardo, who previously worked as an editor on Carlos Reygadas’ Silent Light and Post Tenebras Lux. Separating them was South Korean director Hong Sang-soo, whose The Novelist’s Film took the second place grand jury prize. Berlin introduced gender-neutral acting awards in 2021 and, as previously, both went to women. Best lead performance was won byMeltem Kaptan for her portrayal of a mother who takes on the US justice system to get her son released from Guantánamo Bay in Rabiye Kurnaz Vs George W Bush, while best supporting performance went to Laura Basuki for her role in Indonesian drama Nana. Rabiye Kurnaz Vs George W Bush also took the best screenplay award for Laila Stieler, while veteran French film-maker Claire Denis won best director for Fire (Or Both Sides of the Blade), her new film, starring Juliette Binoche. While the 2021 festival was entirely virtual, 2022’s staged in-person events while abiding by local pandemic restrictions. The most significant casualty was Isabelle Huppert, who was unable to appear to collect her honorary Golden Bear lifetime achievement award after testing positive for coronavirus shortly before the scheduled presentation. Full list of awards Golden Bear for best film Alcarràs (dir: Carla Simón) Silver Bear grand jury prize The Novelist’s Film (dir: Hong Sang-soo) Silver Bear jury prize Robe of Gems (dir: Natalia López Gallardo) Silver Bear for best director Claire Denis for Fire (or Both Sides of the Blade) Silver Bear for best leading performance Meltem Kaptan (Rabiye Kurnaz Vs George W Bush) Silver Bear for best supporting performance Laura Basuki (Nana) Silver Bear for best screenplay Laila Stieler (Rabiye Kurnaz Vs George W Bush) Silver Bear for outstanding artistic contribution Rithy Panh and Sarit Mang (Everything Will Be OK) Special jury mention A Piece of Sky (dir: Michael Koch)A kaleidoscope of disco glitter balls? Check. Tony Manero in a gleaming white suit? Check. More Bee Gees hits than a 70s karaoke session? Check check check. All the iconic elements from the 1977 film are in place in Bill Kenwright’s big-hearted production, as well as a few extras: more songs, more dancing and a Bee Gees band performing live on stage. The only thing missing is a bit more grit and fiery passion in a show that’ll get you dancing, but never hits fever pitch. Oh, and there’s no John Travolta. Alas. Instead, Richard Winsor brings his own qualities to the role of Tony Manero, a brilliant dancer stuck working in a paint shop in 70s Brooklyn. Winsor’s Manero comes across as a thoroughly nice and painfully vulnerable young man. The scenes at home with Manero’s abusive father (Phillip Aiden) lend depth to a production that can feel stuck halfway between a hen night extravaganza and something much darker and more considered. Winsor also brings the precision of a professional – one who has danced lead roles for Matthew Bourne – to his performance. The disco numbers, choreographed with winking humour by Bill Deamer, suffer slightly for this professionalism. It all feels just a bit too tidy: dancing to admire rather than really lose yourself in. It’s the newly devised dance numbers, particularly between Winsor’s Manero and Olivia Fines’ Stephanie Mangano, that really impress. When Manero and Mangano practise together in the studio, there’s a flair to their dancing that feels liberating. And it’s only in Manero’s final scene, when Winsor is able to truly express himself with some yearning contemporary dance, that this Fever begins to burn. Saturday Night Fever is at Peacock theatre, London, until 26 March.Once again the task that lies before you is 15 vaguely topical and general knowledge questions, littered with repetitive in-jokes that long since stopped being entertaining. You will meet Ron from Sparks. You will meet Kate Bush. You will have several Doctor Who references to spot. And after the fuss everybody made about the Eiffel Tower question last time around, this week you will not have to measure anything in feet. There are no prizes, it is just for fun. Let us know how you get on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 43 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and he is too busy writing about the Winter Olympics to reply anyway.As the drug overdose crisis in the United States exploded during the coronavirus pandemic – killing an unprecedented 100,000 people in 12 months – Black and Indigenous Americans were increasingly likely to become the victims. Drug overdose rates in America surged by 31% in 2020, according to figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as the pandemic left many facing lockdowns, and economic and emotional strain. But researchers at the University of California Los Angeles have found that the death rate surged most dramatically among Black and Indigenous Americans, who saw a staggering increase of 49% and 43% respectively in just one year. While the data is not broken down by drug type, experts point toward one driving force: the explosion of synthetic opioids such as fentanyl, a highly potent drug that has flooded the US market and often ends up mixed into street drugs such as heroin, methamphetamines or cocaine. Researchers say the numbers highlight the shifting dynamics of who is most at risk from the opioid crisis, which has in recent decades been viewed as an epidemic of rural, white America. Between 2019 and 2020, the overdose death rate for Black and Indigenous Americans surpassed that of white Americans, who were already dying in unprecedented numbers. “We’re at a historically tragic moment,” said UCLA addiction researcher Joseph Friedman, who co-authored the study. “The increasing toxicity of the drug supply has disproportionately affected communities of color.” The tragedy has hit home for the Black community with several recent high-profile deaths, including the actor Michael K Williams and comedian Fuquan Johnson. Williams was found dead in his Brooklyn home in September from a mix of heroin, cocaine and fentanyl. Four men have since been charged in his death. Johnson, 42, died at a Venice Beach house party after reportedly ingesting cocaine contaminated by fentanyl. “He loved life and he was just starting to make his mark,” Pauline Johnson, Fuquan’s mother, told the Guardian, adding that her son would not have taken the drug if he knew it contained a dangerous synthetic. Friedman and the study’s co-author Dr Helena Hansen, a UCLA psychiatrist and anthropologist, warn in their report that drug overdoses are “increasingly becoming a racial justice issue”, one that has been exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic but stems from historic inequities, including high rates of incarceration, economic disenfranchisement and loss of community cohesion. Others point to a “perfect storm” created by a wave of super-potent synthetic drugs hitting the streets at a time users were feeling increased isolation and displacement because of the pandemic. These problems may have had bigger impacts in communities of color, which saw some of the worst health consequences from the coronavirus while shouldering some of the largest economic burdens. Overall, however, there are still “a lot of unknowns” about what exactly has driven the sudden rise, or whether it will continue, says Ricky Bluthenthal, an addiction researcher at University of Southern California who was not involved in the study. Part of the problem is that the pandemic has limited hands-on research, says Bluthenthal, who usually collects information from drug users in Los Angeles and San Francisco, but was unable to get out into the field in 2020. But Bluthenthal does point to the rise of fentanyl as a key element of the crisis. “What’s happening is fentanyl is replacing heroin in most of the nation’s largest drug markets,” said Bluthenthal. “As fentanyl has begun to replace heroin and become the only thing available, you have this increased mortality among African Americans.” Changing the narrative The UCLA study, which has not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal, analysed the most recent data from CDC on overdose trends. While the number of overdose deaths rose for all racial groups nationally between 2019 and 2020, the rate increased fastest for African Americans, the study found, growing by 49% compared with a growth of 26% for white people. Overall death rates were highest for Indigenous Americans – who lost 41.4 people per 100,000 in the population in 2020, an increase of 43% over 2019. Nationally, death rates for Hispanics were less than those of whites and Asian American deaths but were not assessed by the UCLA study. The 2020 national numbers represent a huge shift from a decade earlier when white Americans were twice as likely to die of drug overdoses. It also complicates a narrative that has often painted the last two decades of opioid deaths as a crisis of white despair. In 2010, at a time when doctors were flooding lower-income, white communities with prescription opioid pills, white Americans were twice as likely to die of overdoses as Black Americans, according to the study’s authors. Then the US cracked down on opioid prescribing practices, forcing many who were dependent on opioids to turn to street drugs such as heroin. This created larger markets around the country for illegal heroin, which was soon being adulterated and then replaced altogether by the cheaper-to-make and easier-to-transport synthetic drugs such as fentanyl, said Hansen. “It began in the north-east, but it’s now spanned into the west,” she explained. “The overdose death rates for all racial groups rose dramatically, but in 2020 Indigenous American and Black death rates crossed over to exceed white death rates.” Hansen and other drug addiction researchers who spoke with the Guardian challenged the narrative that drug overdoses are a white crisis – saying the discussion has become overly focused on “deaths of despair”, a theory that blames the increase in drug overdose in the early 2000s on the growing job losses and disenfranchisement in predominantly white, more rural areas. Hansen said this construct dismisses waves of overdoses in Black and brown communities that began decades earlier, when heroin was marketed toward economically disadvantaged communities starting in 1960s and continuing through the crack epidemic of the 1980s, which led to the “war on drugs” and mass incarceration. “When Black people died it was normalized,” said Hansen, who is working on a book on this topic. She believes that people who are economically disenfranchised are those most vulnerable to drug overdoses, no matter their race. “However, when it comes to poor Black and brown neighborhoods, this happened decades earlier and we didn’t call that ‘deaths of despair’,” she said. “We called that ‘crime’.” ‘Symptoms of continuing legacy of oppression’ The crisis facing Indigenous Americans has also been overlooked and misunderstood, said Melissa Walls, an indigenous addiction expert who is the director of the Great Lakes Hub for the Johns Hopkins Center for American Indian Health in Duluth Minnesota. Pharmaceutical companies agreed to a $590m settlement with Indigenous American tribes this month, over claims that the companies’ targeted sales of opioid pills, such as Oxycontin, fueled waves of addiction and overdose deaths that have hit Indigenous communities particularly hard. The data shows Indigenous Americans have had overdose death rates competing with those of whites since the rise of prescription opioids in the early 2000s – and have a 2020 rate well above those of other racial groups at 41 deaths per 100,000 people. But Walls said the roots of the crisis among tribal groups goes back much further to first contacts with Europeans that began the displacement of Indigenous people from their tribal lands, and left many Indigenous Americans disenfranchised. “This is just the teeny-tiny top of the iceberg of a lot of historical trauma and structural racism that goes back to how this country was founded and how Indigenous people have been treated since colonizers arrived,” Walls said. “These are just symptoms of a much bigger historical legacy of oppression that continues today.” Yet she worries that focus on the addiction problems further pathologizes Indigenous communities, when instead the emphasis should be on supporting tribes to rebuild their cultures. “These issues veil the reality of strength and brilliance in the indigenous communities,” said Walls, who has worked on creating programs to address addiction problems by using traditional Indigenous American healing methods. “Every single native community I have worked with shares one common answer to these issues and that is reclaiming our culture. Returning to our cultural teachings is going to be the ticket out of this mess.” Friedman said that recent incarceration is also a huge risk factor for overdoses – and one that disproportionately affects Black and Indigenous Americans “due to the over-policing and over-incarceration of Black and Indigenous communities”. Those who have just been released from jail are more prone to overdoses because their tolerance for drugs is low, while a lack of treatment services and social support increases the risk of relapsing. The fact that rising overdoses come amid a pandemic that has already disproportionately affected communities of color makes the study even more troubling, said Dr Daniel Ciccarone, a professor specializing in addiction medicine at the University of California San Francisco. “This is very unfortunate data,” said Ciccarone. “The historic magnitude of the drug crisis is tearing the fabric of our society,” he said. “It’s time for fundamental policy changes in how we treat and prevent drug use.”In an unremarkable brown building with 1970s interior decor, nestled between a gas station and a Moose Lodge, Kim Ulmer and two of his employees were making quick work of a steer. The animal was led through a chute into the room at US Beef Producers where it would spend the last few minutes of its life. Less than an hour later, stripped of its head, hide and innards as country music played, it would become two sides of beef. Ulmer and about a dozen other investors bought and reopened the shuttered meatpacking plant in Fort Pierre, South Dakota, in 2020. Upset that local cattle ranchers had to send animals hundreds of miles away to be slaughtered before being sent back to Fort Pierre-area stores and restaurants, they hoped to provide a local option. Nearly two years later, they’re still trying to get certified by the state, but have been held back by what they say are unreasonable requirements. At the moment they are only able to slaughter a handful of cows a week and are required to return the meat to the owner rather than sell it to retailers, which has made the facility’s future uncertain. Finding a viable situation is not easy, with thousands of cattle ranchers and independent slaughterhouses across the United States stuck in a beef-production system dominated by four huge companies. “If I had an account with [local grocery chain] Lynn’s Dakotamart for six a week, I could kill six a week,” Ulmer said as he tried to scrub beef blood from his pants at the plant just across the Missouri River from Pierre, the state capital. “But you can’t kill without a destination.” The conglomerates – JBS, Cargill, Tyson Foods and National Beef Packing – control about 85% of the beef industry’s processing capacity. That imbalance, experts say, has made it more difficult for ranchers to get a fair price for their cattle and for independent processors to stay in business, even though meat prices have risen sharply during the pandemic. At the consumer end of the chain, beef and veal have gone up 16% in the last year, according to the latest figures from the Department of Labor, while food prices overall have gone up 7%. Joe Biden has announced a focus on righting the lopsided industry. In January he pledged $1bn to expand meat and poultry processing with the aim of helping independent processors like Ulmer compete with the big four companies, as well as expanding choice and lowering prices for consumers. It’s part of a wider move by Biden to blame some corporations for high prices as the president faces inflation at its highest level in 40 years. And after decades of failed attempts to better regulate competition in the meat industry, Congress has recently tried to make progress. A bipartisan bill introduced last year by Chuck Grassley, a Republican senator from Iowa, would require meatpackers to buy a certain amount of livestock from independent ranchers, and a second bipartisan bill would create a special office to investigate anticompetitive activities. “You have these big packers lobbying hard against the independent producer,” Grassley said. “They’re screwing the consumer. They’re screwing the cattle producers.” Representatives of JBS and National Beef Packing did not respond to interview requests. Cargill and Tyson representatives declined to answer questions. As the Biden policy to boost independent meat processors was unveiled, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, tweeted a graphic that compared wholesale beef prices and cattle values. Industry analysts have broadly welcomed the Biden administration’s move, though there is disagreement about how much, and how quickly, it is likely to affect prices for consumers and ranchers, and whether it can amount to any meaningful reduction of consolidation without bolder antitrust moves. It is, however, a positive sign for Ulmer and smaller-scale meatpackers hoping to expand in a system that has arguably not been working very well for anyone except the giant firms. How a cow becomes a burger It can be difficult to follow how a steer becomes a hamburger and consolidation within the meat industry has made that process even more opaque. Essentially, a cattle ranch that doesn’t raise animals itself sells young cattle to a feedlot, where they are fed until they’re ready for slaughter. A processor, or slaughterhouse, buys the animals, kills them and turns them into steaks, hamburgers and other cuts of meat. The meat is then sold to grocery stores, restaurants, schools, prisons and other institutions to feed to consumers. The problem with consolidation of meat processors is that large swaths of the country have no slaughterhouses left, meaning live cows must be trucked hundreds of miles to a plant and then the meat trucked hundreds of miles back to that same town. Farmers and independent slaughterhouses say it’s difficult to wedge their way into the process, which they claim is riddled with secret contracts that make it impossible to figure out the real price of beef. Retail beef prices spiked early in the pandemic as meatpacking plants were beset by coronavirus infections, with ground chuck soaring to $5.33 (£3.92) a pound in June 2020 compared to $3.95 (£2.91) the previous June, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The price has since declined to $4.77 (£3.51). Farmers receive about 39% of the retail price of the cattle they raise, said USDA economist William Hahn, noting that figure fluctuates higher and lower over time. Federal regulators and Congress need to recognize that significant portions of livestock-related laws were written in the 1800s and need updating, said Thomas Tomich, a professor of sustainability science and policy at the University of California at Davis who co-authored a 2021 paper on the effects of industry consolidation on California ranchers and processors. The pandemic, which crippled supply as demand for meat spiked, helped focus attention on the effects of consolidation, he said. “It’s great to see the federal government give attention to this in a way we haven’t seen maybe in my lifetime,” Tomich said. “The pandemic is a terrible thing, but the silver lining is that it has revealed some things in our food system that have been developing for decades.” For smaller-scale ranchers like Molly Watkins, who owns a farm in Linden, California, the loss of local slaughterhouses means she and her husband must drive farther than ever to sell a cow, all for a low price that makes it hardly worth the effort. The auction system, which ensures transparent prices in the cattle industry, has fallen apart as meatpackers have come to rely more on fixed-price contracts, she said. “We got nothing for one of the cows,” said Watkins, who did not understand why. “Somebody got her and ground her up and ate her, but we as growers got nothing. To get absolutely nothing for an animal you grew and brought into town yourself? That’s the world we live in right now.” Nearby ranchers have had the same problems, she said, meaning sales of hay, which she also grows on the farm, have dropped steadily in recent years. Big meat processors say through industry organizations they’re not responsible for the changes experienced by Watkins and thousands of others. Sarah Little, vice-president of communications for the North American Meat Institute, which represents slaughterhouses and packers, said supply and demand and other factors were behind the recent turmoil. Four companies have dominated the industry for 30 years and consolidation has been good for the meat industry, she said, helping companies weather the pandemic, labor shortages and drought. “It’s economies of scale and it’s allowed the industry to be more sustainable,” Little said. “We produce more meat from fewer cattle.” But some economists argue consolidation has created a lack of transparency that makes it difficult to pin down why consumers are paying exorbitant prices for beef and farmers are making so little. The federal government has failed for 30 years to enforce antitrust laws, economists say, which is one reason steaks cost so much. “Monopoly is a sign of market failure,” said David Anderson, an economist with the Texas A&amp;M University AgriLife Extension. “While we have a pretty free and competitive marketplace, we have some rules of the road. We have an antitrust act, which should enable the justice department to investigate.” Nevertheless, a 2021 report commissioned by Congress and written by Anderson and two other Texas A&amp;M economists concluded consolidation among meatpackers had not affected beef prices much. “Research indicates that there is market power, but its effect has been small,” the report noted. Modernization Regardless of the root causes of the problems, several in the industry said the upcoming federal investment would help smaller slaughterhouses gain all-important federal certification, which allows plants to sell meat to consumers. Plants must have modern equipment and a US Department of Agriculture inspector onsite to be certified. “The USDA-inspected plants are just a lot more complicated and a lot more expensive to build and maintain,” said John Hansen, president of the Nebraska Farmers Union since 1989. “We hope we will get some new plants started and we hope we will get some of the plants we already have modernized.” Modern slaughterhouses are more desirable to cattle producers because they’re more likely to ensure humane treatment and quick kills, said Bill Niman, founder of the Niman Ranch meat company, a ubiquitous brand among San Francisco Bay area restaurants. “Even though we support small livestock operations from farm to plate, when it comes to meat quality and safety these larger consolidated operations are better than the smaller plants,” said Niman, who left his namesake company in 2007 and now sells animals from his home farm north of San Francisco to a local meat brand. “It’s hard to retrofit an old plant to address all animal welfare concerns.” Among those working to modernize plants is Gary Hendrix of Baird, Texas. He spent a decade gathering investors to start NSC Beef Processing (the acronym stands for No Spinal Cord), which opened a slaughterhouse two years ago to test and showcase new technology Hendrix says will cut labor costs by 30%. The goal is to help rural communities open smaller slaughterhouses to help local ranchers and retailers compete in the difficult market, he said. Antitrust actions would be helpful, Hendrix said, and would attract smaller operators to the industry. “I don’t think you’re going to reduce the size of those companies until you get more players in the industry,” he said. “It’s kind of like trying to umpire a baseball game from outside the stadium. You’ve got to get in the game to affect the outcome.” Back at US Beef Producers in Fort Pierre, which plans to apply for a portion of the new federal money to install new equipment, employee Daniel Bennett relaxes after finishing a slaughter, flecks of cow flesh and bone covering his face, hair and clothes. Anyone who eats beef should understand how the industry works, he said. “You go to Burger King and get a Whopper, but you don’t consider where the meat comes from,” said Bennett, who worked at the fast-food chain before he was hired by the slaughterhouse last year. “I mean, you know. You just don’t think about it.”As news broke recently that the Covid vaccine for children under five would be delayed in the US amid ongoing clinical trials, a call to make the vaccines off-label for use among those children gained force – but officials caution against vaccinating young children without any safety or efficacy data for this age group. When providers sign an agreement to provide Covid-19 vaccine shots, they also agree not to give the vaccine off-label, or use it for purposes other than what it was approved to do. In this case, the Moderna vaccine is approved for adults aged 18 and up, and the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine is approved for those aged 16 and up. But the vaccines are still under emergency use authorizations for younger patients. Providers who give off-label vaccinations in the US may not be protected by legislation that keeps them from being held liable in the case of a rare adverse event. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) warned last summer against providing the vaccine off-label for kids under 12, though that guidance does not seem to be available now on the CDC’s page answering common questions about vaccinations. (The CDC did not respond to requests for comment.) The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) also spoke out against off-label use of the emergency vaccines. Offering the vaccine to children under five is illegal, “and that dose has not been studied in kids under five”, Sean O’Leary, a pediatric infectious diseases specialist and vice-chair of the AAP’s committee on infectious diseases, said in an email. “If providers were to give it to these children, they could lose their status as a vaccine provider,” he said. The 10-microgram dose authorized for kids five to 11 has not been tested among younger kids, who received a 3-microgram dose in the Pfizer/BioNTech pediatric trial. It’s possible that the dose intended for older children is more likely to cause side-effects in younger children, O’Leary said. And if a serious side-effect were to occur in a younger child, medical expenses might not be covered under the current vaccination compensation program. Also, “as a parent, I’d feel terrible. The risk of that is almost certainly quite low, but something to consider,” he said. “As much as I want a vaccine for these younger kids, I think it’s very important to follow the process as it’s designed, as that process has given us many safe, effective vaccines over the decades.” However, some families and physicians are pushing to change these rules, arguing that the clinical trials demonstrate the safety of the 3-microgram dose in young children, and millions of children over five have been safely vaccinated. “I don’t see a difference in a child four years and five years, except for the age – the immune system works the same,” said Dr Wolfgang von Meissner, a family doctor in Germany. “I don’t see why I shouldn’t protect little kids.” Some vaccines – for instance, in kids who might be too young to get them before traveling abroad – and treatments, like certain antibiotics, are given to kids off-label based on a physician’s judgment and with parental consent. “In pediatrics in particular, off-label use of various kinds of medicines is pretty common,” Govind Persad, assistant professor at the University of Denver Sturm College of Law, said. “Often you have medications … that seem like they might be beneficial, but there haven’t been pediatric trials.” In November 2021, several states began recommending boosters for all adults before the CDC and FDA changed guidelines, and in San Francisco, third shots are now available for those who received the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccines. This, too, is off-label use. But off-label use of unapproved vaccines is never allowed, Yvonne Maldonado, professor of pediatric infectious diseases at Stanford University and chair of the AAP’s committee on infectious diseases, pointed out in an email, and the Covid vaccines for children still fall under this category. She said that she was strongly against the use of off-label vaccines. In Germany, where the Covid vaccines are not recommended for children under five but no restrictions against off-label use exist, Von Meissner has been giving children Covid vaccinations since April 2021, beginning with children under 12 who were not yet eligible for the vaccines. He has given 2,500 vaccines to kids between the ages of six months and five years old. He emphasized the importance of informed consent for parents in off-label uses, especially given potential liability issues. “They need to understand, and then they need to make the decision.” He sees the vaccines as particularly important since mask mandates and other precautions are ending in many places. He believes expanding off-label use in the US would provide an additional level of safety to desperate families – including those so eager to get the vaccines, they lie about their children’s ages. This was a move that all experts strongly cautioned against. “I think lying about this is the worst idea,” von Meissner said. “It’s stupid to do it that way, I’m sorry.” Vaccines and medication should only be given under the supervision of a trained health worker who understands the child’s health history. Lying “encourages subterfuge”, Persad said, which might create perverse incentives for parents not to report side-effects or seek follow-up care. Even traveling out of the country, for those lucky enough to do so, isn’t ideal, because it makes it more difficult to track safety signals and data on how effective the vaccines are and who has received them, Persad said. “You could do some of that same stuff for off-label.” Another option for eager families could be expanding the Pfizer trial to include more under-five kids, offering additional data on efficacy, which is particularly important if the trials are shifting from measuring immune responses to tracking real-life cases, Persad said. And new arms of the trials could test different doses among different ages of children. The 3-microgram doses were effective in children six months to two years, but not in kids aged two to five. “It is baffling to me that they did not try these small trials at a more intermediate dose,” Persad said. Companies could also make the vaccines available, especially for higher-risk kids, through the FDA’s expanded access program, Persad said. “Honestly, I would love to see that, as opposed to off-label, where you don’t have the ability to collect as much of this data.” • This article was amended on 17 February 2022. Due to an editing error, the amount of 3 micrograms was incorrectly rendered as “3mg”, which is the abbreviation for milligrams. The article was amended on 18 February 2022 to remove a portion of Govind Persad’s quotation that may have been incorrectly transcribed.Antonio Conte has said Tottenham’s squad may have been technically weakened in the January window and that the club’s transfer policy will slow the rate at which he can make the team competitive. The manager was desperate for reinforcements but the club missed out on Adama Traoré and Luis Díaz and brought in only Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur from Juventus on deadline day. On the same day Tottenham’s two most expensive players – Tanguy Ndombele and Giovani Lo Celso – left on loan, Dele Alli joined Everton on an initial free transfer and Bryan Gil went to Valencia less than six months after his £25m arrival from Sevilla. In an interview with Sky Sport Italia, Conte said: “What happened in January is not easy. Four players left in January. Four important players for Tottenham, two have arrived. So even numerically instead of reinforcing yourself you may have, on paper, weakened. “Then precise choices were made for many reasons. But I certainly never expected that in January four players who I still considered important would change their shirts for a thousand reasons. This shows the difficulty. Tottenham in the last session of the summer transfer market and in January changed eight players.” Conte said the 21-year-old Kulusevski and 24-year-old Bentancur were perfect signings in the framework of Tottenham’s transfer philosophy but believes the approach will require patience. “It is inevitable that in January it is very difficult to get two players like Bentancur and Kulusevski to sign who, I repeat, are the ideal prospects for Tottenham,” he said. “Because Tottenham is looking for young players, players to be developed, not ready players. That is the issue. “The vision, the philosophy of the club is this. It is inevitable that if you want to grow faster and if you want to be competitive more quickly you need players with a lot of experience because they also lead to an increase in experience in your team. But then again, the vision of the club I realised is this and will continue to be this. For this reason it will take a lot of patience.” Conte said psychological work was being done daily with the players “to try to make each player grow individually” and that confidence was fragile. The team have lost their past two games, at home to Southampton and Wolves. “When you take the job in a team that hasn’t won for a long time it is inevitable that you will lack confidence,” he said. “The confidence is down and many times at the first obstacle you throw yourself down, and many times the negativity increases even more; sometimes you grant goals that you struggle to accept. “This has been happening to us in the last period. This is part of a process of a team that has to grow a lot to try to be competitive … They need to work a lot and this does not scare me at all. It is inevitable that certainly the situation compared to the past for me is very different in terms of perspectives, ambitions, in terms of fighting to win.”Random acts of kindness day takes place on 17 February and celebrates and encourages random acts of kindness, large and small. The day was founded in 1995 to “make kindness the norm”. We want to hear from people about how they’ve been kind or had someone be kind to them unexpectedly. Did you hold an event at your school or workplace? Did a stranger do something to help you out? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Good morning. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is considering subpoenaing Ivanka Trump after she appeared to refuse a request for voluntary cooperation, according to a source close to the matter. Subpoenaing the former president’s daughter would mark a dramatic intensification in the investigation; so far, no members of Donald Trump’s family have been forced to testify against him. Ivanka Trump is thought to be important to the investigation: she was close to Trump in the days before the Capitol attack, the chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson said, and appeared to have learned that the plan to have the then vice-president, Mike Pence, refuse to certify Joe Biden’s election win was potentially illegal. Is the panel likely to do it? The fact that committee members are discussing a subpoena suggests they believe it may be required to get her to appear at a deposition. When could it happen? The panel is not expected to take the step just yet – they want to give Trump a reasonable period of time to decide to engage voluntarily. Texts show Ahmaud Arbery murderers used racial slurs, FBI analyst says Two of the three white men convicted of murdering Ahmaud Arbery repeatedly used racial slurs, including violent comments, in messages and social media posts, an FBI analyst has testified. Text messages between Travis McMichael and William “Roddie” Bryan and others in the months and years before Arbery’s murder were shown to the jury of the federal hate crimes trial. The FBI was unable to access the phone of Greg McMichael, Travis McMichael’s father, because it was encrypted, said the analyst, Amy Vaughan. In several social media posts, Travis McMichael, 36, discussed violence against Black people and frequently used the N-word in conversations with friends. Bryan also used the N-word and made other racist comments. Was racism considered in the state trial? No – prosecutors sought only to prove the men were responsible for Arbery’s death, regardless of motive. What does the defence say? They insist the deadly pursuit of Arbery was motivated by a genuine, though erroneous, suspicion that Arbery had committed crimes. New York girl missing for two years found alive in a hidden staircase room A six-year-old girl who went missing two years ago has been found alive and in good health in a makeshift room beneath a staircase in a house in New York state, according to police. Officers suspect she was abducted by her birth parents, who did not have custody. Two years after she went missing from Spencer, New York, Paislee Shultis was found on Monday in her grandfather’s house in the town of Saugerties, about 180 miles away. Police arrested her parents, Kimberly Cooper, 33, and Kirk Shultis Jr, 32, and her grandfather Kirk Shultis, 57. The child has been returned to her legal guardian. How did they find her? Police received a tip about the child’s location and obtained a search warrant. Had police spoken to the biological parents? Police said they interviewed Kirk Shultis Jr several times after Paislee went missing, who said that he had no knowledge of her location. In other news … The US has accused Russia of deploying thousands more troops to Ukraine’s border. The reports of 7,000 more soldiers contradict Vladimir Putin’s earlier claims of a “partial” retreat of Russian forces. Follow the latest on our live blog. There are “strong ties” between some Ottawa occupiers and far-right extremists, Canada’s public safety minister has warned. The statement comes after a group of extremists were charged this week in the border town of Coutts, Alberta, over an alleged plot to kill police officers. The US government is considering easing its mask guidance in the coming weeks, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Rochelle Walensky, has said. Government and business leaders in several areas have scrapped virus measures in the past week. Thirteen women and girls have died after accidentally falling down a well during marriage celebrations in northern India, police have said. The victims were sitting on an iron slab covering the well on Wednesday when it collapsed. Stat of the day: More than one in four women globally suffer domestic violence before the age of 50 More than one in four women worldwide become victims of domestic violence before turning 50, the largest-ever analysis of domestic abuse research has discovered. Analysis of 366 studies involving more than 2 million women found that about 27% of women between the ages of 15 and 49 had experienced physical or sexual violence by a male partner. Don’t miss this: the tech billionaires trying to reverse ageing Billionaires Jeff Bezos and Peter Thiel are devoting vast amounts of money to research into how to reverse the ageing process – and even cheat death. Tests have found it is possible to “reprogram” skin cells, and Thiel has claimed it will be possible to “reverse all human ailments in the same way that we can fix the bugs of a computer program. Death will eventually be reduced from a mystery to a solvable problem”. Climate check: climate crisis could increase southern California wildfires Southern California is likely to suffer from an increase in deadly wildfires as extreme weather conditions are exacerbated by the climate crisis, a study has found. The number of “large fire days” in the region could double by 2100 unless emissions are reduced, researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles, found. Last Thing: the time when TVs had to end broadcasting so children could go to bed Until 1965, the British state required television sets to stop broadcasting between 6 and 7pm in order for children to go to bed. Known as the “toddlers’ truce”, the approach was seen at the time as being socially responsible. Read Benjie Goodhart’s exploration of the bizarre policy here. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comWhen you try to describe the much-loved video game Lemmings, it sounds like a wind-up. Your mission: herding a collection of tiny, green-haired, blue-jumpered, bipedal sprites from a trapdoor entrance to a safe exit without them dying horribly. It looked, if not bad, then wilfully basic even for 1991. But, released years before mobile phone games were a thing, it was nonetheless a fiendishly addictive game that feels like the spiritual precursor to the likes of Angry Birds. And it was manna to many, many kids like me, whose sole household computing device was a rubbish PC with a horrible four-colour CGA screen that basically couldn’t play any video game of the time … except Lemmings! To mark 30 years since its release, Exient – current holders of the franchise – has made a YouTube documentary about it. Made remotely, Lemmings: Can You Dig It? largely consists of interviews with the people involved in the creation of the original game, plus spirited nostalgic interjections from various nerdy talking heads. Accepting its limits, it’s pretty damn endearing. The story begins in ’80s Dundee, which we discover had a remarkably vibrant coding scene thanks to the local Timex factory, which manufactured ZX Spectrums, many of which found their way into the local population. A trio of kids – Russell Kay, Mike Dailly and David Jones – met at the city’s Kingsway Amateur Computer Club, and would go on to make games together, eventually landing themselves a deal with Psygnosis, a hip Liverpool studio that was home to priapic beat ’em up games. Lemmings was the exact opposite of this and was initially rejected, but eventually Psygnosis came around. Most of the documentary consists of accounts of what a delightful time the trio and various other pals had making it. The game started out as an experiment in how many individual animated sprites could be made to walk across a screen at any one time, and took on a sort of giddy momentum that would eventually beget million of sales: by the time they recount how they designed the actual levels, the whole thing sounds like a dream job. Viewers of the documentary will doubtless learn something new: something that I missed at the time was that the game had a carefully crafted 20-level two-player mode that almost nobody knew about, and was basically impossible to access without advanced soldering skills. One of the more fun elements explored here is that the game had never involved any concept art whatsoever: the sprites clearly do not look like actual lemmings, and were merely given the name because of their idiot behaviour. Hence, for hazy reasons, artist Adrian Powell – whose previous job was painting murals in old people’s homes – was drafted in, something he still sounds bemused about to this day. He was essentially responsible for “interpreting” the featureless sprites into something with an adorably rodentlike form … things might have turned out very differently had his art been less cute. The film probably doesn’t need to last for two hours: that’s one minute longer than Citizen Kane. There are moments when it could do with a less rambling structure, for the developer talk to be toned down (“Of course, nobody has ever credited DPaint with gaming on the Amiga,” opines renowned designer Peter Molyneux, bafflingly.) or for somebody to ask some slightly less earnest questions, ie did Lemmings make them all massively rich, and what did they do with said riches? When it ends, it does so with an obligatory 15-minute plug for the game’s current mobile phone iteration that everyone seems a bit sheepish about, and fans of Lemmings 2, Lemmings 3D et al may be dismayed that there’s no mention of any of the interim games. But really this is all about the original, and despite some rambling over-explanations and evident budget limitations, there’s a sweet, earnestness to this documentary. The tale of three lads from Dundee taking on the world via the medium of stupid walking rodent people will make you pine for a simpler age.France and its European partners are to begin a military withdrawal from Mali after more than nine years fighting a jihadist insurgency, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, confirmed on Thursday. Asked at the Élysée if the withdrawal marked a failure for France and its policy of fighting terrorism in west Africa, Macron said: “I completely reject that term.” France first deployed troops against jihadists in Mali in 2013 under the Socialist president François Hollande. The intervention successfully stemmed the insurgents’ advance and returned key cities such as Timbuktu to government control, but extremists swiftly regrouped. In recent years, jihadists have taken over swaths of territory in the former French colony, exploiting political turmoil, poverty and the weakness of local authorities. Macron said French forces would remain in the region but would be based in neighbouring Niger, from where they could help other countries suffering from jihadist activity. “The heart of this military operation will no longer be in Mali but in Niger … and perhaps in a more balanced way across all the countries of the region which want this [help],” he said. Niger has its own significant problem with Islamic extremism, as does Burkina Faso, where thousands of people have died and more than a million been displaced in recent years. Despite Macron’s statement, observers will nonetheless see the withdrawal as a humiliating end to a flagship overseas mission. The daily paper Le Monde wrote: “It is an inglorious end to an armed intervention that began in euphoria and which ends, nine years later, against a backdrop of crisis between Mali and France.” Critics of French strategy in Mali have long accused policymakers in Paris of focusing on military force at the expense of politics. Relations between France and Mali have deteriorated after two coup d’états and the new military regime’s reluctance to agree to an immediate transition to civilian rule. The French ambassador to the former colony was expelled earlier this month, prompting celebrations in Bamako. The presence of Russian mercenary forces from the private military Wagner group has increased tension, with the EU accusing Mali’s military regime of using them to shore up their own power. “Multiple obstructions” by the ruling junta meant conditions were no longer in place to operate in Mali, France and its African and European allies said in a statement. The withdrawal applies to 2,400 French troops in Mali and a smaller European force of several hundred, which was created in 2020 to reduce the burden on French forces. Mali’s armed forces spokesperson Souleymane Dembele shrugged off France’s announcement, saying European troops had failed. “I think that there has been no military solution, because terrorism has engulfed the entire territory of Mali,” he said. Macron said al-Qaida and Islamic State had made the Sahel region of west Africa and the Gulf of Guinea nations “a priority for their strategy of expansion”. Most experts say the dozens of factions and coalitions in the Sahel, a wide band of scrub and bush along the southern fringe of the Sahara, are only loosely associated with al-Qaida or IS and are primarily driven by local motives. However, there is no doubt that French and other European officials see Islamic militant activities in the Sahel as a significant long-term threat. Speaking alongside Macron, the Senegalese president, Macky Sall, said fighting terrorism in the Sahel “cannot be the business of African countries alone”. The Mali deployment has been fraught with problems for France. Of the 53 soldiers killed serving in its Barkhane mission in west Africa, 48 of them died in Mali. Macron’s withdrawal statement comes before his expected announcement that he will be standing for re-election in April’s presidential race. His opponents on the right have said France has been “humiliated” in Mali. Macron denied that France’s intervention had been in vain. “What would have happened in 2013 if France had not chosen to intervene? You would for sure have had the collapse of the Malian state,” he said, hailing his predecessor’s decision to order troops in. About 18,000 United Nations peacekeepers will remain in Mali, one of the biggest and most expensive such deployments in the world. The UN forces and hundreds of personnel in the European Union’s EUTM and EUCAP training missions have relied on French troops for medical, aerial and emergency support. About 300 British troops have also been sent to Mali. France’s army spokesperson Pascal Ianni said Paris would for now continue that support as long as local authorities allowed it.Today in a nutshell: Gold for Gisin as Shiffrin crashes out again, and Canada triumph over the US to take ice hockey title Next up: Team GB’s fading hopes of any Beijing medals are in the hands of the curling teams. The men face the US in their semi-final tonight Ester Ledecka briefly threatened to pull off another unlikely double-double, but in the end it was a one-two for Switzerland in the women’s combined Alpine skiing. Michelle Gisin retained her Olympic title ahead of compatriot Wendy Holdener. Afterwards, Gisin revealed the motto that has spurred Swiss skiers on at these Games – “Drink wine, ski fast”. Gisin enjoyed a glass of wine with teammates before her bronze in super-G, and “we drank wine again yesterday of course … it seems to work for me very well.” Having got herself into a decent position after the first run, heavy pre-Olympics favourite Mikaela Shiffrin again missed a gate and skied out. The six-times world champion has not so much been skiing against everyone else at these Games, as skiing against herself. She tried to put on a brave face in a BBC interview, saying “if I can be the biggest joke of the Games, at least someone’s smiling!” Canada are the women’s ice hockey gold medallists after a 3-2 victory over the US. The Canadians built a 3-0 lead and hung on for the win to capture their fifth Olympic title in seven tournaments, with four coming at the expense of the Americans. The Canadians outclassed the field in Beijing, going seven games unbeaten, for an aggregate score of 57-10, and beating the US twice. Finland overpowered Switzerland 4-0 late on Wednesday to claim their fourth women’s ice hockey bronze medal. Team GB’s women curlers advanced to the semi-finals by a narrow squeak. Three teams tied at five wins and four losses each, so it went down to the draw-shot challenge to determine who went through - an average of the accuracy of each team’s last-stone draw in every match. By that measure, Great Britain prevailed. The semi-finals are tomorrow. Switzerland face Japan and GB face Sweden, while Canada missed out. Miho Takagi of Japan had picked up three silver medals so far in this Games, but in the 1,000m speed skating today she finally has her gold, and a new Olympic record. Brittany Bowe of the US played a major role in Erin Jackson becoming the first Black woman to win an individual Winter Olympic gold earlier in these Games, and Bowe now has her own bronze. Jutta Leerdam of the Netherlands took silver. Things you might have missed If I ever get to time-travel back to before these Games I will be sure to bet a fortune on both the USA and Canada getting knocked out of the men’s ice hockey at the quarter-final stage on the same day. Friday’s semi-final lineup will be Finland v Slovakia and the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) v Sweden. It is the first Olympic semi-finals without the US and Canada since 2006. South Korea’s Choi Min-jeong retained her short track speed skating 1,500m title on Wednesday as Arianna Fontana of Italy bagged a record-breaking 11th career Olympic medal with a silver. Fontana’s ongoing dispute with her national skating federation doesn’t seem to have eased, and she is still unlikely to compete in her home Games in Milano Cortina in 2026. “The season after Pyeongchang, I had male athletes targeting me on the ice, so it was not safe for me to stay with the team,” Fontana has said previously. She currently lives and trains in Hungary. The International Testing Agency says Ukraine’s cross-country skier Valnetyna Kaminska has tested positive for doping with a steroid and a banned stimulant. It is the second doping sample taken at Beijing to test positive. The first involved Alpine skier Hossein Saveh Shemshaki of Iran. You might also want to read: IOC offered US skaters torches instead of medals after Valieva saga Beijing 2022 organisers claim stories of Xinjiang human rights abuses are ‘lies’ ‘This is redemption’: Canada beat USA to women’s ice hockey gold ‘I’ve made a vow’: Elise Christie planning Winter Olympics return in 2026 The briefing’s picture of the day After what felt like one of the longest video reviews in the history of sport, Fanny Smith of Switzerland was yellow-carded and relegated from the bronze medal position in the ski cross. She then proceeded to drop the F-bomb on camera while talking to the race officials, and I couldn’t honestly find it in my heart to blame her. In murky conditions at Zhangjiakou the final result was Sweden’s Sandra Naeslund with gold, Canada’s Marielle Thompson in second, and Daniela Maier of Germany promoted up to bronze at Smith’s expense. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Thursday 17 February 8.05pm Curling – the only live sport left to start today is the men’s semi-finals – Sweden face Canada while Great Britain will play the US 🥌 9pm Figure skating – the women’s free skate is already under way but this is when the final group of six, including ROC’s Kamila Valieva, will compete 🥇 Tomorrow – Friday 18 February 9.30am-10.25am and 11.45am-3.10pm Freestyle skiing – the women fight for the freeski halfpipe title in the morning, then the men do their ski cross 🥇 12.10pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s semi-finals will feature the USA Canada Finland v Slovakia first, ROC v Sweden in the evening. 🏒 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – in the afternoon, the losers of tonight’s semi-finals will play for the men’s bronze medal. In the evening it is the women’s semi-finals 🥉 4.30pm Speed skating – the men’s 1,000m 🥇 5pm Biathlon – it is the men’s 15km mass start race 🥇 6.30pm Figure skating – it is the short program in the pairs ⛸ 8pm and 9.30pm Bobsleigh – the first and second heats of the two-women bobsleigh variety Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 13 🥈 7 🥉 8 total: 28 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 10 🥈 6 🥉 5 total: 21 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 8 🥈 8 🥉 5 total: 21 4 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 7 🥈 4 🥉 4 total: 15 5 🇨🇳 China 🥇 7 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 13 6 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 6 🥈 7 🥉 4 total: 17 7 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 6 🥈 5 🥉 3 total: 14 8 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 6 🥈 1 🥉 5 total: 12 9 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 4* 🥈 8 🥉 12 total: 24 10 🇫🇷 France 🥇 4 🥈 7 🥉 2 total: 13 Selected others 11 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 4 🥈 5 🥉 11 total: 20 17 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 18 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 - 🇬🇧 Great Britain 🥇 🥌? 🥈 🥌? 🥉 🥌? total: ? [*this total includes the team figure skating gold. which the IOC has said will “not be sorted out during this Games”] I’ve got to put together my favourite moments of the Games for our roundup next week – let me know yours by emailing me at martin.belam@theguardian.com and I might try and squeeze some of those into Sunday’s final newsletter for these Games. The last word It is insane. I can’t stop shaking. It’s a dream come true. I don’t think I can find the words – Canada forward Sarah Fillier, the gold medal winning ice hockey team’s youngest player at 21.Sarah Smith, the BBC’s former Scotland editor, has said she feels relieved to have left the country after enduring years of misogynistic “bile and hatred” while covering Scottish politics. Smith, the recently appointed North America editor for BBC News, said she repeatedly experienced gendered abuse while doing her job, which led her to significantly reduce her use of Twitter and to fear she had become a visible target. Born and educated in Edinburgh, she said she believed much of the abuse came from nationalists because her father was John Smith, the UK Labour party leader who died in 1994. He was a notable critic of Scottish independence. In remarks published by the Reuters Institute, Smith said: “He was a very well known politician, he was a unionist, people like to therefore assume that my politics must be the same as my father’s, despite me being, one, a different person, and him having been dead for 27 years.” People would “roll their car windows down as they drive past me in the street to ask me ‘what fucking lies you’re going to be telling on TV tonight, you fucking lying bitch’,” she told Rhys Evans, a BBC Wales executive. That “vitriolic attention” occurred routinely while she prepared for live broadcasts in public. Smith said she “pretty much stopped tweeting” because she feared attracting “shit I can live without”. An experienced reporter for the BBC, 5 News and Channel 4 News, including a stint as US business correspondent, Smith was appointed as the corporation’s first Scotland editor in 2016, following the 2014 independence referendum. She also anchored current affairs programmes, including Sunday Politics. Named as the BBC’s North America editor in November last year, succeeding Jon Sopel, Smith told Evans she was relieved to be leaving Scotland. In the US she would be “gloriously anonymous”. “Nobody will have any idea who my father is. So the misogynistic idea that I can’t have any of my own thoughts anyway, or rise above my family connections to report impartially, will no longer be part of the discourse.” Attacks on Smith escalated after she suggested during a live 10 O’Clock News broadcast in May 2020 that Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, “enjoyed” being able to distinguish herself in combating the Covid pandemic. Sturgeon furiously denied that on Twitter, and said she found the Covid crisis stressful and unpleasant; Smith said her choice of words was a mistake. She also wrongly reported that Alex Salmond had called on Sturgeon to resign over the mishandling of an official sexual misconduct investigation against him, and retracted that on Twitter. Evans said Peter Smith, ITV News’s Scotland correspondent, and Ciaran Jenkins, who covers Scotland for Channel 4 News, were also regularly abused on social media for alleged bias, which appeared at times to be coordinated. “Absolutely horrendous” abuse came from unionists, Peter Smith said, but the majority was from independence supporters. There have been a series of incidents in which BBC journalists have been abused or attacked. Three men were charged after Nick Watt, Newsnight’s political editor, was chased in the street by anti-lockdown protesters in June 2021. A BBC spokesperson said: “The safety of our journalists is paramount and while we wouldn’t comment on individual cases, we have a range of measures in place to support our staff, both online and in person. “No journalist should have to put up with the kind of abuse described by Sarah. There should be no place for it in journalism or any other aspect of public life.”Like the familiar line about making music purely for yourself – and the addendum that if anyone else likes it, it’s a bonus – claiming to be entirely sui generis has long been an interview cliche. It’s a cliche recycled in the title of Melt Yourself Down’s fourth studio album, but that’s forgivable. For once, the band saying it might have a point. They’re nominally linked to London’s jazz scene: saxophonist and de facto leader Pete Wareham formerly played with BBC jazz award winners Acoustic Ladyland; Shabaka Hutchings and Tom Skinner have passed through their ranks en route to the justly acclaimed Sons of Kemet. It’s hard not to feel that the current vibrancy of said scene and the high profile of artists such as Hutchings and Nubya Garcia might account for Melt Yourself Down’s major-label deal: there’s something fairly improbable about a band named after an obscure track by the confrontational no wave saxophonist James Chance sharing a roster with Ronan Keating, Alfie Boe and Michael Ball and amiable Aussie bar band the Teskey Brothers; furthermore, a band whose main concession to commerciality has involved their Mauritian vocalist Kushal Gaya shifting to singing in English, rather than a hybrid of French, Creole and a language of his own creation. For all their pedigree, Melt Yourself Down don’t really deal in jazz. It’s certainly in their DNA. Although the sax on Pray for Me frequently feels as though it’s filling the space occupied in rock by rhythm guitar by churning out monumental riffs, there’s no mistaking the lineage of the sharply pointed interjections on Sunset Flip, or the atonal solo-in-miniature that erupts during Balance. In reality, they’ve spent 10 years attempting to carve out a space in uncharted territory bordered by punk, Afrobeat, funk and traditional Egyptian and Sudanese music. It’s a bold and fascinating idea. So bold, in fact, that their previous music sometimes made you wonder if was possible to put into practice. It feels wrong to criticise a band for being too eclectic, but there was something ungainly and jarring about the way 2020’s 100% Yes jumped from style to style: one minute its fusion of hammering drums and honking sax recalled X-Ray Spex, the next it was chucking out rhythms inspired by two-step garage or techno. There were exciting moments, but also a sense of fusion that didn’t quite fuse. That’s a problem that Melt Yourself Down seem to have fixed. Pray for Me charges purposefully at the listener. Even the ballads, if you can apply that term to the slower-paced All We Have and Ghost on the Run, are focused by metallic synths and ominous, time-stretched noise. It sounds purposeful not merely because of its intensity – everything is distorted, as if the recording equipment can’t cope with the volume at which the band are playing – but because its myriad influences have coalesced into a coherent, broiling sound that carries through the stylistic leaps on display. Boots of Leather starts out with a slippery Afrobeat rhythm. Midway through, handclaps arrive, shifting its emphasis: it suddenly sounds like a glam-y stomp. It shouldn’t work, but, held together by growling bass and massed vocals, it does, to thrilling effect. For all their sonic ferocity, the songs on Pray for Me have strong melodies and hooks in abundance. It’s music that feels entirely of the moment, and not merely because the lyrics frequently deal in what-next? confusion: “My best friend said I’m not Black enough / My neighbour said I’m not woke enough,” the title track complains, while on All We Have, the question “Can we cope?” hangs in the air unanswered. The music is writhing and funky – the band’s two drummer/percussionists even manage to inject a certain dancefloor swing into the Neu!-inspired rhythm of Sunset Flip, an impressive feat – but its power isn’t euphoric or hypnotic so much as cathartic. Pray for Me frequently feels as though something pent up being released. Of the moment or not, there’s an unmistakable note of uncertainty and pleading in the album’s title. You can understand it: the American writer Ted Gioia recently caused consternation with an angry Substack bemoaning the dominance of algorithms (“anything that genuinely breaks the mould is excluded from consideration almost as a rule”) and claiming “nothing is less interesting to music executives than a completely radical new kind of music”. While you hesitate to apply quite such a feverish term to the contents of Pray for Me, they’re certainly different. You wonder if it will find the audience it should in a climate predicated on labelling, on gathering music together in themed playlists. Fingers crossed. This week Alexis listened to Electribe 101 – Space Oasis Dug up decades after its release was cancelled, the second Electribe 101 album emerges sounding bizarrely fresh: Space Oasis is a soaring dancefloor killer that could have been recorded yesterday.Rowan Williams, the former archbishop of Canterbury, has called on the UK government to impose a wealth tax on the super-rich to help tackle “spiralling inequality”, which he said was “deeply damaging to our collective morale and trust”. Williams, who was the most senior bishop in the Church of England from 2002 to 2012, on Thursday joined a growing group of moral leaders demanding a one-off tax on the richest 1% of the population to help close the “staggering” gap between the richest and poorest in society. “Spiraling inequality is a major issue in our society, and all the evidence suggests this is deeply damaging to our collective morale and trust,” Williams said. “A wealth tax of the kind we are backing recognises that vastly disproportionate rewards for a very small number of citizens will not make for a cohesive and just national community.” Williams told the super-rich they should not view paying back to wider society as a tax burden but as “an opportunity to build a stable, sustainable economy that works for everyone”. Government figures show the richest 1% of households in the UK each have at least £3.6m. At the other end of the scale, the poorest 10% of households have £15,400 or less, with almost half burdened with more debts than they have in assets, according to data published by the Office for National Statistics last month. It means the gap between rich and poor had widened to the largest in more than a decade even before the Covid pandemic struck. Williams joined other leaders in the Church Action for Tax Justice campaign group demanding that the government take urgent action to combat inequality by introducing an initial one-off wealth tax on the richest 1% of the UK population, and commit to reviewing the tax regime with the intention of introducing ongoing wealth taxes. A wealth tax on the top 1% could generate at least £70bn a year, according to research by Greenwich University. That would be equivalent to 8% of the current total tax take but would affect only about 250,000 households. The Wealth Tax Commission, set up in 2020 to consider the costs and benefits of imposing a wealth tax, recommended a one-off 1% tax on households with more than £1m. It said the tax would generate £260bn – more than enough to cover a year’s funding of the NHS and social care spending. Cat Jenkins, a manager at Church Action for Tax Justice, said: “As Christians, we believe we are called to highlight injustices in our society and to speak and act for change. The system, as it currently stands, unfairly favours the wealthy over those less well off. In times as hard as these, it’s even more crucial – and morally right – that the richest among us contribute a good measure towards the common good.” The campaign group, which works with churches and Christians of various denominations, said: “It’s time that the wealthiest in our country were asked to pay a good measure of tax, rather than asking the less wealthy to contribute ever greater proportions of their income to the common good.” A group of more than 100 members of the super-rich have repeatedly called on governments around the world to impose higher taxes on them. The Patriotic Millionaires movement, including the Disney heiress Abigail Disney, said the tax system was rigged in their favour and needed to be rewritten to make taxation fairer and restore trust in politics. “As millionaires, we know the current tax system is not fair,” they said in an open letter. “Most of us can say that while the world has gone through an immense amount of suffering in the last two years, we have actually seen our wealth rise during the pandemic – yet few if any of us can honestly say that we pay our fair share in taxes.” Such taxes are being introduced in Argentina, Bolivia and Morocco to help pay for the pandemic recovery. In Norway, about 500,000 people pay an 0.85% charge on their assets above the value of about £125,000. The prospect of such a tax in the UK is rich people’s second biggest fear after the virus, according to Knight Frank’s wealth report.Everything I am, I owe to calories, as Sophia Loren never quite said. I have built myself, one edible unit of energy at a time. In truth I have more than built myself. I am over-engineered, in the way Mussolini’s Milan railway station is over-engineered, or Jason Momoa is over-engineered. See how deftly I compare myself to Momoa? We are exactly the same, him and me. Save that every calorie he consumes turns into a plank of rippling muscle, while mine turn into the greatest muffin top this side of the Greggs cake counter. But it’s all flesh, right? Ah, calories. Mostly I try to ignore them; to regard them as I do the isobars on a meteorologist’s map which in no way describe the experience of standing outside in a howling gale. I know that not all calories are equal; that calories from carbs impact the body differently to those obtained from protein, for example. I also know that we all process foods differently. I have a metabolism that suggests I may at some point have been gene-spliced with a sloth, and hence spend hours in the gym brutalising myself. I also like my dinner very much. I regard the diet book industry as a massive scam. If a single diet book worked there would be no need to publish another one ever again. But still they come. All of this means I should regard the introduction in April of mandatory calorie counts on the menus offered by all hospitality businesses with 250 employees or more as worthy of nothing more than a theatrical shrug. I don’t think of it that way. I find the prospect extremely dispiriting. Eating out is meant to be an indulgence, even when it isn’t a splendid parade of chips, gravy and custard-drenched puddings. It’s meant to be a pleasure. And it is very hard to indulge yourself in pleasure when the metrics arising from your behaviour are being thrown in your face all the time. It’s a bit like going to an orgy only to find it’s being patrolled by an army of nurses armed with swabs and petri dishes. I imagine. Which, of course, is the whole point of the new legislation. Obesity costs the UK £6.1bn a year, rising to £9.7bn by 2050. We clearly need to do something about it. The question is whether this new legislation will help. The evidence that calorie counts on menus change behaviour is scant. One recent US study found that calorie consumption falls initially, before gently rising back to previous levels. It does, however, have other impacts. In 2012 major high street brands including KFC, Costa Coffee and Pizza Hut, representing 9,500 outlets, signed up to a voluntary initiative led by Public Health England to introduce calorie counts. That led in turn to major activity behind the scenes. The companies that supply cakes to the big high street coffee shops are now constantly being told to reduce the calorie counts on new products and to revise existing ones. The great likelihood is that all the restaurants newly landed on planet calorie count will be doing something similar. Alternatively, they’ll take advantage of one exclusion in the legislation: “specials”, those dishes on the menu for 30 days or less, do not need to be calorie counted. So expect to see a huge expansion in temporary items or small adjustments to existing dishes every 29 days to make them suddenly new and – whaddya know? – exempt. And expect to read about me ordering loads of them. It will be an act of self-delusion, but I am more than capable of that. jay.rayner@observer.co.uk20. Green Mansions (1959) This exotic MGM romance directed by Hepburn’s then husband, Mel Ferrer, was in fact her first big flop. Anthony Perkins plays a Venezuelan refugee whose life is saved by Rima the jungle girl: Hepburn in a suede pixie tunic, accessorised with a pet fawn and backed by a supporting cast in brownface. 19. Bloodline (1979) Hepburn was by now really too mature for this sort of ingenue role; in a trashy Sidney Sheldon adaptation, she inherits a pharmaceutical empire and finds herself menaced all over Europe. Not as much fun as it sounds, but compensations include an all-star cast of suspects and an Ennio Morricone score. 18. They All Laughed (1981) Hepburn got top billing for the last time in Peter Bogdanovich’s lightweight indie-style romcom. There’s an hour of Ben Gazzara following her around the streets of New York before we even hear her speak, and the film was scuttled by the murder of poor Dorothy Stratten, one of Hepburn’s co-stars. 17. The Unforgiven (1960) A Texas rancher’s daughter is revealed to be a Kiowa, leading to friction between her adoptive family, local bigots and the tribe demanding her return. Hepburn is basically miscast as a Native American in John Huston’s dour western; even worse, she broke her back in a serious riding accident during production. 16. Always (1989) Hepburn, in dazzling white cable-knit, literally represents heaven in Steven Spielberg’s remake of A Guy Named Joe, a movie guaranteed to make you blub. The star’s final film appearance was little more than a cameo, but what a cameo! Bonus points for donating her entire $1m salary to Unicef. 15. The Children’s Hour (1961) Well-meaning but dated melodrama adapted from Lillian Hellman’s play These Three, about two schoolteachers (played by Hepburn and Shirley MacLaine) whose lives are ruined when a pupil spreads a rumour that they’re lesbians. “The reason I chose Audrey is that she is so clean and wholesome,” said the director, William Wyler. “I don’t want bosoms in this.” 14. Love in the Afternoon (1957) Hepburn plays the cello-playing daughter of a private detective who charms a millionaire playboy in Billy Wilder’s elegant, Lubitsch-like romcom set in Paris. But the 27-year age gap between the leads, exacerbated by Gary Cooper already showing signs of his terminal illness, proved discomfiting even for contemporary viewers. 13. My Fair Lady (1964) Julie Andrews fans were furious when Broadway’s original Eliza Doolittle was snubbed by the film’s producers, but Hepburn is a charming cockney guttersnipe and looks fabulous in Cecil Beaton’s costumes. Her songs had to be dubbed, though co-star Rex Harrison was allowed to sprechstimme his way through the musical numbers. 12. War and Peace (1956) King Vidor’s literary epic, filmed in Italy, may not be the best adaptation of Tolstoy’s novel, but it has a fine Nino Rota score and beautiful cinematography by Jack Cardiff. The script is clunky and the acting is a mish-mash of clashing styles, but Hepburn gives a luminous star performance as Natasha. 11. Sabrina (1954) Hepburn is enchanting as the chauffeur’s daughter in love with the son of her dad’s employers. Humphrey Bogart plays the brother who tries to scupper that match by wooing her for himself, but the 29-year age gap between them means Wilder’s romantic comedy seems a bit icky in hindsight. 10. Breakfast at Tiffany’s (1961) Truman Capote envisaged Marilyn Monroe as the heroine of his novella, but the bowdlerised film role went to Hepburn, whom Photoplay had called “altogether un-Marilyn Monroeish”. Mickey Rooney’s Japanese caricature is a shocker, and I’ll never forgive Holly for dumping her cat in the rain, but Hepburn is an icon of timeless chic in her little black Givenchy dress. 9. Paris When It Sizzles (1964) Hepburn plays a typist hired to help a screenwriter (William Holden) meet his deadline in a deconstruction of movie cliches that was panned on its release. George Axelrod, the Charlie Kaufman of his day, wrote the screenplay, which is packed with in-jokes, genre riffs and superstar cameos, and Hepburn is surprisingly funny and sexy as a comic femme fatale. 8. How to Steal a Million (1966) What fun to see Hepburn hiding in a cupboard with an age-appropriate leading man at last. Peter O’Toole plays the debonair burglar she enlists to help her steal a fake Cellini statuette. Wyler’s cute Paris-set caper doesn’t reach the heights of Charade, on which it’s clearly modelled, but it’s worth seeing for Audrey’s ultra-mod Givenchy outfits and charlady disguise. 7. The Nun’s Story (1959) Hepburn’s best performances are the ones where she doesn’t appear to be acting, but the acme of her self-consciously “serious” work is the title role in Fred Zinnemann’s film about a Belgian nun whose faith is variously tested by nursing in the Congo, Peter Finch’s handsome but agnostic doctor, and the Nazi occupation of Belgium. 6. Wait Until Dark (1967) Hepburn plays a blind woman in this tense thriller that never quite transcends its stage origins. Alan Arkin hams it up as the villain trying to get his hands on a heroin-stuffed doll in her possession by dressing in wacky disguises. 5. Two for the Road (1967) In a turn up for the books, Hepburn is seven years older than Albert Finney, the actor cast as her husband here. She swaps Givenchy for groovy Carnaby Street gear in Stanley Donen’s astute relationship drama, cleverly scripted by Frederic Raphael, about an unhappily married couple driving south through France, with flashbacks showing the pair making the same journey in happier times. 4. Roman Holiday (1953) “She was absolutely enchanting, and we said ‘That’s the girl!’,” said Wyler about picking Hepburn for the role that won her a best actress Oscar and propelled her to stardom. Princess Ann is so fed up with official duties she goes awol in Rome with American journalist Gregory Peck (only 13 years Hepburn’s senior), rides a Vespa and gets a gamine haircut. 3. Robin and Marian (1976) A meeting of middle-aged movie legends; Hepburn is virtually the same age as Sean Connery, her love interest in Richard Lester’s bittersweet Robin Hood coda. Maid Marian is now an abbess, still miffed that Robin ditched her to go gallivanting off to the Crusades. Everyone is older but not necessarily wiser in this wry, elegiac romance with a heartbreaking denouement. 2. Funny Face (1957) Hepburn plays a bluestocking bookseller who gets a chic makeover (though she looks perfectly chic to begin with) in Donen’s delightful musical. Fred Astaire, 30 years older than his leading lady, though still nimble on his pins, plays the Avedon-esque photographer who whisks her off to Paris for a fashion shoot. And the music is great: Think Pink! Bonjour Paris! Basal Metabolism! 1. Charade (1963) It’s the best Hitchcock film that Hitchcock never made: Donen’s impeccable romantic thriller stars Givenchy-clad Hepburn at her most adorable, with Cary Grant (25 years her senior, but hey, it’s Cary Grant!) as the suave mystery man who saves her from MacGuffin-hunting thugs. No one flees for their life quite as prettily as Audrey, and Paris has never looked lovelier.The former world darts champion Gerwyn Price is trading in double-tops for double-jabs after revealing he will take part in a charity boxing match in his native Wales. Price, who played professional rugby union and league before his darts career, has announced he will take on the former professional Rhys “Cool, Fly and Flashy” Evans on 9 April at the Valley Tavern pub in Fleur-de-lis, a few miles from Price’s home town of Markham. The 36-year-old, known as “the Iceman” on the oche, revealed the news on Instagram. “Need to drop 10kg for this,” he wrote alongside posts about his new diet and training regime. After playing as a hooker for Neath and Cross Keys, and in league with South Wales Scorpions, Price switched to darts full-time in 2014. He is the current world No 1 and became the first Welshman to win the PDC world championship when he beat Gary Anderson 7-3 in the 2021 finals. Price reached the quarter-finals in the defence of his title and hit a nine-dart finish against Michael Smith, but went on to lose the quarter-final match 5-4. A divisive figure among darts fans, he labelled fans at the Alexandra Palace “cheats” after complaining of being distracted by a member of the crowd during the game. Evans, who hails from nearby Blackwood, boasts a 3-0 record as a super-lightweight but last fought professionally in 2014. Tickets for “the tear-up at the Tav” will be available in March, according to the pub’s social media.British Gas has set up a scheme to protect the hundreds of millions of pounds it receives in advance payments from customers towards their future energy bills, after the “national scandal” that left households on the hook to pay £500m after a string of energy firms spent consumers’ deposits before going bust. The Centrica-owned energy firm has pledged to ringfence the £294m it holds in credit balances through direct debits from its 7 million customers in a bank account separate from funds it uses to run the day-to-day business. “I think that in any other walk of life using over £500m of customers’ money to prop up a business that subsequently failed would be considered a national scandal,” said Chris O’Shea, the chief executive of Centrica. “I’m amazed it is not treated as such in the energy business.” The move makes it the first company in the sector to explicitly guarantee protection for customers in the event of future market shocks. Almost 30 energy suppliers have gone bust in the UK since gas market prices rocketed to record highs last September. The regulator Ofgem has moved customers of failed businesses to a new energy provider – a process known as the “supplier of last resort” mechanism - with customer deposits covered by the new supplier. However, the money, which Centrica has estimated from official filings is about a combined £500m, is ultimately recouped by charging every household in the UK an additional levy that is added to their energy statements. Centrica said the cost of the energy company failures, including the lost consumer deposits, was responsible for 10% of Ofgem’s near-£700 increase in the cap on average household energy bills, to £1,971. “Every single citizen in the UK will be paying for some of that half a billion and they don’t even know it – but they should,” O’Shea said. “In my view it verges on criminal. Where have all those deposits gone – offices, executive compensation, branding agreements, advertising, discounts – it has been spent on day-to-day expenses and that is unacceptable.” O’Shea called on Ofgem, which has vowed to introduce tougher new rules to make the market more resilient, to follow its lead and introduce matching industry-wide regulations as standard. “Allowing energy suppliers to take customer deposits and not making them protect those deposits was something that wasn’t thought through,” he said. “[Regulations] apply to solicitors, accountants, banks, anyone who takes a customer deposit. It is a glaring error that it hasn’t happened in energy, we don’t have the right regulation.” O’Shea warned that far from getting better, the situation relating to the scale of customer deposits was likely to get worse. Consumers overpay relative to consumption in the summer months, building up big advance deposits, which are then run down through the winter when companies spend more on energy to match usage. With consumers’ direct debit payments expected to increase substantially this spring, before another increase in the price cap by Ofgem in October, the credit balances held by energy companies are likely to increase substantially. “There are some very large suppliers lobbying against [protecting deposits],” O’Shea said. “The balance is set to get bigger and anyone who can’t do this today has already spent their customers’ money on day-to-day expenses.” Last week, Ofgem admitted that it had acted too slowly and that its regulatory agenda had been “dominated” by wanting to open the market to new entrants and promoting competition against the few big players, not protecting customers against poorly run businesses. “That’s what dominated thinking at the time,” said Jonathan Brearley, who was appointed Ofgem chief executive in February 2020, speaking to a committee of MPs last week. “It’s my view that we should have combined that with greater financial resilience.” In March last year, months before the surge in gas prices, Ofgem said it was “concerned that some suppliers may use customers’ surplus credit balances to fund otherwise unsustainable business practices”. “It is within the gift of every player in the industry to hold themselves to a higher standard,” O’Shea said. “I think we have an interest at Centrica in making sure our industry is beyond approach.”When the then Conservative cabinet minister, Norman Tebbit, fondly remembered how his dad went out on his bike to look for work he could hardly have imagined how many hundreds of thousands of people would be doing just that. The number of delivery riders working in the gig economy has boomed during the pandemic, and for some it has been a good way to earn some extra cash. Others, however, are stuck working long hours below the minimum wage and with no employment rights or benefits. Like a gigging musician playing in a pub, in the gig economy you bring your own equipment and the amount you earn depends on the number of people who show up. Today, many gig economy workers register with apps which connect them to customers requiring something or someone to be picked up or dropped off. Often, when they log into the app, they don’t know how many jobs they will get or what they will earn. They receive nothing for waiting time, no compensation if they are injured on the job, and no guidance on how work is allocated. This has led gig economy workers to demand recognition from these apps-based companies that they are employees. When the supreme court dismissed Uber’s appeal against an employment tribunal in February 2021, it was a landmark victory for workers’ rights, taking aim at unethical practices in the gig economy which mask employment as self-employment. The ruling included requiring Uber to recognise that working time starts when their drivers log in, and ends when they log off. Since then, Uber has recognised their 70,000 UK drivers as workers, paying in-work employee benefits, setting up auto-enrolment pension schemes, and allowing them to take paid holidays. However, as I raised in the House of Commons after the supreme court judgment, the ruling only applies to drivers working at Uber (and not even to Uber Eats couriers). We urgently need legislation to create a level playing field for all, providing certainty for platforms and workers alike. Research from Fairwork at the Oxford Internet Institute has shown that other digital platforms have serious progress to make in order to deliver fair pay and work conditions. It reports that only two platforms, Pedal Me and Just Eat, could demonstrate their workers are guaranteed to get the minimum wage after costs. The EU recently proposed a new directive that would improve conditions for those working via digital platforms, establishing the criteria to be met for a platform to be judged to be exerting too much control on the worker for them to be regarded as self-employed. Importantly, platforms will also be able to give self-employed platform workers benefits without there being a risk to their self-employment status. This directive would not apply here of course, so we have an opportunity to learn from what works, or not, as other countries seek to tackle this issue too. Indeed, at the last general election, the government promised to reform employment law, building on the recommendations of the Taylor review, to both encourage flexible working but also ensure that workers have the right to request more certainty in their contracts. The forthcoming employment bill provides the perfect opportunity to show that, post-Brexit, the UK can lead on establishing clear and easy-to-use rules that work for platforms, consumers, and workers, whether they are employed or self-employed. Better working rights for the gig economy will be good for consumers too. Drivers will be less likely to hop between apps and cancel jobs when a better offer comes along if they know they have a guaranteed minimum income based on the number of hours they are available for work. It will also create a level playing field between local businesses that use their own delivery staff, as well as those that use apps. We need to ensure that bricks-and-mortar businesses that pay their taxes and treat their workers fairly are not discriminated against by a system that allows highly profitable apps to do neither. Damian Collins is the Conservative MP for Folkestone and HytheEmma, 46, Hove Occupation Sales operations specialist Voting record Labour all the way; once considered voting Green but decided against it for tactical reasons. Voted remain in the EU referendum Amuse bouche The Chemical Brothers once offered her a lift home after a night at the Ministry of Sound in London Louise, 34, Sussex Occupation International development for a non-profit organisation Voting record A floating voter who would back any candidate if she was persuaded of their leadership ability and policies. Voted leave in the EU referendum Amuse bouche Studied trapeze while at UC Berkeley For starters Louise We arrived at the same time, 15 minutes early. We’re not dissimilar to look at – we’re quite short and quite petite. She had an impression of me that I didn’t live up to. In a good way. Emma We shared a selection of dips and kalamata olives. Then I had a roasted tomato and lentil salad. It was one of those meals where rocket’s coming out of your mouth. She was quite a posh, dainty young lady and I was spraying her with salad. Louise I had some kind of aubergine, Asian dish. It was delicious. My objective was to show that you could have dinner with someone who was – quote unquote – a Tory and voted Brexit, and they weren’t the worst person on earth. Emma I thought she was lovely, but I feel like she lives in a naive bubble. A tiny little village, surrounded by similar people, all wealthy. I wonder if she doesn’t see the impact of what Brexit has done to people. The big beef Louise My main point is that people are massively pro- or massively anti-Boris, and there’s no space in the middle. I object to him being compared to Trump. Emma I nearly laughed out loud at the Boris Johnson conversation. She said Johnson was a go-getter who gets things done. I said, “Tell me one thing that Boris has achieved.” She mentioned something about national insurance raises, but didn’t justify why that was a serious achievement, or indeed, any achievement. Louise I’m not sure that NI was the right way to raise the tax. I don’t think it’s a terrible idea; it’s a broad-based tax. But his leadership around Brexit was good and important. The things we feared – millions of job losses, the hit to the economy itself – these have not materialised. There are friction costs, the challenges to small businesses of exporting to Europe, the red tape, the queues; these are fair concerns. The question is, are they greater than the sovereignty issue? Emma Anyone who’s got here and doesn’t realise that everything that comes out of that man’s mouth is a lie – what can you say? If we’d started listing the ways in which he’s untrustworthy, we never would have concluded that conversation. Sharing plate Louise We both have personal experience of trans issues, and we landed in a not too dissimilar position. Emma We talked about self-identification, and what some people see as the potential danger to women. My feeling is that we’re actually not talking about trans people being a danger to women – it’s just men, isn’t it? It’s this obsession with the evil penis that gets people worried, but trans people are more marginalised and likely to be in danger from the same men who are a threat to women. Louise I’m intrigued by what she said about tomboys – that a girl who was a tomboy would choose another label. I was saying: what is society saying about what it is to be a girl that is making her feel like that? For afters Emma Where we fell down was on mask wearing. She’s a bit worried that we will end up being like a far eastern country where people wear masks just to leave the house. Louise There are lots of questions around whether they’re needed with a vaccinated population. I don’t think they’re cost-free, which I think she agreed with. Emma If anything good has come out of Covid, I hope it’s a more responsible attitude to other people’s health. Takeaways Louise It felt like we agreed on quite a lot. She may have been thinking, “She’s talking a load of rubbish.” Emma I feel I just talked at her. I don’t think either of us changed our opinions, but we found unexpected common ground. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Emma and Louise ate at Terre à Terre in Brighton Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreScotland Yard has been forced to admit it was “unacceptable” for one of its official Twitter accounts to apparently criticise the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, leading him to accuse the force of amplifying misleading information. Khan tackled the suggestion – made in a now-deleted tweet by the verified “Met Police Taskforce” – that he did not understand the rules for disciplining officers. It came as the London mayor said he would not support the choice of the home secretary, Priti Patel, to replace the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, unless whoever was chosen understood “the importance of addressing these deep cultural issues” within the force, such as racism, sexism and bullying. The shock announcement of Dick’s departure has caused turmoil in the Met and for political leaders, including Khan, in whom the Police Federation has declared its members have “no confidence”. Tensions escalated further on Thursday when the Times reported that Dick had told colleagues that Khan had given her an ultimatum to sack senior officers in Charing Cross police station or face suspension herself. Khan insisted during a phone-in on LBC: “It is not the case the commissioner was given an ultimatum to sack them or be sacked.” However, he said he was “angered and disgusted” by the views of some officers at Charing Cross station and “concerned about the impact on trust and confidence” after it was revealed they exchanged WhatsApp messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. Khan criticised a tweet by an official Met account which retweeted a post pointing out that the process for sacking officers is independent of chief constables, with the comment: “Exactly this.” Several hours after the post was deleted, a spokesperson for the Met said the tweet was “unacceptable and shouldn’t have been shared” from an official account. They said senior officers were “addressing the matter” and would remind colleagues “they are expected to be independent and impartial at all times, on and off duty, including on social media”. The mayor suggested the intervention was unhelpful, referring to a recommendation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct that found widespread evidence of bullying and discrimination among officers. Khan said: “When you have Met police accounts amplifying information that is misleading, how is it possible for officers concerned about behaviour of other officers to come forward? “Why are we surprised when whistleblowers don’t come forward if this is the attitude both the IOPC talked about and you’ve exemplified in relation to a blue-ticked account?” With the search for Dick’s replacement now under way, Khan said he believed Patel would be “incredibly professional” in the recruitment process. However, he said that while he hoped to be consulted, he would not support Dick’s successor if “I don’t have confidence that he or she understands the importance of addressing these deep cultural issues”. Khan also resisted any suggestion he should lean on police to encourage the Met to publish photos of Downing Street parties, which the Guardian revealed earlier this week the government expected Scotland Yard would not release. “Just think how inappropriate it would be for me, a Labour mayor, getting involved in operational matters where a Conservative politician is being investigated,” he said. “There are some countries around the world where the police do have their arms twisted in relation to operational issues. I think it is right in our system where I have got no influence in relation to whether the police do investigate Boris Johnson, what is published and so forth. “I have always, as the mayor, been cognisant of the importance of me understanding which side of the line I should be on.”Teachers and pupils in England have complained about inconsistencies in the advance information made available to help focus their revision before the summer GCSEs and A-levels, describing it in some cases as “virtually useless”. School leaders said the information published by exam boards last week about what topics students will be tested on across 300 GCSE, AS and A-level specifications was hugely varied, with modern foreign languages a source of particular concern. MFL teachers have spoken out on social media and written to exam boards expressing disappointment at the advance information for the MFL writing papers. One teacher wrote to the AQA exam board: “What is going on? This information is virtually useless, it reads like the contents page of the textbook – ie, virtually every topic is included for Spanish, and most for French. For some reason, though, German has had more material removed. “Could you explain how exactly I am meant to present this to students who are already stressed by the whole exam process, having missed significant portions of their schooling?” Others have raised concerns about discrepancies in the advance information provided by different exam boards for A-level economics. One student wrote on the Student Room that AQA listed almost the entire specification, while OCR provided a concise list of topics, saying: “This is simply unfair.” The advance information is one of a number of measures put in place this year to try to ensure the fairness of exams, which are returning after being cancelled for two years. Other adaptations include a choice of topics in some GCSEs, such as English literature and history, and exam support materials, including formula sheets in maths. Students have been told that examiners will be more generous when setting grade boundaries to provide a safety net, but parents and teachers say the measures cannot fairly compensate for widely varying experiences of learning loss during the pandemic. A poll of 2,900 teachers by Teacher Tapp found widespread unhappiness with the advance information. In relation to GCSE languages, nearly three-quarters of those who took part in the poll were dissatisfied – 55% “very dissatisfied”, and 19% “dissatisfied”. More than two out of five GCSE English teachers (43%) were dissatisfied, compared with the one in five who were satisfied. GCSE maths teachers were the most enthusiastic, with 47% satisfied with the advance information provided for their subject, while two out of five science teachers expressed satisfaction. One headteacher from Greater Manchester said some of his subject leads had said the advance information was helpful, but others were worried about the impact of exams on the most disadvantaged children, the large volume of knowledge still to be covered, and inconsistencies in the level of adjustments across subjects. He said: “Several subject heads were questioning why, after so much time and so much buildup, the adjustments are so insignificant.” There were also fears the adjustments could compound unfairness. “Changes may well further advantage the more advantaged by reducing content and making revision more focused, but may also disadvantage those worst affected by the pandemic because changes do not go far enough,” the headteacher said. A Guardian callout prompted responses from parents and pupils who were also worried about the fairness of this year’s exams. “Exams should be cancelled and we should trust teachers to give teacher-assessed grades, as they know their students best,” said one A-level student. “The advance information does not compensate for the disruption to education and there are many discrepancies between subjects and exam boards, therefore cancelling A-levels is the only fair alternative.” Steve Chalke, the founder of the Oasis Academy Trust, said his staff were still working their way through the detail of the advance information. “There’s a lot to digest. Some were saying ‘there’s lots here’, others were saying ‘there’s not very much in my subject’.” He also expressed concern about students’ mental health, with some struggling to get out of bed because of anxiety. “The level of nervousness is huge, among staff, parents and pupils.” One teacher of French and Spanish in a comprehensive school in south-west England said her GCSE students were “flabbergasted” to find that just one out of 12 topics had been dropped in Spanish GCSE, while German students were told they would be tested on around half the normal list of topics. She and other MFL teachers were also disappointed to see the holiday topic in French – usually very popular with students – dropped. “They are working their socks off but they are stressed. Some of them are working too hard, some of them are shutting down,” she said. “Some of them I haven’t seen since Christmas.” AQA said the Department for Education had decided that no topics should be removed for GCSE modern foreign languages, and it is the same for all exam boards. It said the writing exam is the only paper with advance information, which is intended to help focus revision not narrow the curriculum, with all topics potentially tested in the listening, reading and speaking exams. An Ofqual spokesperson said: “The advance information has been written to support students prepare for this year’s exam papers. The exam papers will not look the same for all subjects and, therefore, the advance information should not look the same for all subjects. “As in any year, the exam boards will set grade boundaries in a way that ensures that students are treated fairly, regardless of the exam board with which they have entered. Ofqual, as the exam regulator, will oversee this. So students should not worry that advance information about one subject looks different to that of another. “The exam boards have worked within a common set of principles to develop their advance information. It was published on 7 February as its purpose is to support student revision, not to narrow teaching.”Amazon will continue to accept Visa credit card payments across its sites after the companies struck a new global deal. The move comes months after the online retailer threatened to stop the use of UK-issued Visa credit cards because of the fees charged to process payments. Amazon said the fees were “an obstacle” to providing the best prices for its customers, while Visa accused Amazon of restricting customer choice. However, the two businesses have since reached an agreement, ending weeks of negotiations, including an agreement last month to postpone the ban for UK users. A Visa spokesperson said: “Visa is pleased to have reached a broad, global agreement with Amazon. This agreement includes the acceptance of Visa at all Amazon stores and sites today, as well as a joint commitment to collaboration on new product and technology initiatives to ensure innovative payment experiences for our customers in the future.” Amazon said: “We’ve recently reached a global agreement with Visa that allows all customers to continue using their Visa credit cards in our stores. Amazon remains committed to offering customers a payment experience that is convenient and offers choice.” Amazon customers in Australia and Singapore previously had to pay a surcharge when purchasing items using a Visa credit card. This has also been removed. The furore followed the removal of an EU cap on fees charged by card issuers in the UK after Brexit. Visa increased the charge of the value of a transaction for credit card payments made online between the UK and the EU to 1.5%, from a previous charge of 0.3%. The companies have not disclosed how much Amazon pays for processing. In an email to users of the site in November, Amazon blamed the cost of processing the payments: “Starting 19 January 2022, we will unfortunately no longer accept Visa credit cards issued in the UK due to the high fees Visa charges for processing credit card transactions.” The consumer group Which? welcomed the news that UK customers could continue to use Visa credit cards on the site. Ele Clark, a senior editor at Which? Money, said: “Using a credit card to pay offers shoppers valuable legal protections that debit cards cannot, and removing this option for Visa cardholders would have meant fewer rights for millions of consumers. “However, there have been longstanding concerns about credit card fees, and this affects customers and businesses. The regulator must urgently take forward its proposals to examine whether card fees are fair and what impact this will have on competition.” The Payment Systems Regulator launched a review into card fees in 2021 and found they had “increased significantly” since the EU cap was lifted. It is considering whether action needs to be taken on the issue. “We have always said that if we see an issue with fees that required attention outside the scope of our market review, we would consider what action we should take,” the regulator said in November . Meanwhile, the British Retail Consortium said companies faced an estimated £150m increase in the cost of accepting cross-border card payments. British retailers were subject to an extra £36.5m in fees, equivalent to £100,000 every day.You were one of the hip-hop acts that crossed the divide and attracted fans who were into other genres. Did you realise that back in the day? AmongstTheWaves In the beginning, in 1991, we opened for the likes of Naughty By Nature and Ice Cube, but developed a reputation for energetic shows. We somehow got booked for Lollapalooza and thought: “What are we doing here?” but started seeing crowdsurfing and stage diving. After that, rock fans, metal kids and punk fans started showing up to our shows. Our imagery was rockish and we started winning those kids over without doing that style of music. Who inspired you when you started? Kaisersoser Before I knew what hip-hop was, I listened to rock, metal, punk, reggae and old soul. I loved Black Sabbath. In those days, rock kids felt that hip-hop borrowed stuff from others to make hits, but we carried ourselves like a punk band: “If you like us, great. If you don’t, fuck off!” As seminal creators of the west coast/90s hip-hop sound, how have you viewed genres that have mutated from it, such as British grime? Murdomania Some of it is really fucking good and some not so much, but that’s music. I love it when they do creative shit. Your lyrics noticeably lack the sexism that is a feature of a lot of hip-hop – is that a conscious effort? Theplant I never wanted to do what other hip-hop acts were doing, but also [his bandmate] Sen Dog and myself have sisters and we wouldn’t want them to be talked to that way. Tres Equis was a true story about a girl Sen Dog used to date and I Remember That Freak Bitch was also based on some real shit, but other than that it wasn’t our messaging. We were a Latino group singing about cannabis, so there were enough obstacles without being misogynistic. We were no angels, but over the course of our career we never wanted to be disrespectful to women. Do you feel any guilt or regret for some of the lyrics, for example How I Could Just Kill a Man? MichaelDillon85 No, because we were able to tell people in the mainstream what it was like in our communities. Normally, the shit that we were singing about got swept under the rug, but we approached music like the saying: “This is medicine. You may not like it, but it’s good for you.” When you live in a place with a lack of opportunities, one option is selling drugs and one way to have your back is to be in gangs. We tried to explain why things were like that. Since the Simpsons episode [in 1996, Cypress Hill were spoofed trying to remember if, while high, they had booked to play with the London Symphony Orchestra], it has been reported that you were thinking of collaborating for real. What happened? DomiRacerX [He laughs.] That started as a joke between us and the LSO on Twitter, but we would love to do something, preferably a classical performance of Black Sunday. There were serious discussions, which fell through, but we still talk about it. I listen to classical music and I still think it will happen. Did [bandmate] Muggs’ work on the Soul Assassins remix of U2’s Numb lead to invitations to dinner parties at Bono’s or holidays with The Edge in the south of France? McScootikins That would have been cool. Maybe Muggs went and kept quiet [he laughs]. Who would be the ideal collaborator on a Cypress Hill track, dead or alive? eljono Bob Marley. I Wanna Get High was inspired by Rita Marley’s song One Draw and the whole Marley movement was a big influence on us in terms of us pushing for cannabis legalisation and being consumers of it. All these years on, how do you feel about Ice Cube’s King of the Hill? Charlie 187 How are things between you guys and Ice Cube? Jakeybo After we felt that Cube took the hook from Throw Your Set in the Air, we poked back at him on No Rest for the Wicked. He kicked back with King of the Hill, so we released Ice Cube Killa to DJs only. I don’t think he took it as seriously as us in terms of what this shit can turn into, but prior to that we’d been friends and we had a lot of mutual friends who wanted us to mend the relationship. Some time later, on 1 January 1997, he called me and we both sort of apologised to each other in our roundabout way [he laughs] and since then we’ve done shows together and hung out. I’ve got nothing but love and respect for Cube. When I started, he was my benchmark. When you played on Eminem’s Anger Management tour at the Milton Keynes National Bowl in 2003, there was a sound system failure and you performed the first couple of numbers acoustic, with live conga drums as backing. I wonder if you recall one of the best pieces of improvised showmanship I’ve ever witnessed? Magma I totally remember. We were always taught to keep going and never complain about the sound guy. We knew that any stoppages would kill the show’s momentum. Credit to Eric Bobo, who’d come from the Beastie Boys on tour with us as live percussionist – fortunately, it worked. Approximately, in kilograms, how much weed do you think you’ve smoked in your life? mauritianarian Oh man, I don’t know. I’m always reaching new peaks [he laughs]. During our two-hour Dr Greenthumb show on YouTube, we’ll have four or five joints apiece. I’ll probably have six before and another eight afterwards. I’ve built up a tolerance, so we’re high, but not so that we can’t function. When was the last time the cops “come and tried to snatch your crops”? Did they have to “blow your house down” to do so [a reference to Insane in the Brain]? Rumblefish [He laughs.] Oddly enough, I’ve been pulled over many times here in California when I’ve had a tremendous amount of cannabis on me, but they’ve been stupefied that I haven’t tried to hide it. Law enforcement hasn’t given us as many problems as you might think. I don’t think they believed that we had the audacity to actually smoke cannabis on stage in front of their faces, but they were wrong. If you only had one method available, what would it be – edibles, bongs, blunts or spliffs? theplant I stopped doing blunts in ’96, ’97. Bongs I hit now and then. I prefer to smoke regular US joints, without any tobacco, but we’re well rounded, so we can do it all. What would you take to a house party at No 10 Downing Street? dale69 A couple of ounces and three bottles of tequila. I don’t know if that would do the trick for Boris Johnson. He doesn’t seem to be liked very much, but in the US we’ve also got politicians that no one likes – and a couple that people like too much. • Cypress Hill’s 10th studio album, Back in Black, is released on 18 March via BMG.Tensions in the east of Ukraine have risen dramatically after Russian-backed separatists launched an intense artillery barrage across the line of control with Ukrainian forces, shelling a nursery school and injuring three people. According to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) there were “multiple shelling incidents” on Thursday morning across the frontline in the Donbas region. The attack on the city of Stanytsia Luhanska blew a hole through the wall of kindergarten number 21. The school day had just begun when a shell landed on the building in Depovska Street. Video showed debris and masonry strewn over a play area. “The children were eating breakfast when it hit,” Natalia Slesareva told the news agency AFP. “It hit the gym. After breakfast, the children had gym class. So another 15 minutes, and everything could have been much, much worse.” Slesareva said she was working in the laundry room at the time. The explosion blew her back against the door, she said, with smoke, dust and broken windows. “I could not feel the right side of my head. Everything was ringing,” she said. A teacher and security guard were left with concussion. The Ukrainian military said 32 shells landed on the city, also injuring a serviceman and disrupting electricity supplies. A second missile left a small crater near the children’s slides in the garden playground. One woman, Natalia, said she and her husband rushed to pick up their child after hearing the strike. “I was very scared. The kindergarten has no bomb shelter. It only has thick walls. But they even managed to puncture those,” she said. “I still can’t calm down.” The attack was part of an apparent coordinated bombardment by pro-Russian separatists in multiple locations across the 250-kilometre long frontline. The assault appeared to be continuing on Thursday evening with reports of further shelling of the city. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, accused the Russian side of “provocative” behaviour at a time when the US president, Joe Biden, had warned that a Russian invasion of Ukraine remained “distinctly possible” and could happen “in the next several days”. The situation on the ground in the east appeared to be rapidly worsening. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said the Russian-backed militants had used a tank in the operation – an unusual occurrence and a breach of ceasefire agreements. “These shells came from the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, which are controlled by Russia,” Kuleba said. Western diplomats voiced concern about the military escalation by Moscow and its local proxies, about 24 hours after the Kremlin claimed it was moving some of its troops away from Ukraine’s borders. The secretary general of Nato, Jens Stoltenberg, said he was “concerned that Russia is trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine”. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, visiting Kyiv, echoed this. “Reports of alleged abnormal military activity by Ukraine in Donbas are a blatant attempt by the Russian government to fabricate pretexts for invasion,” she tweeted. “This is straight out of the Kremlin playbook.” Maria Mezentseva, a Ukrainian MP, said: “I see it as a further provocation because the previous ones didn’t work. We see them going after social infrastructure. The idea is to provoke the Ukrainian side into a reaction.” The OSCE logs regular firing between Moscow-armed separatists and Ukrainian soldiers. In recent months this low-level conflict has been relatively calm as Russia has moved 150,000 troops to Ukraine’s borders, and Ukrainian soldiers have been under instruction not to return fire. Russia has accused Kyiv of trying to provoke an escalation to recapture rebel territory by force. It says Ukraine is guilty of genocide, which Ukraine strongly denies. The Kremlin said on Thursday it was deeply concerned by the flare-up in violence in eastern Ukraine and hoped that the west would use its influence on Kyiv to prevent further escalation. The Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov dismissed reports of a planned invasion by Russia but said Moscow was watching the situation closely. He said Russia had started pulling back some of its troops that had completed drills in areas adjacent to Ukraine, but that the process would take time. Putin’s intentions remain unclear, after inaccurate predictions by Washington that an invasion might begin on Wednesday. Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, said some Russian equipment and ammunition would remain in his country once joint military exercises with Russia, taking place next to Ukraine, concluded at the weekend. The US, UK, and Stoltenberg have all expressed deep scepticism that Russia is pulling its forces out. The Kremlin said time was needed for troops to return to their bases, saying it took weeks for them to deploy for military drills. On Wednesday, the Russian Duma asked Putin to recognise the two separatist political entities in the Donbas – the Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics – as independent states. The Kremlin has not decided how to respond. Formal recognition would dramatically raise tensions and kill off the Minsk agreement, signed by Kyiv and Moscow in 2015. Russia has repeatedly accused Zelenskiy’s pro-western government of failing to implement the accords. On Thursday, the Luhansk people’s republic claimed it had come under repeated attack. Ukrainian forces had used mortars, grenade launchers and a machine gun in four separate incidents on Thursday, it asserted. “Armed forces of Ukraine have crudely violated the ceasefire regime, using heavy weapons, which, according to the Minsk agreements, should be withdrawn,” the separatists said in a statement. Ukraine’s military denied the claim and said “Russian occupation troops” had cynically targeted civilians. “As a result of the use of heavy artillery weapons by terrorists, shells hit the kindergarten building. Two civilians received shell shock,” it said. The Guardian has seen video apparently showing shelling by separatists against the frontline city of Hirske, controlled by Ukraine, in Luhansk Oblast. A series of percussive booms can be heard. According to Kyiv, the separatists shelled numerous frontline positions on Thursday including in the Ukrainian-controlled city of Adiviyike, where the two sides are a hundred metres apart. Ukrainian forces overlooking rebel-controlled Donetsk airport were also targeted. On Wednesday Nato said Russian military capability was only increasing in numbers and strength, despite claims by Moscow it was partially withdrawing its forces. Stoltenberg said Nato needed to be “prepared for the worst” while holding out hope that the signalling from Putin in recent days was evidence of a sincere desire to find a diplomatic way through the crisis.Mark Rutte, the prime minister of the Netherlands, has apologised after an inquiry revealed that the Dutch state condoned the systematic use of extrajudicial executions and torture during the 1945-9 Indonesian war of independence. The “extreme violence” of the Netherlands’ military and intelligence services was said in the report to have been sanctioned at the highest levels of government, with all considerations subordinated to the goal of maintaining the colony. The government’s position, held since an inquiry in 1969 concluded there had been only isolated “excesses” and that the armed forces “on the whole” had behaved correctly, was condemned in the report as “untenable”. After the publication of the inquiry’s findings, Rutte said: “I make a deep apology to the people of Indonesia today for the systematic and widespread extreme violence by the Dutch side in those years and the consistent looking away by previous cabinets.” Rutte said the blame did not belong to individual soldiers but to the system at the time. “The prevailing culture was one of looking away, shirking and a misplaced colonial sense of superiority,” he said. “That is a painful realisation, even after so many years.” Dr Rémy Limpach, one of the historians involved in the research, said part of the explanation for the conduct of the Dutch, which he said amounted at times to a “reign of terror”, was its weakness in the face of guerrilla tactics. “Often it follows from a feeling of powerlessness, frustration, feeling that you have got your back against the wall,” Limpach said. “Not being able to handle the conflict with normal military means.” The government-funded research, undertaken over four and a half years, offers a challenging perspective on a period of history that remains raw to many in the Netherlands, where the country’s colonial record is fiercely contested. On 17 August 1945, two days after Japan’s surrender brought an end to the second world war, the Indonesian revolutionaries Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta declared independence, breaking with 350 years of Dutch exploitation. The government in The Hague rejected the move and between the independence declaration and the withdrawal of Dutch forces on 27 December 1949 an estimated 100,000 Indonesians were killed, compared with about 5,300 fighting on the Dutch side, including Indonesians in their service. “The sources show that the use of extreme violence by the Dutch armed forces was not only widespread but often deliberate, too,” the Dutch and Indonesian researchers wrote. “It was condoned at every level: political, military and legal. The reason for this was that the Netherlands wanted to defeat the Republic of Indonesia – which had declared independence on 17 August 1945 – at any cost, and was prepared to subordinate almost everything to this goal. In doing so, ethical boundaries, including those that applied at the time, were emphatically crossed.” The army was “frequently and structurally” guilty of “extrajudicial executions, ill-treatment and torture, detention under inhumane conditions, arson of houses and villages, and often arbitrary mass arrests and internments”, the report’s researchers said. Rape was not normally condoned but it was lightly punished, if at all. A spokesperson for the Veterans Platform, an organisation representing former Dutch military personnel, claimed the research underplayed the violence unleashed by those fighting for independence. He said: “The decolonisation period has been too emphatically examined from the perspective of contemporary norms, values and ethical considerations. Unfortunately, more than 200,000 veterans are implicitly portrayed as extreme perpetrators of violence and they and their relatives are insulted and stigmatised.” An organisation said to represent Indo-Dutch people, Platform 2.0, had appealed to the courts to block the report’s publication. The research, conducted by the Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies, the Netherlands Institute of Military History and the Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies, will be published in 14 books, including a summary volume, Beyond the Pale: Dutch Extreme Violence in the Indonesian War of Independence, 1945-1949. The Dutch king, Willem-Alexander, apologised in 2020 for the “excessive violence” inflicted on Indonesia during colonial rule, the first admission of regret since independence.A groundbreaking moment in the history of trade unions and women’s rights is to be marked with the placement of a blue plaque commemorating the 1888 matchgirls’ strike in east London. It is one of 14 blue plaques to be put up in the capital this year by English Heritage. The organisation has sought to broaden and diversify the scheme by inviting nominations from the public that relate to groups of people as well as individuals. The strike by 1,400 girls and young women employed at the Bryant &amp; May factory in Bow was prompted by the dismissal of three workers, low pay and dangerous working conditions. Workers at the factory were at risk of developing “phossy jaw”, a disease that could cause disfigurement, abscesses, brain damage and death, that was caused by exposure to white phosphorus used in the manufacture of matches. The workers, mostly aged between 15 and 20 and many of Irish descent, received meagre wages for long working days, and were fined if their work was deemed substandard. After three weeks on strike, the factory’s owner agreed to almost all the women’s demands, and recognised their union. The strike was hailed as a victory for workers’ rights. “These were women who were dismissed as being unskilled, impoverished girls, and the fact they were disciplined enough to organise and stay out [on strike] under real hardship until their demands were met was very significant,” said Anna Eavis, English Heritage’s curatorial director. “It was a spur and influence for other unions and other examples of direct action. It’s a very important episode, and it has a certain romance to it; it captured the imagination. “This plaque is a great way of acknowledging a group of people who would never get a plaque individually.” It will be placed at the site of the Bryant &amp; May factory, which has now been converted into housing, later this year. Among the other blue plaques to be erected is one to the Ayah’s Home in Hackney, which provided a refuge between 1900 and 1921 for nannies and nursemaids from south Asia brought to London by British families but subsequently abandoned. Dr John Conolly (1794-1866), and the former Hanwell Asylum in Middlesex, will be commemorated for his advocacy of a system of non-restraint in caring for mentally unwell people. Conolly dispensed with handcuffs, leg irons and straitjackets that were regularly used in asylums at the time. The National Union of Women’s Suffrage Societies, formed in 1897, will also get a blue plaque to mark its Westminster headquarters. At its peak in 1913, it had 50,000 members and nearly 500 affiliates, making it the largest of the organisations campaigning for women’s right to vote. English Heritage will also unveil this year the restorations of three of England’s most important sites – Clifford’s Tower in York, Marble Hill in Twickenham, and Richborough Roman Fort and Amphitheatre in Kent. Tim Laurence, the chair of English Heritage, said the charity – which looks after more than 400 historic buildings, monuments and sites – had had a “very tough” two years because of Covid closures, but had seen “tremendous loyalty” from its members and “terrific support” from the government.NDT2 is a company of incredible dancers. The younger sibling of Nederlands Dans Theater is made up of the best of international dance graduates (under new artistic director Emily Molnar). Maybe there’s something magic in the energy and ambition and discipline you take into your first big job, matched with precocious technique. It shows in Hans van Manen’s Simple Things, from 2001, a quartet danced with immense finesse, the performers’ classical grounding evident in smooth-as-silk chainé turns and silent, springing jumps. The technical command and celerity of the dancers shows in an entirely different way in Marco Goecke’s new work The Big Crying, with its sharp, glitching angles, fast-forward speed and precise articulation. They nail its demanding complexity. Ricardo Hartley III is especially eye-catching, stretching into the most elastic backbend, his dancing so clean you could eat your dinner off it. Goecke made the piece after the death of his father (the tops the dancers wear are intended to look like the curtains of a hearse) but it has none of the cliches of grief – no gut-clutching despair, no collapse. His dancers’ world is full of angry jolts, like compulsive thoughts, and a sense of disconnect, from time or the world around them. There’s a striking moment where two dancers throw their chests together, repeatedly and robotically, as if trying to connect at the heart, but nothing yields – the thing is, with work as slick and stylised as this, there’s always the risk the audience feels that sense of distance, too. There’s an interestingly disjointed relationship with Goecke’s chosen soundtrack, songs by Tori Amos, the tumbling waves of piano and her breathy dream-voice up against the severe accents of the dance. A final new piece, Impasse, by Johan Inger, gets us closer to the dancers’ youthful freedom. A trio, at first playfully carefree, are subsumed by encroaching tribes, first a black-clad clan doing sexy Latin hips, then wild, fancy-dressed party animals. The idea’s about the power of peer pressure, the ease with which we follow the crowd. I’m not sure how deeply the work explores its themes but as you can guarantee with NDT2, it has some fantastic dancing. NDT2 are at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 19 February, then touring.Has political correctness infiltrated the pages of concert programmes? “These days it’s easier to appreciate the piece as ‘different’ rather than simply ‘sub-standard’,” we were informed in the note for the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment’s performance of Schumann’s violin concerto, as if concepts of good and less good are no longer allowed when discussing music. Let’s just say, then, that Schumann’s concerto is problematic, and that over the 84 years since it was exhumed from the archives in Leipzig and given its belated premiere, many violinists have attempted to solve those problems. But if there’s anyone today who can show that the work belongs in the pantheon of 19th-century violin concertos, it’s surely Isabelle Faust, who was the soloist for the OAE’s performance, with Antonello Manacorda conducting. Faust certainly tried. As always her playing was a marvel of nimble brilliance, effortlessly navigating the thickets of figuration to which Schumann’s violin writing often resorts, and making the most of the touching simplicity of the concerto’s slow movement. But she could do nothing to mitigate the rambling repetitions in the first and last movements, or their sheer lack of thematic variety, for all her efforts at gilding them. Manacorda tried just as hard to bring life to the routine orchestral accompaniments. His care over textures had been demonstrated right at the start of the concert with his refined, almost stealthy kindling of Mendelssohn’s Hebrides Overture, and, after the concerto, he lavished the same attention on the details of Schumann’s Second Symphony, without ever sacrificing any of its energy, exuberance or lyrical intensity – played on gut strings, with minimal vibrato, the opening of the Adagio was heart-stoppingly beautiful. Manacorda is apparently being talked about as a possible successor to Antonio Pappano at the Royal Opera House; on this evidence he’s certainly a conductor who will bring something fresh to even the most familiar music.Fittingly for self-distributed works by a true American independent, Patrick Wang’s four features to date stand tall with a graceful and tenacious outsiderdom. Their handmade quality and occasional rough edges may have made them a hard sell, but this seems unfair. There’s a collectivist spirit, moral conviction and self-taught experimentalism at work here – the latter given increasing room to express itself as Wang has gradually untethered himself from realism – that demands attention. Especially impressive is Wang’s 2011 debut In the Family (****) – starring Wang himself as Joey Williams, a Texan interior designer whose partner Cody (Trevor St John) is killed in a car accident. Cody’s will, written long before their relationship, states that his sister Eileen (Kelly McAndrew) should act as guardian to Chip (a beautifully instinctive performance by Sebastian Banes), his six-year-old son by his previous heterosexual marriage. This leaves the devastated Joey, himself a foster kid, flailing for legal options to preserve his relationship with Chip. Wang – also a theatre director – likes to squat naturalistically in Joey’s household with signature middle-distance long takes. While this makes the 160-minute In the Family a testing prospect, the intimacy he fosters pays off, because you fully comprehend what Joey is fighting for. Wang’s understated approach to this Asian-American life is somewhat similar to last year’s Minari: racism (or homophobia, for that matter) is never explicitly mentioned as the reason why his in-laws suddenly cold-shoulder him. But prejudice subtly lingers in the vicinity: the hospital officiously bars him from visiting Cody in intensive care. As Wang subtly intensifies the style, the legal sparring builds into something truly engrossing and that wields a wily humanistic force. The lesson here is that people power and communication are worth more than systems and legal processes. “Those limits can be distracted. So don’t head straight for them,” says the gentleman lawyer who comes to Joey’s aid. The deposition scene in which Joey displays unflappable southern aplomb deserves to be a legal genre classic. Shorter but offering less substance is 2015’s The Grief of Others (**), adapted from a novel by Leah Hager Cohen. It’s another household affair, with Trevor St John returning; he plays the paterfamilias of the Ryries, who are close to breaking point after a horrific postpartum event. Wang cranks up the formalism here, with the opening stages scattered among various family members and bystanders cradling various degrees of personal agony, and interlude scenes shot red-filtered from the perspective of the deceased. But the drama constantly struggles to grasp the central nub of the trauma, caught between flat behavioural sequences (in which everything is subtext) and ragged melodramatic confessionals. Wang’s theatrical roots are given full rein in the two halves of the playful but empowering 2018 comedy-drama A Bread Factory, an almost Altman-esque sojourn with the team behind a community performing arts centre in the fictional town of Checkford. But Wang is also a former economist, and A Bread Factory Part One: For the Sake of Gold (***) diligently examines the civic value of art. That’s what lesbian couple Dorothea (Tyne Daly) and Greta (Elisabeth Henry), who run the Bread Factory, have to make a case for when a swish rival outfit across town tries to gazump their funding on the back of their new Chinese performance art duo, May Ray. Wang is clearly having great fun with this pair of po-faced chancers, spoofing vapid conceptual pomposity; the same goes for the Chekhov parody performed by one of Bread Factory crew, and another vignette in which a Hollywood heartthrob swans into town. Wang retains the observational neutrality of his other features, but the manic theatricality on stage constantly overflows from the proscenium into the real-life scenes. Wang is clearly a believer in the mutually reinforcing cycle of life and art. A Bread Factory Part Two: Walk With Me a While (****) shows how it’s the work of places such as the Bread Factory to unearth the latter in the former, when the team find a star performer for their production of Euripides’ Hecuba working at a local cafe. By now, the artifice is running amok all over Checkford: a pair of warhorse thespians slip into Russian melancholia over the samovar; cafe patrons tap-dance out their smartphone frustrations; Wes Anderson-style stop-motion sequences show the development work in progress on the play; a clutch of rough and ready chorus-line songs (most written by Wang). But amid this representational frenzy, it’s the simplicity of the Hecuba sequences – spellbindingly performed by Henry and the waitress-turned-actor Teresa (Jessica Pimintel)– that tip the balance back in favour of realism; a sober reminder that the purpose of all this creation is to find truth. As Greta and Dorothea struggle in the rehearsal room and in their private lives, Wang implies that the real worth of art is in giving us the strength to strive and persist. The fact that the box office take for both parts of The Bread Factory combined was $17,325 only proves his point. • The Films of Patrick Wang (In the Family, The Grief of Others, A Bread Factory Parts One and Two) are released on 18 February in cinemas, and are on digital platforms from 21 March.Part-wild hybrid cats could be banned by the UK government, after social media helped bring these extreme breeds to popularity. With their huge size, powerful muscles and spotted coats, hybrid cats are seen by some as the perfect pet for the social media age. But the growing trade raises concerns over animal welfare and the wildlife black market. Government sources said they planned to review the Animal Welfare (Licensing of Activities Involving Animals) (England) Regulations 2018. A source said: “During this review we will consider whether there is a need to introduce licensing arrangements for cat breeders including restrictions on the breeding of certain types of cats.” Current UK legislation does not regulate the hybridisation of exotic felids with domestic cats. Campaigners have argued that breeds that are part wildcat are unsuitable for most pet owners owing to their complex needs, and put pressure on rare felines in the wild because an increased demand for these cats means some breeders resort to the illegal wildlife trade to find wildcats to breed from. Savannah cats, a cross between a domestic cat and an African serval, have become particularly popular on social media owing to their striking look. One such cat, Stryker, has more than 800,000 followers on Instagram. A “luxury cattery” promoting the breed has 44,000 followers. The savannah cat breed was only recognised in 2001 and since then there has been a surge in its popularity as a trophy pet, with “F1 hybrids” – a cat with a serval as a parent – fetching up to £20,000 a kitten. According to research by the Wildheart Trust, there are 259 small and medium exotic cats registered as pets in the UK. A large number of these cats are used for breeding, producing hybrids such as the savannah. A spokesperson for the animal charity said: “Urgent legislative action to make this form of hybridisation illegal will prevent the suffering of individual animals caught up in this trade and mitigate against future threats to wild populations of exotic felids. The Wildheart Animal Sanctuary has over 40 years of experience caring for exotic felids. We see first-hand the physical and psychological damage inflicted on animals at the hands of humans.” Bengals, such as that owned – and kicked – by the disgraced footballer Kurt Zouma, were created by breeding domestic animals with the Asian leopard cat. While nowadays the breed is established, most are bred with each other rather than wildcats. Many are found dumped at rescue centres because their high-energy personalities are too much for their owners to handle. Those bengals that have a wildcat parent or grandparent could be subject to a ban, but many of the breed are now so interbred that wildcats are far back in their lineage, so experts have said these could still be allowed. A spokesperson for Battersea Dogs and Cats Home said it supported a ban on breeding hybrid cats in the UK. They said: “In recent years demand has grown for designer hybrid cats such as savannah cats, a cross between a domestic cat and an African serval. Unsurprisingly these cats are not suitable for a domestic home environment, due to their wild cat DNA, their size, and their very strong predatory instincts. “We have seen so many examples of animals being bred for their looks rather than welfare, causing numerous welfare issues. It’s vital that we clamp down on this practice and stop further animals suffering at the hands of indiscriminate breeders.” The RSPCA is also calling for a crackdown on the breeding of these cats, because it involves a demand for dangerous wild animals. This has implications both for human safety and animal welfare. The RSPCA scientific officer Evie Button said: “We have concerns about the breeding, trade and keeping of wild – or ‘exotic’ – animals kept as pets, including those classified as dangerous wild animals, such as servals. We believe that animals should only be kept in captivity if good welfare can be assured and this can be very challenging. “Exotic pets are wild, non-domesticated animals kept in captivity and so their needs are essentially no different to the same species living in the wild. Some species – like servals – are unsuitable to be kept as pets because their needs are too complex to be met in a household environment.” She said the charity was pushing for a wider review into the keeping of exotic animals as pets.Whenever my aunt Hilary Peters had any money – including a large sum given to her by her wealthy father, the literary agent AD Peters – she would give it away at the earliest opportunity. Long before the green movement became fashionable, her interest in religions (though she retained independence from all of them) merged with ecology and a deep love of animals, and in the early 1970s she set about healing some of the barren, post-industrial acres of London’s docklands. Hilary, who has died aged 83, encouraged young urbanites to connect with nature - such “connectedness” was intrinsic and vital to her - by starting one of the first city farms in Britain at Surrey Docks. She grew plants in the dock’s masonry and made home-made goat’s cheese for city workers’ lunches. Under her care, goats gambolled and hens scratched in an environment far from rural. Her book Docklandscape (1978) gives a good account of her trials and successes. The daughter of AD (Augustus Dudley) Peters and his second wife, Margaret, Hilary was born in London, with two much older half-siblings. She attended Francis Holland school, then studied theology at St Anne’s College, Oxford. Thereafter she embraced poverty. After her work at the city farm, she lived happily in a narrow boat (with the playwright NF Simpson) for more than a decade and cruised the country’s canal systems, becoming an expert on these waterways. It may have been during this time that she conceived the idea of herself as a “pilgrim without destination”, subsequently transferring herself and the inevitable couple of dogs to a renovated ambulance and touring the country for 10 years. During this time she came to know almost all its landscapes and byways intimately, and gained a compendious knowledge of its churches and large country houses. For some years she edited the journal Follies and gained the reputation for ignoring “Private” signs and gaining entry to any folly that caught her attention. This acquaintanceship with landed gentry contrasted happily with her work for many years as a prison visitor. When foot-and-mouth struck in 2001 she joined farmers resisting what she regarded as the needless destruction of herds that had taken generations to establish. Thereafter, with scarcely a penny to her name, and by the good fortune that seemed innate in her, she became custodian of a beautiful gatehouse on the Badminton estate where she spent the rest of her life. Hilary had thought her mother “melodramatic”, and along with her father’s early departure from the marriage, this seems to have put her off the idea of family altogether. But she made up for it by enduring friendships. Many of those she had met on her travels came to stay at the gatehouse over the years, including a good few people in difficulties seeking a refuge. Hilary’s continual concern was to lay bare, as she saw it, the illusions of the self-constructed ego and to find her way through to the “other world” of a oneness we all, in her view, try to separate ourselves from. She was, I think, the least judgmental person I have ever met. A self-professed hermit, she nevertheless ended her days with an enormous circle of loving and devoted friends from every social class and all walks of life. Hilary is survived by her older sister, the literary biographer Catherine Peters.Thousands have been left without power as Storm Dudley brought chaos to roads and rail services across Scotland and northern England. The worst-affected areas include the North East of England, Cumbria, Lancashire as well as Edinburgh and Glasgow. The Met Office has also issued weather warnings for Friday covering much of the country, with Storm Eunice expected to bring winds of up to 100mph in parts. If you have suffered travel disruption or been left without power because of Storm Dudley, we want to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The New York brand Collina Strada takes sustainability seriously – its website describes it as “a platform for social issues and awareness” rather than a fashion brand – but it’s loved by a younger demographic because it brings the fun, too. Its contribution to New York fashion week on Wednesday was no exception. Rather than a show, a film called The Collinas was debuted at the Angelika cinema. A spoof of a reality TV show documenting a hapless intern, Tommy, joining the Collina Strada team, it sent up the dogmatism associated with sustainability with the eye rolls, vocal fry and side eye recognisable to viewers of shows such as Keeping Up With the Kardashians and The Hills. The use of a disposable cup is greeted with a damning “ew” while Tommy’s pastrami sandwich is a thing of horror to other staff members tucking into raw carrots and broccoli. “I haven’t seen a dead animal since 2013,” says one. This film is a surprise for a brand so known for doing sustainability well but perhaps the irony is a reaction to the rise of Collina Strada – and fashion’s increasing engagement with sustainability – over recent years. Hillary Taymour founded it while a fashion student in 2009, a year when terms such as “sustainability” or “deadstock” would have led a brand to be labelled niche rather than seen as an industry trailblazer. Collina Strada is now very much the latter: it’s produced in small batches in New York, prioritises more sustainable fabrics and has a partnership with a Ghana-based textile waste not-for-profit called the OR Foundation to reuse materials. Crucially, Collina Strada’s clothes are made mindfully but they also have a Y2K, club-ready aesthetic that appeals to Gen Z. All the actors in the film wore the colourful, cut-up, more-is-more designs of the brand. The audience at the Angelika mirrored the style of those on the film, suggesting the invitees were also friends of the brand. Many, including Taymour, wore the tie-dyed, oversized, arty clothes that Collina Strada is known for. The casting for shows and films has also been ahead of the game. Models are always diverse – across age, size, ethnicity, gender and physical ability. The 70-year-old mother of Taymour’s collaborator, Charlie Engman, is a favourite muse, as is Aaron Philip, the black, transgender and disabled model. Both appeared in The Collinas along with the models Cory Kennedy and Jazzelle Zanaughtti; the executive editorial director at Dazed &amp; Confused, Lynette Nylander, and – to make it really meta – a real reality TV star, Whitney Port, who made her name on The Hills. Wider fashion is finally catching up with Taymour. Nominated for a CDFA award in 2019, she was selected by the Gucci designer Alessandro Michele to be part of 2021’s digital festival, GucciFest, and has collaborated with Levi’s and Reebok. Celebrities including Rihanna, Rosalia, Charlie XCX and Camila Mendes have worn her clothes. Speaking to the Financial Times this month, she described what drives her. “My goal with Collina is to teach people and have fun,” she says. “We’re just trying to make fashion a little less horrible.”Ivan Michael Blackstock never stops moving. For the best part of an hour, the choreographer has been patiently explaining his approach to dance, a process that involves springing up from the balls of his feet and gesticulating in time with an imagined rhythm, despite the fact he is seated. “Whether I’m thinking about a performance or making music or picking up a paintbrush – that’s dancing,” he says. “That’s the first gear: the thing through which everything else flows.” Having worked on Beyoncé’s visual album Black Is King, a journey through Black identity and the global African diaspora, his new show, Traplord, casts the streets of south London as the perfect stage to explore the stereotyping of Black men in western society. “When we see street culture and the imagery on TV around young Black men, it’s very violent and aggressive, and yes, there is some of that, but then there’s also a good,” he says. “You can see drill music as one thing – an expression of violence – but it’s people channelling their pain into doing something creative. Just because you live in this community and express yourself loudly, doesn’t mean you’re being aggressive.” An immersive dance performance, Traplord blends theatre, hip-hop and spoken word in its meditation on Black masculinity and mental health. “I’m proud to have worked on Black Is King: it was filmed here and it was a real chance to wave the flag for UK artists. But Traplord feels different: it’s Ivan this time. This is a story that has always felt present in me.” Although he repeatedly describes the process of bringing Traplord to the stage as “therapeutic” and a “great relief”, he says he is interested, above all, in “looking outside my pain”. “Within Traplord there’s a lot of utopic ideas. It’s something I learned from hip-hop, really: ‘What messages are you passing down to the community?’” Blackstock, 35, grew up in Peckham, with his mother, sister and brother, before crossing south London at 15 to live with his grandmother in Brixton. He felt the absence of his father keenly throughout his childhood and the spectre of abandonment hovers over his work; it is the key stumbling block in the hero’s journey in Traplord. “I was abandoned; I felt alone without that father figure in my life, so yeah, I do feel somewhat like I need to be a father, not just to myself, but to other young men.” From a young age, Blackstock channelled that unease into dance. “I’ve been choreographing since I was on the playground in primary,” he says. But the transition to secondary school came with a new self-consciousness that made him doubt his passion. After winning the schoola talent show with an MTV Base-inspired rendition of Usher’s My Way, Blackstock became a target for bullies. “They were like: we spit; we rap. But I was always moving and expressing my ideas through my body.” He describes his life through this period as “like a movie” (when pressed he offers Boyz N the Hood or Brotherhood as examples). At 15, leaving his home meant navigating groups of young men who would hassle him, threatening him with violence and cautioning him not to stray into their territory. “I felt trapped in my environment,” he says, suggesting that his race only added to the intensity of his claustrophobia. Aged 11, he was stopped by police in Elephant and Castle, south London, because he “fit the description” for a bank robbery. “It made me feel powerless. When you’re going through adolescence, there’s a lot of things happening: your body’s changing, you’re trying to find your voice and assert your masculinity; where do I fit in the world?” The answer came through dance. Blackstock left school without any GCSEs (his inability to sit still was no help in the classroom) but was booked as a dancer on MTV shortly after. He followed his passion from there, most pertinently through the hip-hop dance company BirdGang, which he likens to “finding a family”. The group’s breakthrough came in 2006, with a performance of its show What Is BirdGang? at Sadler’s Wells, co-producer of Traplord along with 180 Studios, where Blackstock is the artistic director. “I’ve been a fan of Sadler’s Wells since I was a kid. You know, dreaming one day that my work will be on that stage? BirdGang was like this flock flying together on the same mission and getting the chance to perform there felt like discovering my superhero alter ego.” Even though he is no longer with the company, he says BirdGang is still his family: “I was best man at one of the artistic directors’ weddings.” Gigs as a backing dancer for Kylie Minogue and Dizzee Rascal followed, but it was touring Asia, as a dancer with Pet Shop Boys, that he credits with kicking off his career as a choreographer. “Travelling the world meant being exposed to different types of men, different ideas of masculinity,” he says. Discovering butoh, a traditional form of Japanese dance theatre, was a “big thing for me”. Butoh typically features dancers in white body makeup performing intense and technically rigid body moves. He had unwittingly been a fan of the style for years, having been fascinated with the character Sadako’s creepily deliberate movements in the Japanese horror classic Ring. Blackstock calls this form of cultural exchange “sampling”, likening his use of movements from martial arts in his choreography to Wu-Tang Clan’s use of sounds lifted from kung fu movies. “I was a big Bruce Lee fan as a kid, and I always noted that crossover with hip-hop.” I ask if he is wary of appropriating other cultures for his benefit, just as hip-hop, and now grime and drill, have been subsumed into western culture. “I can only be as conscious as I can be. I don’t think any of us have full awareness of what we’re doing. All we can do is try to respect people’s spaces, people’s identities, and yeah, it’s very much something I’m learning to do also … ” he says, trailing off as though only partly happy with his response. Traplord, however, is very much situated in his own personal experience, even if it maintains his penchant for a broad range of cultural reference points. The show was conceived during two weeks of intimate conversations with a group of friends and collaborators he invited to his rehearsal space in an abandoned east London leisure centre. It draws on Plato’s Allegory of the Cave, Toni Morrison’s Tar Baby and the legacy of Blackface to inform its interrogation of contemporary Blackness. Blackstock is obsessed with what it means to be a Black man today, especially given how often we hear that Black masculinity is “in crisis”. “I just wanted to put my friends on: young Black men on stage telling their authentic truth at a time when I felt that story wasn’t being told on a theatrical stage,” he says. “It’s a fever dream of masculinity.” On Twitter, Blackstock describes himself as a “roadnaissance man”, (riffing on the slang term “roadman”). “Someone joked that I’m a roadnaissance man and it just stuck: I’m young, I’m trying to do something new and that means having your hands in many different pies, but I still feel connected to street culture and the road life.” Blackstock no longer lives in south London, having headed east to be near his rehearsal studio, where he lives with his fiancee, whom he met in 2009 while on a shoot in New York. Unsurprisingly perhaps given the emphasis he places on his own absent father, he is adamant that he wants to have children one day, even if that is not currently on the horizon. “For a long time I felt detached and, for me, that detachment came from a lack of love,” he says. “From feeling a sense of abandonment that led me to abandon myself. I’m interested in elevating those voices. People like me who felt they were abandoned.” As Traplord’s opening draws nearer, Blackstock says he “feels like a superhero … I feel like I’ve been sent here to save the dance scene. Maybe that’s just the ego version but I need people to understand that dance is amazing and recognise how dope the UK scene is. It’s not just what you’ve seen on social media, people busting simple dance moves, we’re here to tell stories. We’re more than just backing dancers.” Traplord is at 180 Studios, London, from 26 March until 16 April.Commuters and long-haul travellers at London’s St Pancras International station will be offered something different this International Women’s Day: the chance to pause, reflect and enjoy a moment of art and connection in an unlikely place. On 8 March the station will become a stage for a series of brand-new, train-themed micro-operas created by teams of female composers and librettists. These include Laura Reid and Oge Nwosu’s poetic song Detritus, which will be performed at the National Rail service departure boards and is told through the eyes of a cleaner who reunites people with their lost items. And against the backdrop of the station’s iconic statue The Meeting Place, Sarah Lianne Lewis and Sophia Chapadjiev’s The Parting Place will tell the tale of an elusive voyeur, while Joanna Taylor and Kerry Priest’s I Just Wanna Be (in Center Parcs) will explore journeys beyond the every day. Each newly commissioned piece has been built on anecdotes submitted to the Royal Opera House by members of the public, exploring themes of time, motion, meetings and farewells. The female composer and librettist duos were selected after an open call from the ROH’s Jette Parker Young Artists Programme (JPYA). The series, called Lost and Found, also includes Victoria Bernath and Teresa Howard’s Mini Break, a comic opera about the panic of lost passports and the inevitable bickering that follows, as well as Anna Braithwaite and Priests’ The Hardest Journey, about hidden disabilities. The event is part of the Europalia Arts Festival, which involves European railway stations including Antwerp, Brussels and Rotterdam central stations. Some of the writing teams were mentored by the award-winning composer Laura Bowler, whose new work The Blue Woman will premiere at the ROH this summer. Singers include the Jette Parker Young artists April Koyejo-Audiger, Thando Mjandana, Chuma Sijeqa, Blaise Malaba and Egor Zhuravskii, joined by Siân Dicker, Milly Forrest, Njabulo Madlala, Sam Marston, Zahid Siddiqui and Jamie Woollard. Accompanying them will be players from the Belgium chamber ensemble Casco Phil, whose artistic director Benjamin Haemhouts devised the project. Angelique MacDonald, producer for the JPYA, said: “It has been a privilege to read the personal stories that were shared with us for this project, and watch them inspire seven new works in different styles and approaches. Opera is an innately human art form and it’s hugely exciting to be able to perform such relatable work with Caso Phil at St Pancras International.” Wendy Spinks, commercial director at HS1, said: “We are so excited for St Pancras International to be the backdrop for the latest Lost and Found performances, straight off the Eurostar. There will no doubt be many interesting and entertaining stories from travellers who pass through train stations, and we can’t wait to see them brought to life through the magic and beauty of opera.” • This article was amended on 20 February 2022 because an earlier version misspelled Victoria Bernath’s surname as “Bernarth”.One question lingered at the Capital Indoor Stadium as Kamila Valieva’s head sank towards her ankles, the tear ducts refused to shut and the Olympic dream of the greatest female skater in history came tumbling horribly to earth. Was all this really worth it? The trials and global tumult of the past week were already far beyond what any 15-year-old should have to bear. Yet Thursday’s free skate programme somehow heaped fresh indignities – and fears for the Russian’s situation. When the haunting strains of Ravel’s Bolero rang out to start her free skating routine, Valieva had the Winter Olympic figure skating title on the tip of her blades. But under the severest scrutiny, she found herself unable to weave her usual spell. She fell twice – first on a quad toe loop and triple toe loop combination, and then again on another quad toe loop combination – and the crowd gasped and gasped again. It was almost as if a doppelgänger had been flown in from outer Siberia. To make matters worse after enduring the longest four minutes and 20 seconds of her life, Valieva then had her coach, Eteri Tutberidze, barking in her ear. “Why did you let it go?” she demanded. “Explain to me, why. Why did you stop fighting? You let it go after that axel. Why?” Tutberidze, whose training methods are as brutal as her success is undeniable, has a nickname: Cruella de Vil. This, though, was a moment for a comforting hug, not an audition for a role as a Hollywood super villain. What made all this even more painful is that Valieva had been leading after Tuesday’s short programme. Yet her free skating routine was so uncharacteristically off kilter it saw her drop to fourth with an overall score of 224.09. One of the crueller ironies here is that when the court of arbitration for sport decided earlier this week to allow her to continue to compete in Beijing, despite a positive drugs test for a banned angina drug, it had done so in order to prevent “irreparable emotional harm”. So much for that. Under World Anti-Doping Agency rules, Valieva is supposed to be a “protected athlete” because of her age. But that idea is meaningless when the people closest to her aren’t doing any of the protecting. After her routine, Valieva spent several minutes in the kiss and cry booth, unable to comprehend what had happened. She was far from alone. Meanwhile, metres away from her, another extraordinary scene played out as two other Russian prodigies, who are also coached by Tutberidze, reacted to winning gold and silver. Until last week, no female skater had done a quad in Olympic competition, but then the 17-year-old Alexandra Trusova performed five of them in a routine of astonishing pyrotechnics to score 251.73 points overall. Many thought it was enough for gold given that the world champion, Anna Shcherbakova, also 17, only landed two quads. However, the judges ruled that Shcherbakova’s combined score from Tuesday’s short programme and Thursday’s ’s free skate was worth 4.22 points more. Trusova was understandably upset – and then some. “Everyone has a gold medal, everyone, but not me,” she screamed. “I hate skating. I hate it. I hate this sport. I will never go out on the ice again! Never! I hate! It’s impossible, it’s impossible! You can not do it this way.” Later, she appeared to calm down slightly – although the residual anger towards her coach, who had only wanted her to do four quads, and the judges remained. “I am not happy with the result,” she explained. “There is no happiness. Everything was enough for me. I did everything. And after, it is out of my hands.” Meanwhile, Shcherbakova was altogether less emotional as she tried to make sense of an extraordinary week for her and Russian skating on and off the ice. “I’m just happy,” she said. “No more emotions. I still don’t understand what happened. I can’t believe that the Olympic Games are over for me.” She also offered some kind words for Valieva, her training partner and compatriot, although she refused to comment on her continuing drugs case. “I was watching Kamila and from her first jump I saw how difficult it was for her, what a burden it was, and I understand what an athlete feels,” she explained. “It is more than difficult to go on after a couple of things like that and I will tell her afterwards what I think personally.” Sadly Valieva’s pain is not yet over. She now faces months of limbo while her positive test for trimetazidine, a drug typically described for patients suffering from angina, is resolved in the courts. It is possible that she still might escape an anti-doping ban, which would enable her to pick up the gold medal she helped the Russian Olympic Committee win in last week’s team event. Hours before the astonishing finale of the single skating competition, the president of the ROC promised to fight any efforts to take that gold away, even if Valieva is eventually disqualified for doping. The ROC’s president, Stanislav Pozdnyakov, insisted that the anti-doping rules were written in such a way that a review of results in a team event would only take place if the alleged anti-doping violation had been committed during the Olympic Games.“We will defend this position consistently in any possible proceedings, including in the court of arbitration for sport,” he said. Those comments will upset a great many countries and a great many skaters. But they will, at least, provide Valieva with a degree of hope. And that was an element otherwise missing on a painful and chaotic night in Beijing.On 31 January, the daily Tribune de Genève announced that four of Geneva’s best-known characters had suddenly been orphaned by the death of their maker, John Aldus, at the age of 81. These figures – a pair of art collectors, a poet and a pretty young woman, name unknown – were not actual Genevois but life-size, hyper-realist bronze sculptures of them, mingling with other burghers in the city’s Plainpalais Square. Placed there in 1982, they were collectively titled Alter Ego – Aldus was one such himself, the artist having for five decades been known by his birth name, Gérald John Ducimetière. The Alter Ego figures remain Aldus’s best-known works, but they are easily misread. The quartet of bronzes are not public sculpture in any usual sense of the term: their purpose is not to memorialise or decorate, but to use familiarity to make space unfamiliar. If one word can be applied to the broad range of Aldus’s art-making – drawing, printing, film et al – then that word is probably “uncanny”. His 1974 video piece, La Blessure (Wound), showed a woodsman’s axe hacked into the floor of Geneva’s venerable Musée Rath; in the photo series, Matterhorn (1975), the Swiss art collector André L’Huillier – one of the characters in Alter Ego – spoons a chocolate replica of the titular mountain into his mouth. These early Swiss works often featured Aldus himself, a Byronic figure with a dark beard. The video Poisson shows him ruminating, for 13 seconds, on the question of why fishermen, demonstrating the size of a catch, do so palms-in rather than palms-out. In a 1975 interview, citing Plato, Aldus ruminated on beauty. “In nature,” he says, “nothing is beautiful or ugly. Man’s obsession with beauty is driven by the knowledge that only we are capable of producing ugliness.” This view, and its classical underpinnings, was typical of Aldus. If his background in the Genevan suburb of Veyrier was hardly intellectual – his father, John, worked in a factory, his mother, Lucie (nee Poitry), was a concierge – the young Ducimetière proved prodigiously bright. Locally schooled, he won a place at the Écoles des Arts Décoratifs and Beaux-Arts in Geneva, graduating in 1961 with the Prix Pierre Cailler. More prizes followed, with federal grants to match. As a student, he had visited Salvador Dalí in Cadaqués, and his work would retain a strong tinge of the surreal. In 1995 he changed his birth name, Gérald John Ducimetière, to John Aldus. “Ducimetière” means “of the cemetery” in French. Perhaps with resurrection in mind, the artist jettisoned his first forename for his second, conflating the last letters of “Gérald” with the first of “Ducimetière” to become John Aldus. (The surname was also chosen to honour the company whose eponymous graphic software Ducimetière liked to use, swallowed up that same year by Adobe.) The following year he moved to London; perhaps, like his familiarly unfamiliar Alter Ego characters, the point was to flirt with displacement. The works Aldus made in London were as thoughtful, and thought-provoking, as his Swiss work had been. His light sculpture, Lykeios (2000), punned in French and classical Greek. The building in whose turrets the piece was installed was called the Lycée, the word deriving from the Athenian temple of Apollo Lykeios where Aristotle had taught. Aldus’s British masterpiece, Tokens (2006), commissioned by Camden council, saw him embedding copies of the fragments attached as identifiers by 18th-century mothers to the clothes of the babies they abandoned at London’s Foundling hospital into the pavement of nearby Marchmont Street. As often in Aldus’s work, the experience of space in the piece becomes an experience of time. Tokens also recalled the artist’s own, more fortunate birth. “I had nine months in my mother’s womb and I became an artist,” Aldus said. “That’s all.” As to his own displacement, moving to London made him happy. Living and working in a studio in Hampstead, Aldus drove most days to an arts club in Chelsea where, book in hand, he would sit by himself, bespectacled and lost in thought. Aldus married Isabelle Braillard in 1986; they later divorced. He is survived by their daughter, Noémie. • John Aldus (Gérald John Ducimetière), artist, born 26 April 1940; died 26 January 2022 • This article was corrected on 21 February 2022. John Aldus’s father was also named John.A Tory MP who leads a group which campaigns against the government’s net zero measures has recruited two members of staff from a controversial organisation that questions climate science. After the Guardian revealed links between members of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, run by the MP Craig Mackinlay, and the Global Warming Policy Foundation (GWPF), further ties between the two organisations have been found. Politico reported that Mackinlay, an outspoken critic of the government’s net zero policies, has taken on Harry Wilkinson, the head of policy at GWPF’s campaigning arm, Net Zero Watch, in addition to Ruth Lea, a former trustee of the arm, to work in his parliamentary office. Wilkinson is a critic of consensus on global heating, and has tweeted: “The ‘climate crisis’ is a religious belief, nothing to do with science.” He previously worked for Nigel Lawson, who founded the GWPF and makes claims such as: “I think that climate change is not a threat, it is happening very gently at a fraction of a degree per decade which is something we can perfectly well live with.” Wilkinson celebrated the news of his appointment, tweeting: “After 5 years of working as a Researcher for Lord Lawson, I am pleased to be able to take a position in Craig Mackinlay’s office. I look forward to supporting his work alongside continuing my role with Net Zero Watch.” Green campaigners have frequently called the GWPF a leading source of climate change denial, as it has questioned climate research by top scientists, called for green measures to be halted, and claimed the rising level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has many benefits. Mackinlay confirmed the additions to his team, adding that Lea, who will be working unpaid, had had a parliamentary pass through association with his office since 2016, but that she had primarily worked with him on Brexit. He told Politico her work with Net Zero Watch “was wholly unconnected to her original appointment with me and is not related to her continuation as a passholder now. She is largely retired these days and she comes to parliament infrequently.” The MP for South Thanet said Wilkinson’s continuing employment with Net Zero Watch “is fully disclosed according to parliamentary rules applying to MPs’ employees and his depth of knowledge acquired there is invaluable to my interest and work on net zero issues”. The Net Zero Scrutiny Group of 19 Tory politicians has been accused of attempting to derail the government’s green agenda, linking it to the cost of living crisis and leading to fears of a “culture war” campaign around net zero. They have recently called for fracking to be resumed and criticised the government’s plans to decarbonise industry, as well as casting doubt on plans to phase out diesel and petrol cars in favour of electric ones. The group claims it does not contest the reality of climate change, merely the costs of net zero.Concerns have been raised around access to Covid jabs for young children after it was suggested they are unlikely to be offered as part of school vaccination programmes in England. On Tuesday, it was announced that all children aged five to 11 in England will be offered a Covid vaccine, following advice from the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI). Similar announcements have been made for Wales and Scotland, with Northern Ireland having confirmed it will do the same. The Guardian understands that details of the vaccine rollout are still being finalised but, in England at least, a schools-based programme is not likely to be the primary route. Instead, the jabs will be offered from April at pharmacies, vaccination centres and, where appropriate, at GP surgeries. The plans appear to be rooted in concerns that provision of the jabs in schools could disrupt other vaccination programmes. “School-based deployment will draw on many of the same resources required for the delivery of other routine immunisation programmes, including for HPV, MenACWY (meningitis) and MMR (measles, mumps and rubella), coverage of which was affected over the last two years because of the pandemic,” the JCVI has noted. There may also be other considerations. “In principle school programmes would represent an excellent opportunity to reach the target group, but I am not sure how comfortable, especially the younger children – and their parents – would be to receive an injection without (a) parent being present, and this needs to be explored with families,” said Beate Kampmann, professor of paediatric infection and immunity, and director of thevaccine centre at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine. Dr Simon Williams, a behavioural scientist at Swansea University, said he supported plans not to offer Covid vaccinations to five- to 11-year-olds in schools, noting a survey from the Office for National Statistics which found only six in 10 parents of children in that age bracket said they were likely to have their child vaccinated. “The downside to it being offered through schools is that some parents might feel like this puts undue pressure on their decision, or might feel that it is less optional that way,” he said, adding having to book an appointment outside of school was less likely to create a sense of division or difference between those children and parents who decided to have the vaccine and those who did not. But the plans have also raised concerns. The JCVI itself has noted that offering vaccines to children at school has previously been associated with “higher levels of vaccine coverage with less inequality as measured by ethnicity and indices of deprivation”. “[The challenge] is to make sure that those parents and children who do want the vaccine, but might find it harder to access or travel to other vaccination locations, or find time outside existing work and other commitments, are able to get it,” said Williams. “As such, making the vaccination appointments easy to book and making sure there are enough opportunities, including local and mobile sites and walk-ins, will help.” Dr Helen Salisbury, a GP in Oxford and a member of the Independent Sage committee, also raised concerns. “If we hope to make vaccines easily accessible to all families who want them, it makes sense to do the vaccination in schools which is where the children already are,” she said, although she added the school health service would need extra support to do so given vaccine programmes for older children need to continue at the same time. Salisbury added that while some GP surgeries may be able to put on further clinics for young children to be vaccinated, others may not feel they have the capacity. “The further option of mass vaccination centres is likely to limit the vaccination uptake to the most motivated families who also have access to transport, and is likely to widen inequalities,” she said. “In other age groups, we can see that the least advantaged in our society have the lowest vaccine coverage: the mode of delivery of children’s vaccines needs to be considered carefully to prevent this being duplicated in this age group.”The Queen should abdicate: this is the right time. Not because another scandal has broken out, with police probing allegations of Saudi cash-for-honours donations to the Prince of Wales’s charity. Not because of Prince Andrew’s disgrace. Nor should she abdicate for the reason given this week by my friend and colleague Simon Jenkins: he calls for her to withdraw gently from public life to spend her declining years in dignified tranquillity, and allow a “planned transfer” to Charles. In other words, let there be no perilous moment when people ask themselves why no one asked them first. Allow no possible pause for thought between her last breath and the shout of “vivat rex”. Make sure it’s a fait accompli with his royal posterior already cemented to the throne. It is indeed a good time to bow out gracefully, as this platinum jubilee celebrates her 70-year reign with all the pomp of a four-day bank holiday and a new pudding. But let it mark an end to monarchy itself, those feudal centuries drawing to a peaceful close. The Queen has held the monarchy together skilfully through tempestuous scandals, from the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, and the divorces of three of her children to the flight of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, once heralded as royals for the Black Lives Matter and #MeToo era. This jubilee would make a cheerful ending to all the royal folderol. What better time to return the sovereignty promised in Brexit to the people to whom it belongs. Elizabeth the Last should get a historic send-off, her golden coach and crown retired and her six palaces opened as fine museums. (No, tourism is no excuse for monarchy: Versailles gets many more visitors, and so does Legoland down the road from Windsor Castle). In death or abdication, her passing will be an emotive memory marker in every family, the last link to the second world war, to remnants of empire and to that old black and white world of Pathé newsreels with their jolly jingo voices. “Thank God for the Queen”, proclaims the Sun’s front page today, absurdly. It’s doubtful she returns any thanks to Rupert Murdoch, whose lèse-majesté arrival here shattered that old reverence for royal mystique. The crown and constitution are no longer abstract debates. The need for an elected president has become urgent now Boris Johnson’s arrival in Downing Street tests conventions, laws and civil rights beyond their limits. John Major expressed that constitutional outrage eloquently on these pages, listing Johnson’s abuses: deliberately breaking international law; tearing up the ministerial code; ordaining police stop and search “without any cause for suspicion”; removing British citizenship at whim, while waging war against the civil service and the BBC, those national safeguards. The Commons Speaker turns out to be powerless against lies told to his face. There is no voice to admonish, check or protect against elective dictatorship by a wrecker of a prime minister with a strong majority. His MPs are shockingly derelict. Until now, monarchy was defended as dignified and powerless, a harmless decoration that never interferes with parliament. Embarrassing lapses – the Guardian’s revelations of the Queen’s consent preventing laws that may reveal her wealth or Charles’s “spider letters” leaning on ministers – are relatively trivial. The constitutional problem is not the monarch’s power, but powerlessness. Presidents around Europe protect constitutions and guard against overmighty politicians breaking basic law. A president would have stopped Johnson illegally proroguing parliament: it takes the authority of election to take action as a vital backstop in a constitutional emergency. Our monarchy has handed all royal prerogative to the prime minister with no check or balance, bar a House of Lords almost as weak as the monarch for the same bad reason – lacking the authority of election. Look how Johnson engages in voter suppression: his proposals for compulsory photo ID and abolishing colleges registering their students will deliberately deter the young and poor from voting. Look how he moves to curb the electoral commission’s power to prosecute illegal political donations protecting his own party’s pelf. There is no brake on an errant prime minister in a country without a written constitution, where a warped electoral system denies fair representation and there is no effective head of state to guard against law-breaking. The unelected Queen must do what the prime minister tells her to. Monarchists speak with revulsion of who an elected president may be. The royal historian Robert Lacey, in a recent debate, asked in tones of horror, “President Lineker? President Street-Porter?” But, urges Graham Smith, CEO of the Republic pressure group, look around Europe at dignified presidents who understand their ceremonial duties and the political limits to their role, while acting as constitutional guarantors. Former politicians take on a presidency with as much independence as our Speakers in parliament. Look across the Irish Sea at Michael D Higgins, Mary McAleese or Mary Robinson and ponder why British voters are too wild or daft to be trusted to make equally sensible choices. Support for this antique dysfunction wanes with each generation and it has become fragile. A majority of under-25s expect it to be gone in 25 years. Monarchy is a cast of mind blocking reform. Monarchy is a feudalism of the imagination that stamps approval on inheritance, inequality and privilege, all growing rampantly right now. “Take but degree away, untune that string, And, hark, what discord follows!” Shakespeare has Ulysses warn, eulogising “degree, priority and place” in Troilus and Cressida: no one knows if this deep conservatism aligning the planets with aristocratic order was his own view. The point is this: that string is untuned already. The crown decorates a riot of constitutional disorder. Abolishing it would open windows into every aspect of how we choose to be governed and how we think of ourselves. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistFrom the “boing” of a minke whale to the “drum” of a red piranha, scientists are documenting more sounds in our world’s oceans, rivers and lakes every year. Now, a team of experts wants to go a step further and create a reference library of aquatic noise to monitor the health of marine ecosystems. The Global Library of Underwater Biological Sounds, “Glubs”, will include every “thwop”, “muah” and “boop” of a humpback whale as well as human-made underwater sounds and records of the geophysical swirl of ice and wind, according to a paper in the journal Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution. Of the roughly 250,000 known marine species, scientists think all 126 mammals emit noise. At least 100 invertebrates and 1,000 of the world’s 34,000 known fish species are known to make noise, but experts believe many more sounds are waiting to be discovered and identified. By bringing together existing libraries of fish, frogs and other marine species, it is hoped the library will help identify the lullabies, chants and anthems of aquatic ecosystems. Some fish species appear to develop geographic dialects, while the calls of blue whales are known to evolve through time. “The world’s most extensive habitats are aquatic, and they’re rich with sounds produced by a diversity of animals,” says lead author Miles Parsons of the Australian Institute of Marine Science. “With biodiversity in decline worldwide and humans relentlessly altering underwater soundscapes, there is a need to document, quantify and understand the sources of underwater animal sounds before they potentially disappear.” In the examples given by experts, Madagascar’s skunk anemonefish produces different fighting sounds to those in Indonesia. Fin whale calls differ among populations in the north and southern hemispheres and over seasons, while those of pilot whales are similar worldwide. Existing websites such as FishSounds and FrogID already host an inventory of aquatic noise. But it is hoped a single platform would enable the use of artificial intelligence identification of unknown noises while also allowing scientists to monitor the health of reefs, open ocean and freshwater ecosystems. Under the proposals, the public would be able to contribute their own underwater recordings. “Collectively, there are now many millions of recording hours around the world that could potentially be assessed for a plethora of both known and, to date, unidentified biological sounds,” said Jesse Ausubel, one of the founders of the International Quiet Ocean Experiment (IQOE) and a scientist at the Rockefeller University. Monitoring noise underwater has been used to study the effect of hurricanes and how prey change their behaviour near predators, and to document the migration patterns of great whales. Many fish and invertebrate species are nocturnal, often making audio monitoring the only viable study method. “Human song varieties include love and work songs, lullabies, chants, and anthems,” said Ausubel. “Marine animals must sing love songs. Maybe AI applied to the global library can help us understand the lyrics of these and many others.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresHello and happy Thursday, The most fundamental concept in American government is that all politicians are accountable to the people. Constituents accept laws shaped by the people they vote for, knowing that they have the power to eventually vote them out of office if they disagree. But when it comes to the US House of Representatives, this pillar of democracy is crumbling. An overwhelming majority of seats in the US House are becoming non-competitive. That means that when voters show up at the polls in November to vote for their candidates, the contests will already be decided. Their votes won’t matter. It felt strange writing that as the opening to a story we published last weekend exploring the decline of competitive congressional seats. How could voters’ choices not matter in an American election? But academics, analysts and other experts say the trend is undeniable. Just 27 of the 335 congressional districts that have been drawn so far as part of the redistricting process are considered competitive – meaning either party has less than a five-point advantage – according to FiveThirtyEight. Dave Wasserman, an elections expert for the non-partisan Cook Political Report, told me he expects there to be 30 to 35 competitive seats in total once states finish drawing all 435 district boundaries. That means that as many as 94% of representatives would be running in relatively safe seats – a figure that astonished me. Why is this happening? Some of the decline in competitive seats is due to natural geographic clustering of likeminded voters. That clumping means that when states draw new lines, it’s harder to draw competitive districts. In 2012, there were 66 competitive districts, Wasserman noted. By 2020, under the same set of lines, there were 51. But politicians are undoubtedly accelerating the decline in competition by distorting district lines to their advantage. As redistricting has unfolded this year, elected officials made aggressive efforts to change district lines to shore up incumbents, locking in their seats for several more years. The clearest example of this happened in Texas, where Republicans, who have complete control over the redistricting process, reduced the number of competitive districts from 12 to one . The decline in competition has huge consequences. No longer worried about a general election, politicians become more worried about fending off challengers in a party primary. That disincentivizes bipartisan compromise and incentivizes playing to their party’s base. “This will further increase polarization … it’s also a reflection of polarization, but it’ll also entrench polarization more deeply,” Richard Pildes, a law professor at New York University, told me. “They will do even more of what we know they already do, which is tack to the more extreme wings in order to try and fight off potential primary challengers to protect themselves on that flank.” The lack of competition can have consequences beyond congressional races, said Amanda Litman, the co-founder and executive director of Run for Something, which focuses on down-ballot contests. She noted that the Democratic party focuses its resources in battleground states where there are competitive congressional districts. Fewer competitive districts, she said, would mean fewer resources. “The fewer competitive elections there are, the fewer places that will be able to have concentrated effort and intentionality around [races],” she told me. Thinking about competitive districts also caused me to rethink what constituted a “fair” electoral map. A state that is evenly split between Democrats and Republicans – with 10 congressional districts, for example – could draw five safe Republican districts and five safe Democratic ones. Would that map be fair? Would it be fairer than one that has three safe districts for each party and four competitive districts? I posed this question to Pildes. He said that politicians tended to favor the former approach. “One reason parties don’t like competitive seats is that if the districts are all 3% to 4% predicted to go in one particular direction, they can all flip in a single election. Whereas if they’re plus-nine for one party, a three-point shift isn’t gonna do anything,” he said. “The value of competitive districts gets sort of short shrift in the political process because there’s not a lot of political self-interest in creating competitive districts.” Also worth watching … Texas election officials are seeing a staggeringly high number of mail-in ballots rejected ahead of the state’s 1 March governor’s primary. Amy Weirich, a Tennessee prosecutor, defended a six-year prison sentence for Pamela Moses, who tried to register to vote while ineligible. A federal judge blocked a portion of a new Texas law that made it a crime for election officials to solicit mail-in ballots. Texas is appealing the ruling. Florida Republicans are considering adopting a new measure that would make it harder to vote by mail, potentially causing headaches for at least 400,000 voters in the state.‘What sound does my body make?” is a question that has followed Briony Greenhill since she was a child in Suffolk, sitting and singing on the stairs of the family home. It’s there today in her work as one of the world’s leading proponents of collaborative vocal improvisation (CVI) and in the power and intimacy of her new album, Crossing the Ocean. “These voices that we have are part of our human design,” she says. “There’s a beauty in bringing that out and making music with it.” Vocal improvisation is different to other forms of singing. There is no song, no score, no lyrics. “When you’re not given a song, and you end up learning to trust the song that comes through you in the moment, it’s like finding the rubber ring you can trip down the river on,” Greenhill says. In CVI, groups improvise together. “You’re a channel for the music, the moment, the air. I’m grounded and I’m hollow, and these bigger energies are coming through me. You’re allowing the song to use you as a vessel.” As a child, Greenhill took singing lessons that moulded her voice to fit pop, jazz and musical theatre styles, which she describes as “putting these techniques on to my voice from outside”. At 20, she met a woman who was teaching the basics of Indian classical vocals at a festival. “You just sing one note,” she says. “You can do it for an hour – it’s a vocal meditation.” It was “about breathing feeling into your body”. Finding this technique calming, Greenhill started doing it most days. During a decade in which Greenhill studied political science and worked for thinktanks and NGOs, music took a backseat: she played singer-songwriter gigs around London and took occasional session work. At almost 30, she felt something needed to change and she travelled to India, where she attended a classical violin concert that would prove transformative. There was something in the violinist’s unstructured, improvised playing that reminded Greenhill of the joy she had found singing as a child. After the concert, she asked if he would be her music teacher. “Well, I teach violin,” he said. “But I want to be your teacher, so I’m going to pretend you’re a violin and get on with it.” Learning to sing like a violin was liberating. “What I’ve found often in music education as a singer is that you don’t get treated like a musician,” says Greenhill. “It’s about lyrics, appearance, your vibe. It’s not about music theory the way it is for instrumentalists. But in India I studied melody and rhythm like a violinist, I asked my voice to find a higher standard of agility and precision and musical excellence.” Greenhill continued her studies in France, under David Eskenazy, and in the US with Bobby McFerrin and the vocalist and performance artist Rhiannon. “It was like ‘Learn Bach preludes in C! Transcribe Wes Montgomery guitar solos and then just sing them!’” she says. “And that was thrillingly next-level.” It can be hard to let go into this way of working. In the making of Crossing the Ocean, Greenhill collaborated with several classically trained musicians – including the composer Simon Dobson – and was struck by how cerebral their music seemed. “Because that’s not where this music comes from – it comes from the body.” Later this year, Greenhill will launch the UK’s first CVI festival. She has already produced a vocal improvisation app, Your Song, and regularly leads courses in the UK and California. “At the start, everyone is nervous,” she says. “But I feel like I have the best job, because people’s voices are so beautiful. They’re this rich garden with all these different plants and flowers in it. And often through fear, or lack of use, those flowers get hidden. So I feel like a gardener. And I have tools and methods to help the flowers come out.” There are often tears. “People go a funny colour and keel over sideways, because the voice is down there quite deep in the heart,” Greenhill says. “I think our modern life is so busy and pressurised, and you just carry on. But when you don’t carry on, and you reach inside for your voice, what comes up with it are things you’ve been pushing down in order to carry on. So you can excavate some of the grief that’s in the heart.” Last summer, Greenhill found herself back in California, singing in collaboration for the first time since the start of the pandemic. It brought up her own grief, of course, but it was a homecoming, too. “Being back on stage, and being back with people, and singing again …” she says, “I realised I had forgotten who I was. I had forgotten why I’m alive.” • Crossing the Ocean is out on 25 FebruaryAnd last but not least, here’s the Daily Briefing. And with that, for the final time for these wonderful Beijing Winter Games, I’ll thank you for your company and bid you farewell. But be sure to stick with the blog for the rest of the week. Bye now! Figure skating: And here’s Sean Ingle writing from one of the most captivating and dramatic Olympic finals ever stages. I know Anna Shcherbakova won the gold - and what a champion she was - but it’s Alexandra Trusova’s routine for bronze I’ll never forget. And then there’s Kamila Valieva’s falls and tears. Curling: Here’s the match report from Team GB’s big win over the USA. And... exhale. That’s the end of tonight’s action, which might make this a good time to take the edge off by flicking through the best photos from Beijing on day 13. Curling: It will be Sweden v Great Britain playing for gold! Canada have fluffed their lines on the final stone of the night! Brad Gushue was left with too much to do from left to right so he tried to run the double instead. The first part of the plan worked but it doesn’t roll back far enough to get even one! They miss out on the extra end by an inch, Sweden winners 6-4 in the end. Gushue has his head in his hands. Wow. Curling: Alright, Shuster has given himself a route to two shots. However, Mouat has one on the button as it is and can take out the US red on the eight foot line - surely that’s his play? It is. And it is away. However, the yellow doesn’t stick around. Good but not perfect. “It all comes down to this,” says Steve Cram. “All of the chatter, all of the bravado, the criticism of his own team. He still, though, has a chance... this would be incredible if he can do it.” He doesn’t! It’s GB with the steal and Bruce Mouat lets out a roar. What a victory this has been, eliminating the defending champions. They take it 8-4 in the end. What a performance. Curling: A good stone from the USA; Bruce Mouat won’t be able to knock that away. Instead, they elect to erect a guard on the left hand side - that has to be dealt with by John Shuster, who calls a time out to work it through with two stones left. Curling: Surely that’s enough for Team GB, using their third-last stone to knock out the only red in the house. The USA have the hammer and three left; two of those will need to end up as points to take this to an extra end. Speaking of which, that’s exactly where Sweden and Canada look to be going with six stones left in regulation. Curling: A correction from the below - the USA have the hammer in this final end, currently 4-6 down. So, if they can snaffle two points here, it’ll be extra time. Curling: Sweden convert with the hammer, breaking the deadlock in the penultimate end of their semi against Canada to take the lead 4-3. Canada hold the advantage in the tenth - an extra end the most likely scenario on that side of the Water Cube. Curling: Alright, back to the water cube, deep into the ninth. A reminder that the Americans have the hammer here, so as long as Team GB can keep them to one shot and hold their nerve in the tenth, well, yes... that’s the plan. Alright, shot for USA - John Shuster is found a way through. He’ll have one further crack at it after Bruce Mouat’s final stone - and here he goes... boom! He taps back the US red and loads up the degree of difficulty on the Shuster. Steve Cram on BBC notes a “look of resignation” on the look of the frustrated skip’s face, and he misses everything! That’s a brilliant steal from the Brits, they’re 6-4 up with one end to go. Also earlier, the sorry story that has been Mikaela Shiffrin’s Olympics. Let’s hope she returns in four years and wins the lot - something like that. Curling: In case you missed it, Team GB’s women are also into the final four after everything went right for them in the final round robin matches earlier today. And with the figure skating sorted, that’s the medals all won for the night. Norway, through their victory in the nordic combined teams event, add another gold and increase their lead at the top over Germany, who didn’t strike gold on day 13. Curling: A big old gear shift from an Olympic final that will be spoken of forever in the sport of figure skating to the more sedate curling rink at the water cube. We pick up the Team GB v USA clash with the score still 5-4 in favour of the Brits but John Shuster has the hammer. “He’s not the Olympic champion for nothing,” says Steve Cram as he blasts Bruce Mouat’s shot out of the house. That’s two scoreless ends in a row as they move to the ninth. As for Sweden and Canada, they’re level 3-3 deep in their eighth; Sweden’s Nikilas Edin to go last with work to do and he sneaks it in there. So, the higher-ranked Swedes take a one point lead with two ends to play. It’s official, the world champion takes gold at the Olympics as well - Anna Shcherbakova has done it. And Kaori Sakamoto holds on for bronze! So well deserved, she didn’t put a foot wrong in either performance despite not enjoying the quads that the Russians - Alexandra Trusova especially - can pull off at will. A word for Trusova, who topped the free skate with her 177.13 - five quads, incredible. If not for her poorer short program, she would be atop the podium. But that’s Anna Shcherbakova’s medal to enjoy - clean, clinical and all with a beaming smile. Meanwhile Valieva, with a 141.93, finishes fourth and is visibly shattered. They are picking up everything on the television coverage - she’s sobbing uncontrollably. GOLD - Anna Shcherbakova (ROC) 255.95 SILVER - Alexandra Trusova (ROC) 251.73 BRONZE - Kaori Sakamoto (JAP) 233.13 Figure skating: Kamila Valieva has three quads listed and nails the first, the salchow. Triple axle next... hands on the ice! Both of them! “She’ll have to be foot perfect from here.” And she isn’t! On the deck entirely out of the triple toe that followed the quad toe. The gold is gone, Anna Shcherbakova is going to be the Olympic champion in the most absorbing and compelling final you could ever imagine. Can Valieva keep it together with her final big jump? No, no she can’t - the quad toe is a flop as well, she’s on her back. Despite the buffer she enjoyed after the short program she’s fighting to stay on the podium from here - indeed, how can she knock Sakamoto out of third? She waves her hand away in dismay as the routine ends - tears as she departs but the crowd have her back. “Plenty of admiration for how she has kept it together,” says the commentator, reflecting on the extraordinary circumstances upon which she has been participating in this competition. Over to the judges. Figure skating: Quad flip into triple toe to start for Shcherbakova and makes it! And another quad flip for good measure. She’s away. They’re the only quads scheduled, will she adapt and throw in another now in response to Trusova? She doesn’t - triple lutz/triple loop comes next - and landed with a smile on her face. Faultless! It might be the case that on any other night, she’s winning this. Surely that’s silver but it can’t overtake Trusova on the free skate alone - she’ll need every bit of the six mark buffer she had over her from the short program. All eyes on the judges - “It is going to be so, so close.” 171.54 is the required score move into first... and she’s done it! 175.75! Shcherbakova snatches the lead by four marks! And now, to finish, Kamila Valieva, the 15-year-old genius to finish the competition. Performing to Bolero. Strap in. Figure skating: Kaori Sakamoto (JAP) was brilliant in the short program, finishing third. And this is fine work again, hitting every note, but there is no way she can knock off Trusova in the absence of a quad. She’s every chance to slot into the silver position before Shcherbakova and Valieva finish the show. “Gorgeous,” declares the TV commentator. 153.29 for 233.13 - that’s the silver medal skate for now. To the business end now, big time. Here’s the world champion, Anna Shcherbakova. The 17-year-old is going to have a dart at two quads here as well. Here we go. Curling: A blank end suits Team GB, USA unable to take advantage of the hammer in the sixth. Bruce Mouat’s team stay at 5-4 up with four ends to go. And the same result over at Sweden and Canada, who remain tied a 3-3 after six ends. Figure skating: Quads everywhere! Alexandra Trusova, blimey - quad flip, quad salchow - bang, bang! A tiny stumble on the quad toe when over-rotating but this is different gravy. The sequence in the middle involves a yoga backbend to die for. Now for the next round of jumps... quad lutz, triple toe combo! If she stays on her feet here she is going to be in the lead by a mile. The Stooges take over on the music to finish, good grief. “Astounding!” says the TV commentator. That’s the word for it. 177.13! Only eight marks off the World Record and her career best. What a time for it. She leads by 37! What a staggering few minutes in the history of the figure skating. Figure skating: Wakaba Higuchi (JAP) every chance of taking even after a small fall. Other than that, triple lutz, triple toe - the combinations were all on point. She also started with the triple axle, so it’s all there - no quads, though. Do the judges treat her kindly? Yup! 140.93 is enough for a lead of one solitary mark. To Alexandra Trusova, the first of the three remarkable Russians. Here come the quads. Curling: Bruce Mouat with the hammer and hits right back with it! Two points, the lead changes again, Team GB 5-4 up after five. Also at the halfway mark, Sweden and Canada are 3-3 in the other semi final. You can feel it already: extra ends are coming. Figure skating: Six skaters in this final group - find a telly for this, we’re going to see some extraordinary quads between now and the end. It’s You Young first up, the Korean performing to Les Miserables. And goes wallop early with the triple lutz/triple toe. “This is so sweet,” says the TV commentator when she hits the triple lutz/triple salchow. “Exquisite timing on the triple flip,” he adds. If she skips cleanly through the spins and combinations - and she does - You Young is surely the leader. Comfortably so, too - 142.75 is the score, the skate of the night, making 213.09 to go into top spot by about five marks. Now the first of the two Japanese skaters in this final group, Wakaba Higuchi. Performing to The Lion King; she’s away. Curling: The pressure is on John Shuster with this final stone, needing to do a lot right to navigate a busy house… and he’s nailed it! Out goes the GB shot, replaced by two for Team USA. The Americans are up 4-3 after four. Over on the other lane, Sweden have picked up two of their own in that end, leading the Canadians 3-1. Figure skating: Disappointment in the eyes of Lorena Hendrickx as she ends her routine, the Belgian trying to process why she didn’t attempt her scheduled triple salchow. “Four points down the drain,” the assessment of the TV commentator. And it’s those points that cost her top spot, 136.70 her free skate score for a 206.79 total; two points adrift. And that’s the end of a brilliant third group. Six skaters left including three Russians, headlined by Kamila Valieva. They’re warming up now. Figure skating: Stirring stuff from Alysa Liu, Tchaikovski providing the soundtrack to her energetic burst, every jump landed. Just 16 years of age, having endured a bout of Covid last month, she can be proud of that. Ooh, but a deduction is detected - she a final rotation on the triple axle. Still enough to overtake Kim Yelkim (KOR) on the basis of the ambition showed? It is! 139.45 for the free skate making 208.95 - we have a new leader, the American six marks clear. Over to Lorena Hendrickx (BEL). Curling: Team GB are on the board with a bumper third end. This time the hammer works for Bruce Mouat, drawing a third shot on the button to take the lead 3-2. Figure skating: “Oh yes!” roars the TV commentator as Kim Yelim finishes another cracker of a performance. “This third group has taken the competition to a new level.” It sure has. That’s the first time we’ve seen a triple salchow into a double toe/double toe. The assumpion from the commentators is that the Korean is about to overtake Bell (USA) and move into the provisional gold medal spot... and she does. But only just - 0.3 of a mark after a 134.85; the third best free skate score so far. Two competitors to come in this group and eight in total. Next up: Alysa Liu (USA). Figure Skating: Right, the ante has been upped now that we’re into the top ten! Following Bell, Anastasiia Gubanova (GEO) completes a flawless routine of her own, which included a high-scoring triple flip/triple toe combination. But the presentation score didn’t quite match the elements, 135.58 leaving her 1.32 points out of first. Curling: In the second semi final, Sweden are 1-0 up over Canada after two ends. Curling: It’s a big steal for the USA in the second end! Out comes the measuring stick, is it two or three points? Just two. But that’s a wonderful start from the Americans. Bruce Mouat’s enjoyed two ends with the hammer and GB are yet to score. Yikes. Figure skating: For the lead Mariah Bell (USA) requires 120.47 and she gets there with ease, 136.92 her score. Into the gold medal position she moves. Lovely stuff. Figure skating: Mariah Bell (USA) is skating to kd lang’s Hallelujah, which she, of course, performed so memorably at the opening ceremony at Vancouver in 2010. Blimey, 12 years ago. It’s a performance to match: the big moment - triple lutz, double toe, double toe - is spot on. I suspect we have a new leader - over to the judges. Figure skating: As I was typing the below, Eliska Brezinova (CZE) looked on track to jump into that gold medal position but, sure enough, she fell with her triple lutz! Correspondent Kurt Perleberg emailed yesterday to ask me whether I believe in miracles. Well, not usually, but at the Olympics, I believe in something bigger. Anyone in Ekaterina Kurakova’s (POL) corner must feel the same at this stage. Figure skating: Nobody can top Ekaterina Kurakova. To think, she was the final skater qualifying for the free skate, with six cut from the pack in the short program. But her 126.76 tonight still has her one point ahead in top spot. Given 13 skaters have followed her, and there are only ten to go, she’s permitted to dream big at this point. Curling: Team GB have the hammer for this opening end and will need to use it well with the USA popping a shot at the top of the button with their final stone. If Mouat is on target he should be able to hit it on the nose, and he does, but whacks it hard enough that there’s nothing left in the house. So, a blank end to begin. Curling: Time for the semi-finals in the men’s competition! As I touched on earlier, a brilliant morning for Team GB - they knocked off Canada in the final session and then Sweden lost to Switzerland, so into first (with an 8-1 record) they land after the round robin. Their opponent in this high-stakes clash is the USA, who finished fourth, but were responsible for the only loss Bruce Moaut’s team experienced in that lengthy first stage. On the other lane, it’s Sweden up against Canada. Go! Figure Skating: Alright, we shift focus to our other medal event of the night, the women’s figure skating free skate at Capital Indoor Stadium. 13 athletes of the 24 in the running; still a long way to go before the Russians. Team USA’s Karen Chen records only the sixth best score we’ve seen so far, a 115.82 placing her fifth. Nordic Combined: Norway’s 14th gold and 11th involving cross country skiing at these Winter Olympics - what an extraordinary team. As for Japan, they have broken into the top three with such a gutsy performance, so close a silver medal. “Ryota Yamamoto,” says the TV commentator, “a name to watch in the years to come.” GOLD - Norway 50:41:01 SILVER - Germany 51:40:00 BRONZE - Japan 51:40:30 Nordic Combined: Jørgen Graabak crosses the line with his arm raised - what a finish, they can’t be beaten on this snow. Now the race for silver is on! Japan’s Ryota Yamamoto is giving it his all in the final climb but German’s Vinzenz Geiger, the individual champion in this event, getting to the line first. Austria miss out. Nordic Combined: With Jørgen Graabak skiing last, the individual champion last week, Norway were always go be tough to beat after Oftebro’s final sprint, and so it looks halfway through his leg, now out to a 41 second lead over the chasing pack of Japan, Germany - who have caught up again - and Austria, who led the race early but are battling for a medal at all as we reach the business end. Now 1500m to go and Norway’s buffer has grown to 61 seconds! Graabak is cruising to yet another gold! Nordic Combined: What a sprint from Jens Luraas Oftebro to finish his leg! Wow! His shift in gear puts ten seconds between Norway and Japan as they make the final transition, Austria crossing with the Japanese. As for Germany, they are now 36 seconds off the pace and surely just about finished in terms of winning a medal. Nordic Combined: Another breakaway from German’s Eric Frenzel, falling ten seconds behind the lead pack as they approach the final kilometre and last nasty climb. “This is where the front three need to really push the advantage home.” Figure skating: Ten of the 24 skaters have now had their say with the situation the same at the top with Ekaterina Kurakova (POL) still in the lead. We’re not far away from the Americans, Karen Chen and Mariah Bell, who perform 13th then 15th. Nordic Combined: The great Eric Frenzel, with three gold medals over the last couple of Winter Olympics, was never going to let this get away from him entirely, catching the top three by the time they reach the 2.5km mark. At the front of the foursome, it’s Norway’s Jens Luraas Ofterbro’s turn to do a shift up the front. This is building towards an tremendously exciting finish over the next quarter of an hour or so. Nordic Combined: Right, just beyond halfway through this race and Germany haven’t enjoyed a good start to leg three, Eric Frenzel dropping seven seconds behind the lead pack of Lukas Greiderer (AUT), Jens Luraas Oftebro (NOR) and Akito Watabe (JAP). A wonderful opportunity for Japan to consolidate their position. Nordic Combined: The lead pack of four have about 1500m to go in the second leg of this relay with Germany’s Julian Schmid leading Austria’s Johannes Lamparter, Norway’s Epsen Andersen and Japan’s Hideaki Nagai. The status quo suits the overall leaders, Austria, with Lamparter taking the race lead on the final climb. Figure skating: A third of the field have completed their free skate in the women’s competition. Leading the way is Poland’s Ekaterina Kurakova who scored 126.67 to finish with 185.84 across her two performances - a lead of three points to Austria’s Olga Mikutina. But to put that in perspective, Russians Valieva and Shcherbakova were both in the 80s with their short program; it’ll take something extraordinary from these early competitors to get anywhere near the podium positions. Nordic Combined: They caught him. At the first exchange, Germany lead Japan over the line, a second from Rehrl (AUT) in third. Their accumulated lead remains healthy but it’s game on. 1km into the second leg and Johannes Lamparter has taken the race lead back for the Austrians, still in that aforementioned trio, plus Norway. Nordic Combined: Franz-Josef Rehrl has broken away in the lead for Austria, already 19 seconds ahead of Norway’s Epsen Bjoernstad, who is chasing with Germany’s Manuel Faisst and Japan’s Yoshito Watabe. Now on to the second loop of the course, the climb, the chase pack are going to work as they approach the halfway mark. A reminder that all four athletes will complete a 5km leg in this relay. The Nordic combined – Men’s Team Large Hill/4x5km – has recommenced with the skiing section. Austria led the way after the jumping, with Norway and Germany second and third. The women’s single figure skating (free progam) is ongoing. The men’s curling semi-finals are coming up. And that’s all from me – I shall hand you over to Adam Collins. Thanks Luke, another top stint from you. It’s 7pm in Beijing, the start of the 13th night session of these Winter Games. And owing to what will play out at the Capital Indoor Stadium over the next couple of hours, it might turn out to be both the most memorable and controversial of the entire fortnight. Becaause, that’s right: it’s the free skate of the women’s figure skating, which means Kamila Valieva, the ROC’s genius 15-year-old, is expected to win the event. Provisionally, at least. There’s no predicting how her drugs saga will play out in the aftermath of these Games, but she’ll skate last tonight after banking a two point lead over her countrywoman, world champion Anna Shcherbakova, in the short program on Tuesday. Starting right now is another medal event, the Nordic Combined Team Gundersen for the men. In short, this is a four-man event where they all have a run down the ski jump before taking to the cross-country course. Germany are the defending champions, standing on the podium four years ago with Norway and Austria. After the jumps, those three teams remain in the top positions with in reverse order from Pyeongchang with the Austrians leading the way, albeit by what converts to just an eight second lead over the Norwegians and 11 seconds from the Germans. Now to the relay, where each athlete has a 5km gruelling sprint ahead of them. Then in about an hour we’ll return to the Water Cube where it’s men’s semi-finals night in the curling! Team GB enjoyed a great morning session to end the group stage, easily accounting for Canada and then watching Sweden go down 10-8 to the Swiss - so, they leapfrogged them into top spot, finishing with an excellent 8-1 record. The only downside is that they are up against the USA in the round of four, the only team to knock Bruce Moaut’s team so far at Beijing. Meanwhile, the Swedes face Canada in the other semi, who they defeated 7-4 the first time around. Okay, to the snow and ice we go! Stay in touch throughout, via email or twitter. The medal table, in which Great Britain’s team are yet to trouble the scorers, is here: The schedule, and live scores, are here: Our team of writers have been busy as per usual, from Canada’s triumph in the women’s ice hockey to Mikael Shiffrin’s ongoing disappointment in the skiing – plus further controversy over China’s human rights record. Here’s what we’ve published so far today: Great Britain’s male curlers will be on the ice in a little over an hour for their semi-final against the USA. Here is PA Media’s report, from a earlier today, after Great Britain’s closing round robin win against Canada: Great Britain’s men’s curling team will play for a place in the Olympic after brushing aside Canada to finish top of the round robin standings. Bruce Mouat’s side claimed a 5-2 win to end an impressive group stage with an 8-1 record - but next up they must meet the USA, the reigning champions and the only team to get the better of them so far. However, Mouat is in no doubt his side have moved on since their 9-7 loss last Friday, and believes the setback in what was only their second game in the competition will not prove a decisive factor. He said: “We’ve learnt a lot about the ice in the last four or five days. We know what kind of throws we need to make shots. “The second game that we had was against the USA, which we did lose, but we’ve learnt so much from that point that I’m really confident we can come out and play better. We will just have to relax into the game and try and not feel the extra pressure that the semi-finals is going to put on and just try and enjoy ourselves which is when we play our best.” Mouat and his teammates Hammy McMillan, Bobby Lammie and Grant Hardie came into the tournament as the world’s No 1-ranked team and runners-up in last year’s World Championship behind Sweden. Sweden, led by the veteran Niklas Edin, whom Mouat’s men defeated earlier in the competition, face the Canadians in the second semi-final. Women’s single skating – free skating: Eva-Lotta Kiibus of Estonia, in fact, has just assumed the bronze-medal position, knocking Feigin of Bulgaria down to fourth. Ekaterina Kurakova of Poland (incidentally, who used to compete for Russia) stays top of the free program figure skating right now. Lindsay van Zundert (Netherlands) second, Alexandra Feigin (Bulgaria) is third. But we are still quite a long way from the business end of the event, and of course another appearance by Kamila Valieva of the ROC team. Courtesy of my colleague, Niall McVeigh, some more from that Mikaela Shiffrin interview that was on the BBC a few minutes ago: “My plan, well, it was quite simple. Just make the turns, try to be clean, fresh on the outside skis. Specifically, I just wanted to be calm from the start and get into my tempo and just build it from there. Oh man, I just wanted to get a full run of slalom! I don’t know if there’s anybody who ever had so many opportunities to get a medal in the Olympic Games, and actually failed so many times on it. “I’ve had a lot of support over the last few weeks, I appreciate it so much … and I’ve also had a bit of a crap storm of ‘What went wrong, caved under the pressure, choked’, all this stuff, and there’s probably some truth to all of it. It feels like there’s not a lot to learn, just try to keep focusing on good skiing – what’s the phrase, take it on the chin? Like … If I can be the biggest joke of the Games, at least someone’s smiling!” Japan’s Miho Takagi clinched her first gold of the Beijing Olympics, following up on the three other medals she has already won in the Winter Games so far, as she sailed to victory in the women’s 1,000 metres speed skating. Takagi kept close to the pace set by the silver medallist Jutta Leerdam at the onset of the race. Despite falling behind at one point, she breezed through the final lap half a second ahead of Leerdam’s time and finished in an Olympic record of 1min 13.19sec. The 27-year-old punched the air in delight upon seeing her record. Leerdam of the Netherlands claimed silver in 1min 13.83sec, while Brittany Bowe (USA) took bronze in 1min 14.61sec. “I’m happy, but after the race I was a little sad with my corner that cost me some seconds,” said Leerdam. “I had too much speed and wasn’t used to it. I just thought ‘oh’, and hammered one more lap.” Takagi, who clocked the fastest time this season of 1min 11.83sec , has won two individual medals in Beijing, finishing second in the 1,500m behind Ireen Wüst and winning a surprise silver in the 500m. The gold medal appeared to be just within reach as she raced ahead of her Canadian rivals towards the finish line in the women’s team pursuit, until a fall by her sister and team mate Nana Takagi cost them the title. That silver medal, which was accepted solemnly amid tears, was the sixth of Takagi’s career and made her the most decorated Japanese female Olympian. (Reuters) Two skaters have finished in the women’s figure skating – free program. Ekaterina Kurakova of Poland leads, currently, with a combined score of 185.84. But it won’t be long before she’s knocked off the top. There are 25 skaters to go in total, finishing with the leader after the short program, Kamila Valieva. Mikaela Shiffrin said it was not the weight of expectation that led to her failing to finish her third race at the Winter Olympics. The American was a strong favourite to win gold in the combined event and was well placed after finishing fifth fastest in the morning’s downhill. But returning to the Ice River course, where she had skied out in both the giant slalom and slalom, her favourite events, Shiffrin missed a gate and skied out yet again. There were no tears, as there were after she skied out of the slalom last week, and no excuses as she discussed her failure at these Games. “In general, people want to be able to say it’s a pressure thing,” she said. “There are certainly points during the Games where I felt the weight of pressure and expectations. But, in general, when I was racing, it wasn’t the case. And it certainly wasn’t more than I ever experienced in my career before. The pressure is there. It’s always there. I don’t feel uncomfortable or even unfamiliar with it. “Today, I felt I had a pretty calm, solid mentality. Nothing too crazy. Of course I wanted to win a medal. But before that I just wanted to take the opportunity to ski another run of slalom on this hill. The whole shebang in sport is that you can have preparation, you can have confidence ... You can have all these pieces and sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn’t. I have literally no idea why we keep coming back and doing it, especially after today. But I’m going to come back out tomorrow and ski some parallel GS (giant slalom) because I’m that much of an idiot.” (Reuters) The BBC just played a snippet of Mikaela Shiffrin’s interview after she came up short again earlier today, this time in the women’s combined skiing: “If I can be the biggest joke of the Games, then at least someone’s smiling.” It’s not been her Games, that’s for sure, and some of her interviews have made uncomfortable viewing. But she certainly isn’t a joke ... and at 26, she’s got plenty of time for a classic Olympics redemption story, too. This is the kind of Olympic training I can get behind: In a sport where talk of tactics, strategies and techniques can sometimes sound baffling, the dominant Swiss Alpine ski team has a simple motto – ‘Drink wine, Ski Fast’. Switzerland’s Michelle Gisin retained her gold medal in the women’s combined on Thursday, sharing the podium with compatriot and silver medallist Wendy Holdener before revealing the secret behind her team’s impressive showing in Beijing. The night before her bronze medal super-G performance, Gisin said she had a glass of wine in the company of Swiss slalom skiers Luca Aerni and Loic Meillard. “Then after the race, they wrote on my door ‘Drink Wine, Ski Fast’,” she said with a grin.”So, we drank wine again yesterday of course and look at that - it seems to work for me very well,” she said, laughing. The Swiss success is not, however, a huge surprise, coming after they won nine medals, including three golds, at last year’s World Championships in Cortina d’Ampezzo. Gisin said they have simply carried that form into the Olympics, the men also enjoying glory with Beat Feuz’s downhill gold and Marco Odermatt’s giant slalom triumph. Corinne Suter won the women’s downhill and Lara Gut-Behrami took gold in the super-G. (Reuters) Kamila Valieva will be up again soon, in the free program of the women’s singles figure skating, and she is well placed to take a gold medal after topping the charts in the short program. Our latest on the sorry saga involving the 15-year-old Russian skater: Great Britain’s women’s curling team squeezed through to the semi-finals at the Winter Olympics after polishing off a 9-4 win over the Russian Olympic Committee team in their final group match. A rare sight at any Olympic Games: nothing currently in the ‘live’ events section. Time for a quick cup of tea. What did you think of the dramatic curling? The emotional speed skating? The Nordic combined? You can email me or tweet @LukeMcLaughlin Tagaki has grabbed a Japanese flag and is skating around the rink on her lap of honour. She had three Olympics silver medals in the bag already ... and now she’s finally won gold. Great effort. Ellia Smeding of Great Britain finished 23rd, 3.98sec down on the champion. Anyone who saw the women’s team pursuit has to be thrilled with that result! Tagaki takes gold for Japan! She has tears in her eyes as she hugs her coach. Lovely to see. Jutta Leerdam wins silver for the Netherlands and Brittany Bowe (USA) sneaks on to the podium at the very last, Golivoka of the ROC team knocked down to fourth. The legendary Wüst finishes sixth, but the 1,000m isn’t her favoured distance. Tagaki sits and waits. She can only watch this final pair. She’s guaranteed bronze, Bowe (USA) and Nifantava (Belarus) Women’s 1000m speed skating: Miho Tagaki of Japan goes fastest! What an effort. She punches the air and cheers with delight after crossing the finish line. It’s a new Olympic record of 1min 13.19sec. She missed out on a team pursuit gold just the other day when her sister, Nana, agonisingly crashed out on the final corner ... can anyone overhaul her now? Angelina Golikova, who was up against Tagaki, clocks the third-fastest time. Jutta Leerdam is knocked down to silver medal position with De Jong and Wüst now in fourth and fifth. Women’s 1000m speed skating: Wüst goes third-fastest in 1min 15.11sec. Is that enough for a medal? Probably not ... but let’s see. Women’s 1,000m speed skating: Jutta Leerdam goes quickest for the Netherlands but she doesn’t look happy. It’s a new track record, 1min 13.83sec, but she is gutted as a slip cost her some potentially crucial time. Austria edged to an eight-second lead over Norway in the ski jumping ahead of the cross-country section in a snowy Nordic combined men’s large hill team relay. With defending champions Germany 11sec off the lead and Japan a second further back, there is little between the ‘big four’ nations of the sport, who have each won the Olympic relay twice since it joined the Games in 1988. Austria, led by Franz-Josef Rehrl’s 127.5 pointer and the world champion Johannes Lamparter’s 125.5.2 jump, notched 475.4 points. Norway’s normal hill world champion Jarl Magnus Riiber ruled himself out of contention for Thursday’s event, the last of the Nordic combined programme at the Games. Norway were hardly short of quality, however, with Joergen Graabak, gold and silver medallist in Beijing, Jens Oftebro, who took silver in the large hill, and experienced Espen Bjørnstad and Espen Andersen making the world champions a good bet to top the podium. Germany, with two of the Pyeongchang team back on duty, and Japan, comprising the Watabe brothers – Akito and Yoshito – along with Hideaki Nagai and individual normal hill champion Ryota Yamamoto, will also be in the mix. France were the best of the rest but, at 1min 27sec behind, know the medals are likely be shared among the leading four. (Reuters) The women’s 1,000m speed skating is back under way. There are six pairs of athletes to come. The men’s curling semi-finals will begin in a little under three hours’ time. USA v Great Britain and Sweden v Canada is the lineup there. Speed Skating – Women’s 1000m: Sounds like there is some resurfacing of the ice going on, so there’s a bit of a delay. The amazing Ireen Wüst of the Netherlands made history last week, by becoming the first winter or summer athlete to win individual gold medals in five Olympics: The 35-year-old will be on the ice soon enough for her Olympic farewell. Speed Skating – Women’s 1000m: The gold-medal race has begun. Ireen Wüst’s Olympic farewell is coming up ... her compatriot, Antoinette de Jong, leads the way at the moment with a time of 1min 14.92sec. Great Britain’s women defeated Sweden 8-2 in the curling round robin. So they should carry plenty of confidence into the semi-final tomorrow. Eve Muirhead speaks to the BBC: “We had to win, that was the first thing we went out there to do. We fought out hearts out. Nothing was in control apart from our own game and that’s what we did. “Of course we maybe had one eye on the other games, but to see we’ve managed to get a qualification spot by, I think it was a centimetre in the draw shot, it shows all our great practice over the months ... it’s drilled into us how important that draw shot is, and that’s proven that it really is. “I was in this position in 2018 as well, in a semi-finals, and I definitely want to do one better. I’m very proud of this team, we’ve got a great chance out there. As a team we’ve played very well all week. And as much as we’ve lost a few games I think all of us know those losses have not been through a lot of bad play. It’s been a lot of inches here and there, but that’s curling. But yeah, I can’t wait to get out here tomorrow night, of course supporting the boys tonight in the semi-final, and let’s hope we can all do Great Britain proud.” Sweden beat Korea 8-4. Great Britain will meet Sweden and Japan will play Switzerland ... and Canada are knocked out! Switzerland top the table, then Sweden, the Great Britain, then Japan. Canada fifth. Great Britain progress via the draw shot challenge! The IOC president Thomas Bach offered US figure skaters Olympic torches as holdover gifts while they await a resolution of the Russian doping case that is preventing them from receiving their silver medals. Women’s curling: If things stay the same in this final end, Great Britain will play Sweden, the Olympic champions, in the semi-finals. Sweden lead Korea 6-4 and Korea need to find a miracle shot to knock the Sweden stones away. The Canada team, potentially, could still be knocked out, which would be a disaster for them. They are pictured nervously watching and waiting as this final round robin match draws to a conclusion. Nordic Combined: Team Gundersen Large Hill/4x5km: France, Czech Republic, USA is the new top three as the ski jumping part of the event goes on. But wait! Ryoto Yamamoto puts Japan top again with a jump of 135m. The Winter Olympics have been plunged into further controversy after Beijing 2022 spokesperson Yan Jiarong dismissed human rights violations among the Uyghur muslim population as “lies” – and then insisted Taiwan was part of China. Yan, a former member of the Chinese delegation to the UN General Assembly, referred to “so-called forced labour” in Xinjiang in response to one question, before insisting China was against the “politicising of sports”. Job done for Eve Muirhead and co in their final round robin match. Now all eyes turn to Korea v Sweden. Sweden are qualified and lead 6-4 in the 10th end so it’s looking good for a Great Britain semi-final at the moment. The imperious Canada women’s hockey team completed a buzzsaw run through the Olympic tournament with a comprehensive victory over their defining foes, seeing off the United States in Thursday afternoon’s gold medal game by a 3-2 scoreline that flattered to deceive. The latest instalment in one of world sport’s most hotly contested rivalries was largely one-way traffic for the half hour when the outcome truly hung in the balance. Marie-Philip Poulin, Canada’s longtime talisman known as “Captain Clutch”, scored twice as the defending world champions opened a three-goal lead behind an aggressive forechecking attack and a standout effort by in-form goaltender Ann-Renee Desbiens, who finished with 38 saves. Women’s round robin curling: Canada have just completed a 10-4 win against Denmark ... while Switzerland now lead Japan 8-4 in a match that is still ongoing, but in the final end. GB ‘have the hammer’ in the ninth end against ROC. Sweden lead Korea 5-4. Switzerland and Sweden have already qualified but there are several teams scrapping to join them in the semi-finals. Nordic Combined: Team Gundersen Large Hill/4x5km: Akito Watabe produces a fine jump of 125m, registering 109.1pts, and making Japan’s total 233.6. The lead the way with Norway and Austria second and third respectively. Women’s curling: With Great Britain leading 5-3, an errant stone from the ROC team has knocked one of their own, red coloured stones out of the action area. We are in the eighth end and as you probably know, GB have to win this, and hope other results go their way, in order to progress from the round robin. There are some nervous faces among the GB team but the scoreboard is in their favour at the moment ... Thank you Mike and good morning / good afternoon / good evening, everyone. Curling: ROC manage to pull one back in the seventh end and with three ends to go, Great Britain lead 5-3. And with that I’ll hand you over to Luke McLaughlin in London, who will see you through the rest of the day’s action in Beijing. Bye for now. Cross-country skiing: some news in ahead of the 50km freestyle race on Saturday - Simen Hegstad Krueger has been named in Norway’s four-man team after his journey to Beijing was delayed by Covid-19. Reuters reports Krueger was stranded in Italy following his positive coronvairus test but has finally arrived in Zhangjiakou, some 200km north-west of Beijing, and is fit enough to take part in the race - one of the sport’s blue riband events. “I’m really glad to finally be here. It’s been a long wait for me in Italy so looking forward to finally getting the chance to compete on these tough courses, looking forward to that,” he said. “[There were] some parts where I thought my chances were quite small to get here, but sometimes my chances felt bigger, so it was ups and downs, but very glad to finally be here.” Curling: Things are getting tense on the ice at the National Aquatics Centre, where Great Britain’s women have extended their lead over the ROC to 5-2 heading into the seventh end of the round robin clash. The Russians’ last stone in end six hasn’t got the legs on it and it’s a steal of one for the Brits. Here’s that story I promised earlier from Sean Ingle. The Winter Olympics have plunged been into further controversy after Beijing 2022 spokesperson Yan Jiarong dismissed human rights violations among the Uyghur muslim population as “lies” - and then insisted Taiwan was part of China. Yan, a former member of the Chinese delegation to the UN General Assembly, referred to “so-called forced labour” in Xinjiang in response to one question, before insisting China was against the “politicising of sports”. Read the full story below: A bit of a lull in the live action at the moment, so let’s just have a look ahead to what is to come today. In about 20 minutes, the nordic combined Team Gundersen large hill/4x5km ski jumping gets underway before the women’s 1,000m speed skating starts in just under an hour from now. There’s the conclusion of the women’s single skating with the free skating, featuring a certain 16-year-old Russian called Kamila Valieva who holds the lead and will go last. The ski jumping part of the aforementioned nordic combined also takes place today before the big curling semi-final between the men of Great Britain and US. Freestyle skiing: Naeslund is the Olympic champion! She gets out in front early in what proves to be tightly contested final, but the fight is more for the silver and bronze, such is the Swede’s dominance in this race. Marielle Thompson picks up silver - and this is the first time a Canadian has not won gold - while Fanny Smith claims bronze. Daniela Maier comes in fourth. Freestyle skiing: Here we go then, the skicross small final. It’s an even start, but Brittany Phelan soon leads, followed by Courtney Hoffos and a third Canadian, Hannah Schmidt. And that’s how it finishes, Kennedy-Sim unable to register a best-ever finish for Australia in this event. Freestyle skiing: So, the women’s skicross big final will be contested by Naeslund, Thompson, Smith and Maier. Kennedy-Smith still has a chance to post her best ever placing in the small final, but no medal this time. A grand total of three Canadians fall in the semis. Freestyle skiing: To the second semi... it’d be picture perfect for a Christmas card out there as the snow falls heavily. Fanny Smith opens up a lead, ahead of Brittany Phelan as Kennedy-Sim lags behind. But it’s Daniela Maier who takes the win, overtaking on the very last jump, to advance along with Fanny Smith! Kennedy-Sim finishes in fourth, and there will be no final for the Australian. Her run is ended at the semi-final stage, as it was four years ago. Freestyle skiing: Sandra Naesland, the world No 1, is imperious in the first semi-final as visibility deteriorates. The Swede eases across the finish line in first place to qualify for the big final along with Canada’s Marielle Thompson. Curling: As the snow tumbles on the slopes, let’s head inside briefly to the National Aquatics Centre where Japan and Switzerland are locked at 2-2. The big men’s semi-final between Great Britain and the US is coming up later on. Freestyle skiing: Brittany Phelan makes it four Canadian women in the semi-finals as Fanny Smith of Switzerland wins the last quarter-final. Not so great for Alexandra Edebo of Sweden, who crashes out. Semis coming up and from there, the small matter of the medal allocation. Freestyle skiing: Back to the slopes and Sammy Kennedy-Sim gets another good start in her four-woman quarter-final and leads from the start to the finish to book her spot in the semis! The veteran of three Winter Games is looking good. Daniela Maier of Germany comes in second and joins the Australian in progressing. My colleague Sean Ingle in Beijing will bring you more on this shortly, but a Beijing official has spoken for the first time about Taiwan and Xinjiang, saying that there is only “one China”. “The so-called forced labour in Xinjiang is lies made up by deliberate groups,” Beijing Games spokesperson Yan Jiarong said. Stay tuned for more. Confirmation of the Swiss athlete’s gold medal - her second in this event. Alpine skiing: The women’s combined podium is pretty much set - Michelle Gisin and Wendy Holdener, both of Switzerland, and Federica Brignone of Italy occupy the top three slots, in that order, as the rest of the course finish off their runs. Freestyle skiing: She’s a renown fast-starter and Sammy Kennedy-Sim bursts out of the gates in her women’s ski-cross 1/8 final. The Australian crosses the line in first to ease into the quarter-finals, but all eyes are on the Italian Lucrezia Fantelli, who has a nasty-looking crash which effectively gifts progress to both Kennedy-Sim along with the Russian Anastasia Chirtcova. Fingers crossed Fantelli is OK - she stays down for a long time, receiving attention. There’s a delay in competition, but we’re back up and running now with those quarter-final heats. Thanks Beau, that was a hectic hour or so. Excellent work seeing us through it all. I’ll be here now for the next 90 minutes or so now, and we’ll start with an update from the women’s ski-cross.... Time for me to sign off and do the short-track relay push to Mike Hytner in Australia. But I did want to toss in one email I received from Barbara Roden in one of my favorite places in the world, British Columbia: “It’s 10.10 pm here on the west coast and I’ll bet a lot of people are glued to the game. Nail-biting time. Also, I haven’t been to a Vancouver Canucks game for a while, but ‘Freeze Frame’ used to be a staple of between plays music at their games. All these arena music people must train at the same place.” I love hockey music. And that was a great game to watch. So the last few hours have been heart-wrenching (Shiffrin), thrilling (hockey) and breathtaking (halfpipe). Still so much more to come. Enjoy. Credit to Team USA for a spirited rally, but it’s just too late. The shot count since Canada’s third goal was 22-5, but only a few of those shots tested Ann-Renee Desbiens, and the great goalie was up to the challenge on those. The Americans will lament their sluggish, muddled start. A lot of mental lapses on defense. A sense that they weren’t rising to the challenge against their eternal rivals. But credit to Canada. They’re just that good. Alpine combined, slalom: The refs are talking about that goal, and while they’re busy with that, we can see Switzerland’s Gisin and Holdener have taken the top two spots. Goal! Canada 3-2 USA 12.5 seconds, 3rd period (Kessel 59:47) Just brute force on the 6-on-4. Kessel jams a rebound through Desbiens. 35 seconds: Good scramble. Alpine combined, slalom: Only five of the first 10 skiers have made it down the course. Now come the two skiers with a good chance -- Holdener and Gisin. Canada 3-1 USA 1:25, 3rd period The USA accidentally plays the puck out of the Canadian zone but regroups. And it’ll be a power play -- Poulin, of all people, for tripping. Dangerous hit on Barnes. 6 on 4 ... Canada 3-1 USA, 2:30, 3rd period Good effort by the US defense to prevent the empty-net goal. Here comes Knight. Canada 3-1 USA 3:08, 3rd period While the PA plays Elvis Costello’s Pump It Up, the US women pull the goalie. Alpine combined, slalom: Never mind, then -- Italy’s Federica Brignone rips through the gates with confidence and bests Ledecka’s combined time by 0.80 seconds. Still, a medal from the snowboard wizard would be amazing. Halfpipe: Gus Kenworthy has qualified! His score of 70.75 holds up, and he makes the 12-skier final. The top nine all hail from the USA (four), Canada (three) and New Zealand (two). Then one each from France, Switzerland and Britain. Alpine combined, slalom: The USA’s Keely Cashman gives Shiffrin some company on the DNF list. Don’t look now, but Ester Ledecka may be set for a snowboard-ski double even more unlikely than the one she pulled off in 2018. Canada 3-1 USA 5:45, 3rd period Nothing happened on the power play. She said she had a mental image of this happening, and it did. Third time she has failed to finish a race. She’s still the GOAT, with Olympic medals, world championships and too many World Cups to count. But this hurts. Canada 3-1 USA 9:21, 3rd period Power play to the USA. Savannah Harmon gets past Jocelyn Larocque, who reaches out in desperation and gets the hooking call. Alpine combined, slalom: It’s underway. Ester Ledecka is going now. Two more skiers after her, then it’s Mikaela Shiffrin, and I’m shuddering with anxiety. Upsets are one thing. But a truly outstanding athlete struggling with internal demons is a harrowing thing to behold. This isn’t Shiffrin vs. other skiers. This is Shiffrin vs. herself. Only a hard-hearted person would root for the latter. Canada 3-1 USA 13:50, 3rd period The right post again gets a bit of action, this time being dislodged as Desbien makes a save and onrushing players slip past. Canada wins a faceoff and gets a bit of space. Princeton’s Sarah Fillier shoots, but Cavallini is up to the task. Canada 3-1 USA 14:58, 3rd period Dink! The sound of puck on post echoes through the arena off an Alex Carpenter shot as the USA applies the pressure. Thirty seconds later, Carpenter slides in between Canadian defenders and takes a pass. She’s forced onto her backhand, though, and Ann-Renee Desbiens makes the save. The result here no longer looks like a foregone conclusion. Halfpipe: New Zealand’s Ben Harrington is able to walk off under his own power after a crash. He may be more disappointed than hurt -- his first-run score is 13th right now, so he’ll just miss the final. Canada 3-1 USA 19:25, 3rd period Underway. The USA needs two goals in 19 minutes to force the traditional overtime between these two rivals. Halfpipe: In case you didn’t believe me when I said a skier ran into a camera operator ... Alpine combined, slalom: The start list is simply the current standings, in order. That means Mikaela Shiffrin is up fifth and will probably be in the start gate within 30 minutes from now. Halfpipe: Two-time world champion Aaron Blunck ran into trouble on his first run and needed to put things together on his second. He did. A couple of double corks, the last a 1260, lands him atop the standings with a 92.00. New Zealand’s Nico Porteous has also broken 90, moving ahead of David Wise. On the bubble right now is the man we’re all watching -- Gus Kenworthy, who posted a 70.75 in his second run after falling in his first. The USA needed some sort of spark, and the rules don’t allow for sending Donald Brashear over the boards to drop the gloves. Hilary Knight is an alternate captain playing in her fourth Olympics, and that shorthanded goal could give this team some confidence. They’ve outshot Canada 24-17. In the first game between the two, that meant very little, but that’s another potential building block here. That’s a start. Hannah Brandt and Hilary Knight swipe the puck from the Canadian power play point players and go off to the races. Knight shoots, it’s blocked, and she jams home the rebound for the shorthanded goal. Canada 3-0 USA 4:27, 2nd period The organist is playing the J. Geils Band classic Freeze Frame. That is all. Oh, and now Canada is getting another power play. Canada 3-0 USA 5:44, 2nd period Ann-Renee Desbiens finally has to make a difficult save, sprawling to keep the puck under her. An inquisitive US attacker comes in and gives a little shove in search of the puck, and multiple Canadian defenders send an unmistakable message not to do that. No response from the US. The US team simply isn’t up for this. Halfpipe: Just a mesmerizing run from the USA’s David Wise, the two-time defending champion in this freestyle skiing event. Two double cork 1260s, a 1080 tossed in for good measure, and it all just flows rather than looking like a series of athletic exhibitions. That’s an 88.75. Safe to say he’ll be back in the final. That’s the end of the first run, and Wise is the leader. Then it’s Canadian Brendan Mackay, followed by Americans Alex Ferreira and Birk Irving. Canada 3-0 USA 8:45, 2nd period The US shots are getting more dangerous, and their pressure earns a power play. It’s Jocelyn Larocque with an effective judo throw, but instead of the ippon, she gets two minutes in the box. Sarah Nurse outraces the US defense, and has enough space to stop and wait for Brianne Jenner to race through the middle. Cavallini makes a good save on Jenner and sends the rebound out wide, but while a US defender skids into the goalie, Marie-Philip Poulin hits the empty net from an acute angle. Canada 2-0 11:34, 2nd period Tell me they’re not playing Vanilla Ice on the PA. Can I go to bed now? Canada 2-0 USA 12:00, 2nd period Best save of the game from Cavallini, moving swiftly to her right on a Canadian 2-on-1. Canada 2-0 USA 13:30, 2nd period If you’re anxious to get to bed early, you’ll love this period. Several minutes go by with no stoppage of play. Meanwhile, in the halfpipe, Finland’s Jon Sallinen just ran into a cameraman as he went up off a wall. Canada 2-0 USA 17:30, 2nd period A half-chance for Canada on a long diagonal pass to an unmarked attacker (and unnamed -- these numbers are not easy to read) sitting on the blue line. She squanders the open look, but it’s another wake-up call for the US defense. You know, just in case those two goals weren’t wake-up calls. Halfpipe (men’s freestyle): Sorry to neglect the qualifying phase of this competition, taking place in a dusty snowfall. The man we’re all watching here is Gus Kenworthy. Competing for the USA, he took silver in the slopestyle in Sochi eight years ago. He also rescued stray dogs while he was in Russia. In 2015, he came out as gay. Since then, he has started an acting career, with an extended run on American Horror Story, a guest spot in Will &amp; Grace, and an appearance as “skier” in Sharknado 5: Global Swarming. He’s competing for Team GB now in halfpipe, where he’ll need a good second run to qualify after a fall in his first. American Alex Ferreira and a gaggle of Canadians and New Zealanders are in good shape to qualify. Alpine combined: NBC speaks with Shiffrin. She says she’s well-placed after the downhill but isn’t confident. She has a mental image of missing the fifth gate again. Can the USOPC set up some Zoom calls with sports psychologists? We’re in the midst of what might be a miserable two hours for underconfident US athletes. Put a pin in this moment ... Canada-USA games can get chippy. There’s no fighting in international hockey, but there’s the usual argy-bargy at times, and neither team backs down. Late in the first period, while Cavallini was covering the puck, Canada’s Sarah Fillier gave Hannah Brandt a solid two-handed shove and knocked her to the ice. Fillier than coolly skated in the foot or two of space between the downed US player and the goal. There was no reaction from any US players. They need a Herb Brooks speech at this point. Canada 2-0 USA 1:40, 1st period Prolonged possession for the USA, but again, no serious shots here. The Americans haven’t had a real scoring chance since Brandt hit the outside of the net with the goal at her mercy in the early going. Canada 2-0 USA 3:48, 1st period Canada has a power play, courtesy of a delay-of-game call when Kendall Coyne Schofield played the puck over the glass, and it just feels like this game will be out of hand if the US penalty kill can’t hold here. Marie-Philip Poulin just kills the USA in every major tournament final. She’s done it again, swiping the puck from an unsuspecting defender and easily depositing it past Cavallini, who doesn’t seem to be getting any sort of a look at a few of these shots. Canada 1-0 USA 6:00, 1st period In the group-stage game, Canada gave up shots by the bushel, but the defense also made those shots a lot less dangerous. The USA just got another shot, but it was from a distance that isn’t going to scare Desbiens. Don’t blame Canada. Blame Wisconsin. That’s where Desbiens went to college. Canada 1-0 USA 7:18, 1st period And a bit better for the USA, forcing a scramble in front of Desbiens’ goal. But the swarming Canadian defense forms a red wall, and the danger is cleared. Canada 1-0 USA 8:24, 1st period Finally, the USA goes back on the attack. Alex Carpenter gets a shot on a quick push forward. Nurse has tied the great Hayley Wickenheiser for points in one Olympic tournament with 17 -- five goals, 12 assists. Well, that didn’t take long. Faceoff win, quick pass to Sarah Nurse, and it’s redirected past Cavellini and in. Canada has outshot the USA 5-1. Goal disallowed! Canada 0-0 USA 13:04, 1st period Canada whips the puck around against a somnambulant US defense, and Natalie Spooner takes it in the middle of the US zone and drills it past goalie Alex Cavallini, who is getting the start here instead of Maddie Rooney, who played the first game. But the US challenges the play, saying Canada was offside. Replay says ... yes. Offside. No goal. But if that isn’t a wakeup call for the US, I’m not sure what would be. Organ plays the Star Wars music from the scene of Luke watching the twin sunset. Canada 0-0 USA, 15:04, 1st period Before I forget, I’d like to single out the organist at the hockey venue, who has been outstanding. They’ve been alternating the organ with recorded music, most recently Tame Impala’s song Elephant. Canada 0-0 USA, 17:40, 1st period CHANCE! Hannah Brandt pounces on a rebound on the doorstep with half the net open behind Canadian goalie Ann-Renee Desbiens. Call it nerves, call it a rolling puck -- Brandt’s shot hit the outside of the goal, and they may regret that. In the group stage, the USA outshot Canada 53-27 and lost 4-2. Just like the USA-Canada men’s soccer game recently. Possession means nothing if you don’t put something in the net. I could bore you with details about how dominant Canada and the USA have been in women’s hockey. But I already wrote a story that included those numbers ... Just know this -- no other country has ever won squat in this sport. A Canadian columnist actually wrote recently that the sport didn’t belong in the Olympics because no one else can compete. It was not a popular opinion. Faceoff ... here we go .. Let’s see ... we’ve covered curling, Alpine skiing, the freestyle halfpipe qualifications ... what’s left? Oh right ... Based on how they had played in the last year or two, Tabitha Peterson and the US women seemed to be a better bet to reach the semifinals than John Shuster and the US men, even though the latter won gold in 2018 But the women lost their last three to finish 4-5, taking care of business against the less-accomplished opponents but failing to break through against the sport’s titans -- world champion Silvana Tirinzoni’s Swiss team, second-ranked Anna Hasselborg and Sweden, and two-time Olympic semifinalist Eve Muirhead and Britain. A loss to fearsome Canadian Jennifer Jones, the 2014 Olympic champion and 2018 world champion, deflated the USA, and they lost their final game to Japan. Shuster’s team underwhelmed in several games, including a horrid 10-4 loss to Italy in their penultimate game. But other results broke their way, and as in 2018, a 5-4 record would get them into the semifinals. They clinched that a few minutes ago with a workmanlike win over a misfiring Danish team. Later today, the US will face Team GB, which clinched the top seed with an 8-1 record. Shuster, though, accounted for that loss. This team often plays to the level of the competition for better or for worse. Mikaela Shiffrin has done what she needed to do in the downhill phase of the combined. She’s in fifth place, 0.56 seconds behind Austria’s Christine Scheyer. No one else in the top seven has any World Cup points in slalom this year. Italy’s Federica Brignone, who’s eighth, has a handful but would not be expected to make up 0.13 seconds on Shiffrin. The biggest threats to Shiffrin are Switzerland’s Wendy Holdener, who’s 0.43 seconds behind the American and stands third in the World Cup slalom standings, and defending champion Michelle Gisin, who’s another 0.01 back and is seventh in World Cup slalom this season. The slalom starts at 1 a.m. Eastern time, right when the USA-Canada gold medal women’s hockey game will be in full swing. Curling: Denmark picks up two in the ninth end, which John Shuster and company will happily concede. USA up 7-5 with hammer in the 10th. For those who don’t know curling -- that’s good. Other games are just for seeding, and Team GB has a firm grasp of the top seed with a 5-2 lead over Canada. Their only loss? USA. Sweden, also with just one loss, is up 8-7 in a barnburner with an already-eliminated Swiss team. Curling: I flipped over to USA-Denmark and heard “if they get this, they’ll get four points.” Nearly had a heart attack. But what they meant was that Denmark would have four points for the game, a threshold they have not oft crossed. And they have not yet crossed it here, either, as Mikkel den Krause makes another mistake that would agitate a typical above-average club curler, taking out a US rock but rolling far enough from the center to give the US another steal. It’s 7-3 USA after eight ends, and John Shuster has the semifinals in sight. The field of 12 is set, led by Eileen Gu, who finished a staggering six points ahead of Canada’s Rachael Karker. Estonia’s Kelly Sildaru took third despite passing up her second run. Team GB will be represented by Zoe Atkin with an impressive fourth-place run. The last spot goes to Germany’s Sabrina Cakmakli. Aside from Sildaru, Atkin and Cakmakli, the final 12 comes from three countries. Kexin Zhang busted out a 1080 to move up from 10th to fifth in her second run, joining Chinese teammates Gu and Li Fanghui in the final. Canada has Karker, Cassie Sharpe and Amy Fraser. For the USA, it’s Brita Sigourney, Hanna Faulhaber and Carly Margulies, clumped together from eighth to 10th. Halfpipe: Margulies improves slightly to 82.25. That’s behind Faulhaber, so her fellow American clinches a spot, but Margulies should qualify. Now it’s up to Devin Logan, who goes big on the first trick but barely lands it. Her tail hits before the rest of her, and it’s a nice bit of athleticism to hang on. But that’s not going to impress the judges. She’s out. Margulies is in, and NBC informs us that she has not competed in two years due to injuries. Not a bad comeback. Halfpipe: As expected after that second run, Brita Sigourney has qualified for the final. Not much has changed on the bubble, which has a lot of Americans. Hanna Faulhaber is ninth and has almost clinched a spot. Carly Margulies is 10th. Devin Logan is one spot outside the top 12 and will have a pressure-packed final run. Faulhaber has already done both runs. Margulies is up now. Alpine skiing, downhill: That’ll do quite nicely for Mikaela Shiffrin. A coach gives a nice fist pump as she comes in second of the skiers so far, trailing only Ledecka and putting 0.44 seconds between herself and Gisin. Ledecka competes almost exclusively in downhill and super-G when she does Alpine skiing rather than snowboarding. She shouldn’t be a factor in the slalom unless favorites like Shiffrin miss gates. Alpine combined, downhill: With Petra Vlhova out, the biggest threat to Mikaela Shiffrin is surely Switzerland’s Michelle Gisin. She’s just the defending champion. And she took bronze in super-G earlier in these Games. But her downhill run is a little ragged. She’s 0.99 seconds behind Ledecka and just fourth out of the eight pre-Shiffrin skiers. Second place -- the USA’s Keely Cashman. Alpine combined, downhill: The versatile skier-snowboarder Ester Ledecka is the fastest skier of the first five by a wide margin. Mikaela Shiffrin starts ninth. Another five minutes or so. Halfpipe: Can Brita Sigourney, the 2018 bronze medalist, improve in her second run to feel a little safer about qualifying for the final? Her 80.50 in the first run put her in eighth place. On her second hit, she flies 12 1/2 feet out of the pipe. She does the same tricks as in her first run except for some slight changes near the bottom. That’s an 84.50. Should be fine. A bit earlier, Kelly Sildaru opted out of her second run, thinking her 87.50 will be enough to qualify. Safe bet. Halfpipe: Eileen Gu won the big air event by a hair. If she does anything like this in the final, it won’t be close. She made the halfpipe look small, easily floating more than 10 feet above it and once again landing back-to-back 900s at the start. The back-to-back flatspins at the bottom were sick as well. 95.50. Off the charts. Before that, the USA’s Hanna Faulhaber didn’t improve her score, once again getting tremendous amplitude but having some sketchy landings. After that, Britain’s Zoe Atkin improved slightly to 86.75. She’ll be in the final. Coming up in about one minute: Women’s combined downhill. This is where Mikaela Shiffrin should shine. She’s the slalom GOAT and is good enough in downhill. She took silver in this event in 2018 and won the 2021 world championship. Halfpipe: If you’re checking in from New Zealand, I have some bad news -- Chloe McMillan is 17th and Anja Barugh is 18th. As many a report card might say: Needs improvement. Halfpipe: The first run is done. Top 12 reach the final. Only the best run counts for each skier. Eileen Gu has the top score with a 93.75, and there’s no way 12 people will top that. It’s unlikely more than two people have a shot at it. Canada’s Rachael Karker and Estonia’s Kelly Sildaru are similarly safe. Likely safe: Canada’s Cassie Sharpe and Team GB’s Zoe Atkin. Three Americans -- Hanna Faulhaber, Brita Sigourney and Carly Margulies -- are clustered at seventh through ninth and might need better runs to feel safe. Devin Logan is 13th, so she definitely needs better. Curling: Well, that changes things. John Shuster makes a solid takeout to lie three with his last rock, leaving no Danish rocks in the house. Denmark’s Mikkel den Krause needs to draw close to the button to get a single point. If he misses by a couple of feet, he gives up a steal of one. He missed by a lot. In archery terms, his shot missed the target entirely and went somewhere into a neighboring realm. USA 5, Denmark 2 after four ends. Bird photo! Curling: I’ve been told there’s a bird in the Ice Cube, but I have no photo. Anyway, the US men just need to beat last-place Denmark to reach the semifinals. They gave up a steal in the second end to trail 2-0. They did get two back in the third, though. Halfpipe: From 32 to just-turned-20, it’s Estonian star Kelly Sildaru dropping into the pipe on her birthday. She and Gu are the only skiers going for the big air-slopestyle-halfpipe triple. No medal for her in big air, but she took bronze in slopestyle. She doesn’t show anything spectacular but gets an 87.50. Halfpipe: A lot of these competitors are teens or in their early 20s. The USA’s Brita Sigourney is 32. She starts out with a huge 900 but loses some momentum late. That’s still an 80.50. Halfpipe: Canada’s Cassie Sharpe only has rotation in three of her six hits, but the judges must have liked what they saw, because that’s an 86.25. Next -- Britain’s Zoe Atkin, one of many US-based Winter Olympians who competes for another country, has a nice array of spins for an 85.25. The parade of high scores comes to a screeching halt with China’s Wu Meng. She crashed, so her score was obviously kind of low. This isn’t figure skating. Halfpipe: Stanford-bound Chinese freestyle skier Eileen Gu starts with back-to-back 900s and ends up with a 93.75. There are six judges for this event, and the highest and lowest scores are dropped. Ironically, the US judge was responsible for the “lowest” score for Gu, though it was a 93. Remarkable consensus here. Halfpipe: The USA’s Hanna Faulhaber has kicked off qualifying with about 15 1/2 feet of amplitude and six tricks. That’s good for an 84.25. Canada’s Rachael Karker goes for more spins than height, landing back-to-back 900s. Here goes Gu ... Hi folks. Beau Dure here, and I’d like to start by saying 1,057 matches in curling still aren’t enough. Especially for the US women, who are out. We watched some of the USA-Canada game last night at the curling club, and we’re all a little depressed. Speaking of USA-Canada, stay up late with me (East Coasters, that is) to keep up with one of the most anticipated events of these Games -- USA-Canada women’s hockey, for the gold this time. Around that time, Mikaela Shiffrin will be going in the combined, an event in which she would the prohibitive favorite if not for her mistakes on these slopes over this fortnight. Before that, let’s check in with Eileen Gu again as she hops into the halfpipe. Today’s schedule Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – after approximately 1,057 matches it is the final bits of the round robin stage, and then in the evening it is the men’s semi-finals 🥇 9.30am-3.10pm Freestyle skiing – there’s action all day but the main attraction from 2pm onwards is the women’s ski cross which goes from the quarter-finals to the final 🥇 10.30am and 2pm Alpine skiing – it is the women’s combined – they do the downhill in the morning, the slalom in the afternoon 🥇 12.10pm Ice hockey – no shocks in the women’s ice hockey the gold medal game will be Canada v US 🥇 4pm and 7pm Nordic combined – the teams do jumping first and cross-country 🥇 4.30pm Speed skating – the women’s 1,000m at the National Speed Skating Oval 🥇 6pm Figure skating – the conclusion of the women’s single skating with the free skating 🥇New Jersey’s governor, Phil Murphy, said he was “deeply disturbed” by video of a shopping mall brawl that ended with a Black teenager pinned to the ground in handcuffs with a police officer’s knee on his back, while officers let the white youth he had been trading punches with watch from a sofa. “The appearance of what is racially disparate treatment is deeply, deeply disturbing, and another reminder that progress we’ve made on relationships between law enforcement and the communities they serve … shows that our work is not done,” Murphy said after viewing the video of the weekend altercation at the mall in Bridgewater township. A Facebook post by the Bridgewater police department acknowledged the incident “has made members of our community upset” and said an internal investigation had been launched. The Black youth’s mother on Wednesday questioned the responding officers’ handling of the incident while the national association for the advancement of colored people (NAACP) called for the law enforcement pair to be disciplined. “If it wasn’t for race, then what is it? What made them tackle my son, not the other kid? What made them be so aggressive with my son, not the other kid? Why is the other kid sitting down, looking at my son be humiliated and put into cuffs?” the mother, named only as Ebone to protect her child’s identity, told CNN. A statement posted to Twitter by the NAACP called on Murphy and the state’s acting attorney general, Matthew Platkin, to remove the two officers from duty. “Despite years of talk about bias training and accountability … the video cannot be denied. The immediate reaction was to aggressively throw the Black child to the ground, knee placed around the neck area and cuffed behind the back,” it said. “At the same time, the white youth, at least equally at fault for the fight as his Black counterpart, was carefully eased on to a couch and treated like a victim. This is something that African Americans in New Jersey experience too often.” National outrage over police treatment of Black individuals built into historic protests following the 2020 murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis when a white officer knelt on his neck for nine minutes. The officer, Derek Chauvin, was convicted of murder while his three colleagues are currently on trial for hate crimes in federal court in St Paul. The civil rights attorney Ben Crump, who is representing the family of the Black teen in the New Jersey incident, said he was “really troubled”. “Why is it the Black kid is presumed guilty and the white kid is presumed innocent?” Crump told CNN. “The Black kid is put face down with a knee in his back and the white kid was allowed to sit on the couch and observe him being humiliated.” In an interview with local TV station ABC7, the Black youth, whose first name is Kye, said he was defending a younger friend. “My friend was arguing with the older kid, and so I kind of just jumped into a fight. And since he’s older, he was on top of me and he’s bigger. I was just confused and mad about it,” he said. “They basically tackled me to the ground, and then the male officer put his knee in my back and started putting me in cuffs. Then the female officer came over and put her knee on my upper back too while [the white youth] was just sitting down on the couch watching the whole thing.”The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, has been accused of allowing fake news to flourish after refusing to debunk false claims that civil servants in his department demanded the removal of a portrait of the Queen. Dave Penman, the head of the FDA senior civil servants union, has claimed that Kwarteng is damaging morale within the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy after ignoring requests to publicly correct reports that staff had replaced the portrait with a smaller picture of the monarch. The row comes amid deepening anger among civil servants that they are being unfairly and repeatedly vilified in anonymous quotes from ministerial aides. The current row in BEIS was sparked by a report in the Daily Telegraph on 1 January under the headline, “How a portrait of the Queen that is ‘the size of a stamp’ has ruffled feathers in Kwasi Kwarteng’s business department”. An official was quoted telling the newspaper: “I think some of my colleagues forget we work for her majesty’s government.” A second added: “The new picture [of the Queen] is the size of a stamp. It’s laughable really.” The article also claimed that a memorial plaque commemorating officials from the former Ministry of Power who died during the second world war had been consigned to the “basement” of the building. The report was based on anonymous quotes from sources. After BEIS staff complained about the report, senior managers met union representatives. Documents show that BEIS managers agreed that staff did not try to downgrade a portrait of the Queen or remove a remembrance plaque. However, Kwarteng has not responded to pleas to correct the record. Penman said the report upset staff, some of whom have relatives who died in the war. “You would think that Kwasi Kwarteng would be ashamed that his allies are not only spreading fake news stories about the civil service, but that they would view a remembrance plaque and a portrait of the Queen as convenient tools with which to spread false and malicious accusations,” he said. “Instead, he’s happy for these stories to run without challenge or public comment despite being asked to do so, damaging the reputation of his department and the civil servants who work there. “The irony is, of course, that those civil servants know exactly where these stories emanate from and his excuse for refusing to respond – their anonymous source – is as insulting as it is transparent. “He must understand the damage this does to morale and trust among his civil servants, all for the sake of a cheap headline.” The latest clash follows a series of claims from unions that the government is briefing against civil servants. Unions have complained that the “partygate” allegations have led to resignations by civil servants while politicians have remained in post. Priti Patel’s former senior civil servant, Sir Philip Rutnam, resigned in March 2020 claiming he had been “the target of a vicious and orchestrated briefing campaign”. Anonymous briefings to the press have also suggested that officials working from home have failed to pull their weight during the pandemic. Asked to respond to Penman’s criticisms, a BEIS spokesperson said: “The Queen is our country’s head of state and it is right that her portrait is given pride of place in government departments with sufficient prominence. Following the renovations, we are pleased to now display two portraits of her majesty in the entrance to our offices in Westminster.”Prince Charles’s biographer, Jonathan Dimbleby, has claimed it is “extraordinarily unlikely” the prince knew of the alleged “cash for honours” scandal, saying the idea he could have been aware “frankly beggars belief”. Dimbleby defended the heir to the throne as the Metropolitan police launched an investigation into claims the Prince’s Foundation offered to support a Saudi billionaire donor’s application for citizenship and upgrade his CBE to a knighthood. The broadcaster and friend of the prince, who wrote Charles’s authorised biography, criticised claims it was “inconceivable” Charles would not have known of the honours offer. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “That is a very colourful thing to have said. ‘Inconceivable’ suggests that there is no possibility other than that he knew. I think it is extraordinarily unlikely that he knew. I think if he had known, he would immediately have taken action about it.” Clarence House has said the prince had “no knowledge” of the alleged scandal and was “happy to help if asked” with the police investigation, but had not been. His former close aide Michael Fawcett, who has since resigned as chief executive of the Prince’s Foundation, allegedly wrote a letter to the Saudi businessman Mahfouz Marei Mubarak bin Mahfouz, making the offer apparently in return for a generous donation. Dimbleby said Charles believed in the honours system, understood it, and had conducted many thousands of investitures. “If there has been some scam, some breaking of the law, you honestly think he would have been party to that? It beggars belief,” he said. He dismissed as insignificant reports in the Daily Mail that the investiture for the Saudi businessman had taken place in Buckingham Palace’s blue drawing room, which the paper said is usually reserved for world leaders, and accused it of “finding fire where there is not even any smoke”. Praising Charles’s charity work, Dimbleby said the royal was president, not a trustee or chief executive of the charity. And, though once close to Fawcett, it “does not mean that Michael Fawcett would have said to him: ‘I just want you to know that I’m thinking of offering an honour on behalf of the Foundation to a Saudi businessman.’ I mean, come off it”. He criticised parts of the media’s ability to “turn a non-bombshell into a bombshell” and compared claims Charles must have known to the smearing of the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, “for allegedly not investigating Jimmy Savile”. The former home office minister Norman Baker, who along with the campaign group Republic reported the allegations to the Metropolitan police as a possible breach of the Honours Act, believed Clarence House would be thrilled with Dimbleby’s interview. “Arise Sir Jonathan,” Baker said. He added: “When the going gets tough, Jonathan Dimbleby is rolled out to defend the prince. “The idea that Dimbleby skates over, is the ‘I know nothing’, kind of Manuel [from Fawlty Towers] response to everything. Fact is, we know Charles and Fawcett are Tweedledum and Tweedledee. Charles has said he’s the one man he cannot do without. So the idea that Fawcett would be doing stuff without Charles knowing, it is inconceivable,” Baker said. Mark Borkowski , an author and PR expert, said it appeared to him that Dimbleby’s interview could demonstrate that Charles, his aides and friends “are up for a fight now”. “They are wheeling out the big guns. Because that was a peerless interview, defending Charles and attacking the Daily Mail. It shows that they are not going to take this lying down. They are not going to go back to ‘never complain, never explain’.”The UK’s low-carbon and renewable energy economy has failed to grow since 2014, according to official data showing a fall in the number of green jobs. In a blow to the government’s pledge to boost net-zero employment opportunities, the Office for National Statistics said its latest figures, covering 2020, showed “no significant change” in turnover and job numbers in the sector compared with six years earlier. Employment in the low-carbon and renewable energy economy – which includes manufacturing, energy supply and construction – fell by about 28,000 across the UK over the period, to just 207,800. Among the steepest declines were in factories producing energy-efficient products, onshore wind, and solar energy. Trade unions raised questions over the government’s plan to boost Britain’s low-carbon economy after years of limited progress. Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary, said the UK had an opportunity to be a pioneer on the path to net zero. “But we will miss out on these opportunities if ministers do not step up public investment and action. And we could see existing jobs lost to other countries who modernise their industry faster,” she added. Although the latest snapshot includes the first year of the coronavirus pandemic – when the British economy plunged into the deepest recession for 100 years – the figures show that in 2019, before the health emergency struck, green business turnover also fell compared with a year earlier. According to the latest data, the sector with the largest growth in jobs was in low-emission vehicles and infrastructure, where employment more than doubled to 19,100. However, this was not enough to offset bigger falls elsewhere, including a decline of more than a quarter, or 32,000, in the number of jobs in energy-efficient product manufacturing. The number of green businesses operating in the UK fell by 13% over the six-year period, while the combined turnover for the low-carbon economy fell by almost 6% to £41.2bn. The ONS said the fall in turnover was largely driven by the energy-efficient products and low-emissions vehicles sectors. The majority of businesses in the low-carbon and renewable energy sectors are in manufacturing and construction, both of which suffered a downturn in 2020. However, it said employment should have been less affected than turnover because the figures included staff on furlough. While green sectors including offshore wind have recorded substantial growth in recent years, with a sharp rise in renewable energy production, critics argue that much of the activity has been driven by foreign companies, with a reliance on the UK importing turbine blades and components manufactured abroad. Boris Johnson announced an ambition in late 2020 to create 250,000 green jobs across the country through a 10-point plan, as part of a wider government drive to hit net zero and embed a green recovery from the coronavirus pandemic. Ministers are seeking to encourage the growth of green jobs in sectors such as offshore wind, including through the creation of freeports in an attempt to boost investment and jobs in the low-carbon economy. However, experts and campaigners have warned the government’s net zero plans lack the required ambition and are not backed up with adequate funding from the Treasury, instead relying on the private sector. A UK government spokesperson said: “Over the last three decades, the UK has achieved record clean growth. Our economy has grown by 77%, while our emissions have decreased by 44% - faster than any other G7 nation. “Against the backdrop of the worst economic recession in a lifetime and an unprecedented pandemic, the low carbon economy has continued to support 430,000 jobs across the UK. We’ve already seen 56,000 jobs created and supported in green sectors last year, including in offshore wind and electric vehicle manufacturing. “As we recover from the pandemic, we are unlocking £90bn of private investment to continue to support the creation of new jobs in new British industries, such as Gigafactories, offshore wind, and nuclear power generation.”Joe Biden has said he believes Russia is on the brink of invading Ukraine, as he joined Nato allies in warning that shelling in the disputed east of the country may be an attempt to set up the pretext for an incursion. Claims of attacks by Russian-backed separatists at several locations in Ukraine’s Donbas region, including at a kindergarten and a school, were said to bear the hallmarks of an attempt to incite conflict. The US president, speaking shortly after the expulsion of his country’s deputy ambassador to Moscow, said his administration had “reason to believe” that Russia was “engaged in a false-flag operation to have an excuse to go in”. He told reporters: “Every indication we have is they’re prepared to go into Ukraine, attack Ukraine … My sense is it will happen in the next several days.” The president made his comments as Russia handed over its long-awaited response to American and Nato proposals about European security. The Kremlin said in its 10-page letter that the US had not taken its concerns seriously about Ukraine’s potential to join Nato and that Russia would need to take unspecified “measures of a military-technical nature”. Biden ordered his secretary of state, Antony Blinken, to change his travel plans at the last minute in order to speak at a United Nations security council meeting on Ukraine. Russia continues to deny that it has any intention of invading Ukraine but Blinken told those assembled that they found themselves in a “moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions of people”. He said: “Our information indicates clearly that [Russian] forces, including ground troops, aircraft, ships, are preparing to launch an attack against Ukraine in the coming days. “We don’t know precisely how things will play out, but here’s what the world can expect to see unfold. In fact, it’s unfolding right now. “First, Russia plans to manufacture a pretext for its attack. This could be a violent event that Russia will blame on Ukraine, or an outrageous accusation that Russia will level against the Ukrainian government. We don’t know exactly the form it will take. It could be a fabricated so-called terrorist bombing inside Russia. The invented discovery of the mass grave, a staged drone strike against civilians, or a fake – even a real – attack using chemical weapons. “Russia may describe this event as ethnic cleansing, or a genocide, making a mockery of a concept that we in this chamber do not take lightly.” Blinken flew from New York to the Munich Security Conference, which starts on Friday. On landing in Germany, the state department spokesman, Ned Price, said the secretary of state had agreed to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in about a week’s time. “The Russians have responded with proposed dates for late next week, which we are accepting, provided there is no further Russian invasion of Ukraine,” Price said. “If they do invade in the coming days, it will make clear they were never serious about diplomacy.” Before the security council meeting, the Russian mission circulated allegations of war crimes and “genocide” against the people of the Moscow-backed Luhansk and Donetsk separatist republics. Most of the allegations concerned accounts of civilian casualties from Ukrainian shelling, largely in 2014, when the conflict was most intense. The Russian documents referred to “mass graves”, but it was unclear whether they were alleging the burial sites were dug by Ukrainian forces or by the families and communities of the dead during the fighting. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergey Vershinin, urged council members to look at the allegations, saying they would be “horrified by them”. He repeated Moscow’s denials of any intention to invade Ukraine, and blamed Ukraine for ceasefire violations The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, echoed the US president’s sentiments, saying the sudden escalation of violence in Ukraine’s eastern territories may be “designed to discredit the Ukrainians”. His foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said she was “very concerned” by Thursday morning’s developments. “Reports of alleged abnormal military activity by Ukraine in Donbas are a blatant attempt by the Russian government to fabricate pretexts for invasion,” she said. “This is straight out of the Kremlin playbook.” Speaking at a meeting of Nato defence ministers, the military alliance’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, and the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, said they had long feared that Russia would look to engineer an excuse for a military incursion. Stoltenberg said: “We are concerned that Russia is trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine. It is still no clarity, no certainty about the Russian tensions. “But what we do know is that Russia has amassed the biggest force we have seen … for decades in and around Ukraine. And we also know that there are many Russian intelligence officers operating in Ukraine. “They are present in Donbas, and we have seen attempts to stage pretext, false-flag operations to provide an excuse for invading Ukraine.” Biden has said that about 150,000 Russian troops are on Ukraine’s border. Officials said the crisis was “entering into a very dangerous” period, and that if the shelling in the Donbas region was sustained, and played up on Russian media, it will have entered a new phase. Speaking at Nato headquarters in Brussels, Austin, a retired four-star general, said all the evidence suggested Russia was preparing for an assault. “We see them add to the more than 150,000 troops that they already have arrayed on that border. Even in the last couple of days,” he said. “We see some of those troops inch closer to that border. We see them fly in more combat and support aircraft. We see them sharpen their readiness in the Black Sea. “We even see them stocking up their blood supplies. You know, I was a soldier myself not that long ago. And I know first-hand that you don’t do these sorts of things for no reason. And you certainly don’t do them if you’re getting ready to pack up and go home.” After the emergence of photographs showing buildings damaged by shells, separatists in the Luhansk region claimed they had been forced to return fire in response to Ukrainian shelling, describing it as a “large-scale provocation”. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesperson, said the shelling “was a subject of very, very deep concern”, describing the incidents as “provocations”. Kyiv disputed the separatists’ claims, saying that Russian-backed groups had initiated the shelling and that its forces had not fired back. A nursery building in Stanytsia Luhanska was hit, wounding two civilians, according to the Ukrainian military. More shelling of the town was reported on Thursday night, but with no immediate reports of casualties. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, described the actions of the pro-Russian separatists as a “big provocation”. Western security officials closely monitoring the shelling in Donbas said it was “the sort of provocation that has the potential to escalate”, while also stressing that exchanges of fire across the line of control in eastern Ukraine were not uncommon. An official said there was “more concern with what is happening now” than with any possible pretext for an invasion by Russia that had been set out previously.Thirty-five years ago Michael Fish chirpily told BBC television viewers that a woman had called in and said she heard there was a hurricane on the way. “If you’re watching,” he told the woman, “don’t worry, there isn’t.” Of course Fish was correct, it was not a hurricane. But it was an unforgettable monster of a storm that caused incredible damage and killed 18 people. The Great Storm of 1987 took hold in the early hours of 16 October and brought winds that peaked at 120mph. It caused mayhem and devastation not seen for 250 years, including damaged buildings, major travel disruption and the uprooting of 15m trees. Numerous small boats were wrecked or blown away and a Channel ferry was blown ashore near Folkestone. The most damaged areas of the country were London, the south-east and East Anglia. In the Observer Tim Walker compared the sensational coverage of the storm – arguably justified – to Daniel Defoe’s account of England’s last great storm in 1703. Defoe wrote: “Very early in the morning there began a very great and dreadful Storm of Wind … which continued with a strange and unusual violence.” The winds caused 2,000 chimney stacks to collapse in London and ships were blown hundreds of miles off course. More than 1,000 sailors died on the Goodwin Sands off the Kent coast. Meteorologists now believe that storm was a hurricane. That is not the case with Storm Eunice, with the predicted wind speeds comparable to what can be seen in northern Scotland during a storm. But the Met Office is sufficiently concerned to give it a red weather warning. The last red weather warning was for Storm Arwen in November 2021, which caused particular chaos and heartache for north-east England and Scotland. The damage was much worse because, unusually, the winds came from the north. Falling trees damaged power lines, leading to power cuts for hundreds of thousands of people, some without heat and light for more than two weeks during bitterly cold weather. If it had happened in London, politicians and numerous callers to local radio argued, it would have been condemned as a national scandal with an instant visit from a concerned prime minister. Arwen, which brought a recorded wind speed of 110mph to Settle in North Yorkshire, was the worst storm in a generation for many. Before Arwen, you would have to go back to March 2018 for a similar red warning. That was during the beast from the east when the mild weather changed dramatically in the last week of February. Temperatures plunged as low as -11.7C overnight and Storm Emma prompted wind warnings for parts of south-west England and south Wales. Before then, only two red weather warnings had been issued by the UK Met Office since the current system came in to force in 2011. • This article was amended on 17 February 2022. An earlier version said “about 9,000 people suffered power cuts” in Storm Arwen; in fact this was the number of homes still without power in the second week after the storm. Hundreds of thousands of homes lost power when the storm first hit.The singer Britney Spears has shared a letter she received from two members of the US House of Representatives inviting her to Congress to talk about her long-running legal battle over her conservatorship that ended with victory in November. “I was immediately flattered and at the time I wasn’t nearly at the healing stage I’m in now,” Spears, 41, said in the Instagram post about the letter she received in December from Congressmen Charlie Crist of Florida and Eric Swalwell of California. “I’m grateful that my story was acknowledged. Because of the letter, I felt heard and like I mattered for the first time in my life!!! In a world where your own family goes against you, it’s actually hard to find people that get it and show empathy.” The letter conveyed Crist and Swalwell’s congratulations to Spears and her attorney Mathew Rosengart for winning the case that ended the conservatorship of the singer’s affairs, which lasted for almost 14 years and was mostly under the direction of her father, Jamie. In an interview following her courtroom victory in December, Spears said the entire affair had left her “scared” of the music business. The House representatives said they were troubled that “for years you were unable to hire your own counsel to represent your personal and financial interests”, among other issues, and invited Spears to Congress to speak about her “empowering” story and for them to learn more of “the emotional and financial turmoil you faced within the conservatorship system”. In her post, Spears thanked the congressmen for the invitation but did not indicate if she intended to take it up. “I want to help others in vulnerable situations, take life by the balls and be brave. I wish I would have been,” she said. “Nothing is worse than your own family doing what they did to me. I’m lucky to have a small circle of adorable friends who I can count on. In the meantime thank you to Congress for inviting me to the White House [sic].” An apparently starstruck Crist responded to Spears’ post in a short video clip of his own, released on Thursday morning. “I wanted to thank Britney Spears for sharing on social media about the conservatorship and the letter that I and Eric Swalwell wrote to her to make sure she understood what was going on,” Crist said. “I’m so happy for her, glad that her conservatorship was resolved. God bless her.” Despite winning back control of her affairs, Spears is still embroiled in disputes with her family. She has threatened legal action against her sister Jamie Lynn for a tell-all book she claims contains “misleading or outrageous claims” and is “potentially unlawful and defamatory”. And in January she made new allegations of financial impropriety against her father in response to his insistence she pay his legal bills.Conservative MPs have warned of a parliamentary backlash following steps taken by the government to ease tensions with China, designed to pave the way for better trading relations. Over the past few weeks, Boris Johnson has quietly signalled a thaw in frosty relations since the decision in 2020 to exclude Chinese telecoms giant Huawei from the UK’s 5G network. His communications chief, Guto Harri, is a former spinner for Huawei, though his previous chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, had also been an advocate of mending relations. The prime minister has ordered a restart of the UK-China Joint Economic and Trade Commission [Jetco] and this year Rishi Sunak is understood to be on the verge of agreeing the return of annual trade summit, the 11th UK-China Economic and Financial Dialogue (EFD), which has not been held since 2019. “The Treasury cannot shake the orthodoxy that we must have better trading terms with China,” one senior source said. “But it is Downing Street who really wants this. Boris has always been uneasy about having to cancel Huawei.” The EFD has previously been used to announce lucrative commercial contracts and closer trade cooperation but a Treasury source played down the significance of the return of the EFD, “if it goes ahead at all”, and said it would be a chance for dialogue rather that leading to any major changes. The source said it was wrong to portray Sunak as the driving force. “It’s the chancellor’s view that our principles should guide our relationship with China. We need to be eyes wide open about their increasing international influence and must take a principled stand on issues that conflict with our own values.” The move to defrost relations with Beijing is understood to be a source of tension between Johnson and his foreign secretary, Liz Truss. “Liz is a proper China hawk,” another senior government source said. Truss is scheduled to meet the delegation of MPs who were banned from China for lobbying for sanctions to oppose the Uyghur genocide in the coming days. The UK’s trade deficit with China has more than tripled in the last year, importing £40.5bn more from China than it exported to the country. Any significant change of approach threatens to reopen splits with backbenchers, especially those who have been blacklisted by Beijing and who are understood to feel they have received no tangible support from government, including on crucial issues like cybersecurity. Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former cabinet minister, said it “beggars belief that we are about to re-invent the failed project kowtow” and blamed the Treasury and Downing Street for an overeagerness to normalise relations. “Whether it is the CCP’s illegal seizure and militarisation of the South China seas or the trashing of the Sino/British agreement on Hong Kong, the Treasury seems ready to turn a blind eye to it all.” There is also continued frustration about Johnson’s stonewalling over the appointment of Tim Loughton, one of the MPs banned from China, to the chair of the Conservative Human Rights commission. The body had been a leading internal Tory pressure group, particularly on Hong Kong which led to its blacklisting by Beijing, but Johnson has declined to approve Loughton as chair for more than a year. Its previous chair, Fiona Bruce, resigned after being appointed a special envoy on religious freedom by Johnson. Loughton has been a strong critic of the prime minister’s conduct over “partygate” as well as the cut to international aid. The rights activist Benedict Rogers, the commission’s deputy chair, is understood to have privately expressed deep frustration at the impasse. Rogers declined to comment. Another source from inside the group said they were “deeply troubled about this government’s commitment to freedom and human rights, the rule of law and democracy”. Other MPs who have been sanctioned include Tom Tugendhat, chair of the foreign affairs select committee, Nus Ghani, the former transport minister who has been a leading campaigner on Uyghur genocide, and Neil O’Brien, the Levelling Up minister. The sanction came after their campaign to insert a clause in the trade bill, which would have permitted the high court to make a preliminary ruling on whether genocide was occurring in a potential trading partner, a clause design to put barriers on a trade deal with China. Loughton, MP for East Worthing and Shoreham, said the government should be aware of a significant parliamentary backlash to any change of approach towards China. “Parliament has made it very clear that a government guilty of genocide needs to be treated with extreme caution and cannot be welcomed as an equal partner,” he said. “It would be an insult to parliament if the government were to ignore our concerns not least when seven Parliamentarians remain sanctioned simply for speaking the truth and standing up to China’s bullying and abuse.” Bob Seeley, who will lead a backbench debate on China next week, said: “We need to engage, but we have to engage as much on our own terms as possible and was understanding the risks of doing so. “I think we have not yet got our heads around these new authoritarian states and both the obvious threats they pose but also the more subtle threats they pose. We are trying to have business as normal. The world has changed. You’re not a sabre-rattler or a war monger for stating what everyone can see.”Dr Seuss and (Mr) Potato Head. The Mandalorian and The Muppet Show. These are just some of the many cultural artefacts that have been dragged to the heart of the US’s all-consuming war over “wokeness” in the past year, with furious rightwingers decrying liberals for “cancelling” things they see as insufficiently progressive. Republican-led states have moved to ban schools from teaching “critical race theory”, an academic framework for assessing entrenched societal racism that is not typically taught in schools. Ron DeSantis, the Trump-lite Florida governor, proposed the “Stop Woke” Act, with woke standing for “Wrongs to Our Kids and Employees”. Oliver Dowden, the Tory party chairman, blundered into this increasingly meaningless word soup on his visit to Washington this week, giving a speech at the rightwing Heritage Foundation identifying “wokeness” as a dire threat to western civilisation. Dowden alluded to modern Maoists who are “obsessing over pronouns” and want to “decolonise mathematics”. “The US and the UK may certainly be very different societies. But we are joined by the same fundamental values,” he said. “Neither of us can afford the luxury of indulging in this painful woke psychodrama.” He sounded downright American, and not for the first time. Dowden has often been in the vanguard of the British government’s halting attempts to start its own “war on woke” in recent years. During his tenure as culture secretary, he condemned the BBC for planning to axe the singing of Rule, Britannia! from the Last Night of the Proms (the BBC blamed Covid then U-turned), said government buildings should fly the union jack more, and moved to put “red wall” voters on the boards of cultural institutions. In his Heritage Foundation address, Dowden condemned the defilement of a statue of Winston Churchill. Much of Dowden’s speech was transparently silly and hypocritical. A society being able to challenge its shibboleths is an act of self-confidence, not the erosion thereof. Complaints about “woke warriors” stifling speech often seek themselves to stifle speech, especially in the US, which is well into the book-banning phase of its Trumpian decline. Even taken on his own terms, though, Dowden was wrong to characterise woke threats to the UK and US as two sides of the same coin. America’s woke wars have mostly stuck new branding on entrenched, decades-old cultural grievances – often thinly veiled expressions of racism and white anxiety – that tend to break down on familiar partisan lines. In many ways, it’s just the new “political correctness gone mad”. The UK, of course, has longstanding institutional racism issues, and countless cultural sores of its own. When Dowden told the Heritage Foundation that the government had told schools that it was “illegal to teach the concept of ‘white privilege’ as though it were undisputed fact”, his audience surely heard a clear echo of the US freakout over critical race theory. In general, America’s culture war discourse is so ingrained that it is impossible to simply uproot it and replant it in Britain, where political life is less structured around hot-button cultural controversies. Sure, people care about patriotic songs and the union jack, often quite a lot. But these symbols aren’t permanent, inflamed points of contention. (Keir Starmer may be keen to emphasise them, but he seems to see them as a post-Corbyn prerequisite for electability, not a finished political offer in and of themselves.) We have tabloids, but we do not have a Fox News mainlining grievance day and night. GB News looks tinpot in comparison. Moreover, the cultural schisms that we do have don’t always reinforce each other. Brexit got nasty, but did not map neatly on to existing divisions. (Dowden voted for Remain.) Covid rules, a key driver of the US culture wars, have not been as viciously polarising here. When Dominic Cummings broke lockdown, he tried to fight his way out of accountability, Trump-style, but was met with a wall of public fury. Ditto Boris Johnson. As of a year ago, nearly 60% of Britons didn’t know what “woke” meant. A roughly contemporaneous poll found the equivalent US figure to be around 30%. It’s easy to oversimplify any transatlantic comparison, and it’s facile to say that culture wars are always a distraction from weightier, kitchen-table issues – culture matters. But the relentless, totalising focus on grievance surely is a distraction. In keeping with their “with or against us” tone, the woke wars, if they are to be effective electorally, need to be an all-or-nothing political strategy. Many US politicians are all in. Most Tories are not. And it’s far from clear that their voters would reward them if they were. In addition to getting Brexit done, increasing living standards has really been the nub of the Tory offer to so-called “red wall” voters, and they will want to see some follow-through at some point. Dowden’s speech went down well at the Heritage Foundation; word for word, it might have gone down quite well in Hartlepool, too. Most British voters, though, need more than a seat on the board of a museum. Jon Allsop is a freelance journalist. He writes the Columbia Journalism Review’s newsletter The Media TodayThe KitKat-maker Nestlé and the Dettol manufacturer Reckitt have both indicated they will pass on rising costs in the form of higher prices this year, adding to the cost of living crisis facing consumers. Nestlé, which also makes Nespresso coffee pods, Häagen-Dazs ice-cream and Purina pet food, increased its prices throughout 2021, and by the final three months of the year they were 3.1% higher. The Swiss food group said it expected its costs to increase further this year and it intended to protect its profit margins by passing some of this extra expense to consumers. “It is a safe assumption that our input cost increases for 2022 will be higher than 2021, that is something that we have to reflect in our pricing,” said Mark Schneider, its chief executive, on Thursday. “There is almost no place in the company that is exempt of inflation now … Some of these things you can hedge against, some not.” Nestlé reported 7.5% organic growth for 2021, which was higher than forecast, and included 2% growth arising from price increases. Meanwhile, the consumer goods company Reckitt, the maker of brands such as Harpic, Nurofen and Strepsils, said on Thursday that its costs increased on average by 11% during 2021. It predicted these would climb even higher this year. The Berkshire-based firm, which was formerly known as Reckitt Benckiser, said it was absorbing some of its rising costs, but was increasing prices of some of its products. “We are passing some pricing on to consumers, but we minimise that through programmes that we have internally, such as productivity programmes,” said Jeff Carr, its chief financial officer. “Prices have gone up but we’re absorbing a significant part of that inflation, and we’re not passing it on to consumers. We want to get good offers to our consumers, we want to be competitive.” Reckitt said it was seeing “across the board” increases in the price of raw materials, especially those related to crude oil such as plastics, as well as tinplate – used for making tin cans – and dairy products. The two companies are the latest in a long line to announce price rises as the UK struggles with a cost of living crisis. The inflation rate hit 5.5% in January, the highest annual jump in the cost of living in almost 30 years. Britain’s households are suffering from a squeeze on their earnings, as the price of goods and services – from food to energy bills to TV and broadband contracts – rises. According to official figures, more than three-quarters of UK adults (76%) reported that their cost of living had increased over the past month, a rise of seven percentage points from late January. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said increasing food shop prices was the most-frequently reported reason for the cost of living crunch (90%), followed by rising energy bills (77%) and increases in the price of fuel (69%).Boris Johnson has claimed the shelling of a nursery school in the Donbas region of Ukraine by Russian-backed separatists was a “false-flag operation” aimed at discrediting the Ukrainian government. According to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) there were “multiple shelling incidents” on Thursday morning across the frontline in eastern Ukraine. Three people were injured in the attack in the city of Stanytsia Luhanska, which blew a hole through the wall of a nursery. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, accused the Russian side of “provocative shelling”. Speaking on a visit to RAF Waddington, in Lincolnshire, the UK prime minister said: “Today, as I’m sure you’ve already picked up, a kindergarten was shelled in what we are taking to be – well, we know – was a false-flag operation designed to discredit the Ukrainians, designed to create a pretext, a spurious provocation for Russian action. “We fear very much that that is the kind of thing we will see more of over the next few days.” A “false-flag” incident is one in which its origin is disguised, usually in an attempt to provoke retaliation. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, had said earlier that shelling across the border indicated Moscow was carrying out “false-flag operations”, though he did not point specifically to the nursery shelling. Johnson said he would be travelling to Munich for the European security conference this weekend, “to talk about what we are going to do to unify the west”. He said the UK was prepared to impose tough sanctions on Russia. “There is still time for the Putin regime to step back. There is still time to avoid a catastrophe; a catastrophe for Russia, a catastrophe for Ukraine and for the world. “If Russia were so mad as to invade, I don’t think people should imagine that this would be a brief business. This would be a bloody and protracted conflict in which, I’m afraid, there will be many casualties, and including many Russian casualties.” Western security officials have been monitoring the shelling in Donbas closely, saying it was “the sort of provocation that has the potential to escalate”, while also stressing that exchanges of fire across the line of control in eastern Ukraine were not uncommon. One official said similar hostilities had been seen previously and it was not uncommon for issues to “flash up and go away”. Another concluded: “I’m not saying this is a pretext, but I didn’t say it wasn’t a pretext.” Meanwhile Liz Truss said in a speech in Kyiv that the free world needed to “wise up” about Russian aggression, draw a line under a decade of drift and recognise the Ukraine crisis was a litmus test of the west’s ability to stand up to aggressors, authoritarians and autocrats everywhere. In an address with deliberate echoes of Margaret Thatcher’s rhetoric, the UK foreign secretary said the trial of strength would require greater cooperation with Britain’s Nato partners, including with the European Union. “If we hang back, that would only embolden the bullies in their campaign against sovereignty and the right of self-determination,” she said. “We must stand up to and defuse Russian aggression now, because if we don’t it will embolden not only the Kremlin, but aggressors, authoritarians and autocrats everywhere. “Bullies only respond to strength,” she said, adding that Russia would acquire pariah status if Putin went ahead with an invasion of Ukraine. Truss was in Kyiv to meet Ukraine’s foreign secretary, Dmytro Kuleba, and launch a new trilateral partnership between Poland, Ukraine and the UK designed to maintain Ukraine’s military security and energy security, and combat disinformation. In an uncompromising speech that continues to signal Britain’s determination to be at the helm of the alliance confronting Russia, she said the UK was open to diplomacy, but said: “Accommodating illegitimate Russian concerns would not make their threats disappear. Instead Russia would be emboldened.” Truss said: “The west needs to wise up, and work together to discredit Russian arguments in public. We should use our intelligence strategically to challenge their narrative – as we did last month, exposing the Kremlin’s plan to install a pro-Russian leader in Kyiv and exposing their military buildup on the border. “We must strengthen our ties with our friends and partners – and strengthen our shared capabilities. We want to see democracies across Europe and beyond stepping up to the plate. We will work even more closely with our allies, friends and partners, including the EU. She argued Russia was an aggressor not just in Ukraine, but in Europe more broadly. “Their campaign of hybrid warfare across Europe has brought cyber-attacks, attempts to undermine elections, and the use of chemical and radiological weapons on the streets of London and Salisbury. They are supporting destabilising mercenaries across Africa. “They have chipped away at the security architecture that makes us all more secure. I mean everything from developing missiles in violation of the intermediate-range nuclear forces treaty … to breaking the commitments they made to Ukraine in Helsinki, Budapest and Minsk. “And now they have deployed their new generation of intermediate-range missiles, which can launch nuclear and conventional warheads.” She described this as “one of the most destabilising developments of the last decade”.Imagine distilling your life to fit in just 7 square metres. There would just about be space for a bed, a toilet and shower, a sink, a microwave and some storage. But no room for a kitchen to cook in, decorations, a place to store equipment for hobbies, or to have anyone round to visit. This is life in London’s smallest microflat. Located in a Victorian conversion in Lower Clapton, east London it is thought by its sellers to be the smallest to have gone on the market in the capital. The minimum price set by auctioneers is £50,000, but it is expected to go for more as it was bought for £103,500 in May 2017. The flat is an example of what experts say is a growing phenomenon of tiny homes, driven by soaring rent and property prices. Microflats are becoming more sought-after and even smaller, they say. The Clapton flat has recently been renovated and has a large window. To maximise space, it has a captain’s bed above storage space and cupboards. The space between the bed and the wall is about wide enough to spread your arms in, and there’s a foldout table for eating or working on. A toilet and shower are in a separate wet room. The owner has already recouped their investment by getting £800 in rent each month. The current tenant lives elsewhere for most of the time and spends just a night or two each week in the flat as it is closer to work. The auction minimum is well below the average deposit for first-time buyers in London, which Halifax calculated at £130,357 in 2020, but Neal Hudson, a housing analyst, warned that first-time buyers should be aware it is not sustainable to live in a tiny flat long-term and that if they are unable to sell they could find themselves stuck. The price is a powerful symbol of how inaccessible housing has become. The TV presenter Kirstie Allsopp recently irked millennials by suggesting they could afford to buy their own homes if they spent less on the gym, easyJet flights, coffee and Netflix. Critics have pointed out that when she bought her first flat, the average home cost £50,000 and measured 73.4 sq m – 10 times bigger than the Clapton flat. Stuart Collar-Brown, the director of My Auction, which is selling the flat, said that although it was the cheapest flat with a long leasehold on the market within a 10-mile radius, he expected it would be bought by an investor rather than a first-time buyer, as high street banks will not lend on properties below 30 sq m. With rental income estimated at about £10,000, investors were likely to be able to recoup the £50,000 outlay within five years, he said. Suitable tenants would not spend much time at home and would be those who were tired of house-sharing but unable to afford more space, or who lived elsewhere and needed a crash pad for work, he said. For instance, doctors or nurses working in nearby Homerton hospital, or workers in the City, given the area’s good transport links to Liverpool Street. In 2019 a 9 sq m flat in another part of Hackney was on the market for £130,000. The estate agents Wild &amp; Co said it received two offers, both below the asking price, and it took 28 viewings to find tenants, who paid £600 a month. Microflats are becoming more popular and their size is shrinking, according to research by Philip Hubbard, a professor of urban studies at Kings’s College London. One in 15 apartments in London fall below the national minimum standard of 37 sq m for a one-bedroom home, while the median size of UK properties below the space standard fell by one square metre to 29 sq m this year. Hubbard recommended that buyers look for flats above 37 sq m since fewer windows and the inability to divide living, working and leisure space take a toll on sleep and mental health, and smaller properties are more expensive per square metre. Julia Rugg, a research fellow at York University’s Centre for Housing Policy, said the Clapton sale reflected the “inflated nature of the housing market in London” and said it would be a “worrying development” if microflats were seen as a solution to housing affordability. “This is accommodation that is barely suitable as a hotel room, and does not constitute sustainable liveable space. The property lacks comfort or amenity and forces reliance on disposable items. The neighbourhood may well be awash with bars and cafes but relying on these for living space makes life very expensive,” she said.A powerful investors’ advisory group has called for shareholders to vote against the $99m (£73m) pay package awarded to Apple boss Tim Cook last year. In a letter to shareholders, the advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) wrote there were “significant concerns regarding the design and magnitude of the equity award” made to Cook in 2021, adding that half of the award “lacks performance criteria”. ISS had made the recommendation for when the company’s shareholders meet next month. Cook, 61, has a personal fortune of $2.3bn, according to Forbes, and has been a vocal critic of social and economic inequality. He has pledged to give away his fortune before his death. Last year, Cook took home $3m in salary, and received $82.3m in stock awards, $12m for hitting targets, and another $1.4m for air travel, retirement plan contributions, insurance premiums and other contributions. His total remuneration package was worth $98.7m in 2021, compared with $14.8m a year earlier. Cook’s pay was 1,447 times that of the average Apple employee, according to a filing disclosed in January. Apple has been one of the big winners of the pandemic. Its share price soared as the coronavirus pushed workers online. In January, it briefly became the first company to be valued at $3tn, it became the first $1tn company in 2018. Apple has so far escaped from the share price collapses experienced by some other tech giants including Meta, Facebook’s owner, and Netflix. In January the company reported an all-time record revenue of $123.9bn, 11% up from last year and higher than analysts’ had expected. But shareholders have become increasingly unhappy with CEO pay deals. Last year a record number of S&amp;P 500 companies failed to attract 50% support from shareholders for their CEO pay deals. The vote against Cook’s pay package would be advisory only and Apple’s board would not be compelled to act on it.A damning independent report into race equality at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM) has found racial discrimination against staff of colour and a dominant Eurocentric approach, and highlighted an absence of senior leaders from Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) backgrounds. The report, written by Prof Jason Arday of the University of Glasgow, was commissioned after an open letter from the BAME staff network in the aftermath of George Floyd’s murder in 2020. The 150 signatories of the letter raised concerns that the LSTM, the world’s first institute dedicated to the research and teaching of tropical medicine, had been slow to acknowledge structural racism, and called for action to confront the institution’s colonial past. The letter also included testimonies providing examples of perceived discrimination and described a culture that was demeaning to African colleagues. The LSTM, founded in 1898 by a shipping merchant with wide-reaching investments in colonial Africa, has about 620 staff, 81% of whom are white. The university’s first tropical medicine director was awarded the Nobel prize in 1902 for identifying the role of the mosquito in the transmission of malaria, and it now benefits from hundreds of millions in research grants and teaches 800 students. Arday interviewed 45 staff members, and ran focus groups with staff and students, although the report highlights that “only a fraction of staff of colour who engaged in individual interviews chose to engage in focus groups, suggesting a lack of trust and/or fear of speaking out”. The report details “issues of racially discriminatory behaviour dismissed by line managers” and staff being overlooked, with the perception that the “infrastructure facilitated a nepotistic pathway”. It found the “current approach towards progression and promotion left many respondents feeling completely ostracised”. Arday highlighted the high number of staff of colour employed using fixed-term contracts, the disproportionate impact on women of colour, and “poor reporting and management of racism”. The report called for the diversification of academic staff to improve learning experiences of students, aspects of which were “sometimes regarded as a ‘colonial exchange’ which centred upon ‘narrow western conceptions of medicine’”. Dr Rinki Deb, the co-chair of the LSTM race equality advisory panel and BAME staff network, thanked “brave colleagues for engaging in the review process and sharing their honest, lived experiences”. “There will be a need for significant change in mindsets and practices within the institution, rebuilding bridges, and investment into sustainable long-term solutions to break barriers,” she said. However, one staff member said many colleagues of colour had disengaged from the process because of the high level of distrust between staff and management. “People have genuinely suffered in the institution – over decades,” they said. In relation to Arday’s decision to not directly quote staff members, citing sensitivity and confidentiality issues, the employee said: “What that doesn’t allow for is the pain of the voices to come through.” They said while many colleagues said they felt sick reading the report, “the leadership don’t feel nausea, they’re feeling good about themselves, and all these initiatives that they’re putting in place. People don’t trust them. “How can it be that it’s the same people who have presided over all this pain for all those years can suddenly overnight become listening and responsive and put the needs of the staff before their perceived needs of the institution?” they added. Prof David Lalloo, the LSTM director, said the institution and board accepted the findings of the review in full and were “completely committed” to addressing the recommendations. “We have a strong desire to do better and be better and are committed to a vision of becoming an actively anti-racist organisation.”Obviously it’s a cliche, but “be prepared” is the best advice ahead of Storm Eunice, which could bring gusts of up to 90mph as well as heavy snow and blizzards. Power cuts caused by fallen trees are highly likely and there are a few straightforward things which people can do in preparation, Northumberland fire and rescue service said. That includes checking you’ve got batteries for torches and radios. Have some food in that doesn’t need cooking. Charge your mobile phone. Check in with elderly neighbours. If power is down then turn off electrical appliances at the socket in case everything comes on when you’re not there or asleep. Torches are safer than candles. Most councils will have a page on their website giving information about storms and who to contact if the power is out or you need to report a fallen tree. The advice from road agencies and travel companies is for people not to go out on Friday unless they absolutely need to. “For anyone who has to set out, we recommend sticking to major roads and avoiding exposed and coastal routes,” said Rod Dennis, a spokesperson for RAC Breakdown. “It’s also vital to reduce speeds and to take extra care when passing high-sided vehicles so as not to get buffeted off course.” If there is ice or snow then be gentle on the accelerator. If the car skids “it’s best to gently steer into the direction of the skid and wait for the car to regain grip. Avoid the temptation to stamp on the brake.” During previous storms there have been alarming reports of cats being lifted in the air and dogs being swept away. Amy Ockelford, a spokesperson for the RSPCA, said: “We’re urging pet owners to keep an eye on the forecast where they live and to plan ahead to ensure the safety of their animals.” Tips to keep pets safe include planning dog walks around the worst of the weather and avoiding dangerous locations. Wear reflective clothing. If the dog is old or feels the cold get them a jacket to keep warm. For cats, ensure they have access to the house or a warm, inside area where they can escape the weather. If conditions are extreme consider keeping the cat inside. It’s not just pets, the RSPCA says. Wild animals can struggle to find food and water during extreme weather or may get lost so consider leaving out food and water for them.It is widely accepted as one of life’s bleak but unavoidable facts: as we get older, our brains get slower. But now a study, based on data from more than 1 million people, suggests that mental processing speed remains almost constant until the age of 60. The analysis puts perceived reductions in speed down to people becoming more cautious as they get older. This could account for the large body of research that has concluded that mental processing speed peaks at about the age of 20 and undergoes a steady decline from that point onwards. “Our finding is encouraging, as our results show that average levels in mental speed in contexts demanding fast and forced decisions do not decline until relatively late in the lifespan,” said Dr Mischa von Krause, of Heidelberg University and first author of the work. The study, published in the journal Nature Human Behaviour, used data from 1,185,882 participants, aged 10 to 80 years, in Harvard’s Project Implicit, an online tool that has been used to collect data and educate people about biases they hold on gender, race and other characteristics. Participants are required to sort words into positive and negative categories, while also assigning image to racial categories. The test is primarily designed to measure the strength of a person’s associations between race (in this case black or white people) and evaluations (represented by positive or negative words), but the latest analysis simply used the age of the participants, their response times and accuracy. The data showed, as previous studies have done, that average time to give a correct response peaked at about 20 years. However, the researchers argue that this metric also captures how cautious a person is in delivering their answer and also their basic motor reaction speeds. By using machine learning, the researchers aimed to extract more information about these two hidden factors from patterns in the data. For instance, if someone consistently responded more slowly, regardless of the difficulty of a given question, the model might be more likely to attribute this to slow motor responses. The analysis suggested that 20-year-olds were quickest because they were the most willing to trade accuracy for speed. The researchers concluded that the purely mechanical part of the response (how fast a person sees the question and taps the keyboard) was quickest in those aged 14-16. Mental processing speed appeared to peak about age 30, and declined only very slightly between 30 and 60. Participants also made fewer mistakes as they became older, at least until the age of about 60. Dr Joshua Hartshorne, a psychologist at Boston College who was not involved in the latest work, said the machine learning method used was impressive and would prompt psychologists to reconsider some earlier findings based simply on response times. “This joins a body of work suggesting that the way mental abilities change throughout life is complicated and we don’t really know what’s going on,” he said. “But whatever’s going on, it’s definitely not that we peak at 20 and go downhill from there.” Von Krause said the work raised the suggestion that people may excel at different tasks depending on their age. “Obviously, there are real-life tasks where it is crucial to avoid mistakes, such as in a medical diagnosis, while in other tasks, such as avoiding an obstacle on the road, speed is more important,” he said. However, he added that, within certain limits, people were likely to be able to adapt their decision-making style to suit the demands of a situation.It is not only the prying eyes of rural neighbours that make Portia Coughlan (Denise Gough) feel trapped. In Marina Carr’s blistering drama from 1996, the anti-heroine of the title feels bound for life to her dead twin, Gabriel, and to the Belmont river where he drowned, aged 15. Everything else in Portia’s life – her wealthy husband Raphael (Marty Rea), lover Damus (Fionn Ó Loingsigh) and young children – is overshadowed by her obsession with Gabriel as the missing part of herself. In Caroline Byrne’s new production, the bare interior of Portia’s expensive home ominously suggests a deep burial chamber, where we first see Portia on the morning of her 30th birthday. Apathetic and drained, she is already working through a bottle of brandy. One of three plays described as Carr’s Midlands trilogy (including The Mai and By the Bog of Cats) Portia Coughlan’s preoccupation with fate, self-destructive desire and the spectral presence of the dead takes it into the realm of the mythic. Yet, though not written as a slice of realism, it touches on subjects that are still highly disturbing 26 years after its premiere: from sexual secrets passed on through generations, to incest and in-breeding; from misogyny to vicious social prejudice. Harbouring resentments, Portia’s parents and grandmother (Derbhle Crotty, Liam Carney and Barbara Brennan) dig up the most hurtful things they can say to each other. In a production that tends to over-signal, Byrne’s direction of these ensemble scenes is in need of toning down, while set designer Chiara Stephenson’s rendering of the mysterious river as a narrow overflow channel seems visually awkward. Carr’s decision to kill off Portia early on is a bold stroke that affords her the freedom to play intriguingly with chronology in the more subtle second half. Here, lighter moments in the pub with her aunt and uncle (Anna Healy and Gary Murphy) bring relief from the extreme bleakness, with Gough showing the softer side of Portia. Likewise, in a compelling scene where she tries to connect with the pained Raphael, we see the woman Portia might have become if she had ever had a chance. • This article was amended on 20 February 2022 to correct the spelling of Fionn Ó Loingsigh. Portia Coughlan is at Abbey theatre, Dublin, until 16 March.Air pollution may affect semen quality, specifically sperm motility — the ability of sperm to swim in the right direction — according to a new study analysing the sperm of over 30,000 men in China. The research, published today in the journal JAMA Networks, also suggests that the smaller the size of the polluting particles in the air, the greater the link with poor semen quality. “Our findings suggest that smaller particulate matter size fractions may be more potent than larger fractions in inducing poor sperm motility,” wrote the authors of the paper. The researchers believe that these findings highlight yet another reason for the need to reduce exposure to air pollution among men in their reproductive age. Researchers have long been trying to establish whether there’s a link between air pollution and sperm quality, but it’s been unclear whether the former has adverse health effects on male fertility because the results from studies are often inconsistent among themselves and complicated to put into perspective. There does appear to be reason to believe that pollution may negatively affect fertility in general for the whole of the population, as suggested in this international literature review published in December 2021. Researchers at the School of Medicine of Tongji University in Shanghai looked at data records from a total of 33,876 men from 340 Chinese cities, aged 34 on average, with a varied degree of exposure to air pollution among them, and whose wives got pregnant through assisted reproduction technology with their sperm between January 2013 and December 2019. They then looked for patterns between semen quality in relation to whether the participants had been exposed to amounts of particulate matter smaller in diameter than 2.5 micrometres, between 2.5 and 10 micrometres, and 10 micrometres, in various key moments of the 90 days before their visit to the hospital for semen ejaculation. To establish the quality of the semen, the researchers concentrated on factors such as sperm count, concentration, and sperm motility. Although the researchers couldn’t find a significant link between air pollution and sperm quality in terms of sperm count or concentration — they did find that the more a participant was exposed to smaller particulate matter, the lower both the progressive and the total sperm motility was. Progressive sperm motility is the sperm’s ability to swim forward, while total sperm motility simply refers to the sperm’s ability to swim in general. Specifically, when exposed to particulate matter smaller in diameter than 2.5 micrometres. there was an estimated decrease in sperm motility of 3.6%, while when exposed to particulate matter of 10 micrometres in diameter, there was 2.44% less sperm motility. Meaning that it’s possible that different size fractions of particulate matter might have differing effects on semen quality, maybe because the smaller the particulate matter, the more likely it is to travel deeper into the human lungs. The data indicates that the effects of pollution are more prominent when exposure takes place during the initial part of the 90 days of sperm creation — the one called spermatogenesis — rather than the other two phases. This, in turn, may mean that particulate matter affects sperm on a genetic level, according to the researchers, but these are just speculations, and there’s more research to be done in this area. “The possibility of a link between air pollution and semen quality has been suggested in a number of studies over the years, although not all of them have agreed with this conclusion,” said Allan Pacey, professor of andrology at the University of Sheffield, who was not involved in the research. “This paper adds to the evidence base suggesting the link is real, and is impressive because it uses semen quality data from over 30,000 men.” “But the level of decline in sperm motility seems to be quite low,” said Pacey, stressing that correlation is not causation. He noted that the paper failed to provide any information about the morphology, shape and size of the sperm, which made it impossible to determine whether pollution might be responsible for deformation of sperm and that’s why their motility is decreased, or whether there were other reasons. According to Pacey, it is important to take these findings with a pinch of salt. Although the data suggests that pollution may have a negative effect on sperm mobility, there still isn’t enough information to infer whether this can have a significant clinical effect at large, and result in the overall decrease of the ability of men in high pollution areas to become fathers. More research out in the field might help answer that question with more certainty in the future.Bankers at Standard Chartered have shared a $1.37bn (£1bn) bonus pot for 2021, in the latest sign that financial firms have emerged from the Covid-19 pandemic in better shape than expected. The payout was up 38% on the previous year and came as the London-headquartered bank reported full-year pretax profits had doubled to $3.3bn, £500m short of analyst expectations The bank said the payout reflected a return to awarding bonuses after lean returns in 2020 caused by the pandemic, as well as an increasingly competitive hiring market. Banks worldwide are expected to follow suit in order to retain key talent. US lenders set the trend for increasing bonuses, with Morgan Stanley approving a 6% payment boost for its chief executive James Gorman earlier this year. Meanwhile, JPMorgan Chase approved a 9% bonus increase for Jamie Dimon. Elsewhere in London, HSBC, Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and NatWest are expected to pay bonuses totalling more than £4bn when they report their annual results in the next fortnight, beginning with NatWest on Friday. Combined, the banks’ annual profits are expected to exceed £34bn – the most since 2007 in the boom before the financial crisis. Gary Smith, the general secretary of the GMB union, which represents 600,000 mostly frontline workers, described increases in banker bonuses as a “kick in the teeth” for people facing the cost of living crisis. The bigger bonus pool at Standard Chartered came as the bank set out plans to cut annual expenses by $1.5bn, as part of a broader goal to achieve double-digit returns by 2024. It also unveiled a $750m share buyback plan, lifted its profit targets and promised to increase investment in China by $300m. It said it expected revenue to grow by an extra 3% a year, and targeted a return on equity of 10% by 2024. It declared a final dividend of 9 cents a share, making a full-year payment of 12 cents a share. This is up 3 cents on the previous year. “Confidence in our overall asset quality and earnings trajectory allows us to return significant capital to shareholders,” said Bill Winters, the bank’s chief executive. “We saw a return to income growth, which we believe signals the start of a sustainable recovery, and we finished the year with good business momentum in financial markets, trade and wealth management.” Winters, now the longest-serving chief executive at a major UK bank, told Reuters he intended to stay on in his role to see through the completion of the plan in 2024. “We have put a refreshed set of guidance on the table today, I would love to deliver that guidance and deliver that package … it’s more than just sharpening up the financials, it’s changing the way that we operate,” he said. Richard Hunter, head of markets at Interactive Investor, said Standard Chartered’s results were “disappointingly light of expectations”. “The company is optimistic on prospects for the coming year, particularly in the fast-growing Asian region where the company has particular focus,” he said. “In the meantime, however, the key metrics are mixed. Credit impairments for the year showed a marked reduction to $263m from a previous $2.3bn, although did not reach the $156m the market had been expecting due to some further provisions within the Chinese property market.”A massacre is occurring. More than 35,000 healthy British pigs have been slaughtered and buried on farms since September, with an estimated 200,000 languishing in a backlog. The reason is that abattoirs lack the staff to process them, largely due to Britain’s exit from the pan-European labour market. In October, the environment department offered 800 six-month visas for foreign butchers. But it insisted they go through its laborious scheme for seasonal workers: barely 100 turned up. Whitehall also refuses to curb imports of European pork – which now makes up 60% of the UK market and rising. To the National Pig Association, Brexit means buy from Europe. For pig farmers, we can read apple growers, flower producers, fishing fleets, road hauliers, house builders, medicine suppliers, care home managers – a whole range of workers on the frontline of Britain’s economy. All have benefited in the past from the open market in European labour. All must now lobby Whitehall for permits, visas, waivers and, if not, compensation. Hundred-page documents must accompany every food convoy to and from Dover and Belfast, where hours of tailbacks quietly rot produce. You might think all this comes from some statist socialist regime. Yet it is the brainchild of the right wing of the Conservative party, now in government. Ironically, the last such seismic distortion of the free market was also instigated by a lapsed libertarian Tory, Edward Heath, with his statutory controls on incomes and prices to combat inflation in 1972. This saw Whitehall officials invading company offices and vetting individual payslips. Those officials are now peering into food containers and poring over job advertisements, exerting the full force of their regulatory zeal. Jobs must be categorised by specialism, shortage, pay and length of stay. Vast Whitehall charts must be mapping labour flows. The Home Office aversion to foreigners has bred a “hostile environment” culture. At the end of last year, private care homes were forced to sack 50,000 unvaccinated staff. To pretend to compensate, the government then offered care homes extra visas. It turned out they could be only for one year – despite the essence of care being continuity. As for getting a visa, it is said to take a minimum of 16 weeks. I care about elderly people more than I do pigs, but the principle is the same. Both are victims not – repeat not – of the UK’s decision to leave the European Union. They are victims of Boris Johnson’s subsequent decision, to aid him in toppling Theresa May, to interpret Brexit as requiring Britain to depart the world’s most efficient and benign economic entity, the single market. This had been in large part the creation in 1986 of the right’s hero, Margaret Thatcher, to honour her free-market principles. Leaving the EU had some arguments for it. Leaving the single market had none. “Soft” Brexit within that market would have been far been easier to negotiate. Leaving it has meant wrecked supply chains and terminated scientific collaboration. It has undermined recruitment patterns and destabilised Northern Ireland. It has crippled the fish industry and impeded billions of pounds of UK trade. Its consequences have wavered between nuisance and disaster. Brexit has seen a consummation of the very thing Tories are supposed to hate – bureaucracy. Whitehall officials used to be accused of “gold plating” Brussels regulations. “Taking back control” has licensed their wildest dreams. Brexit is estimated to have required a civil service army of 50,000 new officials, more than the entire central bureaucracy of the EU in Brussels. The latest addition to this apparat is Jacob Rees-Mogg calling himself the “Brexit opportunities” minister. His first act has been desperate, to “implore” readers of the Sun to tell him what opportunities they could think of. Rees-Mogg is now advocating an Institute of Economic Affairs suggestion to boost trade with other countries by abolishing non-tariff barriers and “recognising [their] regulations, without requiring reciprocity, starting with the EU”. Why should they negotiate at all? Surely this negates the whole point of “taking back control”. But then the government is also desperate to reopen trade talks with the US and China. The idea that Britain might “control” such talks is beyond naive. The battered band of Brexiters is now seen as wandering in a hostile desert, mystified at why their promised land has failed to materialise. Former European partners were supposed to come crawling to London begging for business. We were told: “They need us more than we need them.” But Europe’s other nations have no interest in rewarding separatism of any sort. A Britain divided, weakened and ill-led is merely the subject of scorn and ridicule. Chaos at Dover is an excellent advertisement for European union. Britain’s position as an island has to be one that trades openly with the mainland. Sooner or later, the free movement of goods, services, capital and labour will have to be restored, however painfully. It would greatly help if Labour’s Keir Starmer stopped vacillating and committed himself to that objective, as should candidates for Johnson’s succession. No, this is not revoking Brexit or rejoining the EU. It is just embracing sanity. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistIt’s a long time since Labour had a genuine feel for supporting communities (Letters, 9 February; Politicians may have forgotten about ‘community’, but British people haven’t, 7 February). As a member of a ministerial local government sounding board in the early 2000s, I was asked to imagine what the second stage of “double devolution”, from local government to communities, might look like. At the end of the presentation, a senior voice of Labour local government turned to the minister and said: “Our job is difficult enough already. For God’s sake, don’t make us work with communities as well.” That crushing contempt for communities, and fear of not being in control has not gone away. Lisa Nandy, Jon Cruddas, Steve Reed and others behind Labour Together’s pamphlet Labour’s Covenant openly admit that Labour speaks well about devolution when in opposition but clings to centralised power when in office. They tell a good story about a better relationship between communities and the state, but it could have been written by Danny Kruger, Jerome Mayhew and others at the New Social Covenant Unit for their Trusting the People report, launched at the Tory party conference last October. Listen up, you Covenanters: this is beyond party politics. Work together and with communities to build a cross-party consensus for a lasting devolved settlement across the union. Together, we need to remake our politics at the level at which we can all recognise that we have a shared responsibility to agree how we are housed, fed, employed and kept warm. Rescue us from the pretence that power only works in Whitehall. Do your duty, please. Stephen Hill LondonAir pollution is a social justice issue, the mayor of London has said, as he convened a summit of regional and national health leaders to tackle toxic emissions that are damaging the health of Londoners. “For me the issue is very simple: it’s one of social justice,” Sadiq Khan said, opening the meeting at the Royal College of Physicians in London. “It’s the poorest people, least likely to own a car, least likely to cause the toxic air problems, who are most likely to suffer the consequences.” Khan was joined for the summit by Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical officer; the environment minister Jo Churchill and Rosamund Adoo-Kissi-Debrah, whose daughter Ella became the first person in the UK to have air pollution listed as a cause of death at her inquest. “Look at the evidence,” he said. “It’s the poorest Londoners are least likely to own a car who suffer the worst consequences from toxic air. “You’re more likely to suffer the adverse consequences of air pollution if you’re black, Asian or minority ethnic, if you’re not a car owner. “In outer London, where the ULEZ currently doesn’t go to, there are far more deaths where air pollution has a causative impact; 4,000 premature deaths more in outer London. Poorest Londoners are suffering the worst consequences. So that’s why it’s really important we understand this is an issue of social justice.” The summit has come in the week of the ninth anniversary of the death of nine-year-old Ella Adoo-Kissi-Debrah, who died in 2013 following an asthma attack after years of poor health caused by pollution on the busy road in Lewisham, south-east London, where she lived. The summit was focused on ensuring Londoners are aware of the health impacts of air pollution, including via more targeted “air quality alerts” on the most polluted days. Rosamund Adoo-Kissi-Debrah called for a public awareness campaign around air pollution, including stricter rules on cars idling with their engines running. “It’s going to cost money but it will save lives, so this is all about saving lives. We need to be very bold, and we need to be very loud,” she said. “The coroner’s inquest showed without a doubt that air pollution from the traffic near our home contributed to Ella’s severe asthma, and that without it Ella would still be alive today,” Adoo-Kissi-Debrah said. “The coroner set out clear recommendations on how the UK’s national and local governments and health professionals can prevent future deaths like Ella’s. In London, eight to 12 children die from asthma every year. That is unacceptable, and it’s time we act to save their lives.” Existing measures, including the controversial low-traffic neighbourhoods that have been rolled out across London, were “not working”, Adoo-Kissi-Debrah said. “I was coming today, I was sitting on the train, and I saw the new TfL stat: on the A21 now, traffic has risen,” she said. “And I thought ‘what?’ But then, this is what’s going on, if you shut one place it just moves it on somewhere else. “When you come out you notice it, all the main roads are congested. I wouldn’t like to drive in central London, but there are people who also live here, we forget that; people live here and they breathe this every day, people have to go to work. So for some … it is not a choice.” Whitty said the problem of air pollution was big, but solvable through a combination of regulation and engineering. “This is a big problem and what Rosamund has done so successfully is put a human face on the problem,” he said. But he emphasised that the problem faced people from every walk of life. “It’s not just a problem for children with asthma.”Ministers are stopping supplies of coronavirus tests to universities in England, in the first case of ending the mass distribution of free lateral flow testing kits before dropping all remaining Covid restrictions. Universities are currently advised that students and staff on campus should take lateral flow tests (LFTs) twice a week, even if they do not have coronavirus symptoms. But the contract to supply the kits, through NHS test and trace and the UK Health Security Agency, will be terminated on Friday and not renewed. The cabinet is said to be split over Covid strategy and the future of testing, with the Treasury pushing to end mass testing as a cost-saving measure, while the health secretary, Sajid Javid, wants to retain some free testing to aid community surveillance of the virus. A government spokesperson said: “No decisions have been made on the provision of free testing. Everyone can continue to get free tests, including university students and staff who can order from the government website or their local pharmacy.” Higher education leaders were informed of the surprise decision only on Wednesday. Universities also appear to have been told they cannot distribute any remaining stocks of LFTs past the end of this week. Alistair Jarvis, the chief executive of Universities UK, which represents vice-chancellors and college leaders, said: “The ending of the legal agreement which allows universities to hand out lateral flow testing kits to students and staff ahead of the confirmation that all remaining Covid restrictions in England is hard to understand. “We are asking government for urgent clarification that universities can continue to distribute test kits from the supplies they have on campus. This makes sense when universities have kits which would otherwise go to waste and while there is still demand from students and staff this term.” Jo Grady, the general secretary of the University and College Union, accused the government of “playing fast and loose” with the safety of staff and students on campus, and said the decision could jeopardise in-person teaching. “This approach is reckless and may lead to Covid outbreaks being undetected until it is far too late to limit infections. It is also completely irresponsible for the government to make this change at such short notice,” Grady said. “Ministers must explain how employers are supposed to ensure campuses remain safe when testing is a key health and safety control measure. They must also commit to not abandoning free PCR testing for symptomatic cases. University staff and students need these reassurances urgently.” The government spokesperson said: “We continue to encourage people to use rapid tests when they need them.” The Guardian revealed this week that the Treasury was seeking to cut the budget for coronavirus provisions by up to 90%, including an end to distributing LFTs for asymptomatic testing from March.Teachers unions are calling on the New South Wales state government to extend the supply of rapid antigen tests for staff and students, saying the program has helped to curb Covid-19 transmission in classrooms. Despite Victoria on Thursday announcing its near-identical school plan would be extended until the end of the term, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, indicated his state was still working through details. More than 12,000 NSW students tested positive using rapid tests in the second week of school, an increase of nearly 50% on the 8,100 students who tested positive in week one. A further 521 staff also tested positive in NSW schools during the second week of term. Victoria has recorded infections for 18,825 students and 1,934 teachers since the start of the term, and the state’s education minister, James Merlino, said modelling from the Burnet Institute showed rapid testing had prevented 21,000 further cases. The Victorian government will provide 24m rapid antigen tests to schools and early childhood education centres in addition to 15.6m tests already provided. “[The] modelling shows that will prevent a further 61,000 cases in students and 150,000 cases in the community,” Merlino said on Thursday. In NSW, Perrottet announced that indoor mask mandates would be dropped for most settings from 25 February but that schools were being considered separately. The NSW Independent Education Union acting secretary, Carol Matthews, urged the government to follow Victoria’s lead, given the number of students still testing positive. “It is a critical element of keeping school communities safe,” he said. Matthews also said it would be “unfair” for staff and parents to have to pay for rapid tests. “It puts [teachers] under undue financial strain at a time when their salaries are not keeping pace,” Matthews said. “They are frontline staff and should not be burdened with this added expense.” The NSW plan announced at the end of January also limits interaction between year groups and calls for the use of surgical masks indoors. The measures had made for a tough start to the year for teachers, according to the NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos, but he wanted to see the strategy continue. “Teachers will tell you how challenging it is,” he said. “They’ll say that’s very challenging in the operations of a school. They’ll tell you how challenging it is teaching behind a mask. But they also know that these measures are necessary. They are an extra line of defence against the spread of Covid.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While the state was still recording thousands of cases every day, Gavrielatos said risk mitigation was key. “Rapid antigen tests, while not perfect, are identifying cases before they enter school sites,” he said. “It makes sense to continue with rapid antigen testing. You can never overcompensate when it comes to the implementation of risk mitigation strategies.” Perrottet thanked parents who had helped their kids take part in the twice-weekly surveillance testing that was initially introduced for the first four weeks of term. “I know it has been a challenge for many,” he said. “It’s been incredibly successful and instilling confidence in both our teachers and our parents.”From the Australian Open and its inaugural Pride day and the AFLW’s recent Pride round to this week’s announcement that Adelaide United will be hosting an A-League Men Pride game, the celebration and promotion of LGBTIQ+ inclusion has gathered momentum of late. Add to that the increased visibility of LGBTIQ+ athletes, including the footballer Josh Cavallo and non-binary AFLW players Darcy Vescio and Tori Groves-Little, it signifies an important chapter in Australian sport, as journeys towards the inclusion of LGBTIQ+ people officially begin. For many years, sport has lagged behind wider society, dug its head in the sand around any LGBTIQ+ related issues and neglected the welfare of LGBTIQ+ athletes. So why all these pride rounds and events in sport suddenly? Pride celebrations are a tool used by organisations to address problems associated with discrimination and equity surrounding LGBTIQ+ people, whilst celebrating LGBTIQ+ people involved in their sport, their achievements and the ongoing challenges they experience. They are a specific type of diversity work whereby efforts are made to fix and address a problem. This problem, put simply, is the exclusion and marginalisation of LGBTIQ+ people in sport. The extent of this problem is still significant, and has presented sports administrators a significant challenge for decades. It does not appear to be going away anytime soon. My own research shows that we are still a long way off when it comes to addressing the inclusion of LGBTIQ+ people in sporting environments, where discrimination is still common and a culture and history of vilification and exclusion has long lasting impacts. To further highlight the nature of the problem, recent Monash University research found that half of Australian sporting clubs involved in a study believe that “homosexuality is wrong or unnatural”. Pride games are celebratory in nature and a community development strategy which seeks to build trust, and welcome and invite LGBTIQ+ communities into sporting spaces. They are needed to help normalise inclusion as part of sporting structures, whilst creating conversations whereby people can learn, be educated, and connect with LGBTIQ+ people. Evidence around the impact of these events is encouraging too; research shows that community Pride cups and Pride themed celebrations have a positive influence on fostering supporting environments for LGBTIQ+ players. The right to host or engage with Pride initiatives is not a given however, and there must be benefit to LGBTIQ+ communities, not simply to make a sport or club look progressive. You cannot cherry pick which part of Pride you engage with or celebrate; we are a diverse community but you cannot leave the trans and gender diverse community out of these celebrations. Sports embarking on this journey must get their own shop in order first and foremost, before any big spectacles. These steps might include education and training, policy development (for example trans-inclusion policies), anti-homophobia and transphobia campaigns or participation programs. Organisations like Proud2Play are on hand to help, and in another encouraging step in Victoria, more sports have recently signed up to the rainbow roadmap – a sector-wide initiative between Proud2Play and Vic Sport, which helps sports become “rainbow ready” and engage with inclusion in meaningful ways. But does this increase in Pride games, visibility of LGBTIQ+ athletes and celebrations show progress? Or does it hide and gloss over the lack of action in the space? On the one hand it shows a positive step in that sports are engaging with this particular type of diversity, albeit a lot later than other areas. On the other hand, it shows the often reactive and ad hoc nature of many sports which have not fully engaged or consulted with LGBTIQ+ communities. To be clear though, hosting a one-off Pride round, walking 800m down the rainbow filled streets of Midsumma or Mardi Gras, or posting a tweet in support of gay athletes is not going to solve complex problems such as homophobia and transphobia in sport. Furthermore, sports can become so fixated with their pursuit towards inclusion – adding rainbow banners to social media posts and logos – that they simultaneously fail to address the very reasons why LGBTIQ+ people do not feel included in the first place: anti LGBTIQ+ discrimination. This came to light recently when Melbourne Victory were fined $5,000 after some of their fans directed anti-gay abuse at Josh Cavallo. But when used properly, sport can positively impact an LGBTIQ+ person, which my latest research in tennis found; playing tennis in inclusive environments increased social and mental wellbeing amongst LGBTIQ+ participants and fostered social capital. This social capital proved to be crucial in times of social isolation and loneliness throughout the pandemic. There is evidence to show that several sports in Australia are now on their path towards the inclusion of LGBTIQ+ people, but there is much work to do, and as recent controversies have shown, it may be a bumpy ride along the way. At the forefront of this work must be trans and gender diverse people, who are disproportionately affected by exclusion in sport. The sport sector is better off and a stronger institution with LGBTIQ+ people in it. By letting discrimination linger, we reduce opportunities to find the next Olympic champion, coach or volunteer, but more importantly, we lose the ability to positively impact the life of an LGBTIQ+ person.A friend who I thought was a close friend has been unsupportive following the recent death of my father. We have been friends for 15 years and while we don’t live in each other’s pockets, we are close friends, who confide in each other. I was the bridesmaid at her wedding. When my father died recently, while she did call to commiserate and send a kind text about him, she did not make the effort to come to the funeral (it is a two-hour drive away) unlike my other close friends. While I can forgive that, what I am struggling with is that almost two weeks later she has not contacted me to see how I am doing or whether I was OK after the funeral. My father died close to Christmas, and all my friends except her texted me to say they were thinking of me, which I really appreciated. I don’t expect my friends to get me through my grief, I know everyone has their own life demands, but I would have expected my close friend to be more supportive. My mother and sister think I should cut her some slack as she is a good friend in other ways. I just don’t know how I can pretend that things are the same with her when I see her again. Please don’t say have a conversation with her, as conversations of that kind always affect a friendship anyway. Is there a way I can have a more superficial friendship with her? Eleanor says: You’re right that Serious Conversations always affect a relationship, so I won’t just say “communicate”. I will say this isn’t a failure unique to her. Many close relationships struggle after a bereavement, each side of finding the other impossible to reach. One explanation is the one that you gave: death reveals that you’re not as close as you thought. Another is that people just don’t know what to say to someone bereaved. Really, literally, they don’t know what to say – people who are otherwise loving and perspicacious can get totally dumbstruck in the presence of grief. I think it’s because death is so unflinchingly permanent. Nothing we can say will take it away, and it’s hard to know how to help other people when we can’t take away the source of their pain. So many people just retreat; at least that way they didn’t fail. A lot of people have found themselves standing where you do now – bereaved and wondering why their friend doesn’t call – while the friend is wondering how it would possibly help if they did. So the explanation for your friend’s behaviour might not be that she doesn’t grasp the enormity of losing your dad. It might be precisely because she understands it that something inside her has decided to run. Of course, it’s only so useful to you to know why she’s done this. Maybe she’s felt paralysed in the way that I’ve described – or maybe she’s just being callous – either way she didn’t show up, and that sucks. That’s a fact, no matter what explains it. But if, as you write, you want to have an ongoing relationship with this friend, you’re going to need a way to forgive her. No relationship can survive the slow simmer of resentment, least of all one that’s trending into superficiality. If you want to keep her in your life without smarting every time you see her, it might help to interpret her actions here in the more generous way. That interpretation might not be true – but on the other hand, it might be, and sometimes that possibility is enough for us to forgive when we’ve been hurt. Another thing you might try is to initiate some of the interactions you might have had if she’d stepped up when she should have. If she had called, for instance, you might have talked to your friend about your dad – often after we lose someone it’s nice to talk about them, instead of the fact that they’re gone. So you could initiate that the next time you see her; not with any nod to her absence on the topic, just, “Can I talk about my dad for a bit?” Perhaps you can just use the chance to tell her who he was, what you shared, why you’ll miss him. That’s something she can listen to without feeling compelled to fix anything, and it might give your relationship the sense that your bereavement has been heard. Friends fail us – surprisingly often, especially with grief. If we want to stay friends, it helps to focus on what’s next. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereAustralians wanting to catch up on ABC television shows will soon need to create a free account and login to watch programs on its streaming platform iView. On Thursday, the public broadcaster said iView users would need to set up a free account to use the service from March. In a statement, the ABC explained requiring an account, which has until now been voluntary, would “increase user experiences through features including program recommendations, watchlists and the ability to pick up a show where they left off”. The move has prompted a mixed reaction, with some viewers questioning why they have to sign up for a service that Australians pay for with their taxes or raising privacy concerns, while others have welcomed the extra convenience that comes with it. The ABC said the move would bring it into line with other streaming services, commercial and public, to offer users a tailored viewing experience. “Requiring a login on ABC iView, with all the privacy and data protections people expect of the ABC, enables the commercial-free public broadcaster to continue to nurture its relationship with audiences,” it said. “Nothing about creating a login for ABC iView changes our editorial independence, integrity or responsibility, including the privacy and data protections people expect of the ABC.” The president of ABC Friends, Margaret Reynolds, said the decision had concerned some members who were annoyed at having to sign up, while others had embraced the changes. “It’s a typical clash of new and old,” Reynolds said. “We’re managing new technology with logins and passwords for everything from your phone bill to Netflix. “I think many people would think, ‘what are they complaining about?’ but other people, like me, say if I have to have another password I’ll need a separate room just to keep them in.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Lauren Rosewarne, an associate professor from the University of Melbourne, said that logins were used to track user consumption patterns and their interaction with ABC advertisements online. “Some viewers will see it as a breach of their privacy and believe that something that they fund – as taxpayers – should be able to be consumed unrestricted,” Rosewarne said. “Others, however, actually get benefit from having an account: they can return to a program wherever they last left off, and programs will be suggested to them based on their viewing habits – some viewers see these things as positive.” She said for other people who regularly use streaming services, either commercial or public, the move won’t be seen as “egregious”. “It’s important to recognise generational differences in perceptions and concerns around privacy,” she said. “A generation who has known no world prior to having an infinite number of digital accounts will likely find having to have an iView account as less of an imposition than those who have spent comparatively less time online and guard their privacy with more vigilance.” The ABC has sought to allay concerns over privacy, saying that it put “a high priority on the protection of personal information”. “The ABC will never sell the data, creating an account is free, and there is no paid advertising on ABC platforms in Australia,” it said. But CEO of Thinking Cybersecurity and associate professor at ANU, Vanessa Teague, said the ABC can still legally provide Google and Facebook with a hashed version of someone’s email – a unique code used to cover the actual email. “The ABC has said they will not be conveying viewing habits (to big tech),” Teague said. “But you don’t need to convey that I have a habit of watching cooking shows. You can say ‘it would be advantageous to show me an ad for cooking shows’ and that’s useful information very slightly wrapped up in one layer of separation, so it doesn’t seem to be conveying viewing habits.” She said the privacy policies in place stop them from using raw data, but won’t stop them from building a profile of users if they click on the ads targeted towards them. “They are at the very least linking info about people and what they are interested in watching,” she said. “They should make it an option to opt-in. I don’t think there’s any excuse for putting up that barrier in front of content that is publicly owned. It’s owned content, it belongs to us. “Sticking up arbitrary barriers is inexcusable,” Teague said.Taxpayer-funded ads exaggerated the federal government’s role in infrastructure projects, while a plan to include former deputy prime minister, Michael McCormack, had to be scrapped for breaching advice, an auditor general’s report has revealed. The Australian National Audit Office made those findings in a report, released on Thursday, identifying “shortcomings” in the Building Our Future campaign, including material that was not always presented in an “objective and fair manner”. The audit examined the framework of government advertising, which is once again ballooning in advance of the 2022 election, and three campaigns conducted since 2019. Government advertising is subject to strict guidelines against party political material, but is often criticised for boosting messages favourable to the incumbent. The ANAO found the infrastructure department’s handling of the $34.6m Building Our Future campaign was “largely effective” although it showed some “shortcomings” in compliance. The audit found while advertising materials were free of political content, public relations materials were “not consistent” with advice to the finance department that “activities would not ‘be instigated by any political party or politician, or make reference to any political party or politician’”. In fact, the PR campaign included a movie roadshow attended by Coalition MPs and senators, which the department proposed would include a pre-recorded introduction from McCormack, who was the infrastructure minister and deputy prime minister at the time. The finance department advised that McCormack’s inclusion in the material was “problematic” and it could not support the proposal, which resulted in the pre-recorded message being scrapped. “Campaign materials were not always presented in an objective and fair manner, with some campaign statements not accurately representing the Australian government’s level of involvement in some projects featured in advertising materials,” the ANAO said. The ANAO cited advertising materials with “no reference” to a state or territory partner in projects such as the Brisbane Metro, for which the federal government gave just one quarter of the funds, or the Victoria M80 Ring Road and Nowra Bridge, which it contributed half. The department claimed that acknowledgment of partners was “removed during the refinement stage to allow enough space for campaign messaging/creative elements and to ensure the best possible message cut-through”. The website that press and radio ads pointed to did make clear when projects were funded by partners, it said. In other instances the ads stated “Australian Government is upgrading” the M80 and M1 Pacific motorway, while partnership with state governments was reduced to one reference under the logo. The claim the federal government “is building” the North East Link was downgraded to “is investing” in the project. The ANAO found the department also prepared toolkits for MPs and senators to promote infrastructure projects, the recipients of which were selected through a “political mapping exercise”. “It is unclear how the MPs and senators who were to receive a toolkit were to be selected and infrastructure was unable to provide a list of intended recipients,” it said. The department told the ANAO the toolkits “were not distributed due to the election being called and the caretaker period commencing”, although the campaign ended on 13 April 2019, just two days after the election was called on 11 April. “Infrastructure did not undertake an assessment of whether the wave 1 public relations activities were compliant with the guidelines,” it said. The ANAO also criticised the department for lacking a “long-term communications strategy for the infrastructure investment pipeline or targets for performance against the campaign objectives”. Infrastructure did not set clear targets for awareness of the projects and benefits of transport infrastructure, the ANAO found. Research in 2020 found there was “limited lasting increases in awareness of the pipeline after the first two waves” with “only slight improvements in awareness over time”. The ANAO recommended the department “assess whether continuing a campaign represents proper use of taxpayer resources and document the reasons for continuing the campaign”, which it agreed to do. In its response infrastructure department acknowledged “that there are learnings to be made from past campaign administration to ensure communications adhere more strongly to the guidelines”. The ANAO also examined Treasury’s Economic Recovery Plan campaign, which ran from October to December 2020 and then was scheduled to run again from June to October 2021, but “was paused on 1 July 2021 due to Covid-19 lockdown restrictions” during the Delta wave. The ANAO found this campaign was presented in an “objective, fair and accessible manner” but generated “no increases in overall public or business awareness or understanding” on the economic recovery from Covid. The domestic violence support Help Is Here campaign met guidelines, but the department of social services “did not clearly document the justification for an additional burst of advertising” in the 2020-21 holiday period, the ANAO said.When Midnight Oil announced their final tour last November – a once-more-with-feeling run of dates around the country to support their 13th studio album, Resist – founding guitarist Jim Moginie was typically met with three responses. The first was a scoff of disbelief, usually with a reference to John Farnham’s never-ending farewell shows. The second, more humorous, was that the group should have quit while they were ahead in 1981 – “and that was from some of my friends,” Moginie says. But the third response was a shrug of acceptance. Moginie, 66 in May, is the youngest surviving member of the band; the eldest, singer Peter Garrett, is 69 in April. There will be no long goodbyes. “We’re more like Johnny Rotten [than Johnny Farnham] — we mean it, man!” Garrett says, invoking a line from the Sex Pistols’ anthem God Save The Queen. In their early years, tour handbills promised “The Oils are coming”. Now, 50 years after their rough beginnings, they’re leaving – the stage at least. More than any other band, Midnight Oil have remained part of Australia’s cultural conversation. Their breakthrough classic from 1982, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 – with its indelible hits Power and the Passion and US Forces – spent 177 consecutive weeks on the Australian charts. It opened the doors to a global audience. Their 1986 album, Diesel and Dust, preceded by a tour through remote Indigenous communities, sold 4m copies worldwide. Its opening track, the land rights anthem Beds Are Burning, is listed in the US Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame as one of 500 songs that shaped the form. But it was in the live arena where Midnight Oil built their reputation, not just for galvanising shows, but headline-grabbing protest actions: stopping Manhattan traffic with a gig outside the Exxon building in 1990; playing to a global audience of billions at the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games in “Sorry” suits, campaigning for a government apology to the stolen generations. After a long hiatus caused by Garrett’s pursuit of a second career in federal politics, the band’s resumption for the Great Circle tour in 2017 saw them play across 16 countries to an audience of half a million. They remained a visceral experience, where the extreme physicality of the performances (including Garrett’s unique dance step) was an extension of the sharp angles and energy of the music. To continue, he says, would be testing not only fate but the band’s reputation. For Garrett, it is a relatively easy call. “Only a fool would go on believing that they can bring the same level of effort to it – when they were born in 1953 – as they did 25 years ago,” he says. Moginie won’t name them, but he shudders at the memory of some older groups he’s seen. “You don’t want to be up there, playing the song you did 40 years ago, and everyone’s heading for the hotdog stands,” he says. Hovering over the conversation is the ghost of Bones Hillman, Midnight Oil’s bass player since 1987. Hillman died on 7 November 2020, one week after the release of the Makarrata Project, the band’s first album for nearly two decades and the first to go to No 1 since Blue Sky Mining in 1990. Hillman was the youngest member of Midnight Oil, and therefore in theory “the least likely to be leaving first”, according to Garrett, whose grief at the loss of his bandmate is still palpably raw. But Hillman, who hid his illness from the band, was a road hog. “He never saw a leaf of lettuce he didn’t run a mile from, he never met a beer or hamburger he didn’t fall in love with, and he smoked right through to the end,” Garrett says. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Garrett tends to the view that even if Hillman were still alive, the band would have come to the same decision to retire from touring. But for Moginie, his death was “right at the heart of it”. When he listens back to Resist and The Makarrata Project – both recorded in a six-week recording session in late 2019, with Resist’s release shelved for more than a year due to the pandemic – it’s Hillman that dominates. “All I can hear now when I hear it is him – his playing, his sweet voice, his driving bass,” Moginie says. “It’s funny. We’re all very co-dependent; I can’t remember a time when he wasn’t in the band, even though we had two bass players before him.” On stage, Hillman has been replaced by Adam Ventoura, who has a more rugged edge to his playing, reminiscent of Hillman’s predecessor Peter Gifford. To compensate for the loss of Hillman’s harmony vocals, the band recruited singers Liz Stringer and Leah Flanagan. Their presence softens the band slightly, and is in keeping with the sound of Resist, which leans into the folk-rock tradition of protest singing. A few songs summon some of their old crunch, but mostly this is a kinder, gentler, more sombre Midnight Oil. Nearly a decade after he left behind a second career in politics, including various stints as environment, arts and education minister in the Rudd and Gillard governments, Garrett confesses he has struggled to hold on to his natural optimism. Resist’s cover art is styled like a temperature graph; most of the songs deal with the climate emergency and environmental collapse. The new single, At the Time Of Writing, damns what Garrett labels “inconsequential leadership, the lack of serious adults in the room”. “I still retain my optimism underneath, and I firmly accept that within the time zone of the decade or so [we have left] to hold warming to tolerable levels, that we won’t necessarily end up consigning our successors to an absolute living inferno,” he says. “But there’s every chance we will, if we don’t get on with things and get serious about change, and that’s a very sobering thought for someone who’s got kids – I haven’t got grandkids, but the others have.” And while careful to keep the band’s frustration at being unable to perform in perspective of the human catastrophe of the pandemic, Garrett reserves special venom for the abandonment of the live music sector. “The pandemic showed once and for all that the political classes neither understand nor have a great deal of empathy for the performance industry and the arts in general, even though eventually some money was wheedled out of them,” he says. “How is it that we were visibly discriminated against, while the Barmy Army could slobber over one another together, drinking beer and rubbing their tummies together [at the cricket]? It wasn’t lost on any performers, and hopefully it wasn’t lost on our audiences that we were at the very bottom of the pecking order.” The band is adamant that they will continue in some form, that they have only retired from live performance. Moginie, always the studio boffin of the band, jokes that they may yet write their version of Sgt Pepper – before clarifying it’s his least favourite Beatles album. “I don’t think we’re going to be sad about it at all. I don’t think we’ll all be in tears hugging each other on stage, although that might happen. But I know we’ll all be doing stuff together, it’s just what we do,” Moginie says. But it will be different. “This is a band of musicians and writers and performers who will all continue to do that in different guises, so long as we can breathe a breath,” Garrett says. “What shape and form that takes, that’s anybody’s guess.” • Resist by Midnight Oil is out now. Midnight Oil’s farewell tour runs until May, taking in city centres and regions around Australia and New ZealandThe pandemic has been a destroyer of worlds. Now we have started emerging from our foxholes, taking account of the damage and cleaning things up. A lot has been written in the last few weeks on the toll the pandemic has taken on our friendships. In what’s also been called the great pandemic friendship reckoning, post lockdowns people have clocked the asymmetry of certain friendships (“you weren’t checking in on me, and I was always checking in on you”, etc) or that some friendships have become stale and catching up doesn’t fill you with joy, or things have changed and you have changed. No one is the same person they were two years ago. Right now, a certain emotional Marie Kondo-ing is going on – and it can feel painful. Throw out enough friendships in this process and it may feel as if there’s not many people left. The pandemic also destroyed weak ties – the friendships, acquaintances and pleasant interactions that occurred as a byproduct of our daily lives. It might have been the barista you saw every day, or the security guard you talked to several times a day at your office, or the other parents at the school gate. It’s also our colleagues – people we don’t select to spend time with but often end up physically with for longer periods than our families. Or we did, before. While it can feel like some old friendships are disintegrating before our eyes, now is the time to rebuild the weak ties in our lives. A weak tie won’t replace your childhood best friend, but strong weak ties can improve wellbeing and a sense of being connected with wider communities. Stanford professor Mark Granovetter explored the strength of weak ties in a groundbreaking sociology paper in 1973. Granovetter found that acquaintances were more likely to tell you about opportunities in work or life, because everyone in your close pool of friends and family has access to the same information. A weak tie brings in news and connections from further afield, introduces you to people that you might one day marry or hear about a job from. Weak ties expand our social networks but they also make us feel connected to a broader world. Many of us are now in the early stages of the process of reconnecting with entire areas of our lives that have lain dormant for two years. This also includes reconnecting with colleagues. Colleagues is a bland, functional word, but the term can be elastic enough to cover people we’d get a coffee for, people we’d take a bullet for, and people we were happy to have a break from for two years. Colleagues are not really celebrated much in the annals of friendship – but God, I’ve really missed mine. Being with colleagues in real time makes work better – not just the experience of work, but the actual material product of your work is usually always better with face-to-face collaboration. A great colleague can develop into a great friendship, and in the last two years many of us haven’t had that important relationship in our lives. As anyone knows who has tried to do Friday night knock-off drinks on Zoom, your colleagues online are not the same as your colleagues in the pub or the break room. There’s no connective tissue in the relationship any more, the encounter feels as flat as the screen. Banter, office gossip, the serendipity of a conversation with someone from another team in the elevator or the cross-pollination of ideas that leads to something great or fun has been missing for two years now – and although we have been productive working from home, a definite spark is gone. In How’s Work, a podcast by Esther Perel on the workplace, the psychologist did an episode on a newsroom that worked remotely. It was unexpectedly sad and moving. These journalists were covering the biggest story of their lives from their bedrooms and were not getting the support from each other that is so necessary to process and execute aspects of the job. Said one journalist, “Such a big part of being a journalist are those moments of walking across the newsroom and sparking conversations … The collaboration is so much harder to do when we’re so far away.” Now some are returning to the office. Adjusting will take a while. The great pandemic friendship reckoning is chewing through the social landscape, and workplaces are no different. Many of these previously vibrant work friendships are on ice. Or people have left (without a leaving do, without ceremony, a card, or … anything). New people have started – in fact they started so long ago they are no longer new. But all this is also exciting. It feels like renewal. Our weak ties are waiting for us – all we have to do is connect.One of Australia’s most respected former public servants, Dennis Richardson, has accused Liberal senator James Paterson of engaging in a “grubby” and “despicable” attempt to blacken his name over comments Paterson made in an interview on Sky News. Paterson, the chair of federal parliament’s powerful committee on intelligence and security, argued in the interview on Thursday that Richardson, the former head of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, had publicly advocated in 2018 that the Chinese telco Huawei should be involved in the Australian 5G rollout. Paterson described Richardson as a “distinguished” former public servant. But the Liberal senator told Sky News the government’s decision to exclude Huawei from the 5G rollout was “one of the best decisions our government has made – and I stand by it even if Dennis Richardson disagrees”. Paterson’s critique followed Richardson contending in a series of interviews on Thursday morning that the Morrison government was serving China’s interests, not Australia’s, by politicising national security ahead of the election, and “seeking to create the perception of a difference [between the major parties] when none in practice exists”. The unusual intervention carried weight. During his long career in the public sector, Richardson was secretary of the departments of foreign affairs and defence, as well as the Asio boss, and Australia’s ambassador to Washington. The latter two appointments occurred during the Howard government. Richardson told Guardian Australia back when he was the secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the government considered whether or not Huawei would be involved in the 4G network. “I was on the secretaries committee on national security which recommended against Huawei’s involvement in 4G,” the retired bureaucrat said. “I was not in government in 2018. And I challenge James Paterson to come up with any evidence that I advocated for Huawei’s unmitigated involvement in 5G. “Given that I was on the secretaries committee on national security that recommended against Huawei being involved in 4G, on what basis I would have advocated for Huawei being in 5G is beyond me.” Richardson said he had made a comment in the media that the United Kingdom “had negotiated a deal with Huawei that enabled them to be in part involved in non-sensitive areas”. “However the Brits subsequently overturned that. So James Paterson is being loose with the truth by a long margin. He ought to check his facts and get them right before he makes public comments about individuals.” It was reported at the time that Richardson suggested that Australia should follow the UK’s lead and establish a cyber-security unit to manage risks and safeguard Australia’s national interest, rather than banning the Chinese company outright. “If Huawei has 5G technology [and] if they’re the only telecommunications company with it, I think it would be a shame if we did not seek to take advantage of that, but in a way that safeguarded our own national interest by perhaps looking more closely at what the UK has done,” Richardson said in 2018, according to a report in the Financial Review. On Sky News on Thursday, Paterson also noted that it had been publicly reported that in 2011, when Richardson was secretary of Dfat, he went on leave “to negotiate on behalf of the Canberra Raiders a lucrative sponsorship agreement from Huawei for the Canberra Raiders”. Richardson rejected that. He said he was involved in one presentation at board level, and took half a day’s leave without pay to attend that event, but: “I never negotiated with Huawei their sponsorship of the Canberra raiders. “That is a claim that was put in a letter to the editor in the Canberra Times a couple of years ago which I refuted. Indeed, it was stated in the Canberra Times that I’d taken six weeks leave to negotiate this deal with Huawei, and as I pointed out in my response, I have never taken six weeks leave in my life, let alone taking six weeks leave to negotiate a deal with Huawei.” Richardson said the history recounted by Paterson was selective. “At the time we got that sponsorship from Huawei, no-one other than [former Liberal foreign affairs minister] Alexander Downer was on the board of Huawei – right?” “Alexander Downer was on the board of Huawei, and might I also add that in 2011, when I went to Senate estimates and was questioned by none other than the good senator [Eric] Abetz, who asked me about whether I had done this and that about Huawei, I told him what I’d done, and I said if you think I’ve done anything wrong, go to the public service board, go to the police, go to whomever you like. “He never pursued it. I subsequently deliberately accepted an invitation from Huawei to go to a match of the state of origin in Sydney.” Richardson said other guests of Huawei at that match included a federal liberal staffer and a senior Liberal from the NSW party. “If they want to cast aspersions, then bring it on. It is grubby and it is an attempt to blacken people’s names. “It is despicable for them to want to engage in this sort of innuendo. The first thing they should do is get their facts right – that would help. To say that I advocated for Huawei’s involvement in 5G in 2018 is not even half true. It is extraordinarily misleading and it flies in the face of what happened in 2011.” The escalating brawl between Liberal politicians and members of the national security establishment follows days of intensifying partisan contention over national security. Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton have spent much of the parliamentary week declaring that China wants the Labor party to win the looming federal election. The hyper-partisanship culminated in Morrison on Wednesday branding Labor’s deputy leader, Richard Marles, a “Manchurian candidate” – an observation he later withdrew. The phrase “Manchurian candidate” refers to a politician being used as a puppet by an enemy power. On Wednesday night, the current Asio chief Mike Burgess also declared the weaponisation of national security was “not helpful to us”. Paterson said on Thursday Burgess’s comments had been “over-interpreted”. The Labor leader Anthony Albanese returned fire on Thursday seizing on comments made by Richardson to the ABC. “What is unusual in this case is that the government is seeking to create the perception of a difference between it and the opposition on a critical national security issue, that is China – seeking to create the perception of a difference when none in practise exists,” Richardson had told the ABC. “That’s not in the national interest. That only serves the interests of one country, and that is China.” Albanese used Richardson’s criticism of the politicisation to turn Morrison’s insult back on him. Gesturing in Morrison’s direction in the chamber, Albanese declared after question time: “If you are looking for a Manchurian candidate, he sits over there.”Angus Taylor was refreshingly upfront on Thursday about the extent to which he was sidelined from a major decision affecting the future of Australia’s electricity grid. Speaking to Ray Hadley on Sydney’s 2GB, the federal energy minister said he did not find out about Origin Energy’s decision to shut Australia’s biggest electricity generator, the Eraring coal-fired power plant, seven years earlier than scheduled until the night before. “To find out last night with no warning … I’ve got to tell you, it’s very disappointing,” Taylor said. His New South Wales Liberal counterpart, Matt Kean, also expressed disappointment in Origin’s decision to close the Lake Macquarie plant from 2025, but not shock. He and the company’s chief executive, Frank Calabria, said dialogue between the state government and Origin started months ago. The first contact from the company was in July, and the company requested it be kept confidential. Which, among other things, meant the federal government wasn’t to be told. Origin says there is nothing in this – that the NSW government was the relevant jurisdiction for it to talk with – but it’s no secret that major energy industry players are frustrated with what many see as the federal government’s obstructive and scolding approach to dealing with the historic change under way in how electricity is generated and transmitted. It’s also no secret that Kean and Taylor don’t see eye-to-eye on the best way ahead on electricity. Where the NSW minister talks up the need to act on the climate crisis and promises the country’s biggest renewable energy expansion under legislation passed with cross-party support, Taylor says little about the damage from rising greenhouse gas emissions and mostly emphasises the risks of price spikes and reliability issues in moving away from fossil fuels. It’s important to note those risks are real. No one should assume the shift to a grid that runs overwhelmingly on renewable energy will be straightforward. But emphasis matters, and plenty of experts – from the Australian Energy Market Operator (Aemo) down – say the transformation is manageable. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Taylor’s admission he was kept out of the loop on one of biggest decision affecting the electricity grid in recent times suggests Origin learned from the experience of others, particularly AGL. Those lessons include that to be open with the federal government that you plan to shut a coal plant early is to invite pressure to keep it running. The Morrison government’s approach to energy remains piecemeal and inconsistent. It includes building publicly owned hydro and gas plants that discourage private investment while maintaining it is the industry’s responsibility to provide the generation needed. There is no national policy to guide when ageing coal plants should close, or to support coal communities that face inevitable disruption. Instead, some politicians continue to play out a strange pantomime, pretending the country’s official schedule of coal-plant closure dates – which would see many running well into the 2030s, and some the 2040s – remains a meaningful document. In reality, it is widely accepted that many could shut much earlier. Why? The rise of solar has rapidly made coal plants unviable as the around-the-clock generators they were meant to be. They can’t compete with an influx of free solar energy in the middle of the day, and were mostly not built to ramp down and then back up when needed. This was the point Calabria was making when he said “rapidly changing conditions in the national electricity market” are “increasingly not well suited to traditional baseload power stations”. Coal still provides about 60% of generation in the grid and is crucial for its operation, but renewables are coming fast: from about 20% three years ago to more than 31% last year, and 35% in the December quarter. That should reach 69% by the end of the decade, according to federal government projections. Labor, meanwhile, has a $20bn pledge to bring forward the construction of transmission infrastructure to connect new renewable energy zones. Modelling for the ALP suggests the country could hit 82% renewable energy by 2030 if it wins the upcoming election. How many coal plants does that leave room for? The role of supporting cheap variable solar and wind is expected to increasingly be played by things better suited to filling the gaps. They include batteries, pumped hydro schemes, stronger transmission connections, demand management programs and, at least for a while, gas-fired plants. Aemo laid this out in its draft integrated system plan – a blueprint for an optimal grid – in December, when it suggested the step change under way meant coal plants were likely to shut at almost triple the pace officially acknowledged, and estimated the new generation needed to meet future demand. It is not the only view of the future, but nothing in the weeks since has challenged its view that coal is rapidly headed for the door. Two energy giants – AGL last week, and now Origin – have brought forward coal plant official closure dates and renewables have pushed black coal generation to its lowest levels in 23 years. Eraring is particularly in the gun. As Dylan McConnell, a University of Melbourne energy analyst, points out, it is generally the most expensive coal generator in the grid and its output has fallen more rapidly than the rest of the fleet. It is the sort of decline that might grab a federal energy minister’s attention whether directly informed or not. There are two immediate questions that flow from the announcement of Eraring’s exit. The first is whether the NSW government’s response is up to the task. On support for the plant’s 400 workers and the community that relies, it’s too early to say. Both the company and the state government have promised packages, with details to come. On electricity supply, Kean announced the creation of a “transmission acceleration facility” charged with hurrying up the investment being driven by the electricity infrastructure roadmap that passed state parliament in 2020. Its first mission is building a 700MW “Waratah super battery” with a proposed storage capacity of 1400 megawatt hours. Taylor told Hadley it was “delusional” to think a battery could replace a 2880MW coal plant, but Kean said that was not its role – that it would be designed to fix constraints in getting existing generation to Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong, not provide energy itself. There was also $84m to bring forward other infrastructure and nearly $50m for pumped hydro projects. Is it enough? It’s early days and some analysts have expressed concern, but Aemo was quick to make its position clear: the state would have access to enough electricity to ensure its energy security target – set to ensure the lights stay on even in disastrous circumstances – could still be met once Eraring is gone. Which is good news – and brings us to the second question. When should we expect the next announcement that a coal plant is closing early? It would be unwise to bet it will take long.Islands have always attracted writers and readers as rich fictional microcosms. An island setting can be a paradise, retreat or prison, preserver of wilderness or tradition, test of survival skills. And the global malaise of climate change and Covid-19 may have intensified their allure because, in spite of rising oceans, island novels are springing up all over. Just by chance, I have read three impressive examples recently: Audrey Magee’s The Colony, about an Irish-speaking island community during the Troubles; Norwegian Lars Mytting’s The Sixteen Trees of the Somme, partly set in Shetland, the Scottish islands where I have family roots; and now The Islands, a debut novel by Australian writer Emily Brugman. Brugman draws on her unusual family story as a descendant of Finnish post-second world war migrants who became fishers on the Abrolhos Islands off Western Australia. This chain of dots in the Indian Ocean and its sliver of history are unfamiliar to most Australians, let alone the rest of the world, so she does not need to veer far from the facts to bring a fresh cultural story into Australian literature. The Islands follows an ensemble of characters centred around three generations of the Saari family. In 1959 Onni Saari is a young man with the dangerous job of laying dynamite in the lead mines of Western Australia. But it is his brother Nalle who has disappeared at sea. Onni makes the daylong boat trip from Geraldton to Little Rat Island, and when Nalle does not return he takes up his valuable cray fishing lease, bringing his wife, Alva, to join the small seasonal community. The men are torn between wealth and danger, hardened by work, weather and alcohol; characters with nicknames such as One-eyed Esko, Tall Tommi and Latvian Igor. As the joke goes: “There once was a Finn who loved his wife so much, he almost told her.” Brugman lingers on the women who make homes in the rough camps: the straight-talking older Petra, the artist Helvi, and soon Alva’s daughter Hilda, among other children. Pregnancy and child rearing are risky in such isolation, but Alva prefers the island’s simple freedom to winters on the mainland, where neighbours dismiss them as peasants. There are delightful surprises in the Nordic cold-weather traditions carried on in the sweltering south. Onni builds a sauna where the Finns sweat and socialise. They celebrate midsummer in winter, sing old songs and speak Finnish, which is sampled in bilingual bites. They live by superstitions, unnerved by dying birds and open cupboard doors. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Just as vivid are the islands themselves, mainly inhabited by abundant wildlife, and “dry as bone, the skeletal remains of coral bodies deposited over thousands of years by the push and pull of the current”. Brugman spent time in a shack on Little Rat Island and recreates with sensuous immediacy the slapping water, the sea creatures, the constantly changing sea and sky. The fishers are haunted by the wreck of the Batavia, for which the Abrolhos Islands are most notorious. When the Dutch ship hit a coral reef north of Little Rat in 1629, many drowned and survivors were terrorised, raped and murdered by mutineers. Nothing so dramatic happens in The Islands, though there are ominous echoes. Brugman acknowledges Thea Astley’s Drylands and Elizabeth Strout’s Olive Kitteridge as influences on her novel-in-stories form. Characters move in and out of focus and the narrative takes its quiet momentum – with some leaps in time – from their daily routines and changes of fortune over decades. As Onni and Alva age, Hilda grows up Australian, makes her own mistakes and raises her own daughter. With such an evocative setting, Brugman could have pushed her creativity further, but her stories of family, place and industry are enough. The Islands sits comfortably between social history and imaginative fiction. The writing often rises into the realms of metaphor with pungent, poetic language and chapter headings – Pink snapper, Sea lion, Driftwood, Osprey – symbolising the characters’ experiences. By the end, Brugman has made us care for these hardy people, whose lives she inhabits with curiosity and affection. If we thought we knew the whole story of European immigration to Australia, The Islands extends our horizon in yet another fascinating direction. The Islands is out through Allen &amp; UnwinThousands of nursing and disability care students across Australia are being prevented from completing clinical placements required to graduate due to pandemic restrictions and the furloughing of senior staff who supervise them. With a severe shortage of healthcare workers, the Australian Primary Health Care Nurses Association (APNA) said if the issue was not urgently addressed, an increasing backlog of nursing students will mean there are not enough trained nurses to staff aged care homes, general practices, and other settings. This comes at a time when the healthcare system as a whole, and nursing staff in particular, are already under unprecedented strain after working through two years of the Covid pandemic. On Tuesday, thousands of nurses across NSW went on strike, protesting low pay and “unsustainable” working conditions. A student completing her diploma of nursing through Tafe in Victoria told Guardian Australia she began studying her certificates in ageing support and disability in April 2019, and should have finished courses in May 2020. “As Covid hit, almost all of the facilities in aged care, disability and home and community care shut their doors to students as part of infection control, but under the requirements of the certificate to successfully gain the qualification, students are required to undertake 120 hours of placement,” she said. “The training organisation I was with struggled to get any students in my classes the placement hours, and as a result I still have not got my certificate in ageing support.” She then applied for a diploma of nursing but has encountered the same issue. She should be close to completing her course, but has still not completed the placement hours required. “Tafe Victoria has a special team dedicated to sourcing placement, but we are continuously told there is a serious backlog of students and there are limited placements available,” the student said. “On some occasions, I had a placement booked in, however they were cancelled due to a positive Covid-19 case at the facility. One of the other frustrating things with placement is that training organisations only have placement partnerships with selected hospitals. “Many of us are not able to receive our qualification. I felt such huge anger and frustration that the defence force has been asked to help out in aged care and is allowed in, yet someone like myself with training can’t. It absolutely makes no sense. “My qualifications that I have been working hard to gain are not worth anything and I feel I have just wasted all this time.” The president of APNA, Karen Booth, said “thousands” of nursing students were facing similar issues. APNA has been working with universities and tertiary institutions to provide nursing placements for undergraduate and postgraduate students in aged care homes and other facilities to reduce reliance on hospitals. But Booth said more support is needed to expand the program and coordinate it nationally. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Our primary healthcare nurses desperately need help, and nursing students – many thousands of whom find themselves unable to get the clinical placement experience they need – are a ready-made solution,” she said. “Nursing students can be utilised in primary healthcare to triage patients, help with health checks, and help registered nurses with vaccine clinics and other clinical activities. “More importantly, supervised student nurses, using approved scripted checklists, could do welfare calls to people at home who are sick with Covid, and escalate treatment to registered nurses or general practitioners as needed.” A spokesperson from the federal department of health said the government had sought to address health workforce issues by establishing the “Aged Care Workforce Rapid Response Initiative” in December, a pilot program aimed at connecting students undertaking a Certificate III in Individual Support (Ageing) that require work placements with residential aged care providers who urgently need staff. Providers are expected to pay students while they undertake their placement. The spokesperson did not say how many students had found industry placement through the program. A spokesperson for the Department of Education, Skills and Employmentsaid that it is ultimately up to individual healthcare providers, and any state or territory public health orders, to determine student access to facilities and the appropriateness of work placements. “The commonwealth’s training regulator, ASQA, has noted there is flexibility for training providers to bring forward theoretical training and use simulated workplace environments where clinical placements have been disrupted,” he said. “The Australian government strongly encourages healthcare providers and registered training organisations to assist students wherever possible to make work placements available.”Merilyn Saunders loved sport, music, dressing up and, most of all, her family. The Melbourne grandmother died alone after contracting Covid in her aged care facility in January. Her family believe she was more vulnerable to the disease because she was nursing a broken heart after the death of her daughter. A mother to three children and grandmother to six, it’s unlikely Merilyn, 79, would have been in aged care if it weren’t for the shock death of her daughter, says her brother, Colin Hughes. He says the grief of losing a child made the last few years of Merilyn’s life “very, very hard”. “Merilyn went downhill,” he says. “She got very, very depressed to the point she could no longer look after herself at home, and that’s how she ended up in aged care. “She wasn’t physically ill, she was extremely fit, always strong, but she had severe mental health problems. The last two years were absolutely tragic.” Before her daughter’s death and the pandemic, though, her life was a full one. Merilyn “Mem” Saunders was born on 22 November 1943. Dux of her high school and an extremely active student, she would go on to study teaching, specialising in PE. Her first job was at Coburg High school in Melbourne’s north, where she taught physical education to the future Olympic athlete Raelene Boyle and Australian rules footballer Robert Walls. “She was really good at sport – always won the races at school and swimming, played tennis and netball,” Colin said. “So she had a terrific time.” After she married her husband, Ivan, Merilyn relocated to England and then Canada where she worked as an exchange teacher before starting a family in Melbourne. The couple set up a business, while Ivan represented the council on Melbourne’s Bayside. “She enjoyed social life, being a councillor’s wife,” Colin says. In her later life, Merilyn joined the Ashton-Smith Singers of Australia, an amateur choral ensemble founded in the 1980s by David Ashton-Smith. Performing in the group saw her rub shoulders with the late actor Rob Guest and soprano Marina Prior, who Merilyn eventually befriended. “It was a really lovely thing for Mem; she adored singing and music – was a talented pianist and singer,” Colin says. “She’d always make sure she got herself a photo with Marina and Rob.” Then, four years ago, Merilyn’s daughter Gabrielle passed away in WA, aged just 40. Merilyn travelled there the Christmas after, and took Gabrielle’s daughter Evangeline on a cruise from Darwin to Perth. It was a deeply traumatic time for Merilyn who, on her return to Melbourne, had a mental breakdown, and was admitted to an aged care facility soon after in 2019. Colin says because of the pandemic and extended lockdowns in Victoria, which prevented her from having visitors, Merilyn psychologically “shut down”. “[Her] lifelong friends, her boys … we weren’t allowed to visit from WA and our brother was going through his own health problems, my brother wasn’t allowed to visit,” he says. “Her last two years were spent almost entirely in isolation.” Then, in January of 2022, she caught Covid. After she tested positive to the virus, Merilyn had given an end of life directive and decided against active treatment. “She was a bright girl, she knew what the consequences of that action were likely to be fatal,” Colin says. “Covid is many different illnesses … it can affect you from the respiratory point of view and cause severe anxiety and distress. She didn’t have oxygen problems – maybe because of her strong lungs – but she had gastrointestinal problems … severe nausea, vomiting, inability to hold down food … that was the cause of her death.” Colin is at pains to point out that the staff at Merilyn’s aged care facility took great care of his sister – as well as they could under extremely testing circumstances. “They were wonderful,” he says. “Despite huge problems they followed directives to the letter, and because I’m a doctor they were giving me daily reports on her oxygen. “We don’t hear from politicians what a good job the aged care staff are doing despite the huge challenges. The nursing aides looked after her in the last couple of years really well – and through lockdown, [residents] didn’t get Covid.” At this point in time, only one person has died at Mercy Place Corben – Merilyn. “They were exactly who they said they were, kind, considerate, compassionate,” Colin says. “They arranged Zoom calls when she was still able to receive them, they put in place mental health care plans, they did everything they could.” But as a former GP, Colin is convinced that if the government had intervened and provided free rapid antigen tests to aged care facilities when Omicron started to spread, Merilyn may not have acquired the virus. “Instead of a policy that said everyone who comes to a nursing home has to have a RAT before entry, there was no proper infectious control,” he says. “I’m not blaming the nursing home for that, I just watched this government completely ignore the public health issues and try to pretend vaccination alone was the way out. “Public health measures are still so important – N95 masks, proper PPE which they were struggling to get a hold of in nursing homes, free rapid tests … so many people are suffering [but] politicians are not listening. “The government could buy for a couple of dollars a rapid antigen test and an N95 mask. We’re letting these people die; it’s so ludicrous.” When Merilyn passed away, she became another Covid statistic: a 79-year-old woman who died in aged care, pre-existing conditions. As of 4 February, 9,718 aged care residents across almost 2,000 facilities in Australia had acquired the virus. Since July last year, 801 people in aged care had passed away. When Colin remembers his sister, he remembers a woman who loved to have fun, to dress up, to live her life to the fullest; a woman who got a kick out of sailing a boat in a strong wind. At the celebration of her life, the family played Time to Say Goodbye (Con te partirò), a soaring orchestral ballad first performed by Andrea Bocelli in 1995: Time to say goodbye, To countries I never saw and shared with you Now, yes, I shall see them, I’ll go with you Go on ships across seas, Which, I know, no, no, don’t exist any more It’s time to say goodbye … “That was Merilyn,” Colin says. “In the photos of her at the funeral … she was a Carnaby Street girl – she had the miniskirts, the big bouffant hair, always dressed to perfection. She loved having a good time. “She loved life, she loved her music, she loved sport, and she loved me … “She loved me, and I loved her. That’s all I have to say.”Unlike the unending and tedious debate over who is the best Bond, there is no argument when it comes to the best Hannibal Lecter: it is Mads Mikkelsen. Anthony Hopkins’s overripe performance remains firm in the minds of many, but Mikkelsen is truly brilliant in Bryan Fuller’s strange and excellent show, having had the luxury of 36 hours of telly to transform Hannibal the Cannibal into something beyond a bogeyman. In fact, it takes a while for Hannibal’s toothy side to truly come out in the TV adaptation, which aired between 2013 and 2015. Here, he is a serial killer successfully disguised as a harmless and prissy European oddball, and regarded as a respected psychiatrist in Baltimore. Fuller chooses to focus equally on the cat to his mouse – or the mouse to his cat – Will Graham (played by Hugh Dancy), a prickly and vulnerable profiler tasked by the FBI to help them hunt murderers. Despite being too “unstable” to work as an official agent, Graham is uniquely talented at his gruesome work, so Hannibal is discretely hired by FBI big cheese Jack Crawford (Laurence Fishburne) to keep an eye on his mental health while he does his extremely traumatising day job. Like Bond, most people know Hannibal by mononym alone; we all know about his unique palate going in, but everyone around him (most of whom have attended one of his dinner parties) does not. “Before we begin, you must all be warned – nothing here is vegetarian,” Hannibal announces at the beginning of a dinner, with great aplomb; the fun comes from knowing that meat is the least of his guests’ worries. The suspense instead comes from the episodic murders Graham is tasked with solving, and his slow realisation that there is more to his psychiatrist than meets the eye. As he tells a doubtful Crawford: “You and I probably sipped wine while swallowing the people who we were trying to give justice, Jack.” Much like Fuller’s other shows Pushing Daisies and American Gods, Hannibal has a heightened aesthetic, dialled up to ridiculous. Everything is rich: the colours, the foods, the clothing, the sounds. It all looks lush, while also being unsettling: Hannibal’s dining room, as an example, is often decorated with pomegranates and porcupine quills, inserted by the show’s food stylist to trigger a sense of danger and trypophobia. All this muchness – under a cacophonous soundtrack from composer Brian Reitzell, mashing up everything from theremins to gamelan – leaves you feeling, just like Will Graham, that you may be losing your mind. Much like the show’s aesthetic, Mikkelsen’s angular face veers between freaky and beautiful depending on the shot. Hannibal’s unnerving blankness could be mistaken for an absence of acting, but that’s not it at all: if you’ve seen the Danish actor in Another Round or The Hunt, you know he’s remarkable. On each of the three times I’ve watched the series, I have noticed more subtle details of his performance; the film that develops over Hannibal’s shark-like eyes when he is being careful, the furious twitch of a little finger betraying his great anger, the hint of a delighted smile at Will. It may be apocryphal that Mikkelsen, who has since starred in every Hollywood franchise going, learned much of his English skills from reading Hannibal scripts. Either way, he’s as good here as he is in most things, and clearly having a helluva time, delivering lines like “You tried to kill me, Will – it is hard not to take that personally” with amusing restraint. Hannibal is Dancy’s show too. Up until now, he has mostly been wasted in forgettable romcoms or playing pretty toffs in costume dramas; as Graham, he is snarky, wounded and utterly compelling. Mikkelsen and Dancy share a uniquely charged chemistry and thankfully the show doesn’t ignore it (despite being made by a major American network that, at one point, asked for more blood to be added to a murder scene to cover a butt crack). Hannibal leans into the homoeroticism of a story about a man killing an incredible number of people just to make another man understand him more. “Is Hannibal in love with me?” Graham asks in one episode; by then, both he and you know the answer. On occasion the show can be hammier than anything Hannibal is cooking, but that’s part of the joy. After all, Hannibal the Cannibal is a inherently ridiculous creation – it would be weirder to make a po-faced series about a snobby serial killer who gleefully dances around the FBI and enjoys a bit of heart tartare. Instead, we get moments like Hannibal serving a man his own leg, candied and studded with sugar cane skewers. A totem pole made of dead bodies, anyone? How about a council worker used as a trellis for a tree, his tasty organs replaced with flowers? Really, it’s a wonder Hannibal made it to three seasons: it was weird, it was gross, it was very queer. But we must savour that it got to exist at all.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert checked in on the crisis over Ukraine on Wednesday evening, a day after Russia claimed to be withdrawing some of its 150,000 troops from the border. Nato promptly disputed that claim, “and if you’re feeling confused, that’s on purpose”, said the Late Show host. “Because according to the experts, the US and Russia are waging a signaling war to avert an actual war.” “Yes, a signaling war, just like in that famous movie: Semaphoring Private Ryan,” Colbert quipped. In other Russia news, one of its elite figure skaters, 15-year-old Kamila Valieva, tested positive for a banned substance before the Winter Olympics in Beijing. “Fifteen-year-olds on drugs should not be in the Olympics. They should be on Euphoria,” said Colbert. Facing international outrage, Valieva claimed the drug got in her system via a mix-up with her grandfather’s heart medication. “Yes, come on, you know how it goes! You’re in the kitchen and all of a sudden you trip and fall on to your grandpa’s day-of-the-week pill case,” Colbert mocked. “Now all of a sudden you’re skating around high on a cocktail of Centrum, Lipitor and Viagra.” Because she is 15, Valieva is protected from certain sanctions, allowing her to still compete in the individual figure skating competition. “They didn’t have a choice! If they didn’t allow her to skate, Putin would’ve just rolled her out there on a tank,” Colbert joked. On Thursday, after Colbert’s taping, Valieva faltered in her free skate program, dashing her hopes for a medal. But if she had finished in the top three, no medal ceremony would have been held for the event. “They’ll just ship the medals out to whoever won them later,” Colbert explained, “because every athlete trains their entire life for that magic moment when they can stand at attention on their stoop waiting for the UPS guy. Maybe ask the driver to honk the national anthem.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah reacted to news from the host’s home country of South Africa: that Nelson Mandela’s home in Johannesburg would become a luxury hotel known as “Sanctuary Mandela”, with rooms ranging from $250 to as much as $1,000 a night. “I guess this is just the fate of every historic building now, right?” said Noah. “Because if you think about it, half of the old buildings around the world are now either a bank, an Apple store, or a CVS. That’s it. I wouldn’t be shocked if in a hundred years the White House is going to be turned into Jeff Bezos’s dog’s weekend place. “Some people think that it doesn’t make sense for the home of the man who fought inequality to be turned into a luxury hotel,” he continued. “But it does, it actually does. And it really does if you remember one of Mandela’s most famous quotes, when he said: ‘Do not judge me by the color of my skin, but rather judge me by the thread count of these Egyptian cotton sheets.’” The controversial hotel “is going to come with its pros and its cons”, Noah added, “and I guess it will be good for the people who work there and maybe some of the community, but you’ve gotta admit, man, at the same time, it does feel a little disrespectful for everything that Nelson Mandela went through, you know? You’re just going to pay some money, and you can sleep in his house? You know what he had to do to get to that house?” Noah proposed a compromise: “They should say that for every night that you stay in the hotel, you should also have to spend a night in an apartheid prison. Now you’re getting the full experience.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel responded to Trump’s response to his former accountancy firm, Mazars, which severed ties with the former president amid ongoing criminal and civil investigations into whether he illegally inflated the worth of his assets. In a furious four-page statement, Trump countered: “We have a great company with fantastic assets that are unique, extremely valuable and, in many cases, far more valuable than what was listed in our Financial Statements.” “Only Donald Trump would defend himself against charges that he overvalued his assets by re-overvaluing his assets,” said Kimmel. Trump also blasted the New York attorney general, Letitia James, who is Black, and called for “this political and racist attack” to stop. “Now that’s a good one,” Kimmel said. “Rich white guy claiming racism? I mean, you almost have to hand it to him. That’s like Hawaii claiming tourism. That’s ridiculous.” Joe Biden, meanwhile, ordered the release of Trump’s White House visitor logs “once they fish them out of the White House septic tank”, Kimmel joked. “Trump’s been trying to block the House committee from trying to see this list, claiming executive privilege,” he added. “I feel like the only thing we’re going to learn from the list is how often he ordered Arby’s on Uber Eats or something.”The dryly factual subtitle of Hans Abrahamsen’s Schnee, “10 canons for nine instruments”, hardly hints at the magical sonorities and glittering reflections explored in this 55-minute work, which was composed between 2006 and 2008. In the 1990s Abrahamsen wrote almost nothing, and he returned to composition tentatively, first with a series of orchestrations of both his own and other composers’ music, and then with a piano concerto in which he first explored the sound world he had reimagined for himself. In Schnee that crystalline new world reached its definitive form, conjured from trios of strings and woodwind, together with two pianos and percussion. Its starting point was a series of arrangements of Bach canons that Abrahamsen had made in the early 1990s, but there’s nothing remotely Bachian about his response. The 10 canons of Schnee come in complementary pairs, each of which the composer likens to two versions of a painting in different colours. They are separated by more static intermezzos, while the canons become progressively shorter as the work goes on, with microtones regularly blurring the edges of their intricate plays of pitches. It proved to be the gateway to so much that has followed in Abrahamsen’s music – to the equally fragile soundscapes of the extraordinary song-cycle Let Me Tell You, and more explicitly to his Hans Christian Andersen opera The Snow Queen, first performed in 2019; the first of the canons in Schnee underpins the opening scene of the opera, while the torrential fourth provided the material for the Snow Queen’s sleigh ride through the snow. Schnee is already available on disc, played by Ensemble Recherche, who originally commissioned it. But this performance from the Lapland Chamber Orchestra, conducted by John Storgårds, seems to capture both the rigour and feathery fragility of Abrahamsen’s instrumental writing far more bewitchingly, with tempi that are consistently faster than the earlier version. Alongside its delicacy and sense of wonder, the Recherche performance now seems rather matter-of-fact, and the glittering intricacies of Abrahamsen’s canons are never that. This week’s other pick A number of Harrison Birtwistle’s major scores, including two of his operas, have yet to appear on disc, but a collection from the Nash Ensemble on BIS does at least fill in some of the gaps among his gnarly chamber works. It concentrates on music from the past decade or so, though the origins of Pulse Sampler, for oboe and percussion, date back to 1981. The most substantial piece is the 20-minute Duet for Eight Strings, written in 2018 for the viola player Lawrence Power and cellist Adrian Brendel, who play it here; they are joined by pianist Tim Horton for the 2011 Piano Trio, while Gareth Hulse is the oboist in the Oboe Quartet, which began life as a single movement for the great Heinz Holliger, but which Birtwistle expanded in 2010 at the request of the Nash.Rail firms are warning passengers to avoid travel on Friday, when the worst storm in three decades is forecast to hit the UK. Journeys across Britain will be affected by speed restrictions and delays on Friday, the rail industry said, as Storm Eunice is expected to cause major disruption. Winds of up to 90mph (145km/h) are forecast for parts of the UK, according to red and amber weather warnings issued by the Met Office. Long-distance train operators cancelled many services in advance and said passengers should use tickets booked for Friday to travel on Thursday or Saturday instead. Network Rail will be imposing speed restrictions of 50mph across most of the railway to minimise the risk from fallen trees or debris blown on to the tracks. Engineers will be out in force for the second time in three days to combat damage from the extreme weather. Train services in Scotland, which bore the worst impact of Storm Dudley on Wednesday, had largely resumed by 10am on Thursday after a cleanup operation to repair overhead lines and remove fallen trees. Network Rail said additional engineers would be deployed to tackle problems as they arose, and to check all affected lines for damage before reintroducing services as quickly as possible. All trains in Wales will be cancelled on Friday, with no replacement road transport, after Transport for Wales told passengers to avoid travel because Eunice was expected to be “the largest and most impactful storm affecting Wales for many years”. It said it expected disruption to last into Saturday. Great Western Railway, which operates the south Wales mainline and services across the south-west regions, is also expected to be widely affected by Eunice. The firm said customers could use tickets up to and including Monday, adding that it expected to significantly reduce all its long-distance services, and to close branch lines in Devon and Cornwall. LNER, which runs trains on the east coast mainline between London and Scotland, said customers should expect disruption and could claim a refund if they preferred not to risk travelling. Avanti, which runs trains from London to Glasgow, said it would operate a significantly reduced timetable, with only one train every two hours between Euston station and Birmingham. CrossCountry has advised people not to travel on Friday or Saturday, with a strike affecting services at the weekend. Others, including Northern, London Northwestern and Southeastern, have urged people not to travel on Friday. Jacqueline Starr, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, an industry body, said: “Rail companies are working hard to keep people moving safely but journeys will be disrupted, especially on Friday. We’re asking people to plan their travel for a different day if possible or to check and re-check before they travel.” Jake Kelly, a director at Network Rail, said: “We will be doing everything we can to keep as many services as possible running safely and reliably on Friday, but with such strong winds expected we know that disruption to passengers’ journeys is inevitable.” Transport for Greater Manchester urged people to only make strictly necessary journeys on Friday, saying that flying debris could block Metrolink tram services. On the roads, National Highways has advised motorists to take care and be prepared for gales, with drivers of HGVs, caravans and motorcycles in particular advised to check conditions in exposed locations. Several major road bridges, including the Severn bridges into Wales and the Dartford bridge crossing, will be closed on Friday. The Tamar bridge linking Devon and Cornwall will be closed, and police in the two regions have urged motorists to stay home “unless your journey is absolutely necessary”. Britain’s biggest airlines, easyJet and British Airways, said they were monitoring the situation as the storm approached, but neither had cancelled services as yet. Eunice will be widespread, and comes at the end of a half-term break for many, when higher numbers than usual of families and skiers will be returning from holidaying abroad. Heathrow airport said it was working closely with airlines and air traffic control to avoid any disruption, but poor weather could cause last-minute delays. A spokesperson said: “We encourage passengers to check their flight status with their airline for the latest information.”UH O’! Back in 2008, the Pope’s O’Rangers got to the final of Big Vase with a team spearheaded by Jean-Claude Darcheville. The centre of their defence was marshalled by David Weir, 83. To his right, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Kirk Broadfoot, breathing heavily, brow furrowed, a confused look spreading across his coupon. The late and lamented Walter Smith achieved many great things during a life less ordinary, but taking that team to a major Uefa showpiece occasion was arguably his most outrageous achievement of all. Sheer alchemy, multiplied by chutzpah on the end of a stick. Gotta love Walter. Nothing is impossible, in other words, and that’s surely what the Newc O’ Rangers manager, Giovanni van Bronckhorst, will be telling his men before Thursday’s trip to Borussia Dortmund in the catchily titled knockout round play-offs of this year’s even-more-interminable-than-usual Big Vase. Marco Rose’s side are currently keeping Bayern Munich honest in the Bundesliga, six points behind and not quite out of hope yet, and are the bookies’ favourites to win Big Vase outright, ahead of Barcelona and some properly run clubs like Sevilla, Fizzy Leipzig and Atalanta. By comparison, you can get 150s on James Tavernier lifting Uefa’s secondary jug come May. Oh O’Rangers! Uh-oh! However, Dortmund’s superstar striker Erling Haaland – 28 goals already for club and country this season, but absent for nearly a month – could be missing through injury this evening. Also, it’s not as though the German giants are without their own problems, having been shafted at home 5-2 by perennial losers Bayer Leverkusen a couple of weeks ago, a result nearly as embarrassing as Rangers’ recent dirty protest at Parkhead. Van Bronckhorst’s men have responded well to that humiliation, winning three games on the bounce to the aggregate score of 10-0. Add some positive thinking to the mix, along the lines of “well, if Kirk did it”, and you never know, they could yet pull off a result for the ages. Either that or we’ll have further evidence that, by unceremoniously bolting out of the Ibrox exit door, Steven Gerrard has made his best-timed run since the one that put Liverpool two up in the 2001 final. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE It’s another big night of football: join Scott Murray for Big Vase action including Dortmund 2-0 O’Rangers and Barcelona 1-1 Napoli (5.45pm, all times GMT), before Big Pot coverage of Queen’s Celtic 2-2 Bodø/Glimt and Leicester 1-0 Randers (8pm) with Barry Glendenning. You can also follow England 2-1 Canada in the Arnold Clark Cup with Sarah Rendell from 7.30pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “[Christian] has found a place where he feels confident to take the next step in the fight to get back on to the field. I’m super-happy that he is safe and happy and looking forward to playing football, and that we can all see him play again” – the Denmark coach, Kasper Hjulmand, on Christian Eriksen finding the right club in Brentford. Read his Q&amp;A with Bart Vliestra here. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly Extra is here! Join the podders to dissect the latest Big Cup results, including Liverpool’s Italian job and a “mini-crisis” at Bayern Munich, who have now gone TWO games without a win. FIVER LETTERS “Re: 63-year-old Ralf Rangnick [Fivers passim]. Rangnick, 63, is eligible for his German pension if he has made contributions for 45 years. If not he must wait until a month before his 66th birthday. But at the end of the season he can apply for welfare assistance by job hunting or attending classes. The German government does not currently offer classes in football management” – Lindsay Williams. “I spent two hours of my birthday yesterday watching Peterborough 0-0 Reading. Hardly a celebration” – JJ Zucal [er, happy birthday? – Fiver Ed]. “This reader beef is like wandering into a pub car park to find two guys whose mums cut their hair, pretending to be held back by a third guy with an actual pocket protector, who is shouting ‘Ian, Brian, leave it!’ Long may it continue” – Jon Millard. “Re: the ongoing reader beef. Leave ‘im, Ian! He ain’t worth it! Let’s all just go back inside and finish our drinks” – Matt Dony. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Lindsay Williams. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The Barrow manager, Mark Cooper, has been slapped with an eight-game touchline ban after making reference to an assistant referee’s gender. Cooper made the comments to Helen Edwards during his team’s defeat to Exeter in August. Cooper denies the allegations, and the League Two club are considering an appeal. Wayne Rooney has been warned by the FA over recent comments he made suggesting he wore long studs during Manchester United’s game against Chelsea in 2006 “to try and injure someone”. The Derby manager has not been charged or fined over the remarks. Repeated heading and accidental head impacts in football cause changes to blood patterns in the brain, potentially interfering with signalling pathways, according to a new Norwegian study. Frank Lampard has struck an ambivalent tone on working with a sporting director at Frank Lampard’s Everton. “The key for me is the communication and you’re working in the same direction. If you can get that mix, great,” ha-ha-yeah-noed Lampard. Ralph Hasenhüttl has laughed off links with the Manchester United job after Southampton defender Jan Bednarek said the Austrian deserves to manage “the biggest teams in the world.” [no, sorry, too easy – Fiver Ed] “This was an awful question,” guffawed Hasenhuttl. “He tried to come out with a good answer and he did it.” “What happened in January is not easy. Four players left in January. Four important players for Tottenham, two have arrived.” New to Daniel Levy, Antonio Conte? Liverpool wait on news of Diogo Jota, after ankle knack suffered in the Big Cup win at Inter. “Twisted ankle, it was swollen,” wailed Jürg. England’s home Nations League matches against Italy and Hungary will be played at Molineux in June – the first time Wolves have hosted the men’s national team since 1956. “We very much enjoy taking the squad on the road,” breezed Gareth Southgate. Transfer talk: Kylian Mbappé will team up with Erling Haaland, according to La Liga president Javier Tebas. “Madrid will get Mbappé and Haaland as the others, Barcelona and Juventus, are half [financially] ruined,” Tebas roared. And Dundee have appointed Mark McGhee as their new manager, despite the fact he still has a six-game touchline ban to serve from his Motherwell tenure. “We think there are ways around that,” said Dundee chief suit John Helms, as McGhee was hurriedly stuffed into a bear costume. STILL WANT MORE? The Pope’s Newc O’Rangers can freestyle their Big Vase match with Borussia Dortmund, writes Ewan Murray. It’s the league that matters. Bobby Firmino and Luis Díaz showcased Liverpool’s strength in depth at San Siro, notes an espresso-sipping Jonathan Liew. The SheBelieves Cup squad for the USA!!! USA!! USA! suggests that the Megan Rapinoe-Alex Morgan golden era could be near its end, writes Megan Swanwick. Big Vase previews! Get yer Big Vase previews and predictions here! He knows it, you know it, even educated fleas know it: Pep really, really, really needs to win Big Cup for Manchester City, writes Jamie Jackson. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! RED HOT CURLING ACTIONThere is something very satisfying about going, in the space of a few months, from neophyte, to expert, to outraged dissenter, and enjoying that journey alongside thousands of others. I’m talking about Wordle, obviously, the five stages of which, after its invention in October last year, might usefully be delineated as indifference, confusion, enjoyment, obsession and resolution to cancel the New York Times. Here we are in February and it’s a new world, teetering for some of us on the brink of post-Wordle. I’m not quite ready to jump. But after a week of scandalous decisions by the NYT, the puzzle’s new owners, it’s only a matter of time. This is a sad outcome given the ancillary pleasures that come with the game. As in all things, I was not an early adopter, only giving in and trying a Wordle when friends with even less interest in puzzles than me got sucked in and triggered my competitive machinery. For the past five weeks, I have patiently and conscientiously done a puzzle a day, while enjoying all the benefits of my new hobby. I have made judgments about people who post their results. I have made judgments about myself, primarily how brilliant I am. During a bout of insomnia, I’ve shared my grid at 3am with someone who has sent me their middle-of-the-night results, an action I have understood, obliquely, to be both a boast and a small cry for help. I’ve texted the word “genius” to people when they’ve solved the puzzle in two and received the same validation in return. I’ve wondered if I’m rescuing myself from dementia. And of course, in the last week or so, I have given much thought as to whether, under new management, the words are getting harder. All of which experience is probably very quaint and familiar to veterans of these kinds of games. Here’s another discovery that we – the interlopers, the people who only-like-football-during-the-two-weeks-of-the-World Cup but with puzzles – have discovered a land in which the inhabitants couldn’t have been nicer. Who are these lovely people, with their tolerance for our amazement that word games can be fun? For my entire life, I’ve been operating under the delusion that other people are my people, when in fact, these people might be my true people. It’s a wild ride. “Is it an indication of smartness?” asks the friend with whom I trade scores. “Definitely,” I say, but when I click on the millionth Wordle story of the day, I discover that it’s ability in maths, not words, that’s considered the key. (I am not good at maths). This makes sense given my history with word games. I’ve always hated Scrabble and had no time for crosswords. Boggle didn’t take. It has been a source of small but real sorrow to me that if I’d been alive during the second world war, I wouldn’t have been picked to code-break at Bletchley. But Wordle, for some reason, is different. For me, the fact it’s on a device definitely helps, allowing me to stare at a screen and still feel virtuous. It’s to Wordle’s advantage that it takes so little time to complete – if you haven’t nailed it in 20 minutes, it’s a lost cause – making it seem like a manageable addiction. Like slow-release drugs, you can’t binge Wordle, all of which adds up to an experience we haven’t had for a long time, of having to wait for something for 24 hours, with no possibility of cheating. Which brings us to the New York Times, effortless ruiner of all things. This week, the kerfuffle was about two answers being generated on the same day, but that was an administrative error. The main thing is the choice of words. I’m not sure the puzzle is getting harder – I’m still thinking about the word “tapir”, which appeared in one of the early games. But there is something different about Wordle now it’s under Big Puzzle management. On Wednesday, I got “caulk” – a word I associate with “spackle” and is annoyingly obscure – but this morning, for the first time, I bombed out and didn’t get the word. This wasn’t because it was hard, but because it was easy and I’d wasted two tries on obscure words that I thought were more likely to come out of the NYT’s puzzle desk. It’s not going to be “cakes,” is it, I thought; it’s going to be something aggravating, like “slake” (it wasn’t either). Take it from a puzzles veteran of five weeks, once you stop trusting the puzzle-master, it’s all over and I can feel my interest curdling, a withdrawal helped along by my seven-year-old. “Oh,” she said flatly, when I showed her a Wordle this week. “It’s hangman.” Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistA former Post Office branch manager’s young children were bullied and told their mum was a “liar” and a “thief” during the company’s IT system scandal, an inquiry has heard. More than 700 post office operators were prosecuted between 2000 and 2014, based on information from the Horizon IT system, which was installed and maintained by Fujitsu. Susan Hazzleton, 68, said her children, who were nine at the time, were taunted in the school playground when her Post Office branch in Chelmsford, Essex closed in 2001. Her children were told that their mother was a “liar”, a “thief” and that she was “the reason the village doesn’t have a Post Office or shop any more”, Hazzleton said during the fourth day of evidence. The former post office operator was accused of stealing £300 after auditors checked the accounts of the branch she had run since 1995. She was suspended, her shop closed and six weeks later she was arrested for theft. “[The police] said I couldn’t go and pick the children up from school; they said they would collect them in the police car, take them to the station and they would have to stay there until they finished questioning me,” Hazzleton recalled. “What mother wants that for her children?” Thankfully, her children were able to stay with a family friend. The prosecution dropped the case 18 months later due to a lack of evidence. Hazzleton said Post Office workers told her that no one else was having issues with the Horizon IT system like the ones that she told them she had been having. She said that the shortfalls in her accounts began to “snowball” into the thousands in 2000 after she began using the Horizon system. She said she called the Post Office helpline once a week but received no help. The call handler repeatedly told her: “It will work itself out”, the inquiry heard. “I believed the people operating the helpline had no more idea about the computer system than I did,” she said. After her evidence, the former judge, Sir Wyn Williams, leading the inquiry, indicated he was unhappy that the compensation scheme for those wrongly convicted did not apply to those who were acquitted as well. Wendy Martin, who opened her own Post Office in York in February 2015, said she was left feeling like a “walking zombie” due to the stress of dealing with repeated IT problems. She told the inquiry: “I was open for just under two years and I probably slept five hours a week if that. “I was getting so many kidney infections constantly that my doctor would leave my prescriptions in reception without me having to go in because I didn’t have time to go into the doctors. “My staff were so stressed out that one of them left; she couldn’t deal with it any more. We were all just falling apart.” She said there were issues with the Horizon computer system immediately after taking over the branch. “I just know that we had gone from an office that worked to where I was coming home of a night and I just didn’t know where the cash figures would sit,” she said. “I would check my figures and check the cash and it would show a discrepancy and I’d think, what have I done?” Martin was never prosecuted but has still been left thousands of pounds in debt. She added: “I’ve lost my business and that business was my retirement. I don’t have a retirement; I’ve worked for the Post Office for 16 years and walked away with nothing.” The inquiry, which is expected to run for the rest of the year, is looking into whether the Post Office knew about faults in the IT system and will also ask how staff were made to take the blame. On Wednesday, a group of cross-party MPs called on the government to fully compensate all victims.The regional president of Madrid has accused the leadership of her own conservative People’s party (PP) of waging a “cruel and unfair” campaign to destroy her with false corruption allegations amid reports the party tried to hire private detectives to investigate her family. Isabel Díaz Ayuso, who is often touted as a future PP leader, spoke out after media reports suggested that, during the first wave of the Covid pandemic, her administration gave a €1.5m contract for face masks to a company linked to her brother – for which he received a commission. The reports also alleged that an official in Madrid city hall – which is also run by the PP – contacted a firm of private detectives with a view to getting them to investigate Ayuso and her family. Relations between Ayuso and the PP’s leader, Pablo Casado, have been fraught over recent months. While Ayuso has bolstered her national and international profile since winning an emphatic victory in last year’s Madrid regional election, Casado has faced questions over his leadership strategies – not least the party’s recent, pyrrhic victory in last week’s Castilla y León regional election. On Thursday morning, the PP mayor of Madrid, José Luis Martínez-Almeida, said he had looked into the reports that his administration had sought to hire a detective firm to spy on Ayuso and her family, and said he had found no evidence of such an arrangement. A little later, Ayuso went on the offensive. “Even though political life is full of heartaches, I could never have imagined that the national leadership of my party would act against me in such a cruel and unfair way,” she said in a televised address. “There is nothing more serious than accusing someone in your own house, and who has a responsibility to govern, of corruption.” Ayuso said that PP leaders had spent months putting together a dossier on her and her family in an attempt to associate them with corruption when all the party had to do was look at publicly available documents relating to the contract. “The fact that they were preparing a file means that they weren’t searching for any truth; they were trying to smear me personally and politically,” she said. Ayuso did not deny that the face mask contract had been awarded to a company linked to her brother, but she insisted the process had been completely legal. “I asked my brother and he confirmed that he had had a business relationship with the company and that it was all completely legal, and that everything had been declared to the tax authorities,” she said. She also challenged Casado and his circle to provide any proof whatsoever of wrongdoing, and pointed to her own electoral success. “I’d like to know how many votes those who have spent months attacking me have won for the PP,” she said. “It’s very hurtful that the leaders of your party are not the ones who support you, but the ones who want to destroy you.” The PP’s general secretary, Teodoro García Egea, hit back at Ayuso later on Thursday, saying that it had only sought her cooperation in examining the allegations, and adding that an investigation had been launched. “Since we received information about these alleged irregularities over the summer and asked Isabel Díaz Ayuso about their veracity, all we’ve got from that direction – instead of a clear answer – is a massive campaign of attacks, packs of lies and slanders like the ones we’ve had today,” he said. The furious scale of the PP infighting has not gone unremarked. The satirical news site El Mundo Today tweeted: “Joe Biden to send troops to Génova [the PP headquarters] following the escalation of violence within the party.”Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, has been criticised after saying she wants police to “shoot your terrorists and ask questions second.” Speaking to Matt Forde’s Political Party podcast, Rayner said she was “quite hardline” on law and order and suggested police should “antagonise” criminals. “On things like law and order I am quite hardline. I am like, shoot your terrorists and ask questions second,” Rayner told the live audience at the podcast recording. After a loud audience reaction, she said. “Sorry – is that the most controversial thing I’ve ever said?” “On law and order, I think if you are being terrorised by the local thug, I want a copper to come and sort them out,” she said. “You should be hardline on things like that. It’s not just, ‘Oh you’ve been burgled here is a crime number’.” She added: “I want you to beat down the door of the criminals and sort them out and antagonise them. That’s what I say to my local police … three o’clock in the morning and antagonise them.” Rayner said she had formed her views after being “plagued by antisocial behaviour” when she was growing up. “I want the police to annoy the hell out of them until they realise disrupting lives is not OK. I am quite hardline on that,” she said. Rayner has also spoken out recently about receiving extensive online abuse and death threats. Among those criticising Rayner was the former shadow home secretary Diane Abbott, who said: “Is Angela suggesting a mandatory death sentence for suspected (but not convicted) “terrorists” ?” she tweeted. Rayner was also criticised by the leftwing grassroots group Momentum. Sonali Bhattacharyya, of Momentum’s national coordinating group, said: “These remarks are deeply concerning. It was this approach that led to the assassination of Jean Charles de Menezes. “You can’t kneel for racial justice one day, then praise shoot-to-kill powers for the police the next. “From regressive drug policy to abandoning the rule of law, Labour are trying to out-Tory the Tories. But it’s working class communities and people of colour who pay the price for this law and order agenda. In the party and the streets, our movement will stand up for social justice.” Corbyn himself had been vocally against “shoot to kill” policies. “I think that is quite dangerous and I think it can often be counterproductive. I think you have to have security which prevents people firing off weapons where you can and there are various degrees of doing things, as we know, but the idea you end up with a war on the streets is not a good thing,” he said in 2015.We’re now closing this live blog. Here’s the full report on Angela Rayner’s comments: And for more Covid news from around the world you can follow our global coronavirus blog: Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today: The government has scrapped the “golden visa” system that allows wealthy foreign investors a fast track to living in the UK, amid concerns over links with Russia. The tier one investor visa route will be shut to all new applicants from all nationalities with immediate effect, the Home Office said, adding that some cases had “given rise to security concerns, including people acquiring their wealth illegitimately and being associated with wider corruption”. More here. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said counter-terrorism police should “shoot first” and “ask questions second”, as the party upped its attacks on the Tories’ record on crime rates. Rayner said she supported a more hardline approach to policing, saying she wanted police to “beat down the doors” of criminals and “sort them out”, as Labour continues to set out a tougher approach to law and order. The UK accused Russia of orchestrating “false flag” attacks in Ukraine as a pretext for an invasion. The claims by Boris Johnson and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, came as tensions continued to mount between Russian-backed separatists and state forces in east Ukraine, with shells hitting a nursery school. Truss said reports alleging “abnormal military activity” by Ukraine in the eastern Donbas region were a “blatant” attempt by the Kremlin to fabricate a reason for an invasion. The prime minister claimed there was a “false flag operation designed to discredit the Ukrainians” and “we fear very much that that is a thing we will see more of over the next few days”. Western allies fear Russia will carry out or support attacks in Ukraine that it will then falsely blame on the Kyiv government in order to justify an invasion. More live updates here. Russia’s claim to be withdrawing troops from the border with Ukraine seems to be a “disinformation campaign” and the troops are instead making their final preparations to invade, the UK armed forces minister said. James Heappey said Moscow was continuing to deploy thousands more soldiers to the region and building bridges across rivers that could be used as part of a military incursion into Ukraine. More here. Scotland Yard was forced to admit it was “unacceptable” for one of its official Twitter accounts to apparently criticise the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, leading him to accuse the force of amplifying misleading information. Khan tackled the suggestion – made in a now-deleted tweet by the verified “Met Police Taskforce” – that he did not understand the rules for disciplining officers. It came as the London mayor said he would not support the choice of the home secretary, Priti Patel, to replace the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, unless whoever was chosen understood “the importance of addressing these deep cultural issues” within the force, such as racism, sexism and bullying. More here. A minister hinted that Boris Johnson is likely to announce an end to the provision of free lateral flow tests when he outlines his “living with Covid” plan next week. James Heappey, the armed forces minister, said it was time to reconsider whether some pandemic measures should remain in place as he argued Britons need to “change behaviours” in the face of future Covid variants potentially being less threatening. There have also been reports that as part of the prime minister’s blueprint for the future, the UK government will no longer provide free lateral flow tests to the public. Asked on Sky News whether the offer of free quick-result tests to allow people to check whether they are positive for coronavirus would be “taken away”, Heappey said: “I think that is the direction of travel but the prime minister will shortly announce his conclusions on that.” A new attempt will be launched next week to force publication of the full report on whether No 10 parties broke Covid laws, with Conservative MPs urged to support the move to ensure there are “no more cover-ups and no more lies”. While more questionnaires were sent out by Scotland Yard to people who attended a dozen gatherings under investigation, a “humble address” motion was tabled in the House of Commons by the Liberal Democrats. If passed, ministers would be forced to release a specific set of documents within two days of the Met concluding its investigation. A date has yet to be set for the vote, but it could come on the next opposition day allocated to the Lib Dems. The papers being demanded include an unredacted version of Sue Gray’s report, all accompanying evidence collected by the Cabinet Office, and a list of Downing Street staff issued with a fixed penalty notice. More here. Labour will fight only a “minimal campaign” in most of the Lib Dems’ top 30 target seats at the next general election, in “an informal Lib-Lab plan to topple the Conservatives”, the FT reported. Keir Starmer has reportedly told colleagues that Labour must “ruthlessly focus” resources on its target seats in the vote, which must be held by 2024, leaving the Lib Dems as the main challengers in some seats. That’s all from me for today. Thank you so much for reading along. Have a lovely weekend! We can see through Oliver Dowden’s US-style bluster as a mere distraction from the country’s real problems, writes Jon Allsop for the Guardian today. Here is an extract: The UK, of course, has longstanding institutional racism issues, and countless cultural sores of its own. When Dowden told the Heritage Foundation that the government had told schools that it was “illegal to teach the concept of ‘white privilege’ as though it were undisputed fact”, his audience surely heard a clear echo of the US freakout over critical race theory. In general, America’s culture war discourse is so ingrained that it is impossible to simply uproot it and replant it in Britain, where political life is less structured around hot-button cultural controversies. Sure, people care about patriotic songs and the union jack, often quite a lot. But these symbols aren’t permanent, inflamed points of contention. (Keir Starmer may be keen to emphasise them, but he seems to see them as a post-Corbyn prerequisite for electability, not a finished political offer in and of themselves.) We have tabloids, but we do not have a Fox News mainlining grievance day and night. GB News looks tinpot in comparison. Moreover, the cultural schisms that we do have don’t always reinforce each other. Brexit got nasty, but did not map neatly on to existing divisions. (Dowden voted for Remain.) Covid rules, a key driver of the US culture wars, have not been as viciously polarising here. When Dominic Cummings broke lockdown, he tried to fight his way out of accountability, Trump-style, but was met with a wall of public fury. Ditto Boris Johnson. As of a year ago, nearly 60% of Britons didn’t know what “woke” meant. A roughly contemporaneous poll found the equivalent US figure to be around 30%. It’s easy to oversimplify any transatlantic comparison, and it’s facile to say that culture wars are always a distraction from weightier, kitchen-table issues – culture matters. But the relentless, totalising focus on grievance surely is a distraction. In keeping with their “with or against us” tone, the woke wars, if they are to be effective electorally, need to be an all-or-nothing political strategy. Many US politicians are all in. Most Tories are not. And it’s far from clear that their voters would reward them if they were. You can read the full piece here: The British public won’t swallow the Tories’ half-baked ‘war on woke’ The EU must drop the pretence that the Northern Ireland protocol is designed to protect the peace process, the DUP leader has said. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson said unionism was “rapidly losing faith” that a negotiated solution to issues with the protocol could be achieved through the ongoing negotiations between the EU and UK. The DUP leader, who has repeatedly called on the UK government to suspend the trading arrangements by triggering the article 16 mechanism, was speaking after a virtual meeting with the European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič. Earlier this month Donaldson pulled the DUP first minister, Paul Givan, out of the Stormont executive in protest at the protocol – a move that removed the power-sharing administration’s ability to make any significant decisions. Šefčovič has been holding talks with the main Stormont leaders before next week’s meeting of the EU/UK joint committee on implementing the protocol. Four of the five main Stormont parties also held talks with the Irish foreign affairs minister, Simon Coveney, on Thursday. Donaldson could not meet Coveney in person in Belfast due to travel logistics but is expected to speak with him in the coming days. Donaldson, who last year stopped his ministers participating in cross-border political meetings as part of his campaign against the protocol, said it was the “greatest threat to progress and prosperity in Northern Ireland of our generation”. He added: The EU can no longer keep up the pretence that the protocol was about protecting peace. The Irish Sea border does not have the support of a single unionist elected representative. It is divisive and undemocratic. It trashes the cross-community consent principle. The absence of a functioning executive or north-south structures demonstrates that the protocol is an unrivalled danger to fairness and progress in Northern Ireland. Unionism is rapidly losing faith that a negotiated solution is possible. It is time for the government to take actions which restores fairness and reinstates Northern Ireland’s access to the UK internal market. This is the only way to build a better future for everyone in Northern Ireland. Sinn Féin’s Stormont leader, Michelle O’Neill, who was automatically removed as deputy first minister when Givan quit, held talks with Šefčovič and Coveney on Thursday. She said the majority of people in Northern Ireland did not support the triggering of article 16. There’s no desire here on the part of the wider society around the triggering of article 16. O’Neill said her engagements with Coveney and Šefčovič were “very timely” in advance of next week’s joint committee meeting, adding: We hope that there are solutions to be found, if that’s the case remains to be seen. The Home Office has confirmed it has scrapped the “golden visa” system for wealthy foreign investors amid security concerns, PA reports. The tier one investor visa route will be shut to all new applicants from all nationalities with “immediate effect”, the department said, adding that some cases had “given rise to security concerns, including people acquiring their wealth illegitimately and being associated with wider corruption”. Launched in 2008, the scheme allows people with at least £2m in investment funds and a UK bank account to apply for a tier one investor visa. The scheme has now been axed over concerns about how the system was being taken advantage of, and against a backdrop of souring relations with Moscow given its military buildup on the border with Ukraine. The home secretary, Priti Patel, said: I have zero tolerance for abuse of our immigration system. Under my new plan for immigration, I want to ensure the British people have confidence in the system, including stopping corrupt elites who threaten our national security and push dirty money around our cities. Closing this route is just the start of our renewed crackdown on fraud and illicit finance. We will be publishing a fraud action plan, while the forthcoming economic crime bill will crack down on people abusing our financial institutions and better protect the taxpayer. The armed forces minister, James Heappey, had suggested the change was being made in part because of the Kremlin’s buildup of troops near Ukraine. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Thursday morning: Changes were made to that in 2015 and 2019 to make sure that the checks were ever more stringent. But absolutely, as we enter into what could be a generation or longer of quite acute competition with Russia, all of the things that have become normal in Anglo-Russian relations over the last 30 years will be up for review. And that is, I think, what the home secretary and her team are looking at at the moment. At least 700 such visas have been issued to Russian millionaires in the first eight years of the scheme, according to the Times (paywall). The controversial issue had been due to come to a head in several weeks anyway, as an amendment tabled to the nationality and borders bill during its report stage in the House of Lords would, if passed, have required the visa route to be suspended. My colleague Aubrey Allegretti has more on this story here: UK ministers plan to scrap ‘golden visa’ scheme amid Russia concerns The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, has been accused of allowing fake news to flourish after refusing to debunk false claims that civil servants in his department demanded the removal of a portrait of the Queen. Dave Penman, the head of the FDA senior civil servants union, has claimed that Kwarteng is damaging morale within the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy after ignoring requests to publicly correct reports that staff replaced the portrait with a smaller picture of the monarch. The row comes amid deepening anger among civil servants that they are being unfairly and repeatedly vilified in anonymous quotes from ministerial aides. You can read the story here: Kwarteng accused of letting fake news flourish over Queen portrait These are from the Daily Mirror’s Rachel Wearmouth: Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, has said counter-terrorism police should “shoot first” and “ask questions second”, as the party ups its attacks on the Tories’ record on crime rates. Rayner said she supported a more hardline approach to policing, saying she wanted police to “beat down the doors” of criminals and “sort them out”, as Labour continues to set out a tougher approach to law and order. Speaking to Matt Forde’s Political Party podcast, Rayner said she was on a “different page” to the former leader Jeremy Corbyn’s approach to crime, adding: On things like law and order I am quite hardline. I am like, shoot your terrorists and ask questions second. Taken aback by the live audience’s reaction, she added: Sorry, is that the most controversial thing I’ve ever said? Rayner went on to say she wanted police officers to take a more active role in investigating burglaries, as well as “antagonising” thugs who make life difficult for their neighbours. On law and order, I think if you are being terrorised by the local thug, I want a copper to come and sort them out. You should be hardline on things like that. It’s not just: ‘Oh, you’ve been burgled, here is a crime number.’ I want you to beat down the door of the criminals and sort them out and antagonise them. That’s what I say to my local police … three o’clock in the morning and antagonise them. Rayner said she had been “plagued by antisocial behaviour” when she was growing up, adding: It’s the usual suspects … I want the police to annoy the hell out of them until they realise disrupting lives is not OK. I am quite hardline on that. Her comments displeased many on the Corbynista wing of the party, including the former shadow home secretary Diane Abbott. The Lib Dems’ home affairs spokesperson, Alistair Carmichael, said: “I suspect that Rayner may not have meant this entirely literally.” Last month, an IpsosMori poll for the Standard showed that Keir Starmer’s party was now trusted more on law and order, after weeks of sleaze allegations hitting the government over partygate. A Tory MP who leads a group that campaigns against the government’s net zero measures has recruited two members of staff from a controversial organisation that questions climate science. After the Guardian revealed links between members of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, run by the MP Craig Mackinlay, and the Global Warming Policy Foundation (GWPF), further ties between the two organisations have been found. Politico reported that Mackinlay, an outspoken critic of the government’s net zero policies, has taken on Harry Wilkinson, the head of policy at GWPF’s campaigning arm, Net Zero Watch, in addition to Ruth Lea, a former trustee of the arm, to work in his parliamentary office. Wilkinson is a critic of consensus on global heating, and has tweeted: “The ‘climate crisis’ is a religious belief, nothing to do with science.” He previously worked for Nigel Lawson, who founded the GWPF and makes claims such as: “I think that climate change is not a threat, it is happening very gently at a fraction of a degree per decade which is something we can perfectly well live with.” Wilkinson celebrated the news of his appointment, tweeting: “After 5 years of working as a Researcher for Lord Lawson, I am pleased to be able to take a position in Craig Mackinlay’s office. I look forward to supporting his work alongside continuing my role with Net Zero Watch.” Green campaigners have frequently called the GWPF a leading source of climate change denial, as it has questioned climate research by top scientists, called for green measures to be halted, and claimed the rising level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has many benefits. More on this story here: Staff from climate denial group recruited by Tory MP behind net zero attacks Russia has been accused by the UK of orchestrating “false flag” attacks in Ukraine as a pretext for an invasion, PA reports. The claims by prime minister Boris Johnson and foreign secretary Liz Truss came as tensions continued to mount between Russian-backed separatists and state forces in east Ukraine, with shells hitting a nursery school. Truss said reports alleging “abnormal military activity” by Ukraine in the eastern Donbas region were a “blatant” attempt by the Kremlin to fabricate a reason for an invasion. The prime minister claimed there was a “false flag operation designed to discredit the Ukrainians” and “we fear very much that that is a thing we will see more of over the next few days”. Western allies fear Russia will carry out or support attacks in Ukraine which it will then falsely blame on the Kyiv government in order to justify an invasion. Despite Russian claims to be pulling units back to base following the conclusion of military exercises, the UK and US have claimed that thousands more troops have been deployed, along with supporting assets such as field hospitals and new bridges. Johnson, speaking at RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire, said: The picture is continuing to be very grim. Today, as I’m sure you’ve already picked up, a kindergarten was shelled in what we are taking to be, well, we know, was a false flag operation designed to discredit the Ukrainians, designed to create a pretext, a spurious provocation for Russian action. We fear very much that that is the kind of thing we will see more of over the next few days. Truss, who is in Ukraine, said she was very concerned about the exchanges of fire in Donbas and the continued build-up of Russian troops. Separatist authorities in the Luhansk region claimed there had been an increase in Ukrainian shelling along the tense line of contact, describing it as a “large-scale provocation” and that they then returned fire. The Kyiv government disputed the claim, saying separatists had shelled its forces but they did not fire back a nursery school building in Stanytsia Luhanska was hit, wounding two civilians, according to the Ukrainian military. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy said “the shelling of a kindergarten in Stanytsia Luhanska by pro-Russian forces is a big provocation”. Truss, who has warned that Russian president Vladimir Putin could mount a “false flag” operation to justify an invasion, said: Reports of alleged abnormal military activity by Ukraine in Donbas are a blatant attempt by the Russian government to fabricate pretexts for invasion. This is straight out of the Kremlin playbook. Truss said she was “very concerned about reports today of increased Russian aggression: over 7,000 extra troops near the Ukraine border and an attack by pro-Russian troops on a kindergarten in Ukraine”. She urged Russia to withdraw its troops as there was “still time for diplomacy and de-escalation”. You can read more over on our Ukraine live blog: Ireland’s foreign affairs minister has downplayed the prospect of a major breakthrough in negotiations on Brexit’s Northern Ireland protocol next week, PA Media reports. Ahead of a meeting of the EU/UK joint committee on the implementation of the Irish Sea trading arrangements on Monday, Simon Coveney advised against “unrealistic” expectations about what might emerge. He also insisted that the Irish government was not a bystander to the ongoing political crisis at Stormont that has flared amid ongoing unionist anger at the protocol. But he did express concern about the long-term future of the power-sharing institutions after the recent collapse of the coalition administration. He was commenting on the uncertainty over whether the political will would exist to reconstitute an executive following May’s assembly election. Coveney travelled to Belfast on Thursday to meet political leaders two weeks after the Democratic Unionist party withdrew the first minister, Paul Givan, from the executive in protest at the Irish Sea “border” with the rest of the UK. Asked about the prospects of significant progress on the disputed issuesbetween the EU and UK next week, Coveney said: I think it’s important not to be unrealistic in terms of the expectations that may come from that meeting. I think the likely scenario is that there probably will be a joint statement from both sides in terms of outlining the issues that they want to try and address together. But we should use that as a staging point for progress, as opposed to a reminder of how far apart the two sides continue to be. The minister had meetings scheduled with Sinn Féin, the SDLP, the UUP and Alliance party on Thursday. The DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, was travelling on Thursday and a meeting between himself and Coveney was expected in the coming days. Asked why it had taken two weeks for him to go to Belfast to meet politicians, Coveney said: I can assure you we’re not bystanders and that’s why I’m here, to meet in person with all the parties that are available to meet. But we have been talking to parties in the meantime, as you would expect, and, of course, I speak to the British government all the time, in particular Liz Truss, and I speak to Maroš Šefčovič [European Commission vice-president] a number of times every week. So we are keenly involved in actually trying to find compromise positions and trying to find a way of reassuring people that the Northern Ireland protocol can be implemented in a way that everybody can accept. And, of course, we’re watching closely in terms of the instability in terms of Northern Ireland politics as we lead into assembly elections now in May. And, of course, thinking about post those elections, how the two governments could work together with all of the parties in Northern Ireland to bring about political stability here. Asked if he was concerned about Stormont’s long-term future, Coveney said: I think everybody should be concerned. You know, we’ve had a period of tension and polarisation, much of that links to Brexit and the Northern Ireland protocol issues, I accept that. But we move into an election cycle now and I think all of us have to try to think ahead in terms of the consequences of that election. We have to respect democracy and what people choose in terms of the parties and the make-up of a future assembly. But we’ve also got to ensure that there is sufficient trust rebuilt to ensure that both governments can work together with parties in Northern Ireland to maintain stability and the institutions that are so valuable to people’s well-being in Northern Ireland. Coveney said both the UK and EU acknowledged the consequences for community relations in Northern Ireland of the ongoing failure to resolve the dispute over the protocol. But he pointed to a recent opinion poll as evidence that the protocol was not a major issue of concern for most people in the region. Both the British government and the European Union, I think, are very conscious of the fact that the inability so far to settle some of the outstanding issues around how the protocol is implemented is having a very polarising impact on politics in Northern Ireland. I think we were also reminded in the last few days that not everybody on the streets of Northern Ireland are talking about the protocol in the context of these [Assembly] elections. In fact, less than 7% of people polled in Northern Ireland have said that the protocol is the first issue for them in terms of how they’ll vote. So you know, I think we need to put this into perspective. The protocol and issues around it are important and politicians like me and others have to find solutions and landing zones that are based on compromise and understanding each other’s perspectives, but also around a realistic and honest assessment of what Brexit means and the choices that flow from that. Coveney added: My job is to try to find solutions, to try to be optimistic about what’s possible and to try and work through issues with patience and with respect for everybody and their perspectives, so that we can try to find a basis for agreement moving forward, and I think the European Union is also trying to bring that patience and understanding. More than half of Britons think Boris Johnson has not been up to scratch as prime minister – a jump of 13 points from last year, a poll has found. An Ipsos UK survey carried out last week suggests that 54% of Britons think the prime minister has done a bad job to date, with almost the same proportion supporting a vote of no confidence in his leadership. Pollsters said the results showed a continuing trend of Johnson’s personal rating weakening. It comes as the PM finds himself in the middle of a storm about claims of coronavirus rule-breaking in Downing Street. The Metropolitan police are investigating 12 alleged parties held at the top of government during lockdowns, with Johnson one of about 50 people to have been handed formal legal questionnaires by officers. Johnson has also faced criticisms elsewhere, including in relation to his government’s handling of the Covid pandemic and the attempt to delay a Commons suspension for former Tory minister and MP Owen Paterson last year. Ipsos’s survey found that Johnson’s ratings had slipped across the board, with less than a third of the population believing he has performed well, down by eight points on last year’s polling. In February 2021, 41% thought he was doing a bad job, and that figure has shot up by 13 points to well over half. According to the polling company’s results, 54% of people who voted Conservative in the 2019 general election see him as having done a good job, down from 69% 12 months ago. The proportion of those Tory voters – who won him his 80-seat majority just over two years ago – saying he has done a bad job has nearly doubled, from 15% to 29%. A handful of Tory MPs are known to have submitted letters of no confidence in Johnson’s leadership after the party revelations. A total of 54 letters would need to be handed in to Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, to trigger a confidence vote. The survey found that 56% of the public support Tory MPs pressing for a confidence vote, with about a quarter in opposition. Two in five think a vote is likely to happen, up by five points since the start of the month. Keiran Pedley, the director of politics at Ipsos UK, said: The data continues to show Boris Johnson’s personal poll ratings weakening, with a majority of Britons now saying he has done a bad job as prime minister and a majority supporting the concept of Conservative MPs triggering a vote of no confidence in his leadership. What happens next will likely be decided by events, as police investigations draw to a close and other items move up the news agenda. * The results are based on online interviews with a representative sample of 2,038 British adults aged 18-75, conducted on 9 and 10 February. Russia’s claim to be withdrawing troops from the border with Ukraine seems to be a “disinformation campaign” and the troops are instead making their final preparations to invade, a UK defence minister has said. James Heappey, the armed forces minister, said Moscow was continuing to deploy thousands more soldiers to the region and building bridges across rivers that could be used as part of a military incursion into Ukraine. Despite brief hopes of a respite in tensions after Vladimir Putin’s announcement on Tuesday that there would be a “partial” drawdown of forces, some Nato countries remained sceptical about how many of the roughly 130,000 troops had really been withdrawn. There have been suggestions that the Kremlin has deployed a further 7,000 soldiers to the border, and Heappey said: Worryingly what we’ve seen over the last 48 hours is not the reversal that has been announced in Moscow. He said he still hoped Russia was committing a “hugely expensive exercise” that would end up being a hoax to “wind us up”, but he admitted: We’re on the threshold of a major war in Europe in which tens of thousands of people could die. Heappey told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I fear that it is a disinformation campaign when we are seeing apparent footage of Russian troops moving away from the border. Because all of our indicators suggest that the buildup and the preparations continue. The full story from Aubrey Allegretti and Julian Borger is here: Russian claim of Ukraine drawdown is disinformation, says UK minister And you can follow all the latest updates on the Ukraine crisis over on our live blog: Scotland Yard has been forced to admit it was “unacceptable” for one of its official Twitter accounts to apparently criticise the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, leading him to accuse the force of amplifying misleading information. Khan tackled the suggestion – made in a now-deleted tweet by the verified “Met Police Taskforce” – that he did not understand the rules for disciplining officers. It came as the London mayor said he would not support the choice of the home secretary, Priti Patel, to replace the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, unless whoever was chosen understood “the importance of addressing these deep cultural issues” within the force, such as racism, sexism and bullying. The shock announcement of Dick’s departure has caused turmoil in the Met and for political leaders, including Khan, in whom the Police Federation has declared it has “no confidence”. Tensions escalated further on Thursday when the Times reported that Dick told colleagues Khan had given her an ultimatum to sack senior officers in Charing Cross police station or face suspension herself. Khan insisted during a phone-in on LBC: It is not the case the commissioner was given an ultimatum to sack them or be sacked. However, he said he was “angered and disgusted” by the views of some officers at Charing Cross station and “concerned about the impact on trust and confidence” after it was revealed they exchanged WhatsApp messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. Khan criticised a tweet by an official Met account which retweeted a post pointing out that the process for sacking officers is independent of chief constables, with the comment: “Exactly this.” Several hours after the post was deleted, a spokesperson for the Met said the tweet was “unacceptable and shouldn’t have been shared” from an official account. They said senior officers were “addressing the matter” and would remind colleagues “they are expected to be independent and impartial at all times, on and off duty, including on social media”. The mayor suggested the intervention was unhelpful, referring to a recommendation by the Independent Office of Police Conduct that found widespread evidence of bullying and discrimination among officers. Khan said: “When you have Met police accounts amplifying information that is misleading, how is it possible for officers concerned about behaviour of other officers to come forward? “Why are we surprised when whistleblowers don’t come forward if this is the attitude both the IOPC talked about and you’ve exemplified in relation to a blue-ticked account?” With the search for Dick’s replacement now under way, Khan said he believed Patel would be “incredibly professional” in the recruitment process. However, he said that while he hoped to be consulted, he would not support Dick’s successor if “I don’t have confidence that he or she understands the importance of addressing these deep cultural issues”. Here is the full story: Met police admit tweet critical of Sadiq Khan was unacceptable Ministers have been urged to ensure that the Cobra meeting on the storms (see 11.11am) results in an emergency support plan to deal with power cuts. The Liberal Democrats’ communities spokesperson, Tim Farron, said: Whenever a storm hits, the government is disgracefully unprepared to support the thousands of people affected, they never learn from their mistakes. This time, as people up and down the country are barraged by stormy weather, the government must be on hand to provide support. The Cobra meeting must agree on an emergency support plan including providing food, emergency accommodation and electricity generators for those affected by any power cuts. The home secretary has ordered the first review of Border Force in more than a decade, PA reports. Priti Patel has hired Alexander Downer, a former Australian high commissioner to the UK, to oversee the review, which began on Thursday and will scrutinise all areas of the agency’s work including illegal migration, customs and national security. Downer, a former Australian minister for foreign affairs, is reported to have played a key role in the country’s policy of turning boats carrying asylum seekers at sea away from its coastline. This is similar to plans Patel has attempted to introduce in the UK, prompting criticism from campaigners and threats of legal action. The “wide-ranging, independent review” is the first of its kind since Border Force was established. It will assess the agency’s “structure, powers, funding and priorities” to make sure it can “keep pace with rapidly evolving threats and continue to protect the border, maintain security and prevent illegal migration,” the Home Office said. The department said the move would “ensure the UK government is prepared for future challenges at the border, by identifying change and improvements needed across Border Force’s work on illegal migration, customs and national security to help keep the UK safe, secure and prosperous.” Patel said Border Force officers worked “tirelessly to protect our borders at 140 sea and air ports right across the UK”, and since its inception in 2011 its “remit has grown to meet the changing border threats we face, and in recent years has supported delivery of the government’s Brexit commitments and Covid-19 measures.” She added: The public rightly expects this work to be carried out to the highest possible standard, which is why I have ordered this review of Border Force to identify ways in which it can keep improving its operations. Downer said his review would be “robust, evidence-based and outcome-orientated”, adding: I look forward to assessing Border Force’s structure, powers, funding and priorities, and hearing from a wide range of voices from across the organisation and beyond. This is from the Daily Mail’s John Stevens: It comes as a rare red weather warning – the highest level – has been issued along the coastline of Devon and Cornwall as well as the south coast of Wales on Friday owing to extremely strong winds, and the Met Office said there could be “flying debris resulting in danger to life”. The Met Office said Storm Eunice could bring winds of up to 90mph, causing significant disruption. A lower amber warning for wind remains in place for the rest of Wales and most of England as far north as Manchester. Thousands have been left without power as Storm Dudley brought chaos to roads and rail and ferry services across Scotland and northern England on Wednesday, with warnings of even more severe weather to come as Storm Eunice sweeps across the UK today. The Met Office issued “stay indoors” advice, warning of winds of up to 100mph in places and further disruption to transport, as a clean-up operation was in progress after Storm Dudley. Thousands of homes were left without power in the north-east of England, Cumbria, North Yorkshire and Lancashire as heavy rain and strong winds, gusting to more than 80mph in places hit on Wednesday, uprooting trees and bringing down power lines. More here: Thousands left without power as Storm Dudley wreaks havoc across UK The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has said it would be “inappropriate” for him to lean on police and ask them to release photos of the Downing Street parties. He told LBC: Just think how inappropriate it would be for me, a Labour mayor, getting involved in operational matters where a Conservative politician is being investigated. There are some countries around the world where the police do have their arms twisted in relation to operational issues. I think it is right in our system where I have got no influence in relation to whether the police do investigate Boris Johnson, what is published and so forth. I have always, as the mayor, been cognisant of the importance of me understanding which side of the line I should be on. A minister has hinted that Boris Johnson is likely to announce an end to the provision of free lateral flow tests when he outlines his “living with Covid” plan next week, PA reports. James Heappey, the armed forces minister, said it was time to reconsider whether some pandemic measures should remain in place as he argued Britons need to “change behaviours” in the face of future Covid variants potentially being less threatening. The prime minister is set to outline his post-pandemic plan of action when parliament returns from recess on Monday, having already stated he will aim within days of his statement to lift the requirement in England for those who test positive for Covid to self-isolate. There have also been reports that as part of the prime minister’s blueprint for the future, the UK government will no longer provide free lateral flow tests (LFTs) to the public. Asked on Sky News whether the offer of free quick-result tests to allow people to check whether they are positive for coronavirus would be “taken away”, Heappey said: I think that is the direction of travel but the prime minister will shortly announce his conclusions on that. Johnson’s administration has been warned that the public could be left “flying blind” on Covid if left without free testing provision. LBC, which first reported about free tests being scrapped, also said the availability of free PCR tests could also be withdrawn as part of the changes, with the suggestion the UK would move to a paid-for model if people want to test themselves for the virus. The Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, Daisy Cooper, said scrapping free tests while case rates were “still sky high” would “leave the public and scientists flying blind” and increase the risk of another lockdown. The SNP and Labour have also criticised the touted plan, with Keir Starmer arguing that ending free coronavirus testing would be “a mistake” and would increase the risk of transmission. On Wednesday the Association of Directors of Public Health (ADPH) warned that with coronavirus yet to become endemic and it being “difficult to predict when this state may be attained”, scaling back free tests could weaken the UK’s defences if a new variant of the virus emerges that results in “significant new waves” of cases. The group also said forcing people to pay for lateral flow tests would also have a “detrimental impact” on take-up, particularly among disadvantaged communities. A briefing note said: Significant levels of cases, hospitalisations and deaths continue to disrupt and devastate individuals, public services and the economy. There remains a degree of unpredictability about the course ahead. Heappey said he understood the concern around withdrawing the offer of free LFTs, especially for people wanting to know their Covid status before visiting vulnerable relatives. However, the minister said the country was “moving to a different phase” and that pandemic habits would have to change. He said: We are moving from a period of pandemic into a period of endemic and I think that there is a mindset adjustment that we are all going to need to make as we accept that the expectation is that future variants of Covid will be as mild or, more probably, milder than Omicron. That means we can change our behaviours and worry less about the need to have tested ourselves, and everything else. But the prime minister will bring forward revised measures. I understand why people are concerned - it has become habit and it is a reassurance - but the reality is we are moving to a different phase of this now and I think it is probably time to reconsider whether some of the measures that were in place over the last 18 months need to endure. The government has previously said “universal free provision” of LFTs will come to an end at some stage, although it has said no decision has been taken on timings when responding to reports there could be an announcement on the ending of free testing next week. A new attempt will be launched next week to force publication of the full report on whether No 10 parties broke Covid laws, with Conservative MPs urged to support the move to ensure there are “no more cover-ups and no more lies”. While more questionnaires were sent out by Scotland Yard to people who attended a dozen gatherings under investigation, a “humble address” motion was tabled in the House of Commons by the Liberal Democrats. If passed, ministers would be forced to release a specific set of documents within two days of the Met concluding its investigation. A date has yet to be set for the vote, but it could come on the next opposition day allocated to the Lib Dems. The papers being demanded include an unredacted version of Sue Gray’s report, all accompanying evidence collected by the Cabinet Office, and a list of Downing Street staff issued with a fixed penalty notice. The move will reignite pressure on the government over the parties scandal, which has resulted in calls from some Tory MPs for Boris Johnson to resign. Despite the prime minister having attended some of the events under scrutiny, including a “bring your own booze” garden party organised by one of his most senior former civil service advisers, he has continued to deny any wrongdoing and has avoided a no-confidence vote. There are concerns that some details may never be known, after a leaked Whitehall memo to those investigated by Gray said the Met “will not make public the details of their investigation and therefore your line manager will not be notified”. The Lib Dem’s humble address motion was tabled and backed by all 13 of the party’s MPs. Ed Davey, the party leader, said Johnson “can’t be trusted to admit whether he or any other Conservative ministers end up being fined by the police”, and “we’ve seen time and again that his instinct is to lie, blame others or cover up the truth”. He added: MPs from across all parties need to come together and force Boris Johnson to come clean. The public deserves to know whether our prime minister has broken the law, and for the full Sue Gray report, including any photos, to be published. If Johnson is found to have broken the law, he must fess up and resign. No more cover-ups, no more lies. The full story is here: Lib Dems in bid to force publication of full Sue Gray No 10 parties report Good morning. Labour will fight only a “minimal campaign” in most of the Lib Dems’ top 30 target seats at the next general election, in “an informal Lib-Lab plan to topple the Conservatives”, the FT’s George Parker and Jasmine Cameron-Chileshe (paywall) report. The paper reports that Keir Starmer has told colleagues that Labour must “ruthlessly focus” resources on its target seats in the vote, which must be held by 2024, leaving the Lib Dems as the main challengers in some seats. Labour would need to gain more than 125 seats to reach the 326 required to form a government. The Tories are worried by the Lib Dem threat in their “blue wall” southern and rural heartlands after shock results in last year’s Chesham and Amersham and North Shropshire byelections. The informal Lib-Lab non-aggression pact taking shape would leave the Lib Dems to lead the anti-Tory fight in many southern seats, while Labour would focus on winning back “red wall” seats in the north and Midlands, the paper reports. Labour and the Lib Dems have pooled resources in recent byelections in seats where they are best placed to beat the Conservatives. For example, in Batley and Spen the Lib Dem campaign was virtually invisible, while in North Shropshire the Lib Dems secured a massive 34% swing from the Tories in December; Starmer did not even visit the seat. Labour also gave the Lib Dems a similarly clear run last year in Chesham and Amersham. One Lib Dem strategist told the FT: If Labour and the Liberal Democrats spend all their time and money trying to beat each other it’s really not good for progressive politics. We need to fight in the areas where we can win and that is the overwhelming priority. If the Lib Dems were to win 15 of their target Tory seats, it would reduce the current 77-seat Conservative majority by 30, considerably reducing the scale of the challenge facing Starmer in reaching power. You can read the full story in the Financial Times (paywall). Please feel free to get in touch with me throughout the day as I work if you have anything to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_For charities and campaigning backbenchers like the late Sir David Amess, all-party parliamentary groups (APPGs) are vital platforms for a plethora of good causes and interest areas they wish to promote. To their critics, they can appear as unreformed relics of a past, less-regulated Westminster landscape. But amid the swirl of roundtable discussions, drinks, overseas trips and reports, dozens of communications and public affairs companies are helping to run more than 100 such groups, out of a total of 755, with sponsorship from corporate interests. The full reach of lobbyists acting as APPG secretariats – arranging meetings and trips for members and sometimes cultivating potential funders – is revealed in analysis by the Guardian and openDemocracy. A framework of rules applies to APPGs, setting out how to register if they wish to use parliamentary emblems and how to list the details of any secretariats. However, the system is largely self-policed. Connect Communications, which is co-owned and run by the former Labour MP Andy Sawford, runs the secretariats of 14 APPGs. Policy Connect, a not-for-profit company that has held meetings attended by paying businesses and ministers, runs the secretariats of nine APPGs, covering issues ranging from climate change to data analytics. It said that any private meetings involving ministers were always led by the APPG chair. Healthcare firms provided the bulk of about £250,000 worth of financial benefits-in-kind support registered in 2021 for six APPG secretariats operated by HealthComms Consulting, the lobbying firm founded by Paul Bristow, the current Conservative MP for Peterborough, and now run by his wife, Sara Petela. Her firm acts as the secretariat of the APPGs on adult social care, obesity, sepsis, women’s health, vascular and venous disease, and minimally invasive cancer therapies. HealthComms Consulting was renamed in 2020 from its previous incarnation, PB Consulting, which had been founded by Bristow and had offered clients services such as “NHS market access” and “parliamentary awareness”. Bristow, a former lobbying industry leader who sits on the Commons health select committee, was embroiled in controversy in 2020 when he submitted questions to ministers on a range of health issues linked to the lobbying firm without raising a potential conflict of interest, though he subsequently declared the link. Bristow told the Guardian he had led calls to ban MPs from lobbying and to “clean up the system”, adding: “When doing so, I have been very clear about my wife’s role and I don’t have any involvement with her company, which follows the PRCA [Public Relations and Communications Association] self-regulatory code of conduct. “I also support changes to the rules on APPGs because there are far too many and most are pointless. The ones with secretariats tend to be more effective and those arrangements are declared.” Four APPGs list their secretariats as the College Green Group, a political consultancy founded by Vote Leave’s former chief technology officer, Thomas Borwick. The company’s website previously claimed that “under 10% of APPGs currently achieve their full potential” and offered parliamentarians the chance to “let us catapult your APPG to the top of the league table” by creating “a coalition of organisations and businesses as affiliates or supporters to recruit sponsors” for a fee. College Green, which said it removed the text in the course of a website upgrade, told the Guardian that “league table” was shorthand for how some APPGs achieve more than others in terms of activity. It now describes its role as secretariat for the groups as “allowing for cross-party, issue-based problem solving, with high-level activity and management”. Asked how it recruited sponsors of APPGs, College Green Group said: “We engage with businesses and organisations that have an authentic interest in the topic of focus for each APPG. Based on these conversations we make recommendations to the APPG and, if all parties are in agreement, we engage the sponsors.” The corporate governance APPG received money from British American Tobacco, Deloitte, PwC and others, with support totalling well over £100,000 in recent years to pay for a secretariat run by Jennifer Bryant-Pearson, a lobbyist.More than £13m has been poured into a growing network of MPs’ interest groups by private firms including healthcare bodies, arms companies and tech giants, fuelling concerns over the potential for backdoor influence. Analysis by the Guardian and openDemocracy found that more than half the total £25m in funding for all-party parliamentary groups (APPGs) since 2018 has come from the private sector. Other funds for the 755 groups – a number that has ballooned from 560 five years ago – came from charities and trade unions. On Thursday, the chair of the Commons standards committee, Chris Bryant, for the first time called for parliamentary authorities to have the power to shut down the largely self-policed groups where there are clear conflicts of interest. Writing for the Guardian, he said it may be time to ban commercial operators from funding and running APPGs: “When lobbying firms are effectively driving an APPG in the interests of their clients, we should not only know who those clients are, but we should be able to close the group down where there is a clear conflict of interest.” Bryant, whose standards committee has opened an inquiry into the system, added: “It feels as if every MP wants their own APPG, and every lobbying company sees an APPG as an ideal way of making a quick buck out of a trade or industry body.” APPGs are informal groups representing MPs’ and peers’ interests, from China and Russia to cancer, digital regulation, longevity and jazz. They must be chaired by MPs but are often run or funded by lobbyists and corporate donors seeking to influence government policy. The groups can play a key role in drawing parliament’s attention to overlooked issues, Bryant says. They host roundtables, produce reports, take overseas trips and lobby for change but receive no public money. A number of APPGs are sponsored by companies with interests in the policy areas the groups seek to influence. In situations where there is no conflict of interest, concerns may arise over the perception of one. Examples include: The obesity APPG, which has sought to promote medical interventions for obesity, received £178,500 to £183,000 between 2019 and 2021 from three private healthcare companies that make or promote gastric bands or drugs used in obesity surgery and treatment: Johnson &amp; Johnson, Medtronic and Novo Nordisk. The support was used to pay for a lobbyist, HealthComms Consulting, to run the APPG’s secretariat. The lobbyist says on its website that the APPG promoted calls for “a shift away from the ‘move more, eat less’ mentality prevalent in obesity thinking and better utilisation of treatment for obesity and access to services”. It adds that the APPG “had direct input into the government’s obesity strategy published in July 2020 through meeting with No 10 officials and the development of a top 10 policy wishlist”. The company did not respond to a request for comment. MPs from the armed forces APPG took a trip to Bosnia last autumn as it stood on the brink of conflict, with hospitality and transport part-funded by an arms company, Lockheed Martin, and the defence support company CAE. Lockheed Martin’s head of government affairs accompanied them for one night and to a dinner. A Tory MP on the visit, James Sunderland, subsequently spoke in a Commons debate about the need for the UK to be “part of the solution in the country [Bosnia]” without declaring the trip’s funding. James Gray, the APPG’s chairman, said the trip should have been declared as paid for by the APPG, of whom Lockheed Martin and CAE are “merely sponsors”. He said the companies “had nothing to gain” from the trip, and the subscribers to the APPG “do so because they believe in having a good group of MPs and peers who understand defence”. A Lockheed Martin spokesperson said funding for the visit “would have come from the APPG’s funds and not specifically from Lockheed Martin UK’s contributions”. Sunderland did not comment. In areas related to the climate crisis, the secretariat of the sustainable aviation APPG is an alliance of airlines and airports, while energy companies provided tens of thousands of pounds in the past year for the consultancy running the net zero APPG. Graham Brady, a senior Tory who chairs the sustainable aviation APPG, said it was formed to support collaboration between the aviation sector and parliament, adding: “The benefits in kind reported on the register represent routine secretarial work carried out to facilitate meetings of the group. No direct funding is involved and no benefits in kind have been given to members of the group.” Many APPGs have secretariats run by charities, trade unions and other organisations, which help with their administration and act as a contact point. A thriving industry has also emerged around professional lobbying companies, sponsored by corporate interests, helping to produce reports seeking to influence policy, fund dinners or drinks, and take parliamentarians on free trips abroad. The Guardian and openDemocracy analysis found that since 2018, APPGs have declared £5m in cash funding and £18.3m-£20.2m of “benefits in kind” support, which covers the provision of services, secretarial work, trips or hospitality. More than half of the sponsorship and donations – about £13m – came from private companies. APPGs have been at the centre of controversies but remain largely self-policed. Last month a fresh spotlight fell on the groups after it emerged that a woman at the centre of an MI5 security alert to MPs had provided support and funding for the now disbanded Chinese in Britain APPG. In September, MPs on the standards committee raised questions over the longevity APPG offering platinum, gold and bronze tiers of membership for sponsors, with a fee of up to £100,000 for access to meetings with the group’s members. The APPG said it had dropped the scheme and no sponsor was ever involved in tiered membership. The largest APPG, the parliamentary internet, communications and technology forum (Pictfor), received more than £125,000 worth of benefits-in-kind support last year alone, from firms including Google, Facebook, TikTok, BT, Amazon and Huawei. The group also runs a tiered membership, with rates ranging from £500 for charities to £5,000 for large corporations, for “benefits” such as access to events. Pictfor denied any similarity to the longevity APPG scheme and said its membership did not represent a tiered system of opportunity or influence over the group or its members, but rather protected against it. Analysis of a range of other APPGs underlines the links between the MPs’ groups and private firms. The secretariat for the British bioethanol APPG is listed as Ensus UK, which operates one of the UK’s largest biofuel plants. After the APPG submitted a report to the government calling for the introduction of E10 fuel, which uses biofuel of the type manufactured by Ensus, a meeting was held between the APPG’s chair, a government minister and the commercial director of Ensus UK. Ensus said its support and “modest financial contribution” towards the APPG’s work on E10 was a matter of public record. New coronavirus-related APPGs include business in a pandemic (Covid) world, which has declared £49,000 of benefits-in-kind support for its secretariat, the lobbyist Wychwood Consulting, from a Covid diagnostics company, Cignpost. Neither Wychwood nor Cignpost responded to requests for comment. Wychwood also gets £10,000 to £12,000 of benefits-in-kind sponsorship from Yoti Ltd, a facial recognition company, to run the APPG on digital identity. Yoti said it was open about its sponsorship of the APPG, which provides a unique service to parliamentarians as a forum to discuss and educate them on digital identity. Arms companies are particularly active, with firms including BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin and the missile maker Raytheon supporting the armed forces APPG with £256,000 over four years. A Lockheed Martin UK spokesperson said: “This support is openly and transparently registered in the register of APPGs.” The technology and national security APPG, formed in 2020, received support worth up to £39,000 from Rebellion Defence Ltd, a US-UK defence AI company which has the former Google chief executive Eric Schmidt as an investor and board member, among others. The “benefit in kind” support allows for the APPG’s secretariat to be provided by an Oxford University defence studies centre where one of Rebellion’s co-founders is a research fellow. Rebellion Defence and the APPG declined to comment. All APPGs must be registered and provide funding details but most do not produce or make readily available a detailed breakdown. They are obliged to provide accounts on request, but half of 190 APPGs failed to do so when asked by openDemocracy. APPGs are required only to complete a simple “template for income and expenditure statement” but this does not give the opportunity to provide many details. The alternative dispute resolution APPG’s form listed £4,501-£6,000 for secretariat services and £13,501-£16,000 for a visit to Singapore, with no further detail. The group was approached for comment. Some APPGs, such as the group for the Celtic Sea and another for the wood panel industry, have a lobbyist as a secretariat but no figures for funding were published on their parliamentary registration page. Their chair was contacted for comment. Some other APPGs gave fuller details. On the comprehensive Pictfor website, accounts were uploaded to its blog section. Steve Goodrich, of Transparency International, said: “From big tobacco to kleptocratic regimes, there are a plethora of interests behind these groups that remain [largely] unchecked by formal rules. Without greater transparency over lobbying, much of what happens in these groups will remain behind closed doors.” The government did not comment.All-party parliamentary groups may be informal, but they provide a great service in our democracy. In good hands, they can foster better relations with other countries, keep a weather eye on an authoritarian regime, or bring into sharp focus a policy issue that may otherwise have been forgotten. In that vein, I set up the APPG on acquired brain injury, which produced a report with a list of recommendations after a series of round tables with patients, families and practitioners. Just before Christmas, that bore fruit in the shape of a government commitment to launch a new national strategy on the issue. So an APPG can make a big difference, and the vast majority are run simply and cheaply on the back of the enthusiasm of a few MPs and peers without any extra spending. It’s also an important way of baking cross-party working into the system. No MP can launch their own APPG with the support of their party colleagues alone – they need support from across the benches. But I worry that the number of APPGs has risen dramatically in the last few years. Instead of one cancer APPG, there are now more than a dozen. Some industries are especially well-resourced, with every part of the supply chain and every trade body getting its own group. Some countries have more than one. We now have more APPGs than we do MPs. It sometimes feels as if every MP wants their own APPG, and every lobbying company sees them as an ideal way to make a quick buck out of a trade or industry body. “Look,” they say, “if you really want to get this on the agenda politically, we can get you access to MPs, peers and ministers – but the more financial support you give the APPG (through us, of course) the more effective the group will be.” Hence the rise in the number of APPGs that are serviced by lobbying, PR or communications companies. There are several problems with this. For a start, nobody should be touting access or influence on behalf of an APPG. Second, the rules on what APPGs have to register are pretty clear, but until now this has virtually been a self-policing area of policy. The Commons authorities have neither the powers nor resources to investigate every APPG, and since we abolished the requirement to get permission to launch a new one, the only substantial requirement for an APPG to keep going is to hold an annual general meeting. Sometimes these are so poorly attended as to make one question whether they are really an APPG or just a personal campaign or money-making venture masquerading as a parliamentary affair. I don’t think anyone is concerned when an APPG is supported by a charity. (The acquired brain injury APPG, incidentally, is supported by the UK ABI Forum.) But it may be time for us to ban commercial operators from acting as the secretariat for APPGs, unless they can prove a public interest and enough interest from a larger number of MPs and peers. When lobbying firms are effectively driving a group in the interests of their clients, we should not only know who those clients are, but we should be able to close down the group where there is a clear conflict of interest. Which takes me to another point. The House of Commons and the Lords both have formal select committees covering all the government departments. Proceedings in these committees, and their publications, are covered by parliamentary privilege, which is an important aspect of ensuring MPs and peers can speak without fear or favour. It would be – and is – wrong for any APPG to give the impression that one of its reports or publications has a parliamentary imprimatur or seal of approval. Newspaper editors would be well advised to stop referring vaguely to “a committee of MPs” and to start drawing a clear distinction between the authorised, privileged work of a select committee and the unauthorised work of an APPG. If you have evidence of something that doesn’t smell right in the way an APPG is run, the Committee on Standards on Public Life will run an inquiry into it. We can’t investigate individual groups, but we’d be happy to hear from you as background for our inquiry. I certainly don’t want to curtail the work of APPGs so much that their valuable work comes to an end. They are a vital tool in many backbench MPs’ campaigning armoury. But if an APPG feels like front-of-house for a direct commercial interest or a cover for free trips to exotic locations, or if it’s the brainchild of a lobbying company, then MPs and peers should run a mile. Chris Bryant is the Labour MP for RhonddaThe government has big plans for the green economy. There are targets galore: 2m skilled jobs by 2030, sale of petrol and diesel cars to be phased out by 2035, a net zero carbon economy by 2050. Having been the birthplace of the first industrial revolution in the 18th century, the idea is that the UK can again lead the way in the next phase of technological development. There is a 10-point plan for a green industrial revolution as a statement of intent. All of which sounds mightily impressive. The problem is the claims of global leadership don’t tally with the hard data. Turnover in the low-carbon and renewable energy sector was the same in 2020 as in 2014. The number of people employed has actually fallen by 28,000 to just over 200,000. To take a specific example, at the last count there were just over 10,000 people working in the booming offshore wind sector. Unlike oil and gas rigs, nobody works full-time on the turbines and their manufacture has been outsourced to other countries. It is the same story in solar, where employment has dropped by 4,300 or more than 40%. To be clear, the lack of tangible progress is not due to the pandemic, because jobs and turnover – according to the latest data from the Office for National Statistics – were both flatlining even before the arrival of Covid-19. There are those who think the picture is brighter than the ONS figures suggest. Venture capital, they say, is alert to the opportunities to make money out of greening the economy and investment in new businesses is expanding fast. Even if the optimists are right, there is a long way to go. The problem could be a lack of commercially viable ideas, a lack of finance, a lack of government investment – or a combination of all three. But Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, is right when she says Britain risks losing out to countries that modernise faster. There is a yawning gap between rhetoric and reality. What’s the point of the G20 if it can’t solve the debt crisis? Debt relief for the world’s poorest countries is way down the list of priorities for finance ministers and central bank governors from the G20 at the meeting chaired by Indonesia. While that’s unsurprising at a time of soaring energy prices, rising inflation and supply bottlenecks, it is also shortsighted. The membership of the G20 includes the biggest developed and developing countries, and in the early stages of the pandemic it took steps to help the poorest nations. Debt repayments were suspended and a mechanism – the common framework – was created to provide longer-term relief. Results have been disappointing. Some creditors refused to take part in the temporary debt-suspension initiative, which has now expired. Three countries – Chad, Zambia and Ethiopia – have signed up for help through the common framework but none has yet received any assistance. Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund says 60% of low-income countries are in debt distress or at high risk of it. The World Bank calculates debt repayments from 74 low-income countries will be $35bn (£26bn) this year – double the total in 2020. This is a debt crisis waiting to happen and decisive action from the G20 could still avert it. Debt relief needs to be swifter and it needs to be more generous. A workable scheme can’t just involve sovereign creditors: the G20 should insist the private sector takes part on the same terms. The credibility of the G20 is at stake here. Its critics say, with justification, that meetings have become global talking shops where participants indulge in virtue signalling and point scoring but achieve next to nothing. If the G20 can’t deliver a workable solution to the debts of low-income countries there really is no point to it. All’s fair on love and war for Amazon and Visa Although the details are scanty, peace has broken out in the credit card charges war between Amazon and Visa, as was always going to be the case. The online retail giant was never going to stop its UK customers paying with Visa but bridled at what it considered too steep an increase in transaction fees for both credit and debit cards. In order to secure lower transaction fees, Amazon had to say that it was prepared to go nuclear. The fact that neither side is saying much about the deal suggests both are relatively happy with the outcome.Diogo Jota is facing a race to be fit for Liverpool’s Carabao Cup final against Chelsea on Sunday 27 February after sustaining an ankle ligament injury in the Champions League win over Internazionale. Jota underwent a scan in Milan on Thursday after Liverpool, who had planned to return home immediately after the last-16 first leg, stayed an extra night as a result of the storms in England. The scan confirmed some ligament damage but the full extent of the problem is not yet known. Jota’s ankle remains in a protective boot as a precaution. The Portugal international has been in excellent form for Jürgen Klopp’s team this season and has contributed 17 goals. He will miss Saturday’s Premier League game against Norwich but, without a confirmed diagnosis and given Jota’s quick recovery from previous injuries, Liverpool are reluctant to rule the striker out of any other matches. Klopp’s team host Leeds in the Premier League on Wednesday before facing Chelsea at Wembley on Sunday week.A judge has approved a decision to allow any transgender person in Scotland to select male or female as their sex in this year’s census without holding a gender recognition certificate. Lord Sandison, a civil court judge sitting in Edinburgh, threw out a legal challenge by the feminist group Fair Play for Women, which had gone to court to block that question from being asked. Fair Play for Women argued that people were lawfully allowed to answer that question based only on their legally recognised sex, either from their birth certificate or gender recognition certificate. National Records for Scotland, the government agency, will now publish census returns asking the question “what is your sex”, and offer two options of male and female. About 2.5m households will be asked to complete it. Its guidance reads: “If you are transgender, the answer you give can be different from what is on your birth certificate. You do not need a gender recognition certificate.” In a judgment issued 14 days after hearing the challenge, Sandison ruled there was no legal requirement to insist on legal proof of sex for the census, which will be on 20 March. Sandison said government agencies recognised sex and gender in different ways, and as the census legislation did not adjudicate one way or the other on the issue, Scottish ministers were able to set the question this way. “In the modern age, where social change has meant that such issues are much more openly and widely discussed and debated, I would find it impossible to find that the word ‘sex’ in a statute enabling the general population to be asked questions for the wide and general purposes for which a census is conducted falls to be regarded as restricted in the sense for which the petitioner contends,” he wrote. “Rather, I would accept the suggestion that biological sex, sex recognised by law, or self-identified (or ‘lived’) sex as at the date of the census are all capable of being comprehended within the word.” Fair Play for Women said they were disappointed with the ruling and would be pressing for an urgent appeal. “The guidance proposed for the sex question will jeopardise the collection of accurate data on sex in the Scottish census and erodes the harmonisation of data collected via censuses across the UK,” the group said. Vic Valentine, of the pro-trans campaign group Scottish Trans Alliance, welcomed the judge’s ruling. “Scotland’s census is meant to count everyone in Scotland as who they are on census day, and the guidance provided reassures trans men and trans women that this is the same for them as it is for everyone else,” they said. “This is an important decision: clearly stating that all trans men and trans women are able to be counted on the census as who they are, not just those who have changed the sex on their birth certificate.”Time to wrap up... here are today’s main stories. UK firms have warned that the Brexit free trade deal is pushing up costs, increasing paperwork and delays, and putting the UK at a competitive disadvantage. The British Chambers of Commerce, who conducted the survey, urged ministers to tackle the problems, with supplementary deals to smooth trade across the channel. Consumes have been warned to expect higher prices after Nestlé and Reckitt both warned they would pass on higher costs to consumers. European sales have hit a record January low, as semiconductor shortages hampered production. European stock markets have fallen, on fresh concerns that a Russian invasion of Ukraine could be imminent. The FTSE 100 fell by 0.9%, while Wall Street is down around 1%. US jobless claims have risen, while housing starts dropped in January as bad weather hampered construction workers. Here are today’s other main stories: Goodnight. GW Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst, Hargreaves Lansdow, sums up the day: ‘’Financial markets took a turn for the worse after warnings from the US administration that there is evidence on the ground that Russia is moving towards an imminent invasion of Ukraine. Reports of firing in a border region and accusations that Moscow is orchestrating a false flag operation, an intent to pin the blame for starting conflict on Ukrainian forces, has ratcheted up tensions and led to more investors seeking less risky positions. The price of gold, seen as a safe haven in times of crisis has risen by another 1.37% to $1896 an ounce, an 8 month high. Equity markets dropped with US indices falling on the open and the FTSE 100 lost more ground with once again travel stocks bearing the worst of the losses. Data out from Eurocontrol and the ONS earlier had showed the sector flying into brighter skies with UK daily flights up 17% compared to the previous week, with the lift off helped by half term holiday bookings. It’s feared that recovery for airlines could be derailed if a conflict breaks out on the doorstep of Europe. This concern has seen British Airways (IAG) fall by around 4%, Wizz Air by more than 7% and Rolls Royce, so highly reliant on the commercial air travel, dropped 3%. Cruise company Carnival also saw a 2.5% fall in its share price as worries mount about travellers’ sentiment. Evraz, the Russia focused mining and steel production company was the biggest faller on the FTSE 100 amid heightened worries about the effect sanctions will have on the business. For now the increased tensions haven’t pushed up the oil price, instead Brent crude dropped around 2.2% to $92.6 dollars a barrel. The price is proving much more sensitive to the better prospects for Iranian output, with negotiators of the Iran nuclear deal saying an agreement is closer than ever. An accord would provide supply side relief but fresh falls in the oil price are still likely to be limited by the ever more tense situation surrounding Ukraine.‘’ All Europe’s markets finished in the red, with Germany’s DAX down 0.75%, France’s CAC off 0.45%, and Italy’s FTSE Mib 1.1% lower. Britain’s FTSE 100 index has closed 66 points lower at 7537, down almost 0.9% today. Russian steelmaker Evraz finished as the top faller, down 7.5%, with investors concerned by Joe Biden’s warning that a Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent. Airline group IAG fell 4%, and Rolls-Royce lost 3%, on concerns that travel could be hit by geopolitical tensions. Oil giant Shell also pulled the index down; it dropped 2.7%, following the 2% drop in crude prices today. Financial stocks were weaker too, with Abrdn (-4.1%) and Prudential (-2.7%) in the fallers. On the smaller FTSE 250 index, Eastern Europe-focused airline Wizz Air fell 7.4%. Nestlé and Reckitt’s comments today are a sign that consumers will face further price rises this year, says Spencer Brown, senior vice president at procurement and supply chain consultancy Proxima: “In recent weeks we’ve seen major businesses, from Tesco to Unilever, warn about the impact inflation will have on prices for consumers. Now Nestle and Reckitt are giving similar warnings. In many cases price increases have already been implicated and this is a trend that will only continue. Costs in the supply chain have been rising significantly and we expect this to continue. This means that there are limited options for companies – prices have to rise, products have to be reconfigured or costs have to be absorbed. It is clear that the latter option is not palatable for businesses or their shareholders, so we expect price rises and ‘shrinkflation’, where products become smaller for the same price, will become the norm over the coming months.” US retail giant Walmart has overcome supply chain problems to beat profit and sales expectations on Thursday and set a strong full-year earnings forecast. The US’s largest retailer grew revenues by 0.5% in the last quarter, with net sales in the US 5.7% higher than a year ago. Walmart says it “navigated higher supply chain costs and pandemic-related challenges well”. It expects to grow net sales and operating profits by 3% this year, despite ongoing supply-chain issues and rampant inflation. The company may benefit from the inflationary squeeze, as its huge size allows it to offer better deals... or to absorb price pressures to win customers. Walmart chief financial officer Brett Biggs told a conference call with analysts that the company expects U.S. consumers to remain in a “generally favorable economic position throughout the year”, Bloomberg reports. Journalist Charles Fishman has more details, and makes some very interesting points about Walmart’s success: Gas prices are rising too, with the next-day contract for UK wholesale gas up 6.3% at 175p per therm (back towards Monday’s two-week high). Stocks are also lower in Europe. The UK’s FTSE 100 is now down 87 points, or 1.15%, back towards the lows seen on Monday, with travel companies, oil firms and miners all weaker. Germany’s DAX is down 0.75%, while Italy’s FTSE Mib is off 1%. In New York, stocks have opened lower as the Ukraine crisis continues to worry investors. The main indices are in the red, shortly after president Joe Biden told reporters that a Russian invasion could happen in the next “several days”. Biden described the chance of conflict in the region as “very high.” The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US companies has dropped by 315 points, or 0.9% to 34,619 points. The broader S&amp;P 500 is also down 0.9%, with the Nasdaq Composite off 1%. Biden’s comments came after Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance is concerned that Russia is “trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine”. In another step, Russia has expelled the deputy US ambassador to Moscow, Bartle Gorman. Associated Press has more details: Speaking at the White House, Biden said the United States saw no signs of a claimed Russian withdrawal of forces along its border with Ukraine. He said the U.S. has “reason to believe” that Russia is “engaged in a false flag operation to have an excuse to go in.” He told reporters in Washington: “Every indication we have is they’re prepared to go into Ukraine, attack Ukraine.” Rowan Williams, the former archbishop of Canterbury, has called on the UK government to impose a wealth tax on the super-rich to help tackle “spiralling inequality”, which he said was “deeply damaging to our collective morale and trust”. Williams, who was the most senior bishop in the Church of England from 2002 to 2012, on Thursday joined a growing group of moral leaders demanding a one-off tax on the richest 1% of the population to help close the “staggering” gap between the richest and poorest in society. “Spiraling inequality is a major issue in our society, and all the evidence suggests this is deeply damaging to our collective morale and trust,” Williams said. “A wealth tax of the kind we are backing recognises that vastly disproportionate rewards for a very small number of citizens will not make for a cohesive and just national community.” Williams told the super-rich they should not view paying back to wider society as a tax burden but as “an opportunity to build a stable, sustainable economy that works for everyone”. Here’s the full story: British Gas has set up a scheme to protect the hundreds of millions of pounds it receives in advance payments from customers towards their future energy bills, after the “national scandal” that left households on the hook to pay £500m after a string of energy firms spent consumers’ deposits before going bust. The Centrica-owned energy firm has pledged to ringfence the £294m it holds in credit balances through direct debits from its 7 million customers in a bank account separate from funds it uses to run the day-to-day business. “I think that in any other walk of life using over £500m of customers’ money to prop up a business that subsequently failed would be considered a national scandal,” said Chris O’Shea, the chief executive of Centrica. “I’m amazed it is not treated as such in the energy business.” New house-building projects fell by 4.1% across America last month, as builders continue to face supply chain disuption, rising materials prices...and bad weather. Housing starts in January fell to an annual rate of 1,638,000, from a December estimate of 1,708,000. That could be a sign that rising borrowing costs are weighing on the sector. If so, that would be a blow to efforts to increase housing supply, and address the shortage that pushed prices to record levels. But it’s also due to the freezing weather which hit the US last month, with Winter Storm Izzy bringing heavy snow and damaging ice to the southeastern US, disrupting power supplies and forcing flights to be cancelled. House completions were down 5.2% in January -- which may also show that work was held up in the freezing weather. The number of building permits (giving permission to start construction) rose 0.7% during the month. Just in. The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefit rose last week. There were 248,000 initial claims in the week to Saturday February 12, an increase of 23,000 on the previous seven days. That’s more than economists had expected, but still close to pre-pandemic levels. Jobless claims hit their lowest since 1969 late last year, falling below 200,000 as firms held onto workers in a tight labour market. Back in April 2020, they hit a record at above 6m, as firms shed staff early in the pandemic. US car safety regulators have opened an investigation to assess potential safety issues in certain Tesla vehicles after users reported “phantom braking.” The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has started a formal investigation into 416,000 Tesla vehicles over reports of unexpected brake activation tied to its driver assistance system Autopilot. The preliminary evaluation covers 2021-2022 Tesla Model 3 and Model Y vehicles in the United States after the agency received 354 complaints about the issue over the past nine months. NHTSA said: “Complainants report that the rapid deceleration can occur without warning, at random, and often repeatedly in a single drive cycle.” Earlier this month Tesla updated its “Full Self-Driving” software, to fix a situation where cars would roll through stop signs without coming to a full stop. Turkey’s central bank has left interest rates on hold, despite inflation having surged to nearly 50% in January. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey voted to leave its benchmark rate at 14% today. During 2021 it cut borrowing costs several times, lowering rates from 19%, under pressure from President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to ease monetary policy. Those cuts sent the lira slumping to record lows, driving up import costs and creating an economic crisis. The CBRT said that the pandemic, and rising ‘geopolitical risks’ were creating uncertainty and threatening the global recovery. The variants and increasing geopolitical risks keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive and increases the uncertainty. Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors, particulary in energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally Erdoğan seems to have relaxed his pressure for rate cuts. Earlier today he said debate on the issue had largely dropped off the agenda, and that the government’s goal was to lower inflation to single digits. Consumer goods company Reckitt, which makes household brands including Dettol, Nurofen and Strepsils, is also planning to pass rising costs onto consumers. Reckitt said it had faced on average 11% cost increases during 2021, and predicted these would climb even higher this year- echoing the message from Nestlé this morning. The Berkshire-based firm, formerly known as Reckitt Benckiser, said it was absorbing some of its increased costs, but was increasing prices of some of its products. “We are passing some pricing on to consumers, but we minimise that through programmes that we have internally such as productivity programmes,” Jeff Carr, chief financial officer at Reckitt, told reporters. “Prices have gone up but we’re absorbing a significant part of that inflation, and we’re not passing it on to consumers. We want to get good offers to our consumers, we want to be competitive.” Reckitt said it was seeing “across the board” increases in the price of raw materials, especially those related to crude oil such as plastics, as well as tinplate – used for making tin cans – and dairy products. The company has also been facing continued supply chain disruption, and higher transport costs. Carr said: “Logistics has been a key challenge, not just for us, but for everyone, and that’s been strong double digits, an over 20% increase in in logistical costs, ocean freight being one of the key drivers of that,” Back in the markets, gold hit its highest level in eight months this morning as rising inflation and the Ukraine crisis boosted demand. Bullion rose as high as $1,892 per ounce, for the first time since June 2021. It’s now gained around 5% since the start of February. Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at ThinkMarkets, says three factors have pushed up gold: heightened geopolitical risks and stock market volatility; falling real yields, and soaring inflation. Indeed, the number one source of support for gold is rising price levels around the world as investors seek to protect their purchasing powers from being eroded by depreciating fiat currencies. Inflation has reached multi-decade highs around the world, and a record high in Eurozone. Although soaring inflation has raised concerns about policy tightening from the Fed and other major central banks, this has been offset by the fact real yields haven fallen sharply, boosting the appeal of non-interest-bearing assets like gold. The real yield on the 10-year note is around -5.5%, which has been derived from 2% nominal yield minus 7.5% CPI inflation. This means that real yields will not move into the positive territory with a bit of policy tightening, without a sharp fall in nominal inflation rate. Gold dropped on Tuesday when Russia claimed it was withdrawing some troops, but has now jumped to its highest since last June. That drop suggested gold had been at least partially supported by haven flows. This view has been re-enforced amid fresh concerns about the situation there. Ukraine has said that some Russian-backed forces fired shells at a village in Luhansk region. EU’s Von der Leyen has added that: “We hear claims from Russia about pulling back troops from Ukraine’s border but we have not seen any sign of de-escalation on the ground,” and that it has been adding even more soldiers to the military build-up. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, also attributes gold’s rise to the Ukraine crisis: Europe’s car industry continues to be badly hurt by chip shortages. New car registrations in the European Union fell by 6% year-on-year in January to 682,596 units. That’s even worse than the previous worst January, a year earlier. Industry body ACEA reported that ongoing semiconductor shortages are still damaging car sales across the region, with factories forced to cut production. ACEA says: Various markets in Central Europe posted gains last month, with Slovakia (+72.6%) and Romania (+55.5%) seeing the strongest growth, although Polish sales contracted by 10.2% in January. In Western Europe, on the other hand, almost all countries posted negative results. Looking at the four major car markets, double-digit losses were seen in Italy (-19.7%) and France (-18.6%), while only Germany posted solid growth (+8.5%) and Spain saw a modest gain (+1.0%). In the UK, total new car sales rose by 27.5% year on year in January, although that increase was compared with January 2021 when the UK was in a strict lockdown and car showrooms were closed. Consumer demand for travel insurance is returning to near pre-pandemic levels, according to the price-comparison site Moneysupermarket, but high energy prices mean it does not expect any profit from tariff switching this year. The financial services platform, which helps consumers compare deals, said revenue from its travel insurance comparisons had bounced back in the last three months of 2021. Revenues at its Travelsupermarket division reached 35% of 2019 levels in January, as further easing of coronavirus restrictions was announced. However, it said high wholesale energy prices meant there had been no switchable tariffs available to consumers since October. As a result, the London-listed company said it would not make any profit this year from customers using their platform to compare deals from energy providers, although it predicted the tariff-switching market would return in the medium term. UK consumers continued to return to the shops last week - but visits are still below pre-pandemic levels. The ONS reports that overall retail footfall in the UK increased by 2% from the previous week, but remained at 86% of the level seen in the equivalent week of 2019. It’s the fifth consecutive week of increasing retail footfall, driven by weekly rises in high street footfall as Covid-19 cases dropped from their record highs. More than three quarters of adults felt their cost of living rise this month, as prices in the shops increase. Around 76% of adults said their cost of living had increased over the last month, according to the latest Office for National Statistics’s Opinions and Lifestyle Survey. That’s a notable increase on the 69% recorded in the last two weeks of January, showing inflationary pressure are rising. The most frequently reported reasons continued to be: rising food shop prices (90%) rising energy bills (77%) increases to the price of fuel (69%) Consultants at Kantar warned this month that the average annual grocery bill is on track to rise by £180 this year, with grocery prices having increased 3.8% per year in January. And the chairman of Tesco, Britain’s biggest supermarket chain, has forecast that “the worst is yet to come” on food price inflation, which could soon hit 5%. Many of the cheaper grocery items have seen the steepest increases, which is hurting the poorest families. My colleague Zoe Wood reported yesterday that the Canterbury and District food bank has seen a surge in demand from struggling households, and falling donations as supporters are also squeezed - just as food prices jump. Motorists have also been paying more at the pumps, with petrol and diesel prices hitting records this month. Airbus has announced its highest-ever profits and a return to paying a dividend to shareholders, in a sign of the aerospace industry’s burgeoning recovery from the Covid pandemic. The European plane-maker reported a record net income for 2021 of €4.2bn (£3.5bn), in stark contrast to a steep €1.1bn loss in 2020, when the pandemic first hit. The company, which is headquartered in Toulouse, France, made revenues of €52bn, up from €50bn in 2020. Food group Nestlé is planning to keep raising its prices this year, to shore up its profit margins in the face of rising costs. The Swiss food and drinks giant beat expectations this morning by reporting organic growth of 7.5% for last year, the highest in over a decade. But, 2% of that growth came from price increases, with Nestlé lifting prices by 3.1% in the fourth quarter. The maker of Nespresso coffee pods, Kitkats chocolate bars and Purina petfood says it intends to defend its margins against rising costs. CEO Mark Schneider told reporters that the cost pressures will probably be higher this year than last: “It is a safe assumption that our input cost increases for 2022 will be higher than 2021, that is something that we have to reflect in our pricing. “There is almost no place in the company that is exempt of inflation now....Some of these things you can hedge against, some not.” Nestlé expects its underlying trading operating profit margins will be between 17.0% and 17.5% this year, compared with 17.4% in 2021, and 17.7% in 2020. Reuters: Nestle expects steady margins after beating 2021 expectations Sovereign dollar bonds issued by Ukraine and Russia have dropped this morning, after reports of clashes in Ukraine’s eastern region. Reuters has the details: Ukraine’s growth-linked 2040 bonds dropped more than 4 cents in the dollar to trade at 68.425 cents, having suffered their biggest daily tumble in more than three weeks, Tradeweb data showed. Longer-dated Russian bonds slipped more than 2 cents in the dollar to trade at 105.5 cents. The selloff came as Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine, and Ukraine’s military, blamed each other for the shelling reported this morning. The Russian rouble has also weakened, dropping around 1.5% to reverse Tuesday’s recovery. In the City, the FTSE 100 index is down around 0.66% as the Ukraine crisis weighs on markets. The blue-chip index has lost 50 points to 7553, with Russia’s steelmaker Evraz leading the fallers (-6%). Travel companies are also lower, with British Airways parent company IAG down 2.2%, and Rolls-Royce (which makes and services jet engines) off 2.5%. Bankers at Standard Chartered have shared a $1.37bn bonus pot for 2021, up 38%, even as it said it was trying to cut fixed costs. It’s a sign of how banks were returning to bumper payouts after weathering the Covid-19 pandemic in better shape than expected, as most workers face a painful squeeze on their finances. London-headquartered Standard Chartered said the payout increase reflected a normalisation of bonuses after a lean 2020, but it also reflected a hot hiring market as lenders worldwide paid up to retain key staff. The bigger bonus pool came as Standard Chartered set out plans to cut annual expenses by $1.5bn, as part of a broader goal to achieve double-digit returns by 2024, which it outlined on Thursday as it reported annual results. This bonus season is expected to be the most lucrative since the 2008 global financial crisis, as banks benefit from the economic recovery and a boom in takeover deals. Immigration changes due to Brexit will not deliver the ‘high wage‘ economy that Boris Johnson has promised, a new report from the Resolution Foundation shows. Resolution has analysed UK migration trends, and concluded that the economic impact of ending freedom of movement has been exaggerated by both its supporters and opponents. The new regime is driving changes in the UK labour market, particularly in lower-paying industries which rely on migrant labour and typically see high staff turnover, such as farming or food production Overall, total migration was responsible for 77% of labour market growth between 1994 and 2019. EU workers made up 34% of total growth, and were increasingly likely to have worked in lower-paid roles by the time Brexit happened. But Resolution report’s found that while the Government’s policy is likely to reduce migration into the UK, it is unlikely to significantly boost productivity or deliver a big hit to the public finances. In the short term, the new migration regime will cause some sectors, like food manufacturing, transport and storage and hospitality (which have high turnover and are reliant on EU-born workers in occupations that wouldn’t be eligible the new skilled visa) to experience an acute labour supply pinch. But, the reporst says we shouldn’t expect a reduction in migrant workers to automatically drive up wages for UK-born workers in these same sectors. Firms may look to use labour-saving technology instead -- leading to fewer jobs. If they can’t, they must choose between raising wages and raising prices (hitting incomes elsewhere in the economy), leading to production falling over the medium-to-long term. If low-productivity, migrant-reliant sectors like farming and food manufacturing shrink, then average productivity could rise. Even so, the Prime Minister’s claims that controlled migration is the key to a new high wage economic strategy “are overdone”, Resolution says. Kathleen Henehan, Senior Research and Policy Analyst at the Resolution Foundation, explains: “Despite claims from both sides of the debate, the UK’s new migration regime will do little to change the UK’s economic trajectory, or its central low investment, low productivity challenges. “Over the past two decades, immigration has had a profound effect on the size and composition of the UK’s labour force, with migrants driving over three-quarters of the growth in the workforce. “And sectors which are particularly reliant on migrant workers – such as food manufacturing, warehousing and accommodation – are more exposed to the regime changes, which will limit firms’ abilities to hire low-paid non-UK workers in these industries and to respond quickly to changes in demand. “But evidence does not suggest that the coming change in the level and nature of migration will transform our economy, or our public finances.” “Ultimately, a migration strategy is not a substitute for an economic strategy.” Late last year, the government extended the UK seasonal agricultural workers’ visa scheme for another three years , meaning fruit and vegetable growers will be able to recruit overseas workers to help bring in harvests, following warnings that crops would rot in the fields otherwise. One-in-five workers in food manufacturing in 2017-19 were from the EU and would be ineligible for a SWV, meaning the sector is likely to need to change significantly or shrink in the years ahead, Resolution’s report found. The food and accommodation sectors who rely on EU-workers in SWV-ineligible roles for 10% of their workforce have seen vacancies double as the economy reopened. Data this week has shown that inflation has outpaced wage growth, with the consumer prices index expected to rise above 7% by April. Brexit trade frictions have also been cited as a factor pushing down business confidence in Scotland. Scottish businesses are less optimistic than elsewhere in the UK, according to the ICAEW (Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales) Business Confidence Monitor, released this morning. This may be because domestic sales and export performance have been more subdued than the UK average over the last year. Over the last year, Scottish domestic sales increased by 4.6%, compared to 5.3% for the UK, ICEAW reports. Export growth was weaker too, with sales rising by just 1.5% over the same period, below the UK average (2.2%). ICEAW says: Trading frictions due to Brexit may be a factor impeding growth here. Scottish exports of fresh fish and seafood were quickly disrupted when the Brexit trade deal came in last year, with delays due to new paperwork such as health certificates and customs documentation. Businesses do expect exports to rise this year, by 3.7% - but again, that lags behind their UK counterparts. The survey also found that Scottish firms are facing recruitment challenges and rising costs, For the first time since the BCM survey began, the availability of non-management skills and staff turnover were the most prominent growing challenges for companies. The Herald newspaper has more details: The Herald: Brexit ‘friction’ cited as Scottish business confidence plunges to lowest level in UK The British Chambers of Commerce have identified five issues holding back the flow of goods and services into the EU - and proposed five solutions to address some of these complexity, bottlenecks and pressures on firms. ISSUE: Export health certificates cost too much and take up too much time for smaller food exporters. SOLUTION: We need a supplementary deal on this which either eliminates or reduces the complexity of exporting food for these firms. ISSUE: Some companies are being asked to register in multiple EU states for VAT in order to sell online to customers there. SOLUTION: We need a supplementary deal, like Norway’s with the EU. This exempts the smallest firms from the requirement to have a fiscal representative and incur these duplicate costs. ISSUE: As things stand CE marked industrial and electrical products will not be permitted for sale on the market in Great Britain from January 2023. The same is true for components and spares. SOLUTION: We need action from the Government to help businesses with these timelines. Many firms are far from convinced about a ban on CE marked goods in Great Britain. ISSUE: UK firms facing limitations on business travel and work activities in the EU. SOLUTION: Government needs to make side deals with the EU and member states to boost access in this area as a priority for 2022. ISSUE: Companies starting to be pursued in respect of import customs declarations deferred from last year. SOLUTION: We need a pragmatic approach to enforcement to ensure companies recovering from the pandemic do not face heavy-handed demands too quickly on import payments, or paperwork. Dr Philippa Whitford MP, the SNP’s Europe spokesperson, said: “This latest survey highlights once again that the Tory government’s extreme Brexit deal has been nothing short of an unmitigated disaster. “Brexit has prevented growth in the economy, cost billions of pounds, led to drastic fall in exports, and is now adding to the cost of living crisis. “At a time when Tory cuts, regressive tax hikes, rising inflation and soaring energy bills are hammering families and businesses - Brexit is further piling on the pressure and hardship. “The SNP will continue to press the UK government for action to mitigate Brexit and the Tory cost of living crisis but it’s beyond any doubt that independence is the only way to keep Scotland safe and regain the benefits of EU membership.” The BCC’s survey results are “extremely worrying”, says Nick Thomas-Symonds, shadow international trade secretary: The Government have been asleep at the wheel and have shown a complete lack of support to help businesses who are seeking help. “Labour have been clear that it wants to make Brexit work. The Government should be negotiating a veterinary agreement and working pragmatically with the EU to ensure goods flow easily, including, making sure that there are not delays at our ports and that ministers are giving the tools needed to industry so that trade flows easily. “Business prosperity, job security and livelihoods depend on reliable supply chains. Ministers need to urgently listen to business and give them the support they need.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK businesses are calling on the government for more help exporting to Europe, after new research found that many firms believed the EU trade deal was not helping them grow or increase sales. The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) has surveyed 1,000 businesses, and found that a majority said it has created problems such as pushing up costs, increasing paperwork and delays, and putting the UK at a competitive disadvantage. Just 8% of firms agreed that the Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA) was ‘enabling their business to grow or increase sales’, while 54% disagreed. For UK exporters 12% (or just one in eight) agreed that the TCA was helping them, while 71% disagreed. The BCC received 59 comments on the merits of the TCA, which was agreed on Christmas Eve 2020, including: It had allowed some companies to continue to trade without significant change It had encouraged firms to look at other global markets It had provided stability to allow firms to plan. But this was outnumbered by 320 comments criticising the deal, such as: It had led to rising costs for companies and their clients Smaller businesses did not have the time and money to deal with the bureaucracy it had introduced It had put off EU customers from considering UK goods and services – due to the perceived costs and complexities. William Bain, head of trade policy at the BCC, said smaller firms are particularly suffering from the change to trading relationships between the UK and the EU. “This is the latest BCC research to clearly show there are issues with the EU trade deal that need to be improved. “Nearly all of the businesses in this research have fewer than 250 employees and these smaller firms are feeling most of the pain of the new burdens in the TCA. “Many of these companies have neither the time, staff or money to deal with the additional paperwork and rising costs involved with EU trade, nor can they afford to set up a new base in Europe or pay for intermediaries to represent them.” The BCC has made a number of suggestions, including moves to reduce the complexity of exporting food, and tackling limitations on business travel and work activities in the EU. Last week, MPs on parliament’s spending watchdog warned that Brexit red tape has damaged Britain’s trade with the EU. They fear the situation could worsen unless the government works with Brussels to reduce hold-ups at UK ports, A Government spokesperson, though, says businesses are getting support to help with Brexit changes: “The Trade and Co-operation Agreement is the world’s biggest zero-tariff, zero-quota free trade deal. It allows businesses in Britain to trade freely with Europe while also being able to seize new trading opportunities with countries around the world. “We’ve always been clear that being outside the single market and the customs union would mean changes and that businesses would need to adapt to new processes. That is why we are ensuring that businesses get the support they need, including through the free-to-use Export Support Service. “Goods exports to EU nations were 4% higher last year compared with 2020. However, given the Covid-19 pandemic, global recession and supply chain disruption, it is still too early to draw any firm conclusions on the long-term impacts of our new trading relationship with the EU.” But there is evidence that UK trade has weakened over the last few years. UK exports of goods to the EU were down £20bn last year compared with the last period of stable trade with Europe, according to official figures marking the first full year since Brexit. Elsewhere today, companies such as Nestlé , Reckitt Benckiser and Standard Chartered are reporting results. European markest are set to open a little lower, with the Ukraine crisis firmly in focus. The US has said that Russia has deployed another 7,000 troops to the border, while Ukraine has denied claims by Russian-backed separatists that it has conducted mortar attacks on their terrirory. The agenda 7am GMT: European new car registrations for January 9.3am GMT: ONS weekly survey of economic activity and social change 1.30pm GMT: US monthly building permits for January 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless figuresThe percentage of adults in the US who identify as LGBTQ+ has doubled over the past 10 years, a Gallup study has found. According to poll results released Thursday, a record 7.1% of American adults identify as LGBTQ+, jumping from 3.5% in 2012. “The increase in LGBT identification in recent years largely reflects the higher prevalence of such identities among the youngest US adults compared with the older generations they are replacing in the US adult population,” Gallup noted of the poll, which was conducted in 2021 on 12,416 American adults. The poll also found that 21% of Generation-Z Americans – those born between 1997 and 2003 – who have reached adulthood identify as LGBTQ, more than double the proportion of millennial adults who do so. Among millennials – those born between 1981 and 1996 – 10.5% identify as LGBTQ+. This marks a modest 4.7% increase from 2012, when some members of the generation had not yet turned 18. The percentages are even smaller among Generation X, baby boomers and “traditionalists” – all below 10%. Only 4.2% of Generation X adults, who are between 42 and 57, identify as LGBTQ. 2.6% of baby boomers, who are between 58 and 76, identify as LGBTQ. Lastly, among traditionalist adults – those born before 1946 – only 0.8% identify as LGBTQ+. Those percentages have more or less remained unchanged since Gallup started measuring LGBTQ+ identification in 2012. In addition, the poll found that more than half of LGBTQ+ Americans, 57%, identify as bisexual, making up 4% of the total US adult population. Twenty-one per cent of LGBTQ+ Americans identify as gay, 14% lesbian, 10% transgender and 4% something else. Nearly one in six Gen Z adults, or 15%, identify as bisexual. Meanwhile, 6% of millennials and 2% of Gen Xers say they are bisexual. The percentages of those who identify as bisexual among Generation X, baby boomers and traditionalists fall below 2%. According to the study, women, 6%, are more likely than men, 2%, to indicate that they are bisexual. Men are more likely to identify as gay, 2.5%, than bisexual. Gallup predicts that with one in 10 millennials and one in five Gen-Z members identifying as LGBTQ+, the proportion of LGBTQ+ American adults should exceed 10% in the near future. “These young adults [Generation Z] are coming of age, including coming to terms with their sexuality or gender identity, at a time when Americans increasingly accept gays, lesbians and transgender people, and LGBT individuals enjoy increasing legal protection against discrimination,” Gallup said. According to Gallup, 70% of Americans are currently in support of same-sex marriage, marking a steep increase from 1996, when only 27% of Americans supported it.Henry Danton, who has died aged 102, was the last survivor of the six dancers who created Frederick Ashton’s ballet masterpiece Symphonic Variations in 1946. This was Ashton’s first creation for the stage of the Royal Opera House. He filled the work with a flow of movement, challenging his dancers’ stamina and drawing on their individual skills. Danton’s interest in ballet was aroused by seeing Léonide Massine’s Jardin Public performed by Wassily de Basil’s Ballet Russe at Covent Garden in the 1930s, and particularly by the idea of a statue coming to life, but he did not start training in ballet until he was 21. He enjoyed ice-skating. A friend took him to a rink in Brighton, where he worked with a young partner whose mother introduced him to the ballet teacher Judith Espinosa. She was immediately impressed by Danton’s athletic body (a result of his earlier military training) and turnout (a result of skating) and in 18 months he raced through the Royal Academy of Dancing examinations with honours. In 1942 he was awarded the academy’s Adeline Genée silver award but, because of wartime metal shortages it was not until 2019, when he was 100, that he received the medal. During the second world war, male dancers were in short supply and Danton was snapped up for the short-lived Allied Ballet and then Mona Inglesby’s International Ballet. With both he danced the role created by Vaslav Nijinsky in Les Sylphides, as well as performing new works. With International he benefited from the teaching of the Polish ballet master Stanislas Idzikowski. While he valued his opportunities to dance principal roles, after six months he asked Ninette de Valois if he could join Britain’s premiere company, the Sadler’s Wells Ballet. He acquired a place in May 1944, remaining until 1947, and was a member when it took up residence at the Royal Opera House in 1946. Although he was technically weak in some steps Danton had a strong jump and was happy dancing choreography by Ashton and the Florestan pas de trois in The Sleeping Beauty. He did not get on with De Valois, however. He disliked her ballets – he danced the Rake’s Friend in De Valois’s The Rake’s Progress – and her emphasis on counts rather than the music. He was disappointed, too, by the company’s teachers. De Valois disapproved of his taking classes outside the company with the Russian teacher Vera Volkova, who drew from her dancers an elegant musicality, encouraging them to use their full body and soul, and with whom Danton had an affair. Danton danced with Sadler’s Wells Ballet on tour to Brussels and Paris in February-March 1945. In Paris he discovered another Russian teacher, Victor Gsovsky, who suited him. When he left Sadler’s Wells he returned to Paris. He toured France and western Europe, partnering an étoile of the Paris Opéra, Lycette Darsonval, and followed Gsovsky to the Ballets des Champs-Elysées, one of the most exciting postwar French companies, and then to the Metropolitan Ballet in London. He was born into a military family in Bedford. His father, Charles Boileau Down, a major with the Royal Garrison Artillery, died from war injuries in 1919 when Henry was three months old, leaving his mother, Beatrice (nee Forsyth), to raise three children. Henry and his brother were both educated via a King’s cadetship at Wellington college and the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. Henry had an agreement with his mother that he would accept his military schooling but, once his education was complete, he should be allowed to choose a career. He graduated and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery, but this coincided with the Munich crisis, leaving him unable to leave the services and, indeed, promoted to captain at the outbreak of war. But the army was not for him; he had a breakdown and was released. He later altered his surname to Danton, as Down was not seen as a suitable name for dancer. Nevertheless, his military background accounted for his bearing and his demand for respect. Clearly, he was antagonised by De Valois constantly calling him “boy” and he had sufficient independence to develop his own career rather than toe any line. In the 50s his contacts in the dance world and curiosity took him to New York, South America and Australia. He significantly influenced newly formed ballet companies in Caracas, Venezuela, and Bogotá, Colombia, and embarked on a career as a teacher. Although he lived thereafter in the US, Danton made regular visits to the UK for birthday celebrations, to attend events and reunions, enjoying his status as a senior member of the Royal Ballet. He regarded life as an adventure and loved teaching young people, which he continued to do until he reached 100. He attributed his longevity to his vegetarianism, adopted long before it was fashionable, and to his all-absorbing passion for dance. • Henry Danton (Henry David Boileau Down), dancer, born 30 March 1919; died 9 February 2022There have been more than 1m excess deaths in the US during the pandemic, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The deaths are mainly attributable to Covid-19, as well as conditions that may have resulted from delayed medical care and overwhelmed health systems. At least 923,000 Americans have died from confirmed Covid cases, according to the CDC. Other causes of death above the normally expected number have included heart disease, hypertension and Alzheimer’s disease. Some Americans also die months after their initial Covid diagnosis, because the virus created other fatal complications. Excess deaths are calculated by looking at previous years’ fatalities. In 2019, there were 2.8m deaths in the US; in 2020, it was approximately 3.3m. “All-cause excess mortality is one of the most reliable and unbiased ways to look at the effect of the Covid-19 pandemic,” said Jeremy Faust, an emergency physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and an instructor at Harvard Medical School. “It does not rely on how many tests were done or on subjective cause of death designations.” While cause of death can sometimes be difficult to ascertain, and political pressures can lead to miscounting, excess deaths can indicate the broad scope of a health emergency. “Whenever we hear that another 100,000 people died of Covid, there’s a reliable chorus of naysayers who claim that these deaths would’ve happened anyway,” Faust said. “Excess deaths cuts through that, because it’s about reporting whether the total number of deaths is out of the ordinary.” These figures can reveal the truer toll of Covid – including deaths directly from infection as well as deaths from the circumstances of the crisis. The global number of excess deaths may be millions higher than the official count of Covid deaths. The toll of Covid has been geographically uneven in the US. At first the virus was largely confined to major cities, but then it began spreading in rural areas, with devastating effect. Deaths among working-age Americans are up 40% during the roughly two years of the pandemic, one insurance executive said in December. Many Americans delayed seeking care during the pandemic, and others may have seen the quality of their care decrease as health systems were overburdened by Covid. The US is also in the midst of an overdose crisis, with more than 100,000 overdose deaths in the first year of the pandemic. Excess deaths are also known as untimely or “early” deaths. While the majority of excess deaths in the US occurred among those 65 and older, many of those Americans had many years left to live. The average 80-year-old in the US has a life expectancy of eight more years, Faust noted. “If suddenly more 80-year-olds are dying than usual, it’s a simple fact that many of them had not just months but years, even a decade or more, of life left otherwise in some cases. “Sometimes people say that stopping Covid merely ‘delays death’. To that, I say, ‘Exactly. That’s what medicine and public health are all about.’”Days before the so-called Freedom Convoy reached Ottawa, starting a weeks-long occupation of Canada’s capital and triggering a string of copy-cat blockades, the federal government was warned that violent extremist groups were deeply involved in the protest movement. Intelligence assessments – prepared by Canada’s Integrated Terrorism Assessment Centre (Itac) and seen by the Guardian – warned in late January that it was “likely” that extremists were involved and said that the scale of the protests could yet pose a “trigger point and opportunity for potential lone actor attackers to conduct a terrorism attack”. The assessments offer the first real glimpse into how federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies have assessed the threat of Canada’s anti-vaccine and conspiracy theory movement. “We knew these people were coming,” said a federal government source, who indicated that the Security Intelligence Service Canada – Canada’s main intelligence service, of which Itac is a part – had flagged the involvement of extremist groups and individuals in official briefings. The intelligence reports also show that clear warnings were sent to Ottawa police ahead of the convoy’s arrival in the capital. The city’s police has become the focus of a fierce debate over whether they should have done more to prepare for, or prevent, the occupation. Itac reported that supporters of the convoy have “advocated civil war”, called for violence against prime minister Justin Trudeau, and said the protest should be “used as Canada’s ‘January 6’”, in a reference to the storming of the US Capitol. An early report, dated 27 January, Itac concluded that “a coordinated, complex terrorist attack or planned storming Parliament or other federal locations is unlikely”. But it concludes that the potential for violence remained very real. “While the organizers have declared that this is an act of peaceful protest, some ideologically motivated violent extremism followers in Canada have seized upon this rally to advocate for their own ideological objectives,” the January document reads. “Extremists and other individuals supporting Covid-19 conspiracy theories and violent anti-authority/anti-government views have expressed intent to participate in the convoy and to attend the accompanying protest in Ottawa.” The assessment warns that protesters, and possible extremists, “could use rudimentary capabilities, such as trucks, cargo and fuel, to cause disruptions to infrastructure”. Presciently, the report warned that the 31 January return of Parliament “could motivate a dedicated group of protesters to prolong their protest in Ottawa”. Included in the report is a meme, which was shared widely in the early days of the convoy, which shows a map with a circle surrounding Ottawa and reads “permanent gridlock zone until freedom restored”. As the occupation dragged into its second week, Itac issued another report on 8 February. “All events remained relatively peaceful, with limited low-level conflict,” it reads. “However, violent online rhetoric and the physical presence of ideological extremists at some gatherings remain a factor of concern.” The report makes particular mention of the QAnon figure Romana Didulo, the self-styled “Queen of Canada”, who has instructed her followers to kill healthcare workers and politicians. She and some of her followers appeared in Ottawa for the occupation, waving flags representing her supposed kingdom. Itac also drew attention to a constellation of other demonstrations across the country, including in Quebec City where “the QAnon flag was observed, and the extremist group La Meute stated that approximately 100 members participated in the protest.” La Meute, or The Pack is one of the most visible and influential far-right, anti-Islam organizations in Quebec. It also claimed to have sent supporters to the Ottawa protests, the report said. In the second report, Itac continued to assess the likelihood of a January 6-style insurrection as unlikely, but began warning that “the most likely ideologically motivated violent extremism-related scenario involves an individual or small group using readily available weapons and resources such as knives, firearms, homemade explosives and vehicles in public areas against soft targets, including opposition groups or members of the general public.” Earlier this week at a blockade at the Coutts border crossing in Alberta, police arrested four men and charged them with conspiring to kill police officers and civilians. On Wednesday, the public safety minister, Marco Medicino confirmed that some of those arrested had ties to some extremist elements in Ottawa. Some of the men arrested are believed to belong to a loose-knit group known as Diagolon. Itac reports are largely based on open source intelligence, meaning information already available in the public domain, and law enforcement sources – the centre does not actively monitor individuals or conduct its own investigations. The purpose of Itac is to provide various levels of local law enforcement with reliable information on emerging threats, said Stephanie Carvin, a former intelligence analyst with the Canadian Security Intelligence Service who now teaches at the Norman Paterson School of International Affairs at Carleton University in Ottawa. “They seem to recognize the nature of the event, and who’s coming to the event,” she said. But, the analysts appear to have missed some of the extreme elements of the leadership of the convoy, Carvin said. “It was a movement led by extremists to begin with, and we should not be surprised they turned to extremist tactics.” Itac’s warning that only a dogmatic few would brave the Ottawa cold for parliament’s return on 31 January proved to be a significant underestimation. Yet, even that warning wasn’t heeded. The deputy chief of the Ottawa police service said in early February that they planned for “a potentially weekend-long demonstration”, and were caught off guard when the convoy parked in front of Parliament. “Was the problem that he didn’t have the information?” Carvin said. “Or was the problem that they just don’t take white supremacy seriously?” Carvin said intelligence agencies had been briefing the Canadian government as far back as late December on the possible threat posed by the convoy. “[The protest leaders] were exceptionally clear on what they wanted to do, and how they were going to go about doing it,” she said.Andrew Neil has launched libel proceedings against Jennifer Arcuri, the former lover of prime minister Boris Johnson, after she made allegations about the broadcaster’s inclusion in an address book owned by the convicted child sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Legal filings show Neil has made good on his threat to sue Arcuri after she publicly claimed the journalist was on the “pedo elite train”. The former GB News presenter, who is now hosting a show for Channel 4, said Arcuri’s comments were “evil lies” and “vile and untrue accusations”. Neil has repeatedly said he never met Epstein and the presence of his contact details in the “black book” is because he had previously met Ghislaine Maxwell in New York during the 1990s. Last year Maxwell was found guilty of recruiting and grooming teenage girls for sexual encounters with Epstein. Arcuri came to prominence after claiming she had an affair with Johnson when he was mayor of London, prompting investigations into the decision to award her startup business tens of thousands of pounds in public money. She also accompanied the future prime minister on trade missions, although Johnson will not face a police investigation over the matter. Her exchanges with Neil began as a Twitter row about the effectiveness of vaccines before descending into mudslinging about his supposed connection to Epstein. Arcuri has now deleted some of the tweets that prompted Neil to issue his legal threats but this may be too late. Arcuri, who now lives in the US, is listed as a litigant in person on the high court filings, suggesting she does not currently have legal representative. British libel law places the onus on the person who made the disputed allegations to substantiate their claims. In a series of tweets about Epstein, Neil also told another Twitter user he had no connection to the deceased former financier: “I’ve never even met him, communicated with him, never mind visited any of his properties or been on his planes, cars, buses, helicopters, ponies,” he tweeted. “Now what is it you don’t understand about piss off. And apologise before you do, please, piss off.” He also wrote that he had decided to take legal action “not just to hold Arcuri, who I’ve never met and have no interest in, to account but, more important, to establish that the twitterati can’t just promulgate evil lies without consequences. If you think anonymity will protect you, you’re in for a big surprise.” In a tweet at the end of December, Neil told Arcuri: “My legal team has prepared a massive case against you and we’ll be seeking exemplary damages. Papers will be served in UK and US. I know you’ve been keeping your location private. But tell me, what’s it like in Panama City, Florida this time of year?” Arcuri responded: “This guy is going to give himself a heart attack.”My grandfather Dennis Lee, who has died aged 91, was a proud Yorkshireman whose love of Shakespeare, opera, jazz and his favourite, Nina Simone, was passed on to his family and friends. He was also passionate about the benefits of education and never stopped learning throughout his life. Born in Sheffield to Ernest Lee, a miner and steelworker, and Edna (nee Poole), Dennis lived in the city his entire life and survived the blitz. Dennis attended Chaucer secondary school, leaving at 15 to start on the factory floor at the Batchelor’s foods factory, in Wadsley Bridge. He rose through the ranks to become works manager. Aged 28, he was diagnosed with Brittle diabetes, which is one of the most difficult forms of the condition to manage, especially so in the early days of insulin research. He married Barbara Lindley in 1953 and they went on to have two children, Stuart and Denise. When, in 1958, Barbara’s mother died they took in Barbara’s 10-year-old sister, Christine. They were both loving grandparents and my sisters and I would spend many happy hours at their house. I was there almost every Friday night and my grandfather educated me in literature, opera, jazz and – as I got older – late night comedy on BBC Two. Dennis left Batchelor’s in 1987 and worked at Corus Steel as a manager until his retirement in 1995. An ardent Labour supporter, Dennis was not a materialistic man and jokes were made in the family about the creaking of his wallet when he finally opened it. But when there was real need he was generous to a fault, rescuing his brother from debt and putting money aside to help me with the costs of university. In retirement he was a keen fisherman and would take part in local competitions. He enjoyed the theatre and would take us to see opera, musicals, and plays by Pinter and Shakespeare. He loved watching snooker every year at the Crucible theatre. As he entered his 80s his diabetes caused more difficulties. Many doctors expressed surprise that he had lasted as long as he had and in 2019 he was awarded the Robert Lawrence medal for having lived with diabetes for 60 years. Barbara died in 1999. He is survived by his children, five grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.The “golden visa” system that allows wealthy foreign investors a fast track to live in the UK has been axed amid concern about applicants acquiring their wealth illegally and the growing strain on diplomatic relations with Russia. The home secretary, Priti Patel, announced that the scheme would end with immediate effect to help to stop “corrupt elites who threaten our national security and push dirty money around our cities”. Launched in 2008, the “tier 1 investor visa” programme allowed people with at least £2m in investment funds and a UK bank account to apply for residency rights, along with their family. The speed with which applicants were allowed to get indefinite leave to remain was hastened by how much money they planned to invest in the UK: £2m took five years, while £10m shortened the wait to just two. The scheme had been under review for some time, and its opponents were planning to push for the visas to be suspended through an amendment to the nationality and borders bill in the House of Lords, due to be debated later this month. According to the anti-corruption watchdog Spotlight, 6,312 golden visas – half the number of all those issued – had been reviewed for “possible national security risks”. Patel said she had “zero tolerance for abuse of our immigration system” and that the move was part of a “renewed crackdown on fraud and illicit finance”. Investors will instead be encouraged to apply for an “innovator” visa and must demonstrate “an investment strategy that can show genuine job creation and other tangible economic impacts” rather than passively holding UK-based investments. Pressure remains on Patel to publish a report into the golden visa system that reviewed those handed out between June 2008 and April 2015 to about 3,000 successful applicants, including 700 millionaire Russians. For the past seven months, the government has said it is finalising the report. On Thursday, the Home Office would only commit to publishing it “in due course”. The Labour MP Chris Bryant, a member of the foreign affairs select committee, said ministers were “playing catch up with their own Russia policy”. He noted that the committee produced a report four years ago – endorsed by Patel, given she was a backbench member of it – which said ministers were risking national security by “turning a blind eye” to Russian “dirty money” flowing through the City of London. Bryant told the Guardian that Patel had taken “no action since” and had instead been “doling out gold-plated invitation cards” to some people he feared had come to the UK to launder their money. He urged the Conservative party to reveal how many donors had been given the golden visa, and called for further action such as toughening up unexplained wealth orders, bringing in a register of beneficial owners of foreign companies, and pressing ahead with a long-promised economic crimes bill. Parliament’s intelligence and security committee also recommended in its Russia report published in July 2020 that there should be an “overhaul” of the golden visa programme to enable a “more robust approach to the approval process”. With Russia accused by the head of Nato as well as the UK and US governments of sending more troops to its border with Ukraine while pretending to be withdrawing, the move will also likely be seen as a diplomatic snub of Moscow. James Heappey, the UK’s armed forces minister, conceded: “As we enter into what could be a generation or longer of quite acute competition with Russia, all of the things that have become normal in Anglo-Russian relations over the last 30 years will be up for review.” The Liberal Democrats’ foreign affairs spokesperson, Layla Moran, said that “shutting the door to Putin’s cronies” was not enough as too many had already “walked through it with virtually no questions asked”. She added: “It makes a mockery of their promises to stand up to Putin’s aggression, when they are doing nothing to stop his cronies who are right now stashing their dirty money on our shores and claiming UK citizenship.”As the 2022 Winter Olympics draws towards its conclusion, once again Norway sit pretty on top of the medal table. It is not just a one-off. Norway have been outside the top four in a Winter Olympics medal table once since 1992 and topped it in 2002 and 2018. But how does this small Scandinavian country continually out-power much bigger rivals? “I mean, we have a lot of cold,” said a joking Sturla Holm Lægreid of the (predictably enough) winning men’s biathlon relay team by way of an explanation. It is not simply climate, though. Sweden, Austria and Switzerland benefit from the same advantage and have larger populations and bigger talent pools to draw from. Geopolitics, budgets and population size dictate that China, the US and Russia always put up strong Olympic teams. What Norway does have is an intense focus on grassroots participation in winter sport from a young age. Norwegian athletes will often joke they are a nation born with skis on, but cross-country skiing and biathlon are popular televised sports and there are more than 10,000 local sports clubs in Norway. In 2018, the proportion of children regularly taking part in winter sports was put at 93%. Importantly, at a young age the focus is on fun. They do not keep scores for games involving small children, but as they get older there is a huge active talent pool to move up to the Olympiatoppen for elite sport training. “We’re not many people, but we’re a people with passion,” said Mons Røisland after earning silver in the men’s snowboard big air. “There are so many athletes out of Norway and it’s so impressive and inspiring to see what everyone does to be here.” Norway’s success is not distributed evenly across all Winter Olympics sports. The country leads the all‑time medal table in cross-country skiing, ski jumping and the Nordic combined discipline and 12 of their 14 golds in Beijing have come in those three events plus biathlon. They have never won any medals in bobsleigh, luge or skeleton and have not won gold in figure skating since 1936. Team GB’s quest for medals started in earnest after a dismal performance in the Summer Olympic Games of 1996 in Atlanta when the team returned home with one gold. Since then, funding has been funnelled towards sports where there is a decent prospect of medals and national lottery money has poured in. That is an alien approach to Norway, whose overall Olympic budget is a tenth of that expended by Great Britain. In 2018, Morten Aasen, a former Norwegian Olympian, said: “We don’t do skeleton or bobsleigh because that costs too much money. We are a very rich country, but we believe in the socialist way of doing things. That success should be from working hard and being together.” The huge emphasis on camaraderie means the team have little room for ego. This was typified by Johannes Thingnes Bø. He has won three golds and a bronze in biathlon in these Games, with his elder brother sharing podiums with him as he claimed two golds, a silver and a bronze. Yet after a gruelling 10km sprint event at the Zhangjiakou National Biathlon Centre, which the younger Bø led from start to finish, he said: “Some days you just feel like the wax men do half of the work. Today was a day like that.” While it might look from afar that Norway are sweeping all before them, there are some rumbles of discontent about this year’s performance. The team have 29 medals, but it will be a stretch for them to reach the record they sent in Pyeongchang in 2018 of 39. In particular, the performance in cross-country has prompted much discussion back home. Johannes Høsflot Klæbo finished a distant 40th in the men’s 15km + 15km skiathlon despite going into it as a well-fancied favourite. He said: “In the Norwegian media, for sure, it’s been a lot of discussions about many different things. That is not the best or most positive thing for us.” Birk Ruud, a member of the freestyle ski team, thinks the answer is much more obvious. When asked about Norway’s exceptional performances in Beijing, he said: “We’re a country with a lot of good genes and we work hard.” • This article was amended on 18 February 2022 because an earlier version said that Norway “have not won a figure skating gold medal since 1928”. In fact Sonja Henie successfully defended her Olympic title representing Norway in 1932 and in 1936.Traditional TV cooking shows aren’t really about cooking. They’re about watching, about seeing high-production cheffiness or Gordon Ramsay swear at people. Despite the numerous what-to-watch-in-2022 lists that featured Netflix’s Chinese cooking series Flavorful Origins or Nadiya’s Time to Eat on the BBC, it is rare that you will actually feed yourself off the back of one of them. The same is not true of someone strapping a GoPro to their forehead so they can show you how to make amazing scrambled eggs. Modernist cooking wunderkinds like Kenji Lopez-Alt are using YouTube to make videos that are as immediately instructive as they are zanily entertaining. For all the talk of so-called FoodTok luminaries raking in followers by the millions and earning six-figure incomes, it is YouTube food chefs who are making the best food videos around. They are not constrained, as TikTokers are, by the platform’s time duration or (like television chefs) dictated to by viewing schedules. They can take their time; they can shoot when they want to. No one is telling them what to cook, or what to say. No wonder there are upwards of 1 million food channels. Meet five of the best. Rachel Ama Launched in the summer of 2017, this channel serves as a diary of London cookbook author Rachel Ama’s vegan journey and every dish Ama talks you through is one you want to have a go at. Which is not surprising, given that she explains her reason for starting the channel as: “I went vegan overnight and it was such a good feeling, I wanted the people I loved to experience it, too.” Ama melds the Caribbean food her St Lucian grandmother used to make and the trad British dishes she grew up with in north London with restaurant fare from her travels in Spain, New Orleans and Colombia. She says she is always awkward in photographs, but on video, she has been magnetic from day one. In the second video she ever made, that boundless excitement surges when she realises, on screen, that the faux tuna she’s just demonstrated could actually become a faux tuna melt – the first she’ll have had since going vegan. “Let’s do it, lads,” she gasps and you’re right there with her and that packet of vegan cheese she’s holding up in pure, unscripted triumph. A particular highlight is the high-protein vegan Caribbean feast she posted a few years back, including jerk lentils slightly sweetened with maple syrup and a gorgeously creamy cashew-based mac’n’cheese. The food is so good that after plating up, she forgets herself and eats most of it before realising she has not filmed the tasting. Maangchi As YouTube food channels go, Maangchi is up there with the most famous, a fixture in Top 10 lists. And yet, 14 years after she first made a dish on camera (ojingeo-bokkeum, stir-fried squid) host Emily Kim has no PR, PA or TV slot. She is still doing it all herself. Maangchi has become the go-to guide for authentic Korean recipes in English, from bibimbap (12m views) to trad kimchi (23.5m), and everything in between – fluffy red-bean buns, steamed eggs, twisted doughnuts, green beans in garlic. She is an excellent instructor, explaining what to buy, how to clean it, when to chop or stir or cover and how long to wait, in clear and simple terms. Kim shoots from her immaculately tidy but otherwise ordinary kitchen in Times Square, wearing fabulous outfits such as a green pillbox hat, a pink wig and fake grape earrings. An actual legion of fans from across the globe agree with her son that she is the best cook in the world and their own adoptive mother. Headlines and tweets variously describe her as YouTube’s Korean mom, the internet’s Korean mother and “Maangchi is my mother now”. The love is reciprocated: “My viewers keep sending me messages, saying ‘Maangchi, I made your chicken and it was a big hit and I was proud of myself,’ and I tell them, ‘I’m proud of you’ and even though I don’t see their face, I’m always thrilled, you know.” Chinese Cooking Demystified Fried rice, flavoured rice, things on rice, homemade dim sum, all the noodles: each new video here feels like an invitation and looks like lunch. Run by a Chinese woman, Stephanie Li and her American partner, Chris Thomas, based in Shenzhen, China, this channel does exactly as its name suggests. “English language sources seem to both overthink and underthink Chinese cuisine,” says Thomas: they try to mimic restaurant techniques, but fail to properly explain the foundational ingredients to a western audience. Li and Thomas’s videos are usually under 10 minutes long, neatly edited with a rapid-fire intro and cooking demo out on their balcony – if they take you inside, they will tell you why, and it is all part of what makes them so helpful. The viewer’s own culinary restrictions are always a priority: they will often give you options for the method (if you have a wok, a gas stove, or neither). They shoot up close with clear audio, to make sure you understand what tiger eggs sound like when they are being deep-fried, or exactly how slowly to turn your scrambled eggs to make them in true Cantonese style. For added homestyle goodness, the couple’s dog, Hayek, sits on a chair beside Li as she cooks on camera. “He’s an intense air-licker when he gets excited,” says Thomas. Grandbaby Cakes Chef and baker Jocelyn Delk Adams is a longtime blogger, cookbook author and regular on US TV with appearances on the Food Network and Good Morning America. She is known for very pretty, pastel hued bakes and her videos look and feel exactly like those treats. On screen, she favours gorgeous knits and ice-cream colours; she demos sour-cream poundcakes, buttery cornbread and perfect pie crusts with the easy, welcoming demeanour of an eminently capable host. From creamy grits with shrimp scampi to the deepest reddest crunchiest spiciest fried chicken – well, it’s just beautiful. “When I’m in front of the camera, there’s such a glow and a spark, an enjoyment,” she says. In one of her very first videos back in 2013, she goes back home to Winona, Mississippi to bake biscuits with her grandmother. You watch Delk Adams at the stovetop with Big Mama Maggie, as she was known to everyone, making biscuits as she did every day for decades. It’s an incredibly real, intimate moment – the kind that chefs like to write about in cookbooks, but that no one ever really gets to witness first-hand. “I think about my grandmother all of the time,” she tells me. “She is 100% why I created my entire brand, just wanting to honour her.” Sorted Food The four guys from Hertfordshire who started Sorted Food – Ben Ebbrell, Mike Huttlestone, Jamie Spafford and Barry Taylor – have been making each other laugh over lunch since they were in year 7 together. Back in 2010, on a drunken weekend away in Cornwall, they had the idea to shoot some food videos for some friends who were unable to make the trip. A short while later, they posted a follow-up on YouTube – a lasagne how-to which, much to their surprise, garnered, as Spafford puts it, “comments from people we didn’t know”. Some told them off for not adding milk to the ragu, others for not making the dish like their grandma would have. Every video created since has been a similarly communal effort: burger battles, chocolate challenges, blindfolded taste tests, the four of them often joined by guest chefs, and sometimes, celebs (Emma Thompson turned up in December with her daughter and a Christmas jumper). “It’s mates hanging out, being able to cook and eat great food with each other,” says Spafford. Only Ebbrell is a trained chef, so that means any given episode typically involves him rescuing the messes the three “normals” have made. They have toured the US for NBC’s Today show, published 14 cookbooks, launched an app, convened a community 2.52 million strong, and still they read every single comment. “It doesn’t make much sense commercially,” they agree, but being there for their fans, like they are for each other, is, really, what they are best at.What is happening on the ground in east Ukraine? Tensions have increased after Russian-backed separatists opened fire across the line of control with Ukrainian forces, hitting a nursery school and injuring three people. The west says Moscow may be seeking a pretext to openly intervene in the fighting in defence of the separatist territories that it controls. Russia has amassed a force of nearly 150,000 soldiers in the border regions near Ukraine, and the US has warned that an invasion could be “imminent”. What are the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics? The two territories are run by separatist governments widely seen as Russian proxy states inside Ukraine. Since 2014, they have been in conflict with Kyiv, which refers to them as “temporarily occupied territories”, similar to Crimea. They have received military and financial backing from Moscow since they declared their existence after the Ukrainian revolution in 2014. The two regions cover an area of about 6,500 sq miles and were primarily known before the war for their heavy industry and coal mining. Donetsk, the largest city, previously had an international airport and hosted matches during the Uefa Euro 2012 championship. The fighting has destroyed the airport and left the territories mostly cut off from the rest of Ukraine in a dire economic state. The borders with Russia remain open. What are their relationship to Moscow? Officially, Moscow sees the two states as part of Ukraine and has not recognised their independence, but it has dealings with the leaderships of the self-declared states. Unofficially, the two regions are seen as fully controlled by Moscow, with a leadership installed by the Kremlin, Russian subsidies propping up the economy, and Russia’s military providing protection and arms. Why haven’t they already been absorbed into Russia? Russia has flirted with the idea of recognising the independence of the two regions from Ukraine. But it has stopped short of that or annexing the territories for several reasons. Firstly, they provide Moscow with important leverage in its battle with Kyiv. Russia wants the territories reinserted into Ukraine, but with their leaders having a veto on major foreign policy decisions, such as entry into Nato. If Russia recognises their independence or annexes the territories, then that plan, along with the Minsk ceasefire deal signed in 2015, will collapse. Secondly, many Russians don’t feel a strong affinity for the region. While ordinary Russians view Crimea as an important part of their cultural history and the Russian Black Sea fleet is based there, there is little that ties ordinary Russians to east Ukraine. Nonetheless, Russia has given out hundreds of thousands of passports in the area and helped integrate its economy with Russia’s, making it more likely the frontlines will remain static in the future. Who are the people there? Leaked documents suggest there are just under 3 million people remaining in the territories, 38% of whom are pensioners. That’s less than half of the pre-war population. Anecdotal evidence has shown that many of the people who remain are those who strongly opposed the 2014 revolution that toppled the former Ukrainian leader Viktor Yanukovych (his hometown is in the separatist-controlled regions) and those who are too poor or were unable to leave when fighting broke out. Public opposition in the territories is virtually non-existent. It has become extremely difficult for independent journalists to go to the region, first because of restrictions by the local authorities, and second because of the difficulty of reaching the territories via Ukraine. Earlier this year, a Ukrainian journalist returning to Donetsk for the first time since July 2014 wrote: “Now I feel like a tourist here, the heroine of a fantastic story that flew in a time machine into the past, and when I returned, I found that everything had changed beyond recognition.” How many troops are there? It is not clear how large a force is present in the two territories. Ukraine has claimed that there are “35,000 military personnel and 481 battle tanks, 914 armoured combat vehicles, 720 artillery systems, 202 multiple launch rocket systems on the uncontrolled territories of Donbass”. According to Rochan Consulting, however, those numbers could be “overestimated”.Prince Andrew has been dealt another humiliating blow after the city of York said it planned to revoke his honorary freedom of the city after the settlement of a sexual abuse civil case in the US. The prince has held the honour since 1987 when it was awarded in a huge civic ceremony at York Minster that attracted crowds of more than 200,000 people. The event was hugely significant as it marked the first ducal visit to York in 67 years, and came a year after his marriage to Sarah Ferguson, when they became the Duke and Duchess of York. While efforts have focused on revoking Andrew’s title of Duke of York, his honorary freedom of the city had almost been forgotten until a former council official tipped off the Guardian on Wednesday. The tipoff prompted York city council staff to search the archives and they confirmed on Thursday night that Andrew still has the honorary freedom of the city. Councillors said they would seek to revoke that title in a vote at the next full council meeting on 24 March. Darryl Smalley, a Liberal Democrat councillor and York’s executive member for culture, leisure and communities, said: “Having been stripped of his military roles and royal patronages by the Queen, we are seeking to end Prince Andrew’s links with our great city, including removing his honorary freedom. “York’s unique connection to the crown and the monarch is an important part of our city’s legacy and history. However, as a council and city, we stand with victims of sexual abuse and are doing all we can to end violence against woman and girls locally. “As such, it is inappropriate that Prince Andrew retains his ambassadorial title that is intrinsically linked to our city. The allegations and his associations with convicted abusers are incredibly serious and we are determined to explore all options available to ensure that his links to our city are severed. “I hope councillors across all parties will support the motion to remove Prince Andrew’s honorary freedom of the city of York. Buckingham Palace and the government must then act to remove his Duke of York title. We will be reaching out to MPs to raise our concerns and discuss any possible ways of ending Prince Andrew’s connection to York.” According to reports at the time, Andrew and his then wife attended the ceremony at York Minster to chants of “We want Fergie”. Every family in the city was given the opportunity to apply for tickets, such was the significance of the event. The surprise out-of-court settlement, announced on Tuesday, means Prince Andrew makes no admission of guilt over the claims made by Virginia Giuffre, which he had repeatedly denied and only weeks ago vowed to fight in a US civil trial. The Queen last month stripped Andrew of his military affiliations and royal patronages in an attempt to distance the royal family from the allegations. Nevertheless, he has kept his Duke of York title. The Queen alone cannot remove titles of peerage. Any attempt to remove the title would have to be led by parliament, through a statute passed by the House of Commons and the Lords. Rachael Maskell, the Labour MP for York Central, has said she will try to change legislation in the coming weeks to remove the Duke of York’s title.Novak Djokovic could be allowed to enter this year’s Italian Open despite the men’s world No 1 being unvaccinated, according to officials in Italy. The country’s cabinet undersecretary for sports, Valentina Vezzali, said: “If Djokovic wants to come and play in Rome he can do it,” adding that tennis is “an outdoor sport and the tighter green pass is not required”. “Perhaps Djokovic will most likely not be allowed in a hotel or a restaurant, but if he wants to play he can play,” said Vezzali, a former Olympic fencer and a 16-time world champion in foil. The cabinet undersecretary added that she did not expect Covid-19 vaccine mandates would be in place by May, when the Masters 1000 tournament takes place in Rome. The news has sparked a row in Italy, with people describing the decision as “hypocritical” and “shameful”. “It sounds like the rules do not apply to everyone,” said a user on Twitter. “You need a Covid vaccine passport to work in Italy, but if you are Djokovic you don’t need one,” said another. On Tuesday, Djokovic told BBC he would rather miss out on grand slam tournaments than be vaccinated against Covid as he spoke in depth for the first time since being deported from Australia last month because of his vaccination status. Asked if he would miss the French Open over his vaccine stance, he replied: “That is the price that I’m willing to pay.” Asked if this was also his attitude towards Wimbledon, he said: “Yes.” The reigning champion will be unable to play at Roland Garros as things stand because of France’s recent adoption of Covid passports. However, it is believed he should be able to compete at Wimbledon in June. The Rome Masters are set to take place in Rome from 2-15 May. Djokovic won the title in 2008, 2011, 2014, 2015 and 2020 and lost the final in 2021 after he was defeated by Australian Open champion Rafa Nadal.I see that £15,000 is required by the Art Fund to finalise repairs to the Solebay tapestry (UK museum in urgent appeal for funds to finish repairs on 17th-century naval tapestry, 16 February). As the tapestry was commissioned by her ancestor Charles II, I suggest that this would be a most appropriate cause on which the Queen could spend her money, unlike others currently under her consideration. Varrie Blowers Bedford • I assumed that the omission of the riotous 1913 Paris premiere of Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring from the list of 50 live shows that shook the world (11 February) would be explained by the inclusion of even more significant musical events. So it was a great relief to read about Madonna’s 1990 Blond Ambition tour instead. Bill Hawkes Canterbury, Kent • You report that the taxpayer owns 50% of NatWest after saving the bank in the financial crisis (‘We’ve had a run on champagne:’ Biggest UK banker bonuses since financial crash, 16 February). Why, then, isn’t the taxpayer receiving a bonus, if bonuses of £300m are being paid? Veronica Piekosz Great Smeaton, North Yorkshire • “The intelligence we are seeing is not encouraging,” says Boris Johnson (Boris Johnson says Russia is sending ‘mixed signals’ on Ukraine, 15 February). Now he might understand how the rest of us feel. Robert Sutton Ulverston, Cumbria • Rupert Murdoch did not wait for a pliant government as your headline suggests (Opinion, 16 February). He actively worked for it. Anthony Lawton Church Langton, Leicestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Not only is the government going to spend £2.7bn on implementing the dreadful nationality and borders bill (Refugee group warns of ‘astonishing’ cost of new Home Office policies, 14 February), but it is already spending more than it needs on existing policies. There are billions that could be saved if it stopped detaining people in immigration detention centres and housed them in the community instead. If it allowed asylum seekers the right to work. If it stopped refusing so many applications, only to have to spend money on defending those decisions and losing over half the cases. If it was more efficient and made faster, fairer decisions to save housing and support seekers of sanctuary for what can be 10 years or more. If only. Such moves would not fit into a hostile environment, but they would save more than money. Scrapping the bill and implementing the changes listed here would save distress, physical and mental ill health, dignity, agonies most of us cannot begin to comprehend, and even lives. Suzanne Fletcher Housing stream convener, Tees Valley of Sanctuary • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.While welcoming the Royal Institute of British Architects’ call for the insulation of 3.3m interwar houses (Report, 11 February), I am reflecting on the refusal of local planning officers to agree to effective measures to reduce the carbon footprint of my “interwar” property, although in this case the wars involved were the Seven Years and Napoleonic wars. There are over 370,000 listed buildings in the UK, listed not by worth but by age. Despite my repeated efforts to replace old and inefficient sash windows with almost identical but double-glazed ones, planners refuse to contemplate such works, recommending instead that thick curtains should suffice. Having already fitted such drapes, I am reluctant to keep them drawn for 24 hours a day, so would call upon Riba to include listed homes to its worthy campaign. Colin Burke Cartmel, Cumbria • I am a retired architect with some experience of dealing with historic buildings. Your article had no reference to the potential problems that retrofitting insulation can have, not only on the building itself, but also, with external insulation, on the character of the neighbourhood. It is essential that we tackle the climate crisis, but the solution of external wall insulation should be treated with caution. There are many papers which advise that retrofitting wall insulation can add problems rather than solve them, particularly with resulting damp. Loft insulation, double glazing and draughtproofing are preferable. Phil Ebbrell Mold, Flintshire • I was pleased that you included low-carbon heating in the excellent graphic on how to insulate and decarbonise an interwar home accompanying your report. Last October, I had my domestic gas boiler removed and installed an air-source heat pump, and am basking in the results. I invited interested parties to view it and have been amazed at the urban myths related by visitors, such as that they are noisy, or are unsuitable for solid-walled houses, or that you will need all your central heating ripped out and replaced. Anyone who wishes to view one in operation can contact me through Bath and West Community Energy. David Symington Bath • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I am pleased that this story has finally been picked up by the wider media (The innocent have paid a high price for the Post Office scandal. The guilty have not, 15 February). But what is not being made abundantly clear is that this is actually not a miscarriage of justice, it is far worse: the Post Office was absolutely aware that the Horizon system was flawed but still continued to (a) prosecute subpostmasters on a grand scale for the best part of 14 years, and (b) tell them that they were the only one. The Post Office also took substantial sums of money from the subpostmasters. This is theft and fraud. This is far more dishonest over a much longer period than anything done by Nick Leeson, as one example of many frauds. This was not victimless crime. The Post Office has used every legal device it can think up to avoid any responsibility, thus continuing to ruin the lives of the subpostmasters. It has said that it cannot afford to pay the compensation, so it falls to taxpayers. I am happy that at least some of the tax I pay will be for a good cause. No one has been – or, I suspect, will be – held responsible or accountable. This is a very sad indictment of Britain today. I cannot describe how angry I am about this. David R Lewis Sittingbourne, Kent • Marina Hyde discusses problems related to the raising of concerns about technological failures. Research shows that the two main reasons why people do not report alleged wrongdoing are fear of retaliation and that any wrongdoing identified will not be dealt with. UK whistleblowing legislation aims to “protect” workers, but only does so by providing remedies once detriment has been suffered. It does not compel employers to investigate concerns even when they are raised through their own procedures, or to rectify any wrongdoing. If we really want people to speak up in the public interest, it is imperative that we amend our law to comply with best practice in other countries. Prof David Lewis Head of the whistleblowing research unit, Middlesex University • One aspect of the inquiry that appears to have been overlooked in the media coverage is what this says about our legal system and the extent to which it provides the opportunity for ordinary people to get a fair trial. Given that so many innocent people were found guilty, it’s hard to avoid the conclusion that this is evidence of ingrained and systemic bias in the system. Dr Mark Seneschall Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire • Thank you, Marina Hyde, for your coolly furious and perceptive column. It is beyond comprehension that officials in the Post Office and the government have been able to destroy the lives of hundreds of innocent people while suffering no penalties. Though I have no connection with the case, I cannot help being ashamed that this was allowed to happen. Ellie Weld Twickenham, London • I have the restorative justice solution. Those in the management hierarchy whom the inquiry finds culpable of what is being described as the worst injustice in living memory should be required, unpaid, to run a sub-post office for, say, a year using the legacy Horizon software. They should be obliged to donate personally a multiple of any accounting discrepancy reported to recompense the victims and/or to charity. John Kelly Little Raveley, Cambridgeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Almost three-quarters of Americans are now estimated to have some level of immunity to the Omicron Covid variant that created havoc after it emerged late last year just as people hoped the pandemic was finally waning. The subsequent Omicron wave that assaulted the US this winter has, however, bolstered its defenses, leaving enough protection against the coronavirus that future surges will probably require much less – if any – dramatic disruption to society, experts reckon. Millions of individual Americans’ immune systems now recognize the virus and are primed to fight it off if they encounter Omicron, or even another variant. About half of eligible Americans have received booster shots, there have been nearly 80m confirmed infections overall and many more infections have never been reported. One influential model uses those factors and others to estimate that 73% of Americans are, for now, enjoying protection from Omicron, the dominant variant, and that could rise to 80% by mid-March, experts say. This will prevent or shorten new illnesses in protected people and reduce the amount of virus circulating overall, probably tamping down new waves. Hospitals will get a break from overwhelmed ICUs, experts agree. “We have changed,” said Ali Mokdad, a professor of health metrics sciences at the University of Washington in Seattle. “We have been exposed to this virus and we know how to deal with it.” The coronavirus – the current variant or future ones that are sure to pop up – remains a dangerous germ. It is still infecting more than 130,000 Americans and killing more than 2,000 every day. Tens of millions of people remain vulnerable. And there will be future outbreaks. The notion of a “herd immunity” that could stop the virus has slipped away under the harsh reality of new variants, waning immunity and the rejection of vaccination by some Americans. But the White House coronavirus team on Wednesday said that the nation was moving closer to the point that Covid-19 is no longer a “constant crisis”, as infections drop steeply. And knowledge is building now that the coronavirus is no longer new. Two years ago it arrived in a nation where nobody’s immune system had seen it before. The entire population – 330 million people – were immunologically naive, that is, susceptible to infection. “I am optimistic even if we have a surge in summer, cases will go up, but hospitalizations and deaths will not,” said Mokdad, who works on the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation model, which calculated the 73% figure for the Associated Press. With varying degrees of relief and caution, many Americans are starting to return to their pre-pandemic lifestyles. Sarah Rixen, 41, of Bismarck, North Dakota, started singing again with a civic chorus after taking a year off. Now, with Omicron winding down, she said she feels more confident than at any time since the crisis began. “But I am still a little leery that there could be another variant around the corner,” said Rixen, noting that her family and most of her relatives are fully vaccinated. “I am still going to wear a mask.” As mask mandates ease, workers return to offices and flights fill up, experts are trying to understand whether this return to normal can last, or if another setback is looming. To address that, researchers are using health data from other countries such as Britain, Denmark, South Africa and Qatar to project what could be in store. Scientists at Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health estimate that about three out of four people in the US will have been infected by Omicron by the end of the surge. “We know it’s a huge proportion of the population,” said Shaun Truelove, an epidemiologist and disease modeler at Johns Hopkins. “This varies a lot by location, and in some areas we expect the number infected to be closer to one in two.” That means different regions or groups of people have different level of protection – and risk. In Virginia, disease modelers are thinking about their population in terms of groups with different levels of immunity. They estimate about 45% of Virginians have the highest level of immunity through boosted vaccination or through vaccination plus a recent infection with Omicron. Another 47% have immunity that has waned somewhat; and 7% are the most vulnerable because they were never vaccinated and never infected. In all, the vast majority of Virginians have at least some immunity, said Bryan Lewis, a computational epidemiologist who leads University of Virginia’s Covid-19 modeling team. “That’s going to be a nice shield of armor for our population as a whole,” Lewis said. Still, while the population is better protected, many individuals are not. Even by the most optimistic estimates for population immunity, 80 million or so Americans are still vulnerable. That’s about the same as the total number of confirmed infections in the US during the pandemic. “The 26% who could still get Omicron right now have to be very careful,” Mokdad said.Libraries are romantic yet prosaic places. The romance is that of reading, and the wealth of human imagining and learning that is contained in them. Access to the knowledge and literary art (poetry, fiction, drama) in a library is precious, priceless – and particularly valuable to young minds and people of any age with an interest in education. “The library was the place I went to find out what there was to know. It was absolutely essential,” said the novelist Zadie Smith of her own early life. The prosaic side of libraries is more physical. This is the world of buildings, shelving, books as objects, library cards, fines, computers – and people with bodies that take up space as well as minds that can be opened. It would be hard to find anyone who actively disapproves of libraries, and the principles of self-improvement and pleasure that they stand for. But when it comes to practicalities, Britain’s libraries are on less solid ground. The sector has been cut massively in the past decade, with around 800 libraries across England, Scotland and Wales disappearing. The first Covid lockdown prompted a new surge of interest in reading, as the idea took hold that people forced to stay at home would spend more time with their noses in books – both finding out more about viral pandemics and escaping from them. But the latest data regarding libraries is sobering reading for anyone who values them as bricks-and-mortar places to go, and as places to sit, use the internet, or seek advice from a librarian – as well as databases. The number of books borrowed in the year ending in March 2021 was 72.9m, down 56% on the previous year. Physical visits also collapsed, from 214.6m to 59.7m, with a glint of silver lining in the fact that website visits grew by 18% to 154.7m. Of course, this is the behaviour that one would expect during a pandemic. Many libraries were closed during this period, while people were discouraged from unnecessary mixing. Book sales climbed to their highest in a decade in 2021, with fiction especially buoyant, which suggests that some former users of libraries may have bought books instead. Private libraries at home, whether large collections or single, cluttered bookshelves, appear to be flourishing. But the hope must be that visits and loans at public libraries will soon return to their former level too. Like any other service, libraries need users. And while booksellers might in one sense be regarded as rivals, in fact the vast majority of those involved in the trade, from publishers to poets, are library lovers – as can be seen from the volumes they have inspired, from Susan Orlean’s The Library Book to Matt Haig’s The Midnight Library. This has something to do with the romantic notion of the reader as explorer, with every book (or at least a good number of them) a door to a new store of feeling or understanding. But it also embodies the recognition that if books are to form part of our mutual life, there must be space in the public realm for them. Books can be treasured possessions, but there is also something special about a copy that arrives in your hands having passed through those of others – and that will go on being passed between strangers who share your curiosity.In government, words come cheap, but it is deeds and actions that count. Judged by the threats that Boris Johnson and his ministers make against Russia over Ukraine, you might think that Britain is fully equipped to turn its warnings into deeds. Not so. When it comes to something British ministers really could control, however, like targeting the assets of Kremlin-backed oligarchs and staunching the flows of Russian-tainted money laundered through the City of London, the rhetoric runs into the sand. In this sphere, Mr Johnson’s government does the exact reverse of what is needed. It speaks loudly, but it carries a flimsy stick. Now, there is some prospect of action. The UK is reported to be ready to abolish its “golden visa” regime within weeks. But why so late? And how effective will this reform really be now? The fear is that it is too little, too late and too ineffectual, and that it will prove another underresourced performative stunt designed to create an impression, not achieve a material economic goal. The investor visa scheme, launched in 1994, under which foreign nationals must show they have at least £2m ready to invest in the UK, has been one of the keys to opening up Britain as a safe haven for dirty money from Russia – and from elsewhere too (in 2021 more than twice as many golden visas were issued to Chinese nationals than to Russians). The scheme did not just bring in money. It became the seedbed for an industry of UK enablers – including lawyers, accountants, estate agents, security specialists and lobbyists – to help integrate Russian oligarchs and others into many levels of British life, including the Conservative party. Some of the golden visa scheme’s conditions were tightened in 2015 and 2019. There has been no lack of calls for stronger action, and repeated evidence that ministers do not see this as a priority. Yet economic crime is not just theft. It is also a national security issue. In 2018, the Commons foreign affairs committee warned that Britain was not serious about the subject. In 2020, the intelligence and security committee said that London “offered ideal mechanisms by which illicit finance could be recycled through what has been referred to as the London ‘laundromat’”. Only last month, the Treasury minister Lord Agnew resigned in frustration because a much-delayed economic crime bill has been left out of the next Queen’s speech. That decision shows where the government’s priorities lie. In the tension between its prosperity agenda and security against Russia and other threats, it is the Treasury – and the Tory party treasurer – that too often gets the last word. In January, a US thinktank warned that any US-UK counter-kleptocracy drive would be hampered by the close ties between Russian money and elite UK institutions, including the Tory party. This week, the former Tory minister Lord Faulks told the Guardian that Britain had become a laughing stock as a result of “a deluded desire to protect the City of London”. The recent shift towards renewed deregulation in the internal balance of power in the Tory party suggests that this will not change soon. Yet it should. Action against the City’s role in money laundering is massively overdue. But the abolition of golden visas is a gesture, not a strategy. It is a scattergun approach affecting all foreign nationals of whatever background, when what is really needed is a ruthless and properly resourced targeting of assets and investors with links to hostile regimes like Russia. If Ukraine is invaded, the case for action will be even stronger. But the measures need to be effective and thorough to have any effect now.The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid said the country is seeing “the other side of the Omicron wave”. The PA news agency asked Javid if there will be a dedicated urgent and emergency care recovery plan, as called for by the Royal College of Emergency Medicine. He replied: “There is a plan for urgent and emergency care. Just at the start of this winter, we published a 10-point plan with hundreds of millions of extra funding going into the NHS and social care to help with that winter pressure. I think people could see especially over the last couple of months because of Omicron, which had rightly become the priority, that’s had additional pressure on the NHS. “But it’s right now that we are seeing the other side of the Omicron wave, that things are improving, hospitalisations are falling, that the NHS is doing all that it can to deal with that Covid backlog.” Novak Djokovic could be allowed to enter this year’s Italian Open despite the men’s world No 1 being unvaccinated, according to officials in Italy. The country’s cabinet undersecretary for sports, Valentina Vezzali, said: “If Djokovic wants to come and play in Rome he can do it,” adding that tennis is “an outdoor sport and the tighter green pass is not required”. “Perhaps Djokovic will most likely not be allowed in a hotel or a restaurant, but if he wants to play he can play,” said Vezzali, a former Olympic fencer and a 16-time world champion in foil. The U.S. has shipped nearly 5.2 million doses of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine to Egypt and Nigeria, a White House official told AFP. The shipments were the latest in a global campaign of donations from the U.S. More than 400 million jabs have already been dispatched from a target of 1.1 billion. The official, who asked not to be named, said that 2,999,880 Pfizer doses were heading to Nigeria and 2,158,650 doses to Egypt. The shipments, which left Thursday and were due to arrive by Monday, went through Covax, the global distribution initiative co-led with public-private partnership Gavi. France reported 108,171 coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 258, Reuters reports. It also reported that 3,055 people are in intensive care units with Covid-19, down by 71. France also reported 92,345 new cases. Days before the so-called Freedom Convoy reached Ottawa, starting a weeks-long occupation of Canada’s capital and triggering a string of copy-cat blockades, the federal government was warned that violent extremist groups were deeply involved in the protest movement. Intelligence assessments – prepared by Canada’s Integrated Terrorism Assessment Centre (ITAC) and seen by the Guardian – warned in late January that it was “likely” that extremists were involved and said that the scale of the protests could yet pose a “trigger point and opportunity for potential lone actor attackers to conduct a terrorism attack”. The assessments offer the first real glimpse in how federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies have assessed the threat of Canada’s anti-vaccine and conspiracy movement. “We knew these people were coming,” said a federal government source, who indicated that the Security Intelligence Service Canada – Canada’s main intelligence service, of which ITAC is a part – had flagged the involvement of extremist groups and individuals in official briefings. More data from Italy. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 14,562 on Thursday, down from 15,127 a day earlier. There were 71 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 75 on Wednesday. The total number of intensive care patients fell to 1,037 from a previous 1,073, Reuters reports. Some 538,131 tests for the virus were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 555,080, the health ministry said. Italy reported 57,890 Covid-19 related cases on Thursday, compared to 59,749 the day before, the health ministry said. The number of deaths rose to 320 from 278 on Wednesday, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 152,282 deaths linked to Covid-19 since its outbreak emerged in February 2020. The country has reported 12.32 million cases to date. Teachers unions are calling on the New South Wales state government in Australia to extend the supply of rapid antigen tests for staff and students, saying the program has helped to curb Covid-19 transmission in classrooms. Despite Victoria on Thursday announcing its near-identical school plan would be extended until the end of the term, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, indicated his state was still working through details. More than 12,000 NSW students tested positive using rapid tests in the second week of school, an increase of nearly 50% on the 8,100 students who tested positive in week one. Cuba’s widespread Covid-19 vaccination coverage and early move to inoculate its children proved pivotal in beating back the Omicron variant before it took hold on the island, local and international experts say. Omicron arrived in Cuba in December but fell far short of the pronounced spike in cases seen in many other places and infections have since fallen off by more than 80%, official data shows. Deaths have remained at around 10% or less of their peak throughout the Omicron wave, according to a Reuters tally. Brazil-based virologist Amilcar Perez Riverol said that while case numbers vary widely from country to country depending on the rate of testing, it appeared that Omicron struggled to take hold in Cuba or cause surging deaths or severe illness. It appears that Omicron is not going to have anywhere near the impact that Delta had in Cuba, or even the impact that it is having in other countries, nor will it exert the pressure on the hospital system as in other countries,” Perez Riverol told Reuters. A total of 52,542,206 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by February 16, government figures show, a rise of 10,914 on the previous day. Some 48,818,475 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 21,914. A combined total of 37,911,067 booster and third doses have been given, a day-on-day rise of 34,980. The UK recorded 51,899 new Covid cases today, government figures showed, and a further 183 deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. That is compared to 54,218 infections and 199 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Ministers are stopping supplies of coronavirus tests to universities in England, in the first case of ending the mass distribution of free lateral flow testing kits before dropping all remaining Covid restrictions. Universities are currently advised that students and staff on campus should take lateral flow tests (LFTs) twice a week, even if they do not have coronavirus symptoms. But the contract to supply the kits, through NHS test and trace and the UK Health Security Agency, will be terminated on Friday and not renewed. The move comes as the cabinet is said to be split over Covid strategy and the future of testing, with the Treasury pushing to end mass testing as a cost-saving measure, while the health secretary, Sajid Javid, wants to retain some free testing to aid community surveillance of the virus. A government spokesperson said: “No decisions have been made on the provision of free testing. Everyone can continue to get free tests, including university students and staff who can order from the government website or their local pharmacy.” That’s all from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, on the global coronavirus blog for today as I cross over to our Ukraine coverage. Please feel free to join me there. In the meantime, here’s a recap of all the international Covid developments: Almost three-quarters of people in the US are now estimated to have some level of immunity to the Omicron Covid variant that created havoc after it emerged late last year just as people hoped the pandemic was finally waning. Government ministers in India have dismissed a recent study that suggests the country’s pandemic death toll could be six to eight times higher than the official count as “fallacious and completely inaccurate”. Authorities in Hong Kong said the city’s hospitals have reached 90% capacity and quarantine facilities are at their limit. To ease the strain on the city’s healthcare system, officials said they would allow some patients to be discharged sooner. Most of Germany’s coronavirus restrictions are to be lifted by March 20, a day some commentators have already dubbed ‘Freedom Day’ in a nod to similar moves elsewhere. Portugal has also announced that it will lift its coronavirus restrictions as the number of registered new daily Covid cases dropped to around 16,500, compared with more than 50,000 last month. Israel’s prime minister says the country’s coronavirus vaccination “green pass” system will be suspended as new daily cases of Covid continue to decline. Switzerland’s president Ignazio Cassis is self-isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. The news comes on the day that Switzerland lifted almost all remaining coronavirus restrictions. The Solomon Islands is experiencing its first major community outbreak of coronavirus and its fragile healthcare system is at risk of becoming overwhelmed, the Red Cross warned today. Indonesia’s confirmed Covid cases since the pandemic began crossed 5 million on Thursday, the highest in Southeast Asia. Police in Canada’s capital, Ottawa, have warned truck drivers blockading the city’s downtown to leave or face arrest in a crackdown seeking to end a three-week-long protest over Covid restrictions. Japan is to ease its strict border controls from next month, media reports said, after criticism from students, workers and family members who have been in effect “locked out” of the country for up to two years. Moderna has applied for patents in South Africa relating to its Covid vaccine, prompting fears the company could eventually seek to prevent a new African vaccine manufacturing hub from making its own version of the mRNA shot. Most Covid deaths in Australia have affected migrants, with people born in the Middle East suffering the highest death rate, data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show. In the UK, cabinet splits have emerged over the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, expected to push to retain some free testing and community surveillance of the virus in the face of a Treasury demand to slash the budget. Almost three-quarters of Americans are now estimated to have some level of immunity to the Omicron Covid variant that created havoc after it emerged late last year just as people hoped the pandemic was finally waning. The subsequent Omicron wave that assaulted the US this winter has, however, bolstered its defenses, leaving enough protection against the coronavirus that future surges will probably require much less – if any – dramatic disruption to society, experts reckon. Millions of individual Americans’ immune systems now recognise the virus and are primed to fight it off if they encounter Omicron, or even another variant. About half of eligible Americans have received booster shots, there have been nearly 80m confirmed infections overall and many more infections have never been reported. One influential model uses those factors and others to estimate that 73% of Americans are, for now, enjoying protection from Omicron, the dominant variant, and that could rise to 80% by mid-March, experts say. This will prevent or shorten new illnesses in protected people and reduce the amount of virus circulating overall, probably tamping down new waves. Hospitals will get a break from overwhelmed ICUs, experts agree. “We have changed,” said Ali Mokdad, a professor of health metrics sciences at the University of Washington in Seattle. “We have been exposed to this virus and we know how to deal with it.” Wales’ health minister Eluned Morgan has warned that “England alone” cannot decide to end free lateral flow tests, BBC Wales reports. She said such a move for England, by UK ministers, would affect Wales, which had already paid for many tests. Morgan said: There’s been some very clear messages given to the UK government on this, both from us here in Wales, but also from the other devolved administrations. There is another meeting this week to discuss this very issue, to make sure that they understand that actually, all the decisions can’t be made by England alone, that there’s an impact on us and also that actually, we’ve paid for a lot of the provisions that they are providing already. Morgan’s comments come after recent reports that the UK government is reviewing free tests under plans to “live with Covid” in England, expected to be announced next week. Elsewhere in Europe, Portugal has also announced that it will lift its coronavirus restrictions as the number of registered new daily Covid cases dropped to around 16,500, compared with more than 50,000 last month. People will no longer have to produce a digital vaccination certification to gain entry to restaurants and other venues, and proof of a negative test to enter sports events, bars and night clubs. There will also no longer be limits on the number of people gathering in public areas. However, face masks must still be worn indoors and a digital vaccination certificate must be shown to enter the country and during hospital and care home visits. Cabinet spokesperson Mariana Vieira da Silva told a press conference: This is one more step toward normal life that was snatched away almost two years ago. Our Berlin correspondent, Kate Connolly, reports on the German government’s decision to lift nearly all Covid restrictions next month: Most of Germany’s coronavirus restrictions are to be lifted by March 20, a day some commentators have already dubbed ‘Freedom Day’ in a nod to similar moves elsewhere. The Omicron wave has reached a peak and the number of cases has been going down for several days in a row, though the 7-day incidence rate per 100,000 people remains very high, at 1385. Government leaders who met yesterday to hammer out the new framework have been quick to point out there will be conditions attached to relaxing rules over everything from gatherings to quarantines and home office working, in order to protect health care facilities and have urged caution over believing the pandemic is over. As part of the cautionary approach the government has become famous for, but which Karl Lauterbach, the health minister has insisted had “saved lives”, a vaccine mandate has still not been excluded despite pressure from some quarters that it is no longer needed. The chancellor Olaf Scholz urged those who had not yet been vaccinated to go ahead and do so ahead of the autumn, when experts say infection rates might spike again. And he said he continues to back plans for a mandate saying he hoped that MPs would be able to pass such legislation by the autumn. Around 75% of Germans have been double-jabbed. However, the rate of older people who have yet to receive a jab remains too high, Lauterbach said. Germany’s death rate is also still high, he said - 261 more deaths were reported on Thursday - and the majority of deaths are of unvaccinated people. The proposals will initially see the lifting of the number of vaccinated and recovered people who are allowed to meet, and removes the requirement of customers in non-essential shops to show proof of their vaccination or recovery status. On 4 March, vaccinated and recovered people will no longer need to show an up to date negative test to enter restaurants, bars and hotels. While clubs can open from 4 March if the infection rate remains stable, tests for everyone except for those who are boosted, will apply. The wearing of FFP2 medical masks in indoor spaces, especially on public transport, which is currently mandatory, is expected to be upheld. Scholz said he rejected use of the term ‘Freedom Day’, as it “does nothing to convey the seriousness of the situation”. Critics pointed out that there was little discussion about children in the meeting. In many parts of Germany, the testing regime for children has been increased in recent days. In some states, they have to carry out a daily lateral flow test in order to attend school. Mask-wearing also remains a requirement from primary school upwards. Under current rules, those children who are unvaccinated would be required to quarantine if returning from a country considered to be a high-risk area. ‘High risk’ includes all countries where the incidence rate is above 100. The government has said it is looking to update the legislation. Hello! I’m Léonie Chao-Fong with you on the live blog today. If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick snapshot of all the most recent news stories: Government ministers in India have dismissed a recent study that suggests the country’s pandemic death toll could be six to eight times higher than the official count as “fallacious and completely inaccurate”. Authorities in Hong Kong said the city’s hospitals have reached 90% capacity and quarantine facilities are at their limit. To ease the strain on the city’s healthcare system, officials said they would allow some patients to be discharged sooner. Israel’s prime minister says the country’s coronavirus vaccination “green pass” system will be suspended as new daily cases of Covid continue to decline. Switzerland’s president Ignazio Cassis is self-isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. The news comes on the day that Switzerland lifted almost all remaining coronavirus restrictions. The Solomon Islands is experiencing its first major community outbreak of coronavirus and its fragile healthcare system is at risk of becoming overwhelmed, the Red Cross warned today. Indonesia’s confirmed Covid cases since the pandemic began crossed 5 million on Thursday, the highest in Southeast Asia. Police in Canada’s capital, Ottawa, have warned truck drivers blockading the city’s downtown to leave or face arrest in a crackdown seeking to end a three-week-long protest over Covid restrictions. Japan is to ease its strict border controls from next month, media reports said, after criticism from students, workers and family members who have been in effect “locked out” of the country for up to two years. Moderna has applied for patents in South Africa relating to its Covid vaccine, prompting fears the company could eventually seek to prevent a new African vaccine manufacturing hub from making its own version of the mRNA shot. Most Covid deaths in Australia have affected migrants, with people born in the Middle East suffering the highest death rate, data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show. In the UK, cabinet splits have emerged over the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, expected to push to retain some free testing and community surveillance of the virus in the face of a Treasury demand to slash the budget. In a statement today, the government said Cassis’ test “came back positive and the president went into self-isolation this morning as soon as he learned of the test result”. It goes on to say that the president, 60, “has no symptoms and is in good health”. The news comes on the day that Switzerland lifted almost all remaining coronavirus restrictions despite high case numbers. Cassis announced on Wednesday that it was time to “learn to live with the virus”, telling a press conference: “The light is definitely there on the horizon.” The New York Times has published an opinion piece by Dr Gregg Gonsalves, an associate professor of epidemiology at the Yale School of Public Health and a longtime Aids activist, headlined: “The moral danger of declaring the pandemic over too soon”. The early 1990s were in many ways the most terrible of those first years of the Aids outbreak in America, Gonsalves writes, but the epidemic did not end with the development of a new generation of revolutionary treatments. “Aids still lingered and flourished in America in places that were easy for people like us to ignore,” taking root in the African American and Latino communities and moving from New York City and San Francisco to the South and into rural areas. Nearly three decades later and in the midst of a different infection, the desire to get back to normal is palpable. But it’s also clear that Covid-19 “will follow the fault lines of social and economic inequality in America” and persist in countries where people have insufficient access to vaccines. Gonsalves writes: The lesson of the Aids pandemic is that it’s easy to leave people behind, even if it is at the cost of our collective peril. No one is truly safe until we all are. Yet might we act to save millions of people not just in the interest of self-preservation but also simply because it’s the right thing to do? That would be a signal that this pandemic has changed us. For good. Indonesia registered 63,956 new cases today, down from 64,718 on Wednesday, but more than the previous record set in July last year that had left hospitals on the main island of Java overwhelmed. Health officials also reported 206 deaths on Thursday, compared with more than 2,000 a day at the peak of the surge last year. Data showed the bed occupancy rate at 33%, and 25% for intensive care units. Health minister Budi Gunadi Sadikin has said cases and deaths are expected to increase further but hospitals are unlikely to be overwhelmed again, and the country’s national Covid-19 task force spokesperson Wiku Adisasmito said the situation remained under control. Government ministers in India have dismissed a recent study that suggests the country’s pandemic death toll could be six to eight times higher than the official count as “fallacious and completely inaccurate”. The claim that Covid-19 deaths have been under-reported is “without basis and devoid of justification”, the health ministry said in a statement, The Times of India reports. The study, published on Wednesday, estimates that the Covid death toll in the country till early November was between 3.2 million and 3.7 million, compared with the official figure of 460,000. The official count has since increased to more than 510,400. The estimates are close to the figure provided by a separate team at the University of Toronto last year, who estimated 3.2 million Covid deaths in India between 1 June 2020 and 1 July 2021. If these latest estimates are correct, India would become the country with by far the highest number of Covid-19 deaths in the world, overtaking the United States (928,518) and Brazil (641,096). It would also take the global coronavirus death toll till last November from 7.8 million to 8.3 million. South Africa has approved an oral antiviral drug from Merck, the country’s health regulator, SAHPRA, said today. “The authorisation of molnupiravir for compassionate use offers further therapy in the fight against Covid-19,” SAHPRA said in a statement. We reported yesterday that Merck’s drug, molnupiravir, may not be granted EU approval over “problematic data”. A person familiar with the approval process told the Financial Times that it was “possible” that molnupiravir would not receive approval at all. The European Medicines Agency’s review of Merck’s pill has been delayed after trial data published in November showed the drug was significantly less effective than previously thought. Early data from a late-stage trial suggested that the drug cut the risk of hospitalisation and death in half, but a subsequent analysis found its efficacy is at 30%. Our health editor, Andrew Gregory, reports on a study that suggests a much lower risk of infant hospitalisation when a mother has been vaccinated against Covid: Babies whose mothers get vaccinated against Covid-19 during pregnancy are less likely to be admitted to hospital for the disease after they are born, a study suggests. The new findings are the first real-world evidence that pregnant women can not only protect themselves by getting vaccinated but can also protect their newborn infants. Babies of mothers who had two doses of the Moderna or Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines while pregnant had a much lower risk of being hospitalised with Covid-19 in the first six months of their lives, according to the study from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Dr Dana Meaney-Delman, the CDC’s chief of infant outcomes monitoring research and prevention branch, told a press briefing: The data CDC is publishing today provides real-world evidence that getting a Covid-19 vaccine during pregnancy might help protect infants less than six months of age from hospitalisation due to Covid-19. This is likely because they are born carrying their mother’s antibodies, she said. When people receive an mRNA Covid-19 vaccine during pregnancy, their bodies build antibodies to protect against Covid-19 and these antibodies have been found in umbilical cord blood, indicating that the antibodies have transferred from the pregnant person to the developing infant. And while we know that these antibodies cross the placenta, until this study, we have not yet had data to demonstrate whether these antibodies might provide protection for the baby against Covid-19. Researchers from paediatric hospitals and the CDC looked at children under six months old between July 2021 and January 2022. Let’s return to Hong Kong, where authorities say the city’s hospitals have reached 90% capacity and quarantine facilities are at their limit. Current policy dictates that any individual who is infected with Covid-19 must be admitted to a hospital or community isolation facility. Hong Kong reported 6,116 new cases today and 24 further deaths over the past week, the Associated Press reports. To ease the strain on the city’s healthcare system, officials said they would allow some patients to be discharged sooner. Under the new approach, people who are infected but present mild symptoms will be allowed to leave just after seven days if they test negative on the seventh day. Those who do not meet these criteria must complete the full 14-day isolation period or wait until they test negative. The move comes amid reports of patients being treated on beds outside a hospital in the city’s working-class neighbourhood of Sham Shui Po. From DW News’ correspondent, Phoebe Kong: Chuang Shuk-kwan, the head of Hong Kong’s Communicable Disease Branch, said medical staff are “very unhappy” because of the number of emergency cases where patients are being held in tents. The public hospitals are in a “crisis situation,” said Sara Ho of Hong Kong’s Hospital Authority. If a large number of patients are waiting outdoors and if this continues, then no matter how hard our medical professionals work around the clock, there’s no way to solve this problem relying on our own effort. The Solomon Islands is experiencing its first major community outbreak of coronavirus, and at a frightening pace. With just 11% of its population fully vaccinated, the Pacific Island nation’s fragile healthcare system is at risk of becoming overwhelmed, the Red Cross warned today. The nation of some 690,000 is spread across hundreds of islands, and many are served by only small clinics or have no nearby facilities at all. The capital Honiara has only one small hospital and authorities have already turned a sports building into a field hospital. Clement Manuri, secretary general of the Solomon Islands Red Cross Society, said the virus was spreading “faster than the wind from our cities and towns to the most remote communities”. Local authorities said last week that one in every two people in Honiara now has Covid symptoms, but with the lack of testing it is hard to say exactly how many are currently ill with the virus. Officials have struggled with the country’s vaccine rollout programme, particularly in hard-to-reach outlying islands. Misinformation and rumours have contributed to vaccine hesitancy, and getting vaccines out to remote island communities creates a major logistical challenge. With the current outbreak, however, people are now rushing to be vaccinated. “People are lining up all day,” Manuri told the Associated Press: I think the fear now is if it goes to the villages it will be a very serious problem. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. We start with the news that the UK government may announce an end to the provision of free lateral flow tests (LFTs) next week. James Heappey, the armed forces minister, has suggested Boris Johnson may scrap free do-at-home tests when he outlines his “living with Covid” plan. In an interview with Sky News this morning, Heappey said it was time to “reconsider” whether some measures should remain in place as he argued Britons need to “change behaviours” in the face of future variants. Asked whether free LFTs will be “taken away”, Heappey said: I think that is the direction of travel but the prime minister will shortly announce his conclusions on that. There are also reports that the availability of free PCR tests could also be withdrawn as part of Boris Johnson’s blueprint for the future, amid warnings that the public could be left “flying blind” on Covid if left without free testing provision. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said ending free testing would be “a mistake, [as] Covid isn’t going away”. Starmer said on Wednesday: It’s still important that people test if they have symptoms or if they’re going to see someone vulnerable. If you take away free tests, that will … make it worse in the long run. It’s not good to get rid of free tests on health grounds nor is it economically the right thing to do. Here is a brief round-up of all the day’s top Covid news stories so far: Israel’s prime minister says the country’s coronavirus vaccination “green pass” system will be suspended as new daily cases of Covid continue to decline. Police in the Canadian capital, Ottawa, have warned truck drivers blockading city’s downtown to leave or face arrest in a crackdown seeking to end a three-week-long protest over Covid restrictions. The Hong Kong government plans to make up to 10,000 hotel rooms available for Covid patients as the city battles a surge in cases and local media reported the government will make testing compulsory from March. Japan is to ease its strict border controls from next month, media reports said on Thursday, after criticism from students, workers and family members who have been in effect “locked out” of the country for up to two years. Restrictions introduced to curb the spread of Omicron across Australia’s two most populous states will be eased over the next week as cases continue to drop in New South Wales and Victoria. Moderna has applied for patents in South Africa relating to its Covid vaccine, prompting fears the company could eventually seek to prevent a new African vaccine manufacturing hub from making its own version of the mRNA shot. Most Covid deaths in Australia have affected migrants, with people born in the Middle East suffering the highest death rate, data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show. In the UK, cabinet splits have emerged over the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, with Sajid Javid expected to push to retain some free testing and community surveillance of the virus in the face of a Treasury demand to slash the budget. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. I’ll be back tomorrow but my colleague Léonie Chao-Fong will be along shortly to continue bringing you the latest coronavirus stories from around the world. Bye for now. Moderna has applied for patents in South Africa relating to its Covid vaccine, prompting fears that the company could eventually seek to prevent a new African vaccine manufacturing hub from making its own version of the mRNA shot. Moderna’s spokesperson Colleen Hussey confirmed it had filed for patents “related to both the Covid vaccine and Moderna’s platform technology” in South Africa and elsewhere, after a group of 60 Africa-based charities raised concerns about them, but said the move would not block vaccine distribution in Africa. She reiterated Moderna’s October 2020 pledge not to enforce its Covid-related patents during the coronavirus pandemic. But South Africa’s Afrigen Biologics, which used the publicly available sequence of Moderna’s vaccine to make its own version of the vaccine, said it had received no communication from the company about the patent filings. It plans to start making and distributing across Africa in November. Israel’s prime minister says the country’s coronavirus vaccination “green pass” system will be suspended as new daily cases of Covid continue to decline. Naftali Bennett said on Thursday after meeting health officials that Israel’s Omicron wave “has been broken” and that additional reductions in coronavirus restrictions were forthcoming. The green pass system, Israel’s digital vaccination passport, limited entry to indoor venues and large gatherings to people who had recovered from coronavirus or received at least three doses of the vaccine. Although new infections remain high, Israel’s health ministry has reported a steady decline in serious cases of Covid since the peak of the country’s Omicron wave earlier in February. Restrictions introduced to curb the spread of Omicron across Australia’s two most populous states will be eased over the next week as cases continue to drop in New South Wales and Victoria. The changes, similar across both states, will begin to take effect from Friday. However, the lifting of the indoor mask mandate remains another week away. In Victoria, from 6pm on Friday, density limits at hospitality and entertainment venues will be removed, dancefloors can reopen and QR code checkins will no longer be required in retail settings, schools and many workplaces. In New South Wales, from 12.01am on Friday, density limits will be scrapped, QR codes will remain only for nightclubs and music festivals with more than 1,000 attenders, and singing and dancing can resume at venues other than at festivals. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, also announced that the recommendation to work from home would be lifted, returning it to the employer’s discretion. However, masks will still be required until 25 February. “These changes are measured and proportionate to the circumstances we find ourselves in and are particularly due to the efforts of everybody across our state,” he said. In the UK, cabinet splits have emerged over the government’s “living with Covid” strategy, with Sajid Javid expected to push to retain some free testing and community surveillance of the virus in the face of a Treasury demand to slash the budget. Ministers including the health secretary and the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, are expected to meet on Thursday to discuss the strategy before it is announced next week. The Guardian revealed this week that Sunak’s Treasury is seeking to cut the budget for remaining Covid provisions by up to 90%, from £15bn this year to as little as £1.3bn in future years. The plans are likely to involve an end to all free PCR testing from March except for 1.3 million of the most vulnerable people, as well as in hospitals and high-risk settings, and an end to free asymptomatic testing with lateral flow tests (LFTs). However, there is an ongoing debate over the level of funding for free LFTs for those with Covid symptoms. Most Covid deaths in Australia have affected migrants, with people born in the Middle East suffering the highest death rate, data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show. Despite just 26% of Australians being born overseas, new ABS data shows there were 2.3 Covid-19 deaths per 100,000 people born in Australia, compared with 6.8 for those born overseas. Experts say Australia’s reliance on migrants to undertake essential, insecure work and a failure to engage migrant communities early in pandemic planning is a key reason for this. The ABS data also supports previous data gathered throughout the pandemic that found deaths are higher in older populations and in people with pre-existing conditions. Almost 70% of death certificates in Australia reported pre-existing chronic conditions such as dementia and diabetes, according to the data which analysed 2,639 deaths where people died with or from Covid-19 from the start of the pandemic to 31 January 2022. The ABS expects to receive further data for this period once it receives information from the jurisdictional registries of deaths. Japan is to ease its strict border controls from next month, media reports said on Thursday, after criticism from students, workers and family members who have been in effect “locked out” of the country for up to two years. The restrictions, which limit arrivals to Japanese citizens and returning foreign residents, have affected 150,000 students, triggering accusations from politicians and business leaders that the ban is damaging the country’s economy and international image. Japan briefly relaxed the rules last year but tightened them again in November in an attempt to prevent the spread of the highly contagious Omicron variant of the coronavirus. The opening up will be incremental, however, and will not apply to tourists. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, is expected to announce later on Thursday an increase in daily arrivals from 3,500 to 5,000, as well as a reduction in quarantine from a week to three days for people with a negative test result and proof they have had a booster shot. Police in the Canadian capital, Ottawa, have warned truck drivers blockading city’s downtown to leave or face arrest in a crackdown seeking to end a three-week-old protest over Covid restrictions. The interim police chief Steve Bell vowed “to take back the entirety of the downtown core and every occupied space” in “coming days”, Reuters reported. The federal public safety minister, Marco Mendicino, accused extremist groups of helping organise protests in Ottawa and at US border crossings and repeated suggestions that some actors wanted to overthrow the Liberal government. Police handed leaflets to truckers that said “You must leave the area now. Anyone blocking streets … may be arrested.” Police also ticketed some of the hundreds of vehicles blocking Ottawa’s downtown. At least one large rig left while some demonstrators put the leaflets into a toilet placed in front of a truck. Some truckers blew their horns in violation of a court order forbidding such behaviour. Wendell Thorndyke, who has parked in front of parliament for 21 days, insisted he had no intention of leaving. “We think it’s cute. They turned all the cops into meter maids,” he said as he filled his engine with oil. Hello, Tom Ambrose here. I’ll be bringing you the latest Covid news over the next couple of hours. We begin with news that the Hong Kong government plans to make up to 10,000 hotel rooms available for Covid patients as the city battles a surge in cases and local media reported the government will make testing compulsory from March. The chief executive, Carrie Lam, renewed an appeal for support from the global financial hub’s 7.5 million people, many of whom are fatigued by some of the world’s most stringent restrictions even as most other major cities adjust to living with the virus. Daily infections have surged by more than 40 times since the start of February and authorities have shut schools, gyms cinemas and most public venues. Many office employees have reverted to working from home. Lam’s comments, in a statement released late on Wednesday, came after the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, told Hong Kong’s leaders their “overriding mission” was to stabilise and control coronavirus in the global financial hub. “With the utmost concern and staunch support of President Xi Jinping … all in society must now join hands in riding out the fifth wave of the epidemic, displaying the Hong Kong spirit in full,” she said. “I am optimistic that, through the joint efforts by the government and hotel sector, at least 10,000 hotel rooms could be made available.” In a move to free up beds for isolation, Lam said she had spoken with local hotel owners and the security chief, Chris Tang, would oversee the operation of participating hotels. Hong Kong was expected to report around 5,000 new cases on Thursday, Now TV reported, up from the previous day’s record high of 4,285 confirmed infections and an additional 7,000 preliminary positive cases.Swiftly doing away with any extraneous guff, the title of Channing Tatum’s to-the-point co-directorial debut Dog doesn’t need a journey, a way home or even a purpose, it just needs a dog. So dog lovers eager for a dog movie primarily about a dog will be reassured by the knowledge that Dog does feature plenty of dog but they might be a little surprised about what else the film has to offer, an odd and atonal ramble across the US where the dog comes first and plotting comes a long way after. It’s been four years since we’ve seen Tatum on screen, (he’s been heard in a couple of animated films since 2017) and Dog is a slickly calculated comeback vehicle, as calculated as they come. He gets to be macho but sensitive, shirtless but sometimes merely wet-shirted and, most importantly, he gets to frolic with a cute dog, a hard-to-resist Belgian shepherd called Lulu, partly inspired by his real pet Lulu who died three years ago. Tatum plays an army ranger suckered into transporting his late friend’s difficult dog to his funeral. Both man and mutt have been traumatised by their time serving overseas and the long drive ahead gives them both a chance to learn something from the other in between a series of increasingly bizarre run-ins. For while the general structure of Dog is as basic as its title, the tone is far harder to figure out, a warm-hearted family film striving for a hip edge, the question of who this is for being asked on a loop throughout. The scrapes the pair get into include a failed tantric threesome with two women in Portland, a kidnap on a weed farm involving a tranquilliser and an axe and a racist attack at a high-end hotel leading to time behind bars. The script, from co-director and long-time Tatum collaborator Reid Carolin and former soldier Brett Rodriguez, is both strange and sanitised, caught between appealing to younger kids and also to their much older brothers; what if dog movie but cool. Whatever the aim of this all might have been, it’s muddied with every new escalation. The aforementioned racist incident is a particular flub, with Tatum’s character feigning blindness to get a fancy room for him and his dog, who is then triggered by the sight of a Middle Eastern man and so attacks him. There’s a way this could have been handled with some delicacy and interrogation (what sort of racial profiling has infected the instincts of some army-trained dogs?) but it’s in the centre of an absurd comic set piece, and all it does is remind us that while the film takes ample time to focus on the crippling PTSD experienced by many US soldiers (one of the script’s finest and most sensitive qualities, mind), there’s no effort to remind us of the other side of that equation. It’s not handled with the horror it deserves or even that much embarrassment from Tatum’s character. It’s just another weird thing that happens in a movie full of weird things. While a reliably commanding Tatum works well with the dog (he’s clearly a devoted dog owner), the script leaps past too many of the pair’s key milestones together. We’re told, and shown, that Lulu is violent and impossible from the outset but there’s not quite enough legwork involved in showing us how he manages to tame her (a brief, batty episode involving Jane Adams establishing a psychic connection to her does not suffice) and it’s one of many lazy A to C pole vaults the film does to rush us toward the finale. It’s a collection of uneven episodes – a wordless Q’orianka Kilcher and a racist Bill Burr also briefly crop up – stitched together by copious shots of Tatum sitting on his car in a tight T-shirt next to a sunset. Dog wants to be that sturdy plane movie you find hard to surf past when you see it on cable in the ensuing years and while it looks and sounds the part (Thomas Newman score – check), there’s not the slick storytelling and big emotional beats to match. It might be a pet project for Tatum but it’s a rough ride for the rest of us. Dog is out in UK and US cinemas on 18 FebruaryThe UK competition watchdog is teaming up with its counterparts in the US, Canada, Australia and New Zealand in a drive to detect and investigate collusion between suppliers or shipping groups to hike prices. The Competition and Markets Authority said it was linking up with its fellow agencies in other “five eyes” nations after receiving “multiple complaints” from businesses about supply chains, where, for example, fees for shipping have soared by up to 10 times compared with pre-pandemic levels in the past two years. The CMA said that despite the complaints it was yet to find evidence of potential breaches of the law. A new working group made up of the US Department of Justice, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, the Canadian Competition Bureau and the New Zealand Commerce Commission is planning to “meet regularly to develop and share intelligence to detect and investigate suspected anti-competitive behaviour and collusion”. The agencies released a coordinated statement saying they were “putting firms on notice that those attempting to use supply chain disruptions as a cover for illegal anticompetitive conduct, including collusion, will face the full force of the law”. It is understood the remit is broad, covering sectors including retail, healthcare and agriculture. In the UK, businesses found to be colluding could be fined up to 10% of global turnover and directors could be disqualified or in some cases face criminal prosecution. Michael Grenfell, the executive director of enforcement at the CMA, urged anyone aware of anti-competitive behaviour to contact the watchdog’s cartels hotline. He said: “People and businesses across the world have been facing higher prices for goods and for transporting them. “While price rises can be legitimate, the CMA would be concerned if collusive anti-competitive practices are contributing to these rises or preventing prices from coming down. “The CMA is ready to use its legal powers where it finds evidence that the issues in the supply chain might be caused by potential breaches of competition law. “These are global issues that are best addressed together. With support and intelligence from partner agencies across the world, we can step in and take enforcement action if we find evidence of anti-competitive behaviour taking place.” Businesses have been warning for some time of the impact of the surging cost of moving goods, which is partly responsible for inflation in the cost of goods and a squeeze on household spending. MakeUK, which represents the manufacturing industry, and the British Chambers of Commerce, wrote last autumn to the CMA, asking it to look into the world’s biggest shipping companies and whether soaring costs could be justified. Their complaints came as the biggest global shipping firms were expected to make extraordinary profits in 2021. The CMA told industry groups it would monitor the situation, but informed them it was not able to address the price rises unilaterally, because shipping costs were “the product of multiple factors, often international in nature”.South Africa’s potential move to join the Six Nations could spark a bidding war to host the British &amp; Irish Lions in 2033 with Argentina, Japan and the US among the possible candidates. The Lions are due to travel to Australia in 2025 but there is no agreement in place as to where they will subsequently play after their multi-tour deal came to an end after their drawn series in New Zealand in 2017. The All Blacks are still expected to host the Lions in 2029 but with South Africa exploring the option of joining the Six Nations after 2025, the 2033 tour destination is less certain. Last summer’s maligned series against South Africa was arranged as a one-off with a new commercial partnership for that tour only and afterwards the Lions’ managing director, Ben Calveley, said that future deals would be done on a “tour-by-tour” basis. “There is no long-term commitment to anyone,” he said. “We do a tour-by-tour deal depending on the conditions that prevail on our end.” Calveley also stated that the Lions were not looking to deviate from the traditional model of rotating between the Springboks, Australia and New Zealand but South Africa joining the Six Nations would make them a far less attractive proposition. That, in turn, could pave the way for the Lions to break new ground. Both Argentina, in 2005, and Japan at Murrayfield last summer have played against the Lions before and given that the commercial benefits of staging a Lions tour are huge for the host nation, they would not be short of bidders. The US are the frontrunners to host the 2031 World Cup and hosting the Lions tour years later would be the ideal next step in their progression. The Lions have not employed a bidding process before but did not rule out doing so in the future after the 2021 tour. Meanwhile, proposals for South Africa to replace Italy in the Six Nations – as opposed to joining a seven-team competition – have been rejected by a well-placed source in Italy, where a plan for an expanded tournament with the Springboks joining the existing teams is considered a more likely outcome.He saw it as a relaxed chat for a local podcast about social issues in the place he has worked and lived in for more than three decades and so, by his own admission, was a little unguarded. But Sir Tim Smit, the co-founder of Cornwall’s Eden Project, has become embroiled in a furore in his adopted homeland after suggesting that the Cornish could be “a bit more fucking articulate” and were too fond of looking backwards to “good old days [that] never were the good old days”. Smit’s words were pored over by politicians and academics on Thursday – as well as by residents and business people in St Austell, the town closest to Eden, with some fiercer critics claiming his words were racist, a charge he strongly refutes. “He’s put his foot in it, hasn’t he?” said Simon Carter, an art dealer in St Austell. “He’s a good businessman but I think he has some odd ideas. I don’t think it’s fair to say Cornish people look backwards. I actually think Cornwall’s very forward-thinking.” Mark Lawther, who runs a travel company in the town, agreed. “Cornwall is a unique place with unique people and a unique culture, which is very important for people, but it’s not remotely backward-looking.” Claire Harris, who runs an art shop, saw a “grain of truth” in some of what Smit said. “People do look at the past through rose-tinted glasses at times,” she said. “And people can give off negative vibes, which makes getting things done much harder.” Most Cornish people, she added, were “too busy making a living” to be articulate about Cornwall. Simon Knowle, a complementary therapy practitioner, said he had time for Smit and there was room in Cornwall for all sorts of views. “Tim’s a remarkable individual. And remarkable individuals can be contentious.” In the podcast hosted by the Cornish performer and artist Seamas Carey, Smit bemoaned the fact that people who spoke about Cornwall were sometimes criticised as “arrogant” if they were not Cornish themselves. Smit, who was born in the Netherlands and moved to Cornwall in 1987, said: “You feel like saying, well if you were a bit more fucking articulate you could speak up yourself.” He went on: “You’ve all got mums who made the best pasties in the world and it’s fantastic and it’s fabulous and you talk about the good old days and the good old days never were the good old days. They’ve been bad for about 70 years and they’ve been bad because of tossers like you and that’s what I would actually say to quite a lot of Cornish people. “I really would because you cannot define your life in terms of what you don’t like. You’ve got to actually define your life sometimes in terms of the sunny uplands you would like to aspire to.” On Thursday Smit told the Guardian that he took part in the podcast for a family friend and was “off-guard”, chatting as if he was in a pub. He admitted he “went off on one” but said: “The idea that I’m anti-Cornish is as far off the mark as it could possibly be.” Smit said he regretted using the word “tossers”. But he added: “I’m not racist. It was a type of Cornish approach I was talking about.” Andrew George, a Cornish Liberal Democrat councillor, called it an “astonishing rant”. He said: “The Cornish have always been the last refuge for this kind of ‘acceptable’ racism. He knows he can get away with it because there are enough who share his lazy caricature of Cornish people and the prejudice and antipathy which accompanies it.” Joanie Willett, the co-director of the Institute of Cornish Studies, said the cheerful, holiday image people had of Cornwall made it harder for residents’ real experiences to be seen and heard. “We are not inarticulate, it’s that our story is not being heard,” she said. “We do try to define ourselves in terms of our sunny uplands. But that voice gets drowned out.” There were some backers for Smit. Kim Conchie, the chief executive of Cornwall Chamber of Commerce, said he must have been feeling “grouchy” when he did the interview but added that people like Smit and Rick Stein had helped Cornwall get its “mojo” back. Bert Biscoe, a Cornish politician, historian and bard of the Cornish Gorseth, which exists to maintain the Celtic spirit of Cornwall, said Smit had over-stated Cornish people’s inclination to be negative. He sais he was glad the comments had led to debate, before adding: “But he could have been a little more polite.”Elon Musk has been criticised by the Auschwitz-Birkenau museum for comparing the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, to Adolf Hitler. The chief executive of Tesla tweeted a meme that showed a photo of Hitler with the words “Stop comparing me to Justin Trudeau” above the image and “I had a budget” below. The tweet was later deleted. Musk’s use of Hitler’s image “disrespects the memory of all victims and hurts many people”, said the Auschwitz-Birkenau museum, which is on the site of the Nazi concentration camp where an estimated 1.1 million people were killed. “Using the image of Adolf Hitler &amp; therefore exploiting the tragedy of all people who suffered, were humiliated, tortured &amp; murdered by the totalitarian regime of Nazi Germany created by him is sad &amp; disturbing,” the museum tweeted in reply to Musk. The American Jewish Committee said the billionaire’s tweet was unacceptable and demanded he apologise. “Once again, Elon Musk has exercised extremely poor judgment by invoking Hitler to make a point on social media. He must stop this unacceptable behaviour,” it said. “Musk may believe posting a meme comparing Justin Trudeau to a genocidal dictator who exterminated millions is an appropriate way to criticise policies he disagrees with. It is not. It never is. Musk must apologise and find other ways to voice his displeasure.” Musk did not respond to the AJC or the Auschwitz-Birkenau museum, but posted another tweet that suggested his Twitter followers read a book about the economic history of Nazi Germany for “an in-depth explanation”. The world’s wealthiest person, with a $236bn (£173bn) fortune, made the original post in response to reports that Canadian authorities had ordered banks to block cryptocurrency donations to anti-vaccine protesters. Musk has frequently spoken out in favour of the Canadian trucker protests against Covid-19 mandates. Last month he posted a photo of the long line of trucks and tweeted: “Canadian truckers rule”. In another post he said: “If Canadian government is suppressing peaceful protests, that’s where fascism lies.” The Tesla boss also accused the US financial regulator on Thursday of targeting him with a “harassment campaign”, which he said was designed to “chill” his criticism of the US government. In a court filing, his lawyers accused the Securities and Exchange Commission of “targeting Mr Musk and Tesla for unrelenting investigation largely because Mr Musk remains an outspoken critic of the government; the SEC’s outsized efforts seem calculated to chill his exercise of first amendment rights”. The filing is part of Musk’s attempt to persuade the SEC to distribute $40m (£29m) in fines that he and Telsa paid to the regulator over misleading tweets in 2018. The SEC sued Musk after he tweeted he had “funding secured” to potentially take his electric car company private at $420 a share. In reality, a buyout was not close. Tesla and Musk settled by agreeing to each pay a $20m fine, and to let the carmaker’s lawyers vet his tweets that could affect its stock price. Musk’s lawyer said the SEC had committed to returning the $40m to Tesla shareholders, but had failed to yet do so. • This article was amended on 20 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to Auschwitz-Birkenau where “960,000 people were killed”. The death toll there is estimated to be 1.1 million. The figure of 960,000 relates to those who were Jewish.Simone Inzaghi tried to remain upbeat throughout his post-match press conference but, in keeping with Internazionale’s entire night against Liverpool at San Siro, a positive performance came with a sting at the end. Inter’s coach described their display as “probably our best game of the season” considering they were facing “one of the best teams in Europe” and stated several times that he was proud of the Italian champions’ tireless shift. Only the fine margins had gone against them, he continued, with Roberto Firmino’s glancing 75th-minute header the decisive detail. And then came the sting, or perhaps just the reality. “We don’t have much hope now,” Inzaghi admitted. It has been drained by Liverpool’s ruthlessness, their set-piece prowess, the impact of Jürgen Klopp’s high-calibre substitutes and the commanding partnership of Virgil van Dijk and Ibrahima Konaté in the heart of the visitors’ defence. The growing understanding between the pair provided a platform for Liverpool’s late victory and Inter’s understandable lament. It seems a statistical error that, after an open and hugely entertaining game in which Ivan Perisic wreaked havoc down Liverpool’s right for a sustained spell after half-time, neither Alisson nor his Inter counterpart Samir Handanovic made a save between them. Liverpool scored with their two attempts on target, from 12 overall, while the hosts failed to find the target from nine attempts. The determined, organised and intelligent defending in front of Alisson had a greater influence on his clean sheet than any profligacy on Inter’s part. Wednesday was only the eighth time that Van Dijk and Konaté have started together since the latter’s £36m arrival from RB Leipzig last summer. Their partnership is at the fledgling stage and to lavish it with praise is not to undermine Joël Matip’s continued claims as the polished, often unsung foil to Van Dijk. Matip has much more to contribute than smacking his teammates’ heads while they celebrated Firmino’s goal at San Siro, and receiving a deathly stare back from Jordan Henderson for his troubles. But Konaté and Van Dijk complemented each other superbly in the last-16 first leg in Milan, dealing with the physical threat of Edin Dzeko, stifling Lautaro Martínez throughout and curbing Perisic’s probing crosses with countless interceptions. Van Dijk, having worked his way back to imperious form, gave the 22-year-old Konaté licence to defend impressively on the front foot in the safe knowledge his back was covered. They were dominant against Inter’s set pieces – in contrast to their opposite numbers in the decisive closing stage – and Dzeko’s pained expression when clean through on the stroke of half-time, only for Van Dijk to cruise past and roll the ball back to Alisson, encapsulated Inter’s torment in front of goal. That recurring dream of running nowhere fast was played out in real time by Dzeko. Klopp has adopted a careful integration policy with his summer signing, similar in some respects to Andy Robertson’s first season as a Liverpool player, but Konaté is pressing his claims for a more regular role with every start. Liverpool’s season is brimming with the expectation and hope that disappeared from Inter in Milan.Hikaru Nakamura defeated Levon Aronian 3-1 in the all-American Fide Grand Prix first leg final at Berlin on Thursday as the five-time US champion, who has become a Twitch stremer with more than a million followers, showed his speed skills by winning both 15-minute rapids after two classical games were drawn. Nakamura needed a wildcard from the Fide president to compete in Berlin, and that decision drew sharp criticism from Arkady Dvorkovich’s Russian compatriots, but his games were full of energy and ideas. The decisive final encounter was level until Aronian, needing a win to stay in the match, advanced his white king too far into the black camp where it was trapped by Nakamura’s rooks. This was the first leg (of three) of the Grand Prix, which qualifies its top two finishers to the eight-player Candidates at Madrid in June, the event which will decide the 2023 challenger for Magnus Carlsen’s world crown. There has been tension between Aronian and Nakamura dating back to a touch-move incident at Moscow 2016, but the former Armenian, 39, and the 34-year-old, who has popularised chess to huge online audiences, are now both well placed. They will miss the Grand Prix second leg starting in Belgrade on 28 February before returning for the final leg in Berlin on 21 March. In contrast, the quintet of Russians who failed to get past the group stage all face elimination. The only US casualty who did not reach at least the semi-final in Berlin was Wesley So, and the former Filipino was knocked out by a compatriot. Leinier Domínguez found White’s winning move in the diagram with seconds to spare, avoiding a plausible but losing alternative, Can you do as well? Aronian, Domínguez, and Carlsen’s 2018 challenger, Fabiano Caruana, are all residents of St Louis, which has become a global chess centre with backing from the billionaire Rex Sinquefield. St Louis has a chess Hall of Fame, a chess club open nine hours a day, and the world’s largest chess piece, a 20ft high king. Sinquefield’s other ambition was to create a group of top grandmasters, through a mixture of home talent and transfers, capable of winning the biennial 150-nation Olympiad. That target has already been fulfilled, as the US won gold in 2016, were an unlucky second to China in 2018, and will again be favourites at the next Olympiad in Moscow in July. The Grand Prix action now moves to Belgrade, where the favourites are Anish Giri, the Netherlands world No 9, Shak Mamedyarov, Azerbaijan’s world No 7, and Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, France’s world No 11. The last two are both in the same Belgrade preliminary group, already styled the “Group of Death”. China’s world No 3, Ding Liren, withdrew from both Berlin and Belgrade and is thus out of contention. What has happened to him raises the question whether Chinese sports officials have quietly downgraded their achievement targets. International chess, as opposed to the Chinese version which is much more generally popular, has only been taken seriously by Beijing since the 1970s. Chinese teams have been regular winners of the women’s Olympiad, won gold at the open Olympiad in 2014, and then, at Batumi 2018, won both Olympiad titles, the first nation to achieve the double since the Soviet Union in 1986. Success at Batumi was generally expected to lead to a still stronger Chinese campaign to create a challenger for Carlsen’s individual global title. It seemed that this would be spearheaded by Ding, but the 29-year-old, who should be at the peak of his powers, has just missed a major opportunity There are suggestions that Ding left it too late to apply for a visa for Berlin, then decided he had little chance to do well in Belgrade and gain a place in the final leg via a withdrawal. In contrast, China’s No 2, Yu Yangyi, has played in the World Cup and the Grand Swiss, and is also in the field for Belgrade. The obvious solution for Ding is to establish a second home in Europe from where it would be much easier to commute to major tournaments, Aronian, when still an Armenian, had a base in Berlin, while both India’s Vishy Anand and Bulgaria’s Veselin Topalov operated from Spain in their peak years. A wider concern is that Beijing sports officials may have made a policy decision to downgrade their chess ambitions and to consider the 2018 double Olympiad gold as sufficient fulfilment, tacitly abandoning any further campaign to support Ding towards the individual world top. Perhaps they have concluded that Carlsen is too strong to dethrone. Carlsen himself will be back in action on Saturday in the Airthings Masters, the opening event of the online Meltwater Champions Tour. Games start at 5pm, and Carlsen’s four opponents that day in order will be Russia’s Vladislav Artemiev, the 17-year-old world rapid champion, Nodirbek Abdusattorov, Russia’s rising star Andrey Esipenko, 19, and the defeated 2021 challenger, Ian Nepomniachtchi. 3803: 1...Qf2! threatens 2...Rxh3+! 3 Kxh3 Qh4 mate. If 2 Qd4 Qg3+ 3 Kh1 Re1+ wins the queen. Dominguez v So: 1 Kh1! wins. The game ended 1...Nh4 2 Rxh4 g6 3 Rxh5+! and mates. If 1...Rf3 2 Re8+! mates. If 1...g6 2 Re2 wins. White had planned 1 Re2?? but saw at the last moment that it loses to 1...Ne1+! 2 Rxf2 Rxf2+ 3 Kg3 Rg2+! and Nxd3.Britain believes that nearly half of Russian forces that have massed near Ukraine are now within 30 miles of the border, in contrast to statements from Moscow that its forces were being sent back to barracks. Reinforcements from 14 battalions were in the process of arriving, officials added, while highlighting a pontoon bridge that had been briefly set up in Belarus in the past few days as an example of unusual military activity. There was evidence, a defence source said, “of Russian forces leaving the deployment sites for staging areas closer to the border”. A couple of hours later, the US president, Joe Biden, warned that an attack could take place “in the next several days”. Russia has repeatedly said it has no intention of invading Ukraine and on Tuesday announced a drawdown of troops from Crimea, accompanied by videos of tanks being loaded on to transport trains. But the UK – in conjunction with the US – stepped up its warnings on Thursday. The pontoon bridge, revealed in satellite imagery, was built five miles from Ukraine’s borders across the Pripyat river in the Chernobyl reactor exclusion zone as part of ongoing joint exercises in Belarus between Russia and its neighbour. Ukraine is crisscrossed with rivers, which has been highlighted as a possible hindrance to any potential Russian ground invasion unless they used pontoon bridges. Images from Wednesday, highlighted by the defence analyst group Jane’s, showed that the bridge had been taken down. But officials said of its construction: “This activity is highly unusual and inconsistent with any past exercise.” As part of the growing public relations efforts, the UK’s Ministry of Defence also released a short video saying that it had seen “no evidence that Russian forces are withdrawing from Ukrainian border regions”, with a map showing a possible invasion on multiple axes. The video warned: “Defence intelligence assesses that he [Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin] would be willing to sustain thousands of casualties to get what he wants.” However, analysts from the International Institute for Strategic Studies questioned this week whether Russia had the capacity to carry out such a wide-ranging invasion as the video suggested. John Chipman, the chief executive of the thinktank, said on Wednesday that should Russia decide to attack, “there’s probably enough combat mass now present to conduct a more limited ground operation, perhaps to seize Ukraine eastern regions”. A key moment could come on Friday. The president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, said he would meet Putin that day to decide whether Moscow’s forces would remain in Belarus after 20 February, when the joint exercises were due to conclude. Previously, both countries had said Russian forces would depart on that date. Over the past 24 hours, independent experts have become increasingly sceptical that Russian forces are moving significantly away from the border areas, although it can take time for open-source satellite imagery or other video to emerge. Thomas Bullock, a senior open-source analyst from Jane’s, said that it “looks like the equipment is actually being moved to positions closer to the border … there’s nothing to really indicate otherwise”. The videos released by Russia’s Ministry of Defence, Bullock said, were heavily edited and sometimes appeared to combine clips of tanks both arriving to and leaving the rail station, making it unclear whether the armour had really been withdrawn. “It’s a bit misleading really,” he added. “If you wanted a consistent narrative you’d just show the tanks driving to the train station. Instead, they show them going there, they come back, they’re going again. It seems a bit all over the place.” Footage published by the Russian government had shown elements of the 136th Motorised Rifle Brigade and 42nd Motorised Rifle Division of the 58th Army, both deployed to Crimea, boarding railcars that the Russian defence ministry indicated were bound for their permanent bases in mainland Russia. Western defence sources said they would be sceptical unless they saw evidence of forces, some of whom have deployed across Russia, returning to their bases with heavy equipment. After a smaller buildup last spring, thousands of troops remained near Ukraine, rather than going home. The Russian newspaper Izvestia, which has good sources in the defence ministry, also reported that the 3rd and 150th Motorized Rifle Divisions were returning to their garrisons as part of the drawdown. But, as analysts noted, their permanent bases are located in Valyuki, a base just over 9 miles from Ukraine, and in Rostov region just 25 miles from the border. “Best guess is we will see a deployment shell game,” wrote Michael Kofman, a research programme director in the Russia studies programme at the US research centre CNA. “Units redeploying around Ukraine without altering the overall picture. Some BTGs [battalion tactical groups] leaving Crimea, but even more still arriving elsewhere.” More powerful Russian units such as the 1st Guards Tank Army had been identified moving to positions as close as 19 miles from the border this week, Bullock said, “tearing up streets” in small villages as they drove to positions within striking distance of the border.A multimillionaire DJ and her husband were last year forced to hand £4m to the National Crime Agency (NCA) after admitting in a settlement that they had brought the money into the UK illegally through a $2.9bn (£2.1bn) money-laundering scheme nicknamed the “Azerbaijani laundromat”. Izzat Khanim Javadova, who performs in London and Ibiza as DJ Mikaela Jav, and her husband, Suleyman Javadov, entered the UK years earlier after investing at least £2m under the “golden visa” scheme that has attracted thousands of wealthy people from Russia and former Soviet states to settle in Britain. Most moved to London, nicknamed “Londongrad” in some circles. Javadova, a cousin of the Azerbaijani president, Ilham Aliyev, and a daughter of a former Azerbaijani MP, was granted a “tier 1 investor visa” during a “blind faith period” between 2008 and 2015, when 97% of investors were subject to scant checks on the legitimacy of their wealth. More than 3,000 people were granted investor visas during this period, including 705 Russians. They include: ● Zamira Hajiyeva, whose husband was the former chair of Azerbaijan’s state bank, who was served with the UK’s first unexplained wealth order after being found to have spent £1m a year at Harrods. Law enforcers alleged the money came from her husband Jahangir, who was sentenced to 15 years in jail in Azerbaijan. ● Nirav Modi, an Indian billionaire awaiting extradition over an accusation of defrauding a state-owned bank of £1.5bn. ● Mukhtar Ablyazov, the son of a former energy minister in Kazakhstan, accused of embezzling $5bn (£4bn) from a state bank and lying to a court about the scale of his vast fortune, including a £17m mansion on The Bishops Avenue in London. After the 2018 Salisbury poisonings of Sergei and Yulia Skripal, a former Russian military officer and his daughter, the government launched a review into the investors awarded visas from 2008-2015. The review has yet to be published. Meanwhile, new investors continued to take advantage of the visa system. The latest Home Office data shows 798 investor visas were granted in the year to September 2021, of which 82 were award to Russians – the highest 12-month total since 2018. The scheme remained open, despite parliament’s joint intelligence and security committee saying in 2020 that it was “welcoming oligarchs with open arms”. “It offered ideal mechanisms by which illicit finance could be recycled through what has been referred to as the London ‘laundromat’,” it said. “Russian influence in the UK is ‘the new normal’, and there are a lot of Russians with very close links to Putin who are well integrated into the UK business and social scene, and accepted because of their wealth. This level of integration – in ‘Londongrad’ in particular – means that any measures now being taken by the government are not preventative but rather constitute damage limitation.” Chris Bryant, a Labour MP who sits on the foreign affairs select committee, said the UK “remains the soft underbelly for dodgy Russian money” and the investor visa programme had been a “gold-plated invite to launder money in the UK”. The Home Office announced on Thursday that the scheme would end with immediate effect. Bryant said the UK had become addicted to “dodgy money”, and questioned why Priti Patel, the home secretary, had not ended the scheme sooner, saying she was on the foreign affairs committee when it recommended closing it. The scheme was launched by the Labour government after the 2008 global financial crisis to raise investment. A £2m investment allowed an application within five years, decreasing to three years with £5m, or to two years with £10m. Prem Sikka, emeritus professor of accounting at the University of Essex and a Labour member of the House of Lords, said: “The City is hooked on dirty money. Foreign money, often illicit, has inflated the housing market [while] Britons can’t get on the housing ladder.”Long before full time, debate was under way regarding where this sits in a table of one-off results for Scottish teams in European competition. Success for Rangers against Borussia Dortmund is at least a valid part of the discussion. The visiting contingent inside Signal Iduna Park not only – and quite rightly – partied but realised this was an extraordinary occasion that will be spoken about for years to come. Far from stealing victory, the Scottish champions were fully deserving of it; including by the two-goal margin. There may even be frustration for Giovanni van Bronckhorst that Rangers do not have more leeway before the second leg. Dortmund, earlier the Europa League favourites, are staring elimination square in the face. They were run ragged at times by Rangers’ display. From Van Bronckhorst there was post-match stoicism. “This is a very good result against a big European team,” the Rangers manager said. “We know we are only at half way. We are not through to the next round.” Indeed, Dortmund have the talent to turn this tie on its head in Glasgow. Erling Haaland, who missed this embarrassing loss through injury, could be back by then. “I can’t say that yet,” said the Dortmund manager, Marco Rose. “He did a little training yesterday but there is still some time to go. He also hasn’t played for quite a while. I don’t know.” From Mats Hummels, the Dortmund centre-back, there was scathing assessment of what happened here. “We’re playing an awful lot of nonsensical football,” he said. “A lot of illogical football and making our opponents so strong.” It felt impossible to disagree. Rangers clearly harboured no sense of trepidation. Spotting glaring weakness in the Dortmund defence is one thing, capitalising on it in the manner Rangers did quite another. When Jude Bellingham curled a fine shot beyond Allan McGregor to reduce the Dortmund arrears to two goals, at 3-1, there was a lingering sense the German side may complete their comeback and restore a sense of natural order. Rangers were having none of that. Alfredo Morelos, who tormented the home defence all evening, strode forward to restore Rangers’ three-goal lead. The final goal of six in the game belonged to Dortmund’s Raphaël Guerreiro, which changes the complexion of the tie ever so slightly. Rangers, though, must have belief they can puncture Dortmund’s shaky back line when roared on by a capacity Ibrox crowd. An indication that this may be Rangers’ evening arrived within 10 minutes. Borna Barisic lacked conviction with a shot that was saved by Gregor Kobel. Ryan Kent, who enjoyed an outstanding evening, was the creator. Brief panic, but only that, followed for Van Bronckhorst. Dan-Axel Zagadou had a simple task to head Dortmund in front from a corner but fluffed his lines. Bellingham flashed a pass across McGregor’s six-yard line that found no takers. That was as good as the first half got for Rose’s team, who were jeered off at the interval. By that stage, a James Tavernier penalty and a Morelos tap-in had put Rangers on course for victory. Zagadou’s miserable evening continued when VAR correctly penalised him for handball. Tavernier did the rest from 12 yards. It was the Rangers captain’s corner, flicked on by Joe Aribo, that Morelos converted. The pick of Rangers’ goals belonged to John Lundstram. The midfielder bent a shot out of Kobel’s reach from 22 yards after Kent laid the ball back into his path. At 3-0, Rangers were in dreamland. Bellingham, one of precious few Dortmund players who emerged with credit, duly had his say. Undeterred, Morelos survived a VAR check before celebrating a fourth. Zagadou was again involved, having deflected the ball on its way into the net. Dortmund had now conceded nine goals in two home outings. It could have been 10, Aribo’s shot instead flying agonisingly wide. Dortmund claimed an element of salvation with a long-range Guerreiro effort. This gives them hope for the second leg. Based on this evidence, however, they cannot have much; the home support’s disgust towards their team was plain at full-time. “I am really proud of the performance,” Van Bronckhorst said. Rightly so. The Dutchman must wish the away goal rule was still in place.