Russell T Davies, whose five-part drama It’s A Sin centred on the lives lost to Aids in the 1980s, has been named the most influential name in television in an annual list compiled by industry experts, with the drama’s leading star, Olly Alexander, taking second spot. Strictly winner Rose Ayling-Ellis, whose performance raised awareness of hearing impairments, came third, while the creators of Squid Game, Hwang Dong-hyuk, and Succession, Jesse Armstrong, two of the biggest international television shows of 2021, completed the top five. The RadioTimes.com TV 100 2021 list, recognised the top 100 people in front of and behind the camera in 2021, according to leading figures from across the creative industries, including Charlotte Moore, the BBC’s director of content, and Anne Mensah, the vice-president of content at Netflix. Davies’s Channel 4 drama was “far and away” the obvious winner, said Morgan Jeffery, the executive editor of entertainment website RadioTimes.com. He described It’s a Sin as a “beautiful tribute to lives lost to the Aids epidemic – a stunning piece of work, it challenged stigma, sparked conversations and even led to charity drives raising hundreds of thousands for HIV charities”. Davies, whose previous successful works include Queer as Folk, The Second Coming, and the 2005 revival of Dr Who, was acclaimed as a “powerhouse of ideas” and “one step ahead of the trends”, by Nicola Shindler, the executive producer at Quay Street Productions. Alexander, who played Ritchie in It’s a Sin, was described as “central to the show’s impact, vividly bringing to life the realities of the Aids crisis in the 1980s in the gay community” by Zai Bennett, the managing director of content at Sky. Ayling-Ellis, the first deaf actor to star in EastEnders, had “defied stereotypes to prove that hearing impairments need not be a barrier”, said Moore. Of her appearance on Strictly, Moore added: “That electrifying moment in the middle of primetime TV when she covered Giovanni’s ears and danced without sound for 10 seconds, 10 million people experienced the world through Rose’s eyes and ears. It was mesmerising and an extraordinary tribute to the deaf community.” Kate Winslet made the top 10 for her performance in Mare of Easttown, as did the teenage tennis player Emma Raducanu for winning the US Open. Stephen Graham was also in the top 10, with judges hailing his “extraordinary year”, including his nuanced performance as Tony in Jack Thorne’s Help to his Bafta-nominated chef in Boiling Point. The England men’s football team at the delayed 2020 Euros was also a highlight, coming in 10th position. The full top 100 can be seen at radiotimes.com/tv-100-2021.Europe’s biggest banks led by HSBC, Barclays and BNP Paribas have provided £24bn to oil and gas companies that are expanding production less than a year since pledging to target net zero carbon emissions, data shows. Investments to drill new oil wells and tap fresh gas reserves, backed by funds from major banks, appear to contradict commitments to international agreements and undermine efforts to accelerate the switch to renewable energy sources, the report said. Banks have acknowledged that they have an important role in the transition away from fossil fuels, and last April many signed up to the United Nations-backed Net-Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA), which requires they set targets to reduce carbon emissions. However, analysis by campaign group ShareAction showed that 25 banks that signed up to reduce emissions have provided $33bn (£24bn) in loans and other financing to 50 companies with large oil and gas expansion plans. The oil companies include America’s ExxonMobil, which has tried to defy shareholder demands to cut emissions, state-owned oil company Saudi Aramco and London-listed Shell and BP who have made huge profits from gas price increases in recent months. Since 2016, the European banks have provided financing worth $406bn. Climate scientists and economists have warned that stopping expansion of oil and gas production is vital to reducing global carbon emissions, the key driver of the climate crisis. The International Energy Agency last May said no new oil and gas fields should be exploited to give the world a chance of reaching net zero by 2050 and avoid global heating of more than 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. There is also a growing consensus in the investment community that oil and gas assets could be financially damaging investments – although there are also likely to be many profitable opportunities for those willing to ignore criticisms. Highlighting the pushback from international investors keen to limit the costs of shifting away from fossil fuels, a report last week by the accountants EY found that 70% of UK firms admit they have encountered resistance from investors and shareholders about their plans to reduce emissions, with 42% saying their shareholders want them to wait for competitors to act first. Xavier Lerin, ShareAction’s senior research manager, said: “If oil and gas demand decreases in line with 1.5C scenarios, prices would fall and assets become stranded. On the other hand, if demand did not fall enough to limit global warming to 1.5C, the economy would suffer from severe physical climate impacts. Either way, value will be destroyed for energy companies, banks and their investors.” More than half ($19bn) of the financing since the net zero agreement came from four of alliance’s founders. They were London-headquartered HSBC and Barclays, France’s BNP Paribas and Germany’s Deutsche Bank. HSBC, Barclays and BNP Paribas also provided the most finance to these companies since 2016, at $59bn, $48bn and $46bn respectively. A spokesperson for the NZBA secretariat, based in the United Nations, said that members who joined the alliance in April 2021 were due to set their first 2030 targets in the autumn of 2022, focusing on the biggest polluters including oil and gas companies. Targets must “align with no/low-overshoot 1.5°C transition pathways as specified by credible science-based climate scenarios”, the spokesperson said. A spokesperson for HSBC said the bank would publish science-based targets for oil, gas and power companies on 22 February. “We are committed to working with our customers to achieve a transition towards a thriving low carbon economy,” they said. A Barclays spokesperson said the bank had set “a target for a 15% absolute reduction in our financed emissions from energy, including coal, oil and gas, by 2025”, as well as restrictions on fossil fuel exploration in the Arctic, as part of an “ambition to become a net zero bank by 2050”. A BNP Paribas spokesperson said it had financed mainly “European energy companies that are largely committed to transitioning their model” and who would “accelerate transition by developing renewable energy and other transformative solutions”. The spokesperson added that there had been a “significant decrease in the support granted by BNP Paribas to oil and gas players in 2021 compared to 2019”, but that there was a “totally atypical” need for extra financial support during 2020. A Deutsche Bank spokesperson said carbon-intensive sectors were “only a small share of our loan book” and less than peers. The bank would have an “intense dialogue with clients to move from high-carbon business models towards low and no-carbon ones”, the spokesperson added.The UK will need nearly 230,000 new rental homes to avoid a shortfall if the current growth in demand continues, according to a new forecast. Private rented sector supply will have to increase by 227,000 homes a year to meet the demand for 1.8 million new households over the next decade, according to analysis by the consultancy Capital Economics. The UK has faced a persistent shortage of new housing, adding to soaring house-price growth, with many people being forced to rent for longer. The number of households in the UK private rented sector increased from 2.8 million in 2007 to 4.5 million in 2017, according to official figures. Private rents in Britain rose at their fastest rate on record in January and average advertised rent outside London was 9.9% higher than a year ago, according to data from property website Rightmove. The government took a series of steps to remove tax relief for buy-to-let landlords after hundreds of thousands joined the rush to buy second or third properties. As well as the tax relief, landlords have benefited in the last decade from ultra-low interest rates and capital gains from rising house prices. Andrew Evans, managing economist at Capital Economics, who was commissioned to carry out the study by the lobby group National Residential Landlords Association (NRLA), said “a series of policy changes” had reduced the stock of rental properties in the UK. He added that “supply could fall by over half a million more over the next decade” if no changes are made. Ben Beadle, chief executive of the NRLA, said there was a “supply crisis now engulfing the sector” and that “urgent action” was needed to provide affordable rental housing. A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, said: “We support the private rented sector and recognise the crucial role build-to-rent homes have in boosting housing supply, and increasing quality and choice for renters across the country. “This government is building more genuinely affordable homes to help people on to the housing ladder. Since 2010, we have delivered more than 574,000 affordable homes and we are investing £11.5bn in affordable housing.”A coalition of hundreds of pro-refugee organisations has estimated the astronomical costs of five Home Office policies to block refugees, which are due to become law in a matter of months. The campaign coalition Together With Refugees, which is made up of about 360 community groups, refugee organisations, trades unions and faith groups, is publishing a report on Monday. It attempts to calculate the cost of policies such as offshoring refugees – with the bill running into the billions. The Home Office is yet to publish this information itself. Taxpayers could face an extra £2.7bn a year cost to fund the schemes, according to the paper – named A Bill at What Price? It is being published before the first vote in the House of Lords on the government’s controversial nationality and borders bill. The Home Office dismissed the calculations as “pure speculation”, but the SNP MP Stuart McDonald said the research “shows in stark terms what many MPs have long feared about the huge cost to the taxpayer”. The MP for Cumbernauld, Kilsyth and Kirkintilloch East added: “I and others have continually pressed the government to set out their own assessment of these costs, via the impact assessment they are required to produce for such legislation – and which they have repeatedly promised, but failed, to provide to the public and parliament.” Using open source data, the report calculated the extra spending that will be needed to pay for five key measures proposed in the bill. These projects include: New large, out-of-town accommodation centres to house up to 8,000 people seeking refugee protection – £717.6m a year. An offshore processing system to send people seeking refugee protection to another country to be detained while they wait for a decision on their claim, based on Australian government costings, which the Home Office said it is modelling its plans on – £1.44bn a year. Imprisoning people seeking refugee protection who arrive via irregular routes, such as in a small boat across the Channel – £432m a year. Removing people seeking refugee protection from the UK to another country if the government said they should claim asylum elsewhere – £117.4m a year. Extra processing costs for additional assessments of people allocated a new temporary protection status, who have already passed a rigorous assessment recognising them as a refugee, every two and a half years – £1.5m a year. Sabir Zazai, a spokesperson for Together With Refugees, said: “This is an astonishing amount of additional public money for the unworkable and cruel proposals in the bill – enough to pay for more than 80,000 NHS nurses a year. “Having fled their homes in fear and struggled to find safety, these measures would leave women, children and men facing further hardship in prison, isolated in another country indefinitely, separated from family and facing insecurity and indecision.” Together With Refugees is calling for an end to the proposal in the bill to treat people differently based on how they arrive here, rather than the dangers they face in their home countries. It is also calling for more safe routes for people to reach protection, asking the government to agree a target to resettle 10,000 of the world’s most vulnerable refugees a year. A Home Office spokesperson said: “These figures are pure speculation. While lives are being lost in the Channel we will look at all options available to us. Our broken asylum system is costing the taxpayer an unacceptable £4.7m a day on hotels, which is why urgent reform is needed. “Our New Plan for Immigration will fix the broken asylum system so that we spend less time and money on those abusing the system, enabling us to focus on helping those in genuine need.”UK ministers and the Scottish government have reached a deal over proposed freeports in Scotland, after months of disagreement over what No 10 has billed as one of the main economic benefits of Brexit. The Scottish government had resisted the idea of freeports – specific areas that offer tax breaks and other incentives to investors – which are intended to revitalise deprived areas but have been accused of encouraging tax avoidance and lower regulation. Scottish ministers instead proposed the idea of green ports, based around low-emission industries and fair work practices. The deal appears to follow this model, but with the compromise name of “green freeports”. The plan proposed two green freeports, which can be rail or air hubs as well as seaports. They can apply alongside other local businesses, as well as the council and other public bodies. A bidding process for the two locations will run from this spring until summer, with the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, which is leading the process, saying it hopes the sites will be running by spring next year. Any consortium submitting a bid “must guarantee that local communities will benefit from it, as well as delivering on ambitious targets for net zero”, the joint announcement said. In July last year, the Scottish government released a longlist of areas being considered for its own green port plans: Dundee; a series of areas around the Firth of Forth; a similar collection of sites around Glasgow; Cairnryan, a port near Stranraer; Shetland; Orkney; Aberdeen and Peterhead; and Montrose. For the green freeports the process will start again, with both the Scottish and UK governments assessing the bids and having an equal say on the choice. In an announcement featuring quotes from Rishi Sunak and Michael Gove as well as himself, the prime minister hailed the wider freeports concept as “truly transformational”, saying: “I am delighted that people across Scotland will reap the benefits that will come from having two new green freeports.” Kate Forbes, Scotland’s finance secretary, said: “I am pleased we have been able to reach an agreement on a joint approach that recognises the distinct needs of Scotland and enshrines the Scottish government’s commitment to achieving net zero and embedding fair work practices through public investment.” Eight freeports in England have already been confirmed, with tax breaks including no stamp duty, full rebates for construction and machinery investment, five years of zero business rates, and lower tariffs and customs obligations. Most will be around busy coastal cargo ports – Felixstowe, Liverpool, Hull, Southampton and London Gateway. The others are Plymouth, Teesside and a zone around East Midlands airport. Rishi Sunak has said that the tax free zones will generate investment in deprived areas of the country. Ahead of the deal to leave the EU it was claimed the government was unable to press ahead with plans while inside the single market and customs union and that the subsidised areas would form part of the “Brexit dividend”. In 2020, the EU announced a review of the 82 freeports across the continent after identifying that their special tariff and duty status aided the financing of terrorism, money laundering and organised crime.British employers are expecting to award pay rises of 3% in 2022, the highest in at least a decade, though well below the rate of inflation, as they try to recruit and retain workers, according to a new survey of businesses. The expected pay rise comes amid persistent signs of a tight labour market, with almost two-thirds of employers expecting to have difficulties filling job vacancies in the coming six months, according to a survey of more than 1,000 recruitment and human resources workers by YouGov for the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD). Pay growth has risen sharply higher than it was before the pandemic, thanks in part to the pace of the economic recovery following coronavirus lockdowns at the start of the pandemic in 2020. Average weekly earnings rose by 4.2% year on year in the three months to November 2021, faster than at any point between the financial crisis in 2008 and the start of the pandemic in 2020, according to the Office for National Statistics. The latest data on wages and employment will be published on Tuesday, with economists expecting pay growth to slow, but remain above pre-pandemic levels. The CIPD reported that more than two-thirds of recruiters were expecting to hire by the end of March, and that plans to make workers redundant were lower than before the pandemic. Almost half of the recruiters surveyed said they were struggling to fill vacancies, and 41% said more staff were leaving – a phenomenon that has been dubbed the “great resignation” as workers look for better opportunities elsewhere. As well as headline pay rises, workers have been able to win other benefits, ranging from hybrid working at home or offices to a four-day week with no loss of pay. There have been particular difficulties attracting workers in sectors like hospitality, which have been hit by the drop in immigration caused by the pandemic and Brexit. Salaries for jobs in hospitality have increased by up to 12%, with a record number offering a wage of more than £50,000, according to Caterer.com, a recruitment website. The 3% median pay rise expected by CIPD members would nevertheless result in a real wage cut for many because of price rises across the UK economy. Inflation has risen to its highest level in 30 years as companies cover rising costs because of supply chain disruptions during the pandemic and a surge in energy prices. Annual consumer prices index inflation hit 5.4% in December, and the Bank of England expects it to rise as high as 7% in the spring. Jonathan Boys, the CIPD’s labour market economist, said: “Even though businesses anticipate making record pay awards to their employees this year, most people are set to see their real wages fall against the backdrop of high inflation.” Boys said it was encouraging that more employers were considering other options to keep staff, such as providing flexible working and spending more on training and other perks such as health benefits. Those practices “should reduce wage inflation pressure to a degree”, he said. Some economists are looking for signs of a so-called wage-price spiral, in which workers demand higher pay to compensate for higher prices for the goods and services they consume – although others say that pay rises are long overdue in many countries. In the UK, workers have gone through the worst extended period for real wage growth since the Napoleonic wars, and real wages are still less than they were before the financial crisis that started in 2008, according to the Resolution Foundation thinktank. The expected pay rises reported by CIPD members were the highest since at least the winter of 2012, the earliest comparable data. Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, this month provoked fury from unions – and unusually similar front pages for the broadsheet Financial Times and the tabloid Daily Star – after calling for workers to go without pay rises to control inflation. Unions and economists pointed out that Bailey did not call for companies to hold prices steady at the same time.A drive to encourage women eligible for cervical screening to book and attend their appointments has been launched in England to prevent cancer deaths. The campaign comes as an online survey of 3,003 women aged 25-64 who were eligible for cervical screening, conducted last month, revealed that 42% of respondents cited embarrassment as preventing them from attending, while 34% said they kept putting it off and 28% said they were concerned it would be painful. Cervical cancer develops when abnormal cells in the cervix – the neck of the womb that is connected to the vagina – grow out of control. The disease is the second most common cancer among women under the age of 35 in England; figures from 2019 suggest that about two women in England die every day from the disease. However, the latest figures for England from NHS Digital reveal that between April 2020 and March 2021 about 30% of women aged 25-64 who were eligible were not adequately screened. The Department of Health and Social Care is launching an awareness campaign to increase the uptake of life-saving screening. Supported by the NHS, the campaign Help Us Help You – Cervical Screening Saves Lives includes a film featuring the GP Dr Zoe Williams chatting to familiar faces, including the Loose Women panellist Linda Robson and the drag queen Victoria Scone – as well as discussing common questions and worries about screening. Dr Nikki Kanani, a GP and medical director for primary care at NHS England, said cervical screening saved lives. “By screening for risk signs at an early stage, it means that any abnormal cells can be treated quickly before they potentially develop into cancer,” she said. “We know it can feel embarrassing or feel like something that you can easily put off, but accepting your invite and getting checked could save your life. And please do speak to your GP practice about any concerns you might have – we are here to help you.” The survey also revealed the proportion of those who had never attended cervical screening was higher among lesbian or bisexual women than those over 25 in general. Scone said, as a queer woman, she was initially uncertain whether cervical screening was imperative. “However, this new campaign has clarified that all women and people with a cervix, including those in the LGBTQ+ community like myself, are eligible for a screening, so I booked myself in,” she said. The development of vaccines against human papillomavirus (HPV) has prevented thousands of people from developing the disease or pre-cancers. However, the jabs are only free in England under the universal programme for those who have yet to reach their 25th birthday, and the vaccines do not prevent all cases of cervical cancer: even those who have had the jabs still need to go for screening when invited. The screening procedure takes a few minutes and involves the gentle insertion of a smooth, cylinder-shaped tool into the vagina before a soft brush is used to take a sample from the cervix. The sample is then tested for certain types of HPV and, if present, the cells are examined for abnormalities. If necessary, further investigations and treatments can then be offered to prevent the chance of cancer developing. The Gogglebox star Scarlett Moffatt, who also participated in the film, said cervical screening may have saved her life. “The screening detected HPV and abnormal cells linked to the development of cervical cancer, and I underwent treatment to have the cells removed,” she said. “If I hadn’t been to that appointment, I don’t know what situation I would have been in now.”A new British dating app is promising to eradicate Tinder Swindler-style romance fraud, which cost duped daters almost £100m last year, by ensuring that all members complete biometric ID verification before they digitally mingle. Fluttr, which claims to be the first UK online dating app to use such technology to improve user safety, is launching on Valentine’s Day in the hope of getting a boost from singletons looking to change their relationship status. The issue of romance fraud, catfishing and fake profiles has been put into the spotlight following the release of Netflix documentary The Tinder Swindler, which tells the true story of a man who went to extraordinary lengths to scam women for millions after meeting them online. The pandemic, when online dating was the only mixing that was allowed, has driven a huge surge in scams costing those duped £92m in the UK last year. “We want to rid the world of Tinder Swindlers and create a safe space free from the fake profiles used to defraud, catfish and abuse online daters,” said Rhonda Alexander, the chief executive and co-founder of Fluttr. “We’re reclaiming the fun of online dating by using digital ID verification and AI technology to create an environment that is secure enough for people to do everything from connecting with real people to falling in love.” According to the UK’s cybercrime and fraud reporting centre, Action Fraud, 8,863 cases were reported to the National Fraud Intelligence Bureau between November 2020 and October last year. This is a 27% increase on the previous annual figure of 6,968 cases, which span simple acts of deception to organised scamming operations involving fake video calls and websites, the previous year. Daters who strike up online relationships between Christmas and Valentine’s Day tend to be the most susceptible to romance fraud, according to official figures. “Requests for money often are highly emotive, such as criminals claiming they need money for emergency surgery, medical care, or to pay for tickets and travel documents to visit the victim if they are overseas, even a debt that must be paid urgently,” says Richard Bromley, fraud risk manager at banking and payment app Revolut. “The scammers often pretend to work overseas, in the military, as a doctor or in an oil rig.” Fluttr has partnered with digital verification firm Yoti, which has clients including the NHS, Post Office and National Union of Students, to ensure all would-be daters are providing the correct personal details matched to government-issued documents. The subscription-only service, which says it will not run in-app ads or store user data, is looking to drive sign-ups with a promotional offer of £9.99 a month, with the typical price planned to be £14.99. The company is majority owned by Ethical Social Group, a UK-based technology company that aims to positively change social media platforms. It is funded by a small group of mostly UK-based private investors.One of the most prominent critics of the Morrison government’s handling of Covid-19 outbreaks in aged care has entered the race to replace health minister Greg Hunt in the seat of Flinders. Dr Sarah Russell, a public health researcher and the director of Aged Care Matters, was selected by the Voices of Mornington Peninsula group on Sunday evening to contest the Liberal-held seat at the May election. Russell is one of a number of high-profile women challenging Liberal members in ordinarily safe seats, seeking to capitalise on concern about Coalition climate change policy and lack of action on a national integrity commission. Russell told the preselection meeting she had been an aged care advocate for six years and climate activist for 30, seeking endorsement to help defeat “the worst government we have had in my lifetime”. “It is unforgivable that all political parties – including the Greens – who know the evidence and understand the science to have chosen to politicise climate action,” she said. Russell previously contested the inner north Melbourne seat of Cooper for Fiona Patten’s Reason Australia party, garnering just 2% of the vote, but will be on home turf in Flinders, as she lives in Mount Martha on a property that was owned by her grandparents since 1935. Russell has been a critic of the pace of the vaccine booster rollout in aged care, and workforce shortages that have caused poor standards of care during the Omicron outbreak. Russell joins a crowded field in which local councillor Despi O’Connor is also contesting Flinders as an independent, a decision Russell has slammed as “having a bet each ways” after O’Connor had expressed interest in running as the Voices candidate. Russell replaces Claire Boardman, who resigned in December as the deputy public health commander for infection prevention and control in the Victorian health department’s Covid-19 team to contest the seat as the Voices candidate but pulled out due to the difficulty of winning with a split independent vote. Hunt won Flinders in 2019 with a 46.7% primary vote and 55.6% two-party-preferred, defeating Labor despite a challenge from former Liberal MP Julia Banks, who won 13.8% of the vote as an independent. Hunt is retiring at the 2022 election, potentially putting the seat in play. Zoe McKenzie, a former National Broadband Network director and trade adviser, is contesting the seat for the Liberals. Scott Morrison is yet to say who would replace Hunt as health minister if he wins a fourth term for the Coalition. In comments to Guardian Australia, Russell acknowledged the race to replace Hunt had become a “clusterfuck” and promised to be a strident voice for the climate-conscious community if elected to federal parliament. “I’ll be the Jacqui Lambie of the left,” she said. Russell also cited the independent candidate for Goldstein, Zoe Daniel, as inspiration for the run. Russell told the meeting she hopes that “all independents agree to give preferences to each other and put Liberals last” in the contest.Perfection is hard to achieve … but the city of Melbourne comes close. Draped along the banks of the Yarra River, it’s a historic capital that wears its passions on its sleeves. One that’s unafraid to express itself through art or architectural design and can always be relied upon to push the boundaries in the kitchen – and on the sports field. It’s also a fantastic place to live, work and play, repeatedly ranked among the world’s most liveable cities, and you don’t have to travel far to enjoy a taste of the city at its finest. Yarra’s Edge, a buzzing, waterfront village only 2.4km from the CBD, is a neighbourhood in demand. With a stellar location and fantastic city views, plus a vibrant community and dining scene to match, it’s a place residents can’t wait to return to after a day at the office. The new Voyager tower – selling now – is upping the ante even further, featuring luxurious apartments and a dazzling residents’ Skydeck rooftop space and bar, with the best of Melbourne right at its feet. The homewares boutiques of Port Melbourne and the famous South Melbourne Market – not to mention a delicious mix of bars and restaurants – are all within easy reach, while Melbourne CBD is only a short stroll away across the eye-catching Webb Bridge, or along the Yarra River. Victoria and Demian Gibbins, owners of The Espressionist cafe, in the nearby Array Tower overlooking the marina, have called Yarra’s Edge home for many years. Their popular cafe and wine bar has grown and evolved with it, too. Though they originally envisioned it as an art gallery and exhibition space, they saw the potential to offer something that would get them more involved in the community. “There’s such a strong community vibe here, which is surprising considering it’s high-rise living in the city,” Victoria says. “We saw a real need for specialty coffee offering. You’ll now see the same faces getting their morning coffee, lots of social groups out, and so many people out walking their dogs. They all know each other and their dogs’ names too.” An established favourite on the brunch circuit, The Espressionist has also opened a wine bar that’s bringing a taste of CBD style across the Yarra. The Espressionist has since evolved into a full restaurant experience, open seven days for breakfast, brunch, and lunch. In late 2020, in anticipation of Voyager’s opening, it also added a sleek wine bar, complete with blush-pink lounges, art deco-inspired decor, and a killer dinner and cocktail menu. And it’s not the only fabulous dining option in the neighbourhood. If you don’t want to go into the city for something great to eat, you don’t have to. Here are some of the best bites and bars by the river, in Yarra’s Edge. Pasta, just like mamma used to make At Sassone Cucina Italiana, a family-owned restaurant on the River Esplanade, every bite is like a passport to the streets of Italy. Established by Frank Sassone and inspired by decades of family tradition, the restaurant offers dishes – from luscious chicken and mushroom risotto to baked rigatoni with eggplant and meatballs – that are generous and made with love. A feast from the pearl of the Middle East Fusing modern techniques with Lebanese family recipes passed down through generations, Corniche Restaurant is a feast for the eyes and the soul, as well as the stomach. Think mezze platters as beautiful to behold as they are to devour, makanek (Lebanese sausages) drizzled with a delicious pomegranate sauce, and lahem meshwi (lamb backstrap) marinated for hours in a fragrant mix of spices – and that’s barely scratching the surface of the menu. Fine food and wine with a breathtaking view The Espressionist is all grown up. An established favourite on the brunch circuit, it has also opened a wine bar that’s bringing a taste of CBD style across the Yarra. From Thursday to Saturday you can drop in for dinner or pull up a chair by the bar and explore wines sourced from Australia’s top wine-producing regions. Try to time your visit for sunset, when the windows of the city skyline blaze into life, reflecting kaleidoscopic shades of purple, pink and gold. Anchor Eatery is housed in a distinctive ship-like building at the western end of Yarra’s Edge. Fresh smoothies and indulgent pastries Anchor Eatery is a popular spot for locals and office workers seeking a lunchtime escape from the CBD. Stop by for yoghurts, wraps, smoothies and juices, or pick up a great coffee and pastry. Owner Nick Totos says you won’t find a better view than right at his doorstep – whether during the day or in the early evening as the city lights burn into life. Seafood to your heart’s content Sometimes the flavours of the sea are just what the doctor ordered. Hooks at the Yarra is renowned for its fresh seafood – think succulent prawns, oysters and Moreton Bay bugs – and the location couldn’t be better. Positioned right at the edge of the Webb Bridge, overlooking the marina, it’s a perfect spot to meet up with friends, raise a glass or two, maybe find yourself a beanbag to stretch out on, and enjoy stellar views of the skyline. Keen to experience what else awaits? Yarra’s Edge is ready for you to take a bite.The game was only just over, and Andy Farrell was already brooding on exactly where it had gone wrong. Listening to him, you guess his Ireland team, who did so well to fight their way back into the match after being 22-7 down, are going to have a long week picking over the bones of their 30-24 defeat. Farrell was particularly keen to focus on how France had stifled Ireland at the breakdown. There was the sloppy start, too, which left them 10 points down in seven minutes, and, at the other end of the game, the question of whether they were right to kick their last penalty when they were six points back, and had already scored twice from attacking lineouts. In public, Farrell backed the decision. “That’s all ifs, buts, and maybes,” the coach said. “The players have a great view from out on the field, and in reality we got the three points and there was still plenty of time left. And we had another opportunity from a lineout close to the end there that we missed.” It was undoubtedly one of those decisions, though, which the players will look back on and wonder how the game would have played out if they had gone the other way. A fourth converted try would have put them one point ahead with seven minutes left, and earned them another bonus point too. That may be why Farrell was so keen to protect the players from public criticism. He wanted to concentrate on the good things they had done. And there were plenty to pick from. “I was unbelievably pleased with the character and the fight from the players in that second half,” Farrell said. “They’re such a courageous side. I’ve seen many a team come here to Paris and fall over completely, especially with a scoreline of 22-7, that was never going to be the case with this lot. They backed themselves to get back into the game, and it says a lot that we were in with a chance of winning it at the end.” Especially, as he said, given how much went against them. They lost their captain, and playmaker, Johnny Sexton, three days before the game, their hooker, Ronan Kelleher, went off after 25 minutes with a shoulder injury, and Peter O’Mahony managed only five minutes as a replacement before he went off too, with a brain injury. “It never fazed the group, and that’s a brilliant thing to take forward.” Farrell has not wanted to talk about it, but in the back of his mind he knows his team will be back at Stade de France next year, for two crucial games in the pool stages of the World Cup, against South Africa and Scotland. Get through them, and they will face another, against France or New Zealand. He wants his team to believe they can win games here, not be haunted by the way they came up short. So he needs them to build on this result, not be knocked back by it. It’s why he was so keen to talk up what they did well, rather than dwell on what they didn’t. Before all that, of course, they have a home game against Italy, a trip to play England at Twickenham, and another home game against Scotland. France, who started with two home games, have to play Scotland and Wales away, before they host England on the last Saturday. The championship is not done yet. “History shows that you’ve got to be ready to take your chance in the Six Nations, you’ve got to make sure that your own house is in order in regards to your next game,” Farrell said. “Yes, France are in pole position, they’ve had two home games, but I’m sure that if we continue to show the fight and character that we have here, in what was an unbelievable Test match, I’m certain we’ll be in the mix towards the end of it.”The band who wrote April Sun in Cuba has hit out at Australian prime minister Scott Morrison for his “cynical” rendition of the 1977 hit. In a statement, the band Dragon called the performance “a cynical move for a politician to co-opt music in an attempt to humanize themselves come election time.” Morrison had performed the song with a ukulele on 60 Minutes, as part of a “behind-the-scenes” profile of his family life in the wake of sliding polls. “Maybe if his trip to Hawaii had not been cut short, he could have learn[ed] the lyrics to the rest of the chorus,” Dragon said – referring to an ill-fated holiday to Hawaii the Morrison took during the 2019 black summer bush fires. It’s not known whether Morrison picked up his ukulele skills on that trip, which his office initially tried to avoid making public. Morrison issued a statement expressing deep “regret” for “any offence caused to any of the many Australians affected by the terrible bushfires by my taking leave with family at this time”. The song is an escapist dream of escaping in search of greener pastures, against the backdrop of possible political disaster – JFK, Castro, missiles. Dragon said in their statement it was “about a long-ago diplomatic fracas on the other side of the world”. The band was not pleased with the association, or with Morrison using their work to rehabilitate any political fracas of his own. “Like many times before, Dragon is back in the headlines for all the wrong reasons,” they said.Fears that diplomatic efforts will fail to prevent a Russian invasion of Ukraine within days are writ large across most of today’s front pages, despite the latest talks announced by Boris Johnson and German chancellor Olaf Scholz. The Mirror carries an air of the inevitable with the headline “Countdown to war”, saying Vladimir Putin has continued to mass troops at the border and quoting No 10 saying there could be an invasion “at any moment”. The Mail’s front page says “Frantic 48 hours to save Europe from war”, referring to reported US intelligence suggesting Wednesday could be when the Russian president gives the order. It notes Johnson’s planned tour of European leaders as a “last-ditch diplomatic blitz”. The Times also frames the latest diplomatic efforts from the British and German leaders as a last attempt to avoid conflict. “Leaders in final push to avert Ukraine invasion” is the headline, although it notes Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has invited Joe Biden to visit and called for calm. Its main image is of a 79-year-old Ukrainian woman being shown how to use an assault rifle, which is also the image of choice for the Telegraph, which homes in on Johnson’s planned efforts on the world stage, with the headline “PM urges Russia to step back from the brink”. It does not offer further details on who he will meet, and when, but says the prime minister “will focus on engagement with the Nordic and Baltic nations”. The Express carries almost exactly the same headline, and quotes Johnson’s fears that the crisis is now at a “critical juncture”. The i has the main points in its bullet-point format, under the headline: “Tensions rise in Ukraine as west steps up efforts to stop invasion”. The FT also opts for an image of a Ukrainian civilian being given basic weapons training and focuses on German diplomacy and the diplomatic and military pullouts. “Scholz plans fresh Ukraine talks as west steps up evacuations” is the headline. The Guardian opts for a more colourful Ukrainian civilian being shown around an assault rifle in its main image, and focuses on the evacuations, saying politicians are being extra cautious after being surprised six months earlier by the speed of the fall of Afghanistan to the Taliban. Metro focuses on the bravado displayed by Russia’s ambassador to Sweden, Viktor Tatarintsev, who said: “We don’t give a shit about all their sanctions”. The headline is “West can’t Vladi scare Putin”. Sunday’s New York Times says “US pulls most diplomats in Kyiv as tensions mount”, carrying two stories: one on Biden’s efforts to deter Putin and another analysing the west’s “information warfare” strategy with Russia.Even by Super Bowl standards, an event in which the mythologising is as much of a sport as the football, this has been a particularly hyped half-time show. Three weeks before the fact, the NFL released a four-minute trailer, a third as long as the performance itself, which saw Dr Dre, the most important producer in rap history, assemble a superhero cast of 90s hip-hop and R&amp;B legends: Eminem, Mary J Blige and Snoop Dogg as well as Kendrick Lamar, the great west-coast hip-hop talent of his generation, who went to the same Compton high school as Dre. Yet, despite all that pomp, this felt like a different kind of half-time show, directorially and musically more inventive than the normal tropes of marching bands and fake fans on the pitch. There was more collaboration and smart interstitial set-pieces, all brought together by Anderson.Paak’s impressive live band. Just before it began, the NBC hosts whispered it might be the greatest Super Bowl half-time show ever – it wasn’t far off. It began with Snoop Dogg – in a regal ultramarine blue tracksuit – and Dre, atop a set built to look like a Compton street (which included a replica of the trailblazing Black architect Harold Williams’ MLK memorial outside the Compton Civic Centre). They shared the grin of two men reveling in how far they had come as they performed The Next Episode and California Love (although there was no 2Pac hologram to join them for the latter, despite rumors). The camera panned out to reveal a troupe of dancers free-styling across an aerial map of Compton’s streets, and inside the set’s houses were more dancers and the band playing on couches, a bustling scene. From the roof of one of the houses emerged 50 Cent, recreating his classic 2003 video for In Da Club by performing the song upside down, hanging from the ceiling (plus some enjoyable nightclub choreography reminiscent of every birthday party this song has been played at since its release). There was barely time to catch a breath before Mary J Blige stood atop the set to sing Family Affair and No More Drama, the camera panning between her powerful rooftop performance and the party scenes below. She gave way to Kendrick Lamar, emerging with an army of zombie dancers from a series of cardboard boxes to perform Maad City and Alright, before Eminem’s set-piece performance of Lose Yourself, from 8 Mile. Dre finished with a small tribute to 2Pac, playing the piano riff of I Ain’t Mad At Cha before a moving finale: three generations of artists that Dre mentored, collaborated with and produced, gathered together to watch him perform Still Dre, a song that nods to his unrivaled dominance over west-coast hip-hop. In one telling, this is the redemption moment for the Super Bowl half-time show, after the NFL came under widespread criticism for failing to back players who took the knee. In 2016, Rihanna, Cardi B, Adele and other high-profile artists were reported to have rejected opportunities to perform at the show in solidarity with Colin Kaepernick. The event had to squeeze by with Maroon 5, surely not the top of any booker’s list, and questions about its relevance lingered. Since then the production has been taken over by Jay Z’s Roc Nation, with acclaimed artists such as the Weeknd and a celebrated shared performance by Jennifer Lopez and Shakira returning prestige to the slot. Now with five of the defining artists of 90s hip-hop and R&amp;B sharing the stage, led by Dr Dre – who, as part of NWA, gave America’s music its most powerful statement against police racism – it could be argued the Super Bowl has regained some credibility among black fans. The choice of artists was enough for at least one police force, in Long Island, to encourage residents to boycott the ceremony. There were rumors that there would be limits to how much restitution the NFL would allow: reporting in Puck said the NFL had rejected Eminem’s request to take the knee at the ceremony (something they later claimed to be false), and told Dre that he would not be able to include the lyric “still not loving police” in his performance of Still Dre. Yet both those powerful moments did happen. But even they were emotionally overshadowed by Kendrick Lamar emerging from a row of cardboard boxes to perform Alright, the song that was heard at Black Lives Matter protests across the country, now being performed at the centerpiece event of a league that had told black athletes five years ago they had no right to protest against racism. The Super Bowl half-time show remains the biggest gig in the world, with an unparalleled live TV audience; not for nothing did Mary J Blige, who at 51 is one of the most decorated R&amp;B singers of all time, describe this performance as “the opportunity of a lifetime”. Yet this year it felt about more than great production values and Pepsi sponsorship. You can’t do much in 12 minutes, in the gap between a football game, but everything you can do, Dre did. There will be debates that follow about whether all this powerful symbolism is more than glossy gesture politics, but given the brief they had, you can’t imagine them trying any harder to make this mean something.They won! That team! But more importantly, we witnessed one of the most compelling half-time shows for years, the first time that hip-hop (with a little help from R&amp;B) took centre stage at the year’s biggest concert. The combination of Dr Dre, Kendrick Lamar, Eminem, Snoop Dogg and Mary J Blige (with a little from 50 Cent and Anderson .Paak) proved to be a winner, taking us all back to the early 2000s with some throwback hits before bringing us back to the almost present thanks to Kendrick. There were also some never-not-needed jabs at the NFL and police brutality thanks to Eminem and Dr Dre. The ads were curious. A lot of nostalgia cameos, as expected, but also a strange collection of sign-of-the-times ads with electric cars, hi-tech at-home Covid testing and, most controversially, cryptocurrency all getting a showcase. The commercials can be topped next year, easily, but that show will take some beating. Sonic the Hedgehog 2 Despite all of the pre-release fun-poking (fans ripped the character design in the trailer so much that Paramount tweaked it for the actual movie), 2020’s Sonic the Hedgehog became one of the year’s biggest, and sadly only, hits with $319m worldwide. The inevitable sequel is being rushed out this April and a headache-inducing Super Bowl spot, introducing new villain Knuckles voiced by Idris Elba, does little to explain the appeal to OG game fans who wisely skipped the last film. Wallbox enlists a real lightning strike survivor Wallbox, a company for safe electric vehicle chargers, manages to convince a real lightning strike survivor to “embrace electricity” after an understandably tumultuous relationship with power. I’m not sure if the ad’s beginning – security camera footage from May 2012 in which Seth T gets struck down by lightning in his driveway – is real, but if so … I too would have a complicated relationship with electricity. Jennifer Coolidge plays Lady Luck for FanDuel The ads for sports betting, now legalized in several states, are in full swing – and have roped in Jennifer Coolidge as Lady Luck (complete with an in-pocket leprechaun) – for popular sports book, FanDuel. Zac Efron gig-ifies fishing for AT&amp;T In the name of AT&amp;T’s fiber with new hyper-gig speeds (I don’t know either), Zac Efron plays himself playing himself and a hearty fisherman in a VR game. A mustachioed Efron pulls increasingly elaborate riches from a pond, while saying a lot of words about livestreaming, internet speed, reliability, content, connectivity, the future, etc. Tech! Sam Adams dances with the robot dogs Boston-based beer company Sam Adams brings its spokesman, Your Cousin From Boston, to the headquarters of Boston Dynamics, the company behind the uncanny and unsettling robot dogs, for a dance party. The kegger, in honor of the Wicked IPAs Party Pack looks like a good time, but the sight of a robot dog doing a two-step remains incredibly disconcerting. Vroom stages a car-selling musical Used car platform Vroom stages a musical for an In The Heights-style high of finding a buyer – backflips, bubbles, strangers dancing in the street – and the music-stopping low of said buyer flaking. Deion Sanders and son compete for Oikos Oikos Greek yogurt pits NFL great Deion Sanders against son Shedeur in a versus-style strength competition to get “Dad strong” – though Deion’s mom, Connie Knight, gets the last word. Martha Stewart lights up with Snoop Dogg Odd-couple friends Martha Stewart and Snoop Dogg star in this ad for Bic’s EZ reach lighter, in which Snoop asks Martha to pass the bowl ... of strawberries. Hologram Kenny G serenades for Busch Light “Every time you open a Busch Light, the mountains start singing,” a hiker tells us in this ad for the low-cost beer, which recruits pre-eminent saxophone legend Kenny G to play, in giant hologram style, over some snow-capped peaks. Sam Wolfson’s five star review of tonight’s fantastic half-time show is now live for you to read here: A pretty fascinating reminder of just what a huge undertaking the half-time show is: So while Eminem took the knee, this also happened: But then so did this: So nothing makes sense: But of course far-right Twitter is raging Modern Family’s Ty Burrell says, I’ll take it Greenlight, a debit card and app to teach kids and teens how to manage money, recruits Modern Family’s Ty Burrell to demonstrate how not to make financial decisions. No discernment, all gas, Burrell says “I’ll take it” to everything from a “Tytanic” boat to a winged horse to all the sneakers on the rack. A dog, a horse and some Budweiser Budweiser traditionally spends big on a handful of different Super Bowl ads but last year, the company made the decision to bow out so that funds could be allocated to support Covid-19 vaccine efforts. Bud is back this year with an ad all about being back, a story of a dog mildly obsessed with an injured horse who finally makes it back on his feet. ‘Down never means out’ makes for a strange choice of slogan for a beer ad, mind ... Somehow everyone is sitting next to Drake: Hellmann’s mayonnaise tackles Pete Davidson Self-described “very hittable” person Pete Davidson gets laid out by former Patriots linebacker Jerod Mayo in the name of Hellmann’s mayonnaise, which is “tackling food waste” by encouraging viewers to turn their less desirable leftovers into mayo-adjacent dishes. There’s grilled cheese, potato salad, frittata – I’m not sure how frittata involves mayo, and I’m from the Midwest (go Bengals!) – but ok. Davidson’s mom, Amy, also makes an appearance and is thankfully not tackled. Brie Larson turns Eugene Levy into a stunt driver for Nissan When Brie Larson rolls up in a bright yellow Nissan and asks Eugene Levy if he wants to take a spin, the Canadian actor answers “coffee is enough excitement for me”. But a few seconds behind the wheel transforms him into the “Thrill Driver” – a cool and collected stuntman who breezes by Schitt’s Creek costar Catherine O’Hara on the highway, impresses Danai Gurira and rescues Dave Bautista mid-air, without spilling a drop of coffee. The Super Bowl half-time show, the concert of the year, is a time to remember the bizarre and unfair damage done to Janet Jackson’s career in the aftermath of the 2004 show. As numerous TV shows and docuseries have re-examined major pop culture stories of the 90s and 2000s through a more feminist, considerate lens, the fallout of what became known as Nipplegate – Justin Timberlake ripping Jackson’s top at the end of their duet, exposing her breast – has come in for overdue reconsideration. In late 2021, the New York Times, following the success of its films Framing Britney Spears and Controlling Britney Spears, released Malfunction: The Dressing Down of Janet Jackson, which forensically retraced the events: the exposure, which left Jackson in tears and a censorious commentariat that labeled Jackson a harlot, the wardrobe accident a deliberate act of filth. And last month, Janet herself gave the final word on her long-gestating, four-part docuseries on Lifetime. “It was an accident that should not have happened, but everyone is looking for someone to blame and that’s got to stop,” she says in the final episode. “Justin and I are very good friends and we will always be very good friends. We spoke just a few days ago, and he and I have moved on, and it is time for everyone else to do the same.” Irish Spring is a literal place Soap manufacturer Irish Spring envisions the real place – lush and verdant, of course, full of white sweaters and nice-smelling people – with a touch of Midsommar-esque ominous politeness. Idris Elba is not “flashy, sexy or lit” Well, to be more specific, Idris Elba’s ad for Booking.com is none of those things, something he confidently states at the start. The very unsexy travel company has recruited 2018’s Sexiest Man Alive for an ad all about how boring but necessary their services are. It just helps to have Idris to look at. Amazon’s Alexa reads ScarJo and Colin Jost’s minds In a spot that drew attention from celebrity gossip sites prior to the game, SNL’s Colin Jost and Scarlett Johansson poke fun at their marriage for Amazon’s Alexa. Apparently, a Jost-Johansson mind-reading Alexa would know that he finds her morning breath lacking, that she pretends food bought from Whole Foods (also owned by Amazon) is an old recipe and that she is not being quite truthful about the experience of kissing hot costars. Celebrities selling random things get a lot of ridicule every year, but people seem most personally and understandably, are offended by Larry David’s crypto ad: Something for us all to mull over during every Super Bowl ad break: Update: NFL reps are claiming that was just a rumor and Eminem was not told he couldn’t take a knee as players have been doing the same since 2016 without any sanctions. There are many moments during the half-time show that people are talking about, but this one seems to have attracted the most chatter: After he was told not to: Dr Evil returns to save the world for GM The Austin Powers gang is all here for General Motors’ electric vehicle push (EV-il, get it?). Mike Myers reprises his role as Dr Evil, Seth Green returns as his exasperated son Scott, Mindy Sterling is back as Frau and Rob Lowe takes over for Number 2, played by Robert Wagner in the films. It’s 2022, not 1997 and Dr Evil has a new threat to tackle: the climate crisis, which threatens to destroy the world before he can rule it. Enter: electric vehicles and Scott’s son, Baby Me. Guy Fieri hails Bud Light seltzer to Flavortown The mayor of Flavortown hath spoken: Bud Light hard seltzers have the “loudest flavor” of all the seemingly infinite competing hard seltzer varieties. In his first Super Bowl ad, Guy Fieri, the celebrity restauranteur and Americana taste connoisseur, presides over an actual Flavortown staffed by lookalike henchmen – with his signature platinum spiky hairdo, sunglasses and half-platinum goatee – on the hunt for good food and drink. Pringles get ‘Stuck on You’ In a sweet and succinct ad for the popular chips, a man goes through his life’s highlights with his hand stuck in a cylindrical Pringle’s can, soundtracked to Lionel Ritchie’s Stuck on You. Okay so that was fast. But in case you missed it, the half-time show is now up on YouTube, officially too! But NFL has cruelly blocked it from being embedded so you’ll have to click here. It’s worth it! And then there was this one ... Seth Rogen and Paul Rudd reminisce over chips Longtime friends Paul Rudd and Seth Rogen perform their bromance for Lay’s chips, with a string of “golden memories” shared over a bag of chips (Rogen’s preferred flavor: cheddar jalapeño, while Rudd opts for barbecue). This all goes down before Rogen’s wedding to the ghost from Paul Rudd’s first home, so maybe not the most truthful memories. The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power Tonight has also given us a new look at Amazon’s ambitious new Lord of the Rings series, which has cost a reported $465m to make. It certainly looks epic in scale, but the niggling question remains: do we really need this? Peter Jackson’s original series remains virtually perfect and still all-too-recent and nothing yet, not even this handsome trailer, has shown us that Middle Earth needs revisiting. Scientology is now trending, of course Scientology sells ... again It wouldn’t be a Super Bowl without ... errrr a Scientology ad, the “church” paying for a spot every year, each as evasive as the one before. This year’s beat-hitting “inspirational” ad could be for a bank or a car or pretty much anything. Mr Peanut’s 2019 reaction remains evergreen. What’s notable here though, is that it’s not showing nationally but only in select markets. Were you one of the lucky ones? Lindsay Lohan gets glowing for Planet Fitness Lindsay Lohan appears to have returned from her time abroad in Dubai with a spot for Planet Fitness that riffs on her past, very well publicized struggles: thanks to her gym membership, she’s sleeping better than ever – much to the paparazzi’s chagrin – and turning “DUI into DYI” (aka bedazzling ankle monitors). Mostly this ad served as a reminder that I’m looking forward to her return to screen in an as-yet-untitled Netflix Christmas movie this year. Here are some more pictures of tonight’s thrilling half-time show: The Cable Guy rings again A funny enough idea here has Jim Carrey’s obsessive Cable Guy discover he is now obsolete thanks to new tech. An okayish reminder of a very good movie. Turns out there was yet another cameo: I guess so: So a full review will be coming, along with as many videos and images that we can share but it was one of the most thrilling half-time shows we’ve seen for years, all hits and no filler, not a surprise given the participants. It was perhaps less awe-inspiring in terms of staging and spectacle but that can often be distracting and focusing on a more open, gimmick-free structure made it feel that much more involving. The slight problem was trying to fit in five stars, along with a special appearance from a sixth, meant that it all felt like too much and not quite enough? Another tribute to 2Pac with Dr Dre briefly playing the unforgettable piano intro to I Ain’t Mad Atcha before Still DRE starts, bringing Snoop back and causing probably the loudest sign of recognition from the crowd. And then it’s over already! That was quick! Can’t we get more of them and less of *insert team names*? Kendrick Lamar appears next with Alright along with suited dancers all wearing Dre Day sashes. The bottom of the stage is revealed in full to be a map of Los Angeles and an overhead shot shows off some impressive synchronised movement from Lamar and his dancers. It’s another change of pace but so far, it’s all fitting together incredibly well. Then comes Eminem! He’s picked his most rousing big venue-fitting track, 8 Mile’s Lose Yourself, along with a live band. It’s a big moment and every fan in the crowd has their phones out to record. A surprise guest! It’s 50 Cent who appears for his best known track In Da Club, turning one of the white houses into a club surrounded by dancers. Mary J Blige comes on next for Family Affair and a set of sparkled back-up dancers. What’s that much more energizing about this year’s structure is the block party vibe with groups from all of the different white houses dancing along and carrying on their different scenes. No More Drama slows things down a bit then and Blige, as ever, gives it her absolute all. Dr Dre appears first to introduce Snoop Dogg and some white houses where the latter raps on top of. It’s a mini version of LA from the looks of it with a living room and some cars outside. Snoop then hands over to Dre and Next Episode turns into California Love, an appropriate choice for the venue and a large set of dancers doing the very most. It’s a more opened up stage than usual and all the better for it. Some scores / goals / dunks were made and now we are here for the real entertainment, a tantalizing supergroup performance featuring Kendrick Lamar, Eminem, Mary J Blige, Dr Dre and Snoop Dogg. The half-time show has given R&amp;B stars the spotlight sometimes but historically, has not embraced hip-hop, so this feels like a major moment. Let’s see how five major stars are able to share the stage. It’s a challenge! Keeping up with the Joneses As Tom Jones plays, Leslie Jones, Rashida Jones and Tommy Lee Jones race their Toyota Tundras. And then a confused Nick Jonas turns up. And we’re confused too. Larry David does crypto It’s really been a big night for cryptocurrency ads, the highest profile of which stars Larry David, turning down some of history’s best ideas. The star said that he gets offered a lot of ads that he’s happy to turn down but this was one that really appealed to him. It’s ... better than the QR code one? Matthew McConaughey is back in space The actor said he wanted people to actually think his Salesforce ad was for Interstellar 2. But sadly, that isn’t the case and it’s yet another classic combo of big name, worthy voice-over and “oh huh, it’s an advert for that?” ending. So what can we expect from tonight’s half-time show? During a press conference this week, Dr Dre said it would be “fucking incredible” and insisted there will be no wardrobe malfunctions. “I had to talk Snoop and Em out of pulling their penises out,” he said. Mary J Blige’s face was described as “semi-mortified”. There’s not a whole lot to take from this trailer other than it will be high-gloss and high-budget. While we don’t know the exact cost of tonight’s performance, 2020’s JLo and Shakira show was budgeted at $13m. Kanye is in attendance: Dolly and Miley phoning it in No one does a Dolly Parton cover as well as Miley Cyrus so their pairing makes a lot of sense. Sadly, this T-Mobile ad and the accompanying song, hits a disappointingly bum note. Uber Don’t Eats Just because it’s in an Uber Eats bag doesn’t mean you should eat it, as celebrities such as Trevor Noah, Succession’s Nicholas Braun and Gwyneth Paltrow learn the hard way. The Uber Eats spot, in which celebs nom on household goods from dish soap to sponges, mostly serves to confirm that Jennifer Coolidge, most recently of HBO’s The White Lotus, is convincing even when eating a roll of paper towels. Anna Kendrick and Barbie An ad for Rocket Homes pairs Anna Kendrick and Barbie and takes a decent on-paper idea – what if Barbie had to contend with the very grim and very real complexities of the housing market – and doesn’t really do much with it. Four, count ’em four, teasers this week, for ... this. While this week has seen accusations of domestic violence resurfaced against half-time performer Dr Dre, we’ve also heard from an accuser of Snoop Dogg, who denies the claim. You can read the details here: Meadow is back Jamie-Lynn Sigler reprises her role of Meadow Soprano in a slick ad for Chevrolet that sees her taking on the late James Gandolfini’s place in a remake of the classic opening to the hit HBO show. It’s refreshing to see a well-known character return in a Super Bowl ad without it being played for laughs, and a recent interview with Sigler plays with the idea that she has taken over the family business. Michelob Ultra takes Serena Williams bowling Instead of the Super Bowl, Michelob Ultra heads to Superior Bowl – a dimly lit, worn in, hyper-competitive bowling joint staffed by none other than Steve Buscemi and frequented by Peyton Manning, Serena Williams and others. The question that at least a few of us are now asking ... is Nope part of TFCU (The Forgotten Cinematic Universe)? An ad for cryptocurrency company Coinbase has aired and it was ... just a QR code. A very expensive one: It’s being viewed as both depressing and ridiculous on Twitter: And then of course: Nope Probably the most anticipated trailer of the evening (that actually dropped this morning) is for the film that has been shrouded in secrecy up until now – Jordan Peele’s latest “social thriller” Nope, out this summer. The rather divisive title is not really explained in the first tease, but it’s quite likely meant to mean Not Of Planet Earth. Maybe. Because the Oscar-winning film-maker has turned his sights up to the sky, after going underground with Us, for a film that’s about something evil sucking people up from above. Daniel Kaluuya, Keke Palmer, Steven Yeun and some very scared horses star. Flamin’ hot Cheetos leads a rainforest chorus Perennial Super Bowl ad favorites Doritos goes sans celebrity in this spot for its flamin’ hot chips, which inspire a collection of jungle animals to sigh, sniff, beatbox and then sing their way through Salt-N-Pepa’s Push It. Speaking of the NFL’s race and gender issues, and given the league’s repeated failures to address players’ violence against women, I would be remiss not to mention halftime show headliner Dr Dre’s long history of domestic violence allegations. The 55-year-old rapper and producer has been alleged to have assaulted and threatened multiple women since at least 1991, including two mothers of his children and by his wife of 24 years, Nicole Young, whom he divorced last year. Dre has refuted Young’s claims, but somewhat addressed the others in a statement to the New York Times in 2015: “I apologize to the women I’ve hurt. I deeply regret what I did and know that it has forever impacted all of our lives.” The details are covered in brief by my colleague Andrew Lawrence, who called the selection of Dre as a headliner “a tone deaf choice for a league grappling with raging gender and race crises”. So here’s a look at which stars have turned up to watch the game live, from Charlize Theron and Rebel Wilson to Chris Tucker. A reminder that to attend the game, proof of vaccination had to be shown, unlike at next month’s Oscars ... Andy Richter’s Julius Caesar loves avocados “I looooove salads – if that’s what I’m known for, I’ll be happy,” says Julius Caesar aka comedian Andy Richter in a spot for Avocados from Mexico (a brand? A movement?) set at an ancient Roman tailgate. As far as gladiator-themed Super Bowl ads go, this is no Beyoncé, Britney and Pink singing We Will Rock You in the Colosseum for Pepsi. Instead, we’re in the parking lot with the plebeians who traveled three months by oxcart to see Maximus fed to the wolves. Netflix has condensed their 2022 movie preview trailer for a Super Bowl ad that just premiered – a rather bizarre assemblage of clips, and actors breaking the fourth wall. Stuart Heritage wrote about how frightening it all is here: Arnie and Salma go electric Arnold Schwarzenegger had been teasing this ad last month on social media, sharing a fake movie poster for Zeus, something that just about no one actually fell for. As most predicted, it was to hype up his Super Bowl ad, where he plays the thunder god alongside Salma Hayek as his wife Hera. It’s to hawk BMW’s new electric model. Arnie has a history of electric car support and once converted a Mercedes into an electric car, raising its value to $1m. In case you missed it then here’s a rather wonderful reminder of how rather wonderful Jhené Aiko’s voice is: Moon Knight It’s looking like a rather dark year for Marvel, after tonight’s horror-tinged Doctor Strange 2 tease and now this, a second look at their new Disney+ series, Moon Knight, recently described as “brutal” by Marvel boss Kevin Feige. Oscar Isaac’s British accent remains ... a decision but there’s plenty to get excited about here, including a grizzled Ethan Hawke and some stunning on-location imagery. Ewan McGregor meditates on stuff for Expedia For Expedia, Ewan McGregor muses on the futility of all this stuff we buy – thinner TVs, smarter smartphones, lighter light beers – when we could be traveling (assuming there’s not another Covid surge). “Do you think any of us will look back on our lives and regret the things we didn’t buy? Or the places we didn’t go?” he says, walking off on to a sunlit beach. Hannah Waddingham plays a high roller For Japanese online retailer Rakuten, Ted Lasso’s Hannah Waddingham (along with a hairless cat sidekick) plays a high stakes roller matched bet for bet by an ordinary online shopper. Will Smith’s – what if The Fresh Prince but a drama series, Bel-Air – airs today on NBC’s streamer Peacock (and tomorrow in the UK) and so there’s a ton of promo during the game, including an ad explained here by an excitable Will: You can also read an interview with the star Jabari Banks: Zendaya’s Sally sells seashells for Squarespace As told (with precise pronunciation) by André 3000, Zendaya’s Sally once sold a few seashells by the sea shore – until she opened a website on Squarespace, which turned her into a seashell celebrity with all the glam (and outfit changes) worthy of the Euphoria star. If they can bring back a T-Rex, then ... Jurassic World: Dominion After the success of last month’s Scream, the legacy sequel – aka the one that brings back the old to mingle with the new – continues with force this year with our first real look at the inevitable greatest hits sequel Jurassic World: Dominion. The last film brought back BD Wong and a cameo-ing Jeff Goldblum to join Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard but this time they return with both Sam Neill and Laura Dern, an exciting prospect for hardcore fans. The trailer has some promising moments but there’s an awful lot here to be juggled – despite the familiar faces, it’ll be the lesser-known DeWanda Wise who leads – so whether all balls can be kept up in the air remains to be seen. Kanye’s McDonald’s order It’s been a chaotic weekend for Kanye West, whose rather alarming Instagram posts have been causing concern as well as ridicule. But the rapper and entrepreneur has also cropped up briefly in an ad for McDonald’s, a surprise cameo that might be a way of announcing a new Kanye meal, following in the footsteps of Travis Scott who pocketed $20m for his. More to come, uhhhhhhhh maybe. The Lost City A quick look at Sandra Bullock and Channing Tatum’s The Lost City, a knowing spin on Romancing the Stone, doesn’t really offer us much we haven’t already seen in the initial trailers. The story of a romance novelist who finds herself in a real adventure has plenty going for it – Bullock returning to physical comedy, Daniel Radcliffe as a bad guy, a role for the extremely funny Patti Harrison, a piss-taking cameo from Brad Pitt – but three trailers have now shown essentially the same moments on a loop (someone over at Paramount is very proud of the line “What is this, Taken? Am I took-en?”) so let us hope there’s more to be found when it hits cinemas next month. Doctor Strange and the Multiverse of Madness And early out of the gate comes one of the night’s biggest trailer reveals. The phenomenal success of the most recent Spider-Man instalment (about to take over Avatar’s mammoth box office) and the film’s many, many cameos has upped the ante for the next Marvel adventure, something the new tease of Sam Raimi’s Doctor Strange 2 is certainly aware of. While we knew from the last trailer that Wanda would be a major part, the new teaser has confirmed a rumour that Patrick Stewart would be starring as well. Is he playing Professor Xavier though? Is it about to be an X-Men mash-up? We’ll find out for sure in May. Try it yourself if you can! Jason Bateman gives the history of evolution Jason Bateman surveys the history of human evolution, from the invention of our first words (aka caveman grunts) to the first maps, phones and TV screens, all leading up to Hyundai’s first electric car, the Ioniq 5. While Super Bowl viewership has fallen in recent years, along with pretty much every other live event, we’re still talking a considerable, not-to-be-sniffed at audience. Last year 92m viewers still tuned in and so advertisers remain more than happy to spend the most for an ad. This year’s rate has gone up from $6.5m for 30 seconds to $7m. Experts have called this year’s theme amusing and warm, a string of gentle ads that will not be going too deep. Phew. Celebrities tend to descend upon the Super Bowl wherever it’s being played but this year the LA setting should mean that even more will appear. We’ll add pics when they crop up but here’s a quick look at who has been spotted so far: This blog is firmly not about sports, but the Super Bowl half-time show, as the most watched concert of the year, is inextricable from the NFL’s abundant issues with race and gender and its tendency to favor performative gestures (hashtags for racial justice on the field) over substantive change (hiring any black coaches – there is only one, in a league of 32 teams). This year’s line-up features some of the biggest Black artists in the US – Dr Dre, Kendrick Lamar, Snoop Dogg and Mary J Blige. It’s a far cry from five years ago, when high-profile artists such as Rihanna, Adele and Cardi B reportedly declined offers to perform out of frustration with the league’s handling of Colin Kaepernick’s protests for racial justice. And it’s in large part thanks to Jay Z, who entered into a public partnership with the league in 2019 that gave his company, Roc Nation, influence over the league’s social justice initiatives and music events. The league’s racial issues are arguably as bad as ever – for more on that, read my colleague Andrew Lawrence’s piece on the optics of this year’s halftime show. The line-up is “too big to fail”, he writes, but “like the league’s efforts to address its race and gender problems, this too appears to be a no-win proposition”. It’s here! That one team playing that other team to win that whatever for something, I don’t know. What matters here is what is happening off the pitch or whatever it’s called, a place to avoid all the sport and focus on the other festivities. Tonight, as ever, there will be a host of celebrity-packed trailers and first looks at major movies and, most importantly, a much-anticipated half-time performance from a hip-hop and R&amp;B supergroup: Kendrick Lamar, Mary J Blige, Eminem, Dr Dre and Snoop Dogg. So for the next few hours, this will be a football-free zone. It is football they are playing tonight, right?The Los Angeles Rams have been accused of trading away their future to build a team of superstars, but their fans are unlikely to care when the present looks this good. Six years after the team returned to California – after a 20-year sojourn in St Louis – the Rams are Super Bowl champions for the second time in their history. Their last title-winning team was led by a turbocharged offense known as the Greatest Show On Turf. This victory was a lot grittier but just as welcome. “I can’t say enough about the resilience of this team,” Rams coach Sean McVay said after the game. “Guys stepping up when they had too and it’s going to sound like a broken record, but that’s what makes this team great. That’s why they’re world champs.” Rams quarterback Matthew Stafford arrived in Los Angeles last March after spending the entirety of his career in the football wasteland of Detroit. The Rams hoped that he was the final piece in a team of stars that would push them to their first championship since the 1999 season. He certainly looked the part early on in this game. On his first throw, he connected on a short pass to Cam Akers for a first down. But the drive fizzled out and it was the Bengals’ chance to make an early impression. It had taken Stafford 13 years to reach his first Super Bowl. His opposite number, Joe Burrow, had arrived here in just his second in the league. Like Stafford, he completed his first pass. The Bengals, showing the confidence of a team that had already beaten the No 1 seeded Tennessee Titans and fearsome Kansas City Chiefs to get to Sunday’s game, elected to go for it on fourth down at midfield. Burrow couldn’t complete his pass though and the Rams took over with excellent field position. That was enough of an opportunity for Stafford. He connected with Cooper Kupp for 20 yards and then found Odell Beckham Jr with a 17-yard strike for a touchdown. Beckham tore into the NFL as a rookie in 2014, famous for his spectacular athleticism and ability to pull off breathtaking catches. In recent years he had been judged as little more than a walking distraction and, like Stafford, a player whose reputation fell short of his output. But the two men had given their team a vital early advantage, particularly when their formidable defensive line and star cornerback Jalen Ramsey are capable of shutting down opposing offenses. It was Ramsey who broke up a would-be touchdown pass for the Bengals on third down at the end of the first quarter. Evan McPherson kicked the ensuing field goal to make it 7-3 and the Bengals were on the board. Stafford had supplied Beckham with a touchdown and he went to his other top receiver, Kupp, for his second. The 28-year-old had clocked up 1,947 receiving yards in the regular season, the second-highest total in NFL history, and few of his catches were easier than this one as he found himself free of any coverage in the end zone. Burrow’s favorite target throughout this season has been his old college teammate, Ja’Marr Chase. But neither player was involved in the Bengals’ opening touchdown, which came on their next drive. Running back Joe Mixon showed off his arm, finding Tee Higgins with a six-yard pass and the score was 13-10. It was the first time a running back had thrown a touchdown in a Super Bowl since January 1980. Stafford was playing flawlessly but even when he’s at his best the siren song of an inadvisable pass is never far away. He duly delivered on the Rams’ next possession. At the Cincinnati 43-yard line he heaved it into the end zone and Jessie Bates leapt in front of Van Jefferson, who could have fought harder for the catch, to make the pick. The teams went into half-time separated by a field goal but the game so far had not gone as most had predicted. The Rams defensive line, led by one-man wrecking crew, Aaron Donald, had been expected to tear into a Bengals offensive line that had failed to protect Burrow for much of the last two seasons. But Burrow was enjoying more time to find his targets than he was used to. And that point was backed up with the first play of the second-half. Burrow danced around the pocket, Higgins lost Ramsey with far too much ease for the Rams’ liking, scooped up the pass, and scampered away for a 75-yard touchdown. The Bengals had the lead for the first time in the game, 17-13. Stafford, meanwhile, was reverting to type: a spectacular start followed by an impressive implosion. A knee injury had ended Beckham’s game which meant more snaps for Ben Skowronek, a rookie with just 11 career receptions. Stafford attempted to find him with his first throw of the half, but was slightly off target and Skowronek deflected it into the welcoming arms of Chidobe Awuzie. That led to a second field goal from McPherson and one in reply for the Rams to make it 20-16. As the game wore on, the defenses started to take control. Stafford was hauled down behind the line and shaken up by DJ Reader. Then Burrow was brought down twice on the ensuing Bengals’ possession, two of the Rams’ seven sacks on the night which set a Super Bowl record. “They have a really good front. Aaron Donald, Von Miller and Leonard Floyd are three of the best players in the league and we expected they were going to get some pressure,” said Burrow after the game. “I think they did a good job.” Stafford had led 34 fourth-quarter comebacks during his career and he would need to make it 35 as the Rams entered the final stanza trailing by four points. Crucially, his defense was continuing to harry Burrow as the Bengals offensive line tired. With less than two minutes left, the Rams drove to the Bengals’ one-yard line, with help from a series of penalties on the Bengals. This is what the Rams had traded for when they acquired Stafford: a quarterback who could push them over the line when it mattered. He duly wheeled out and threw his third touchdown pass of the game to Kupp, who was later named Super Bowl MVP for his two-touchdown performance. “You put the ball in your best players’ hands when it matters most,” said McVay, who became the youngest winning head coach in Super Bowl history at 36 years, 20 days. “That’s what we did with Matthew and he delivered in a big way. He’s a world champ.” The Rams were three points up with 85 seconds to play. Now it was Burrow’s time to lead his team. He had shown a cool head in crucial situations throughout the playoffs but by now the Rams’ defensive line were rampant. Appropriately it was Donald, arguably the most talented player in the entire league, who ripped through the line to force Burrow into an incompletion on fourth down and seal the 23-20 victory for the Rams.Oh and one last thing, check out Tom Lutz’s game report live from SoFi Stadium, linked below! Final thoughts Okay, NBC is about to switch out to coverage of the Winter Olympics, so that means that it’s about time for us to shut down this live blog. Thanks to everybody who contributed their emails and tweets, sorry that I couldn’t fit them all during this action-packed Super Bowl. As promised, we had a tight game that wasn’t decided until the literal last minute. You can’t ask for a better end of the NFL season than that. Do stick around for further coverage from the Guardian as we will break down the Los Angeles Rams’ impressive Super Bowl victory over the coming days. To nobody’s surprise, Cooper Kupp, who caught two touchdown passes, is named Super Bowl MVP. “I don’t feel deserving of this,” he says. That’s absolutely not true, he ended up having to be the majority of the Rams’ offense after Beckham went down. Time for the presentation of the Vince Lombardi Trophy. Did Roger Goodell not get loudly booed? That’s a black mark on this Super Bowl crowd. When Aaron Donald is inducted into the Pro Footbal Hall of Fame, this is going to be the image that everybody remembers: Some words for the Cincinnati Bengals, who nobody had thought would be going this far and were one or two plays away from coming out this game with one of the most improbable championships in NFL history: they have something special here with Joe Burrow and I would be surprised not to see them here again if they can keep him and keep him healthy. This is the first Super Bowl win for the Rams since 1999, when they were in St Louis! As per usual, we’ll keep this live blog going until the trophy presentation. It was almost set up for Aaron Donald to make the game-clinching defensive play. Rams 23-20 Bengals, FINAL The Bengals just let the clock run down as Stafford kneels down to end the game. The Rams have won Super Bowl LVI! Rams 23-20 Bengals, .39, fourth quarter After another touchback, the Bengals will start on their own 25. Burrow finds Chase for a 17-yard gain that will take them to their own 42-yard line. That’s a quick start. On the next play, Burrow finds Boyd for a nine-yard gain that takes them nearly to midfield. Second and one, Burrow throws one long and wide. Third and one, with the clock ticking. Perine doesn’t pick up the yards. The Bengals take a timeout. After the timeout, Aaron Donald takes down Burrow on fourth down! That’s almost certainly going to do it! Rams 23-20 Bengals, 1.25, fourth quarter First and goal, there’s a pass interference call on the defense. That means it’s first and goal at the one-yard line. A lot has gone on here, without anything happening. Stafford takes it himself but doesn’t get close to the touchdown. The Bengals take a timeout. Second and goal, Stafford FINALLY hits that touchdown to, you guessed it, Cooper Kupp! The extra point is good, and now the Bengals have just 1.25 to try to tie this one up ... or more. Can they do it again? Rams 16-20 Bengals, 1.44, fourth quarter Stafford’s third pass is incomplete to Kupp but there’s a holding call on the Bengals defense. It feels iffy given the circumstances, but so it goes. So it’s first and goal at the Bengals four here. On the next play, Stafford seems to throw a touchdown pass to Kupp but there’s a flag. There’s holding on the offense and unnecessary roughness on the defense, so that means offsetting penalties. So we’re replaying first down now. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 1.47, fourth quarter Stafford’s second pass just hits the ground. Third down and goal. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 1.51, fourth quarter What the Bengals need here, badly, is an interception or a fumble recovery. Stafford’s first-down pass? Too high. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 1.55, fourth quarter First and then, Stafford finds Akers for three yards. Second and seven, Stafford throws to Kupp for a 22-yard gain! They’re at the Bengals’ 24-yard line and things are getting dicey for Cincinnati here! First and 10, of course Stafford is going to find Kupp again. This completion is worth eight yards and it takes them to the Bengals 16. Akers, neutralized this entire game, goes off for an eight-yard gain! At the two-minute warning, the Rams are eight yards away from their opponents’ end zone with a new set of downs. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 4.06, fourth quarter The Rams are at their own 37. Stafford tries to find Akers, but he can’t. He then goes with Kupp again for an eight-yard gain. On third and two, Stafford hits Hopkins for a six-yard gain that gets them into Bengals territory. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 5.00, fourth quarter Yes, I wrote “putting unit” a few updates ago and not “punting unit.” Sometimes spell-check isn’t sufficient. Meanwhile, Stafford finds Hopkins for a nine-yard gain on first down. Smart move not brining Michel back out there. On second and one, Stafford’s pass is incomplete. Third and one, they opt to rush and Akers can’t quite get there. Big fourth down decision. You have to think they go for it here at their own 30. They do! Kupp takes the ball ad runs! He picks up seven yards for a first down! That might have saved the Rams’ season! Rams 16-20 Bengals, 6.20, fourth quarter First and 10, Burrow finds Mixon for a three-yard loss. He’s looking a little more comfortable now. It’s second and 13 now, Mixon picks up four yards. A massive third and nine situation here and Burrow finds Boyd with a perfect pass that the usually sure-handed Boyd somehow just drops. Huber’s punt will put the Rams at their own 21. Let’s see if they can make the Bengals pay for what looks like a massive missed opportunity with that dropped first-down pass. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 8.01, fourth quarter Meanwhile, the Bengals are doing good running on first down, which is important because Burrow is out there but it doesn’t look like he’s fully right. Mixon picks up 12 yards on first down for, well, another first down. At the Bengals’ own 28, Mixon picks up eight yards. Second and two, Mixon gets stuffed for no gain. Then we have Burrow’s first throw, a three-yard pass to Evans for a first down. The Bengals are at their own 39. I strongly suggest that the Rams start passing on first down from here on out. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 9.58, fourth quarter Sony Michel gets the ball on second and third and gets pushed back. On third down, Stafford throws short and that’s one of the briefest possessions you will see without a turnover. Here comes the punting unit. Hekker pins the Bengals to their own 16. Let’s see if Burrow is coming out and, if so, how healthy he looks. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 11.29, fourth quarter Joe Burrow’s injury, it looks to be his right knee, has cast a pall over this game. Hopefully, he can return like Stafford did. Speaking of Stafford, he finds Jefferson for a seven-yard gain to their own 42-yard line. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 11.38, fourth quarter Burrow throws incomplete to Higgins on second and nine. On third down, the Rams defense blitzes Burrow, who looks shaken in the aftermath. He limps off and he’s holding his leg in pain and this looks worse than Stafford’s foot injury. There was a flag for unnecessary roughness after the end of the play, on Isaiah Prince. There’s a 14-yard penalty on the Bengals before they punt. At their own 14, Huber’s 54-yard punt is returned by the Rams to their own 35. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 12.38, fourth quarter The ever-present Mixon picks up a yard on first down. On second down, Burrow absolutely nails Boyd with a perfect pass for 16 yards. The Bengals are at their own 33. Mixon, once again, gets the ball on first down and gives them a single yard. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 14.11, fourth quarter On second and five, Akers gets pushed back to the Bengals 49. It’s third and seven now, Stafford throws very, very deep to Jefferson, but he’s utterly swamped by defenders. The Rams punt and pin the Bengals to their own 16. Rams 16-20 Bengals, end of the third quarter As expected, Stafford is back out there. Akers picks up five yards on first down, getting the Rams to the Bengals’ 47-yard line and that ends up being the final play of the third quarter. Only 15 minutes left in regulation everybody! Rams 16-20 Bengals, .43, third quarter Stafford is walking around, but man it looks like he hurt his ankle pretty bad on that sack. I would imagine if there’s any way he can stay on the field, we will see him on the next Rams offensive possession. It is Burrow’s time to get sacked here, a two-yard loss courtesy of A’Shawn Robinson. On the next player, it’s Von Miller who gets to Burrow, pushing Burrow back 10 yards. The Bengals now have a third and 22 at their own four-yard line. Not ideal. Burrow finds Mike Thomas for a 17-yard gain. All that will do is giving more space for the punter, the announcers point out correctly. Huber’s punt will put the Rams at their own 48-yard line. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 2.55, third quarter Stafford connects with Jefferson for a loss of a single-yard and we get a timeout for an injured player. It looks to be Awuzie for the Bengals defense. It’s second and 11 at the Rams 46. Stafford passes to Akers who picks up four yards. The next play could be very significant: DJ Reader sacks Stafford for a six-yard loss that forces the Rams to punt. More than that, Stafford limps out of the field and immediately gets examined. The punt will put the Bengals at their own 16. A health update for the Rams and it’s a very bad one. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 4.30, third quarter Rams defense steps up huge here. Ernest Jones sacks Burrow for seven yards and his third-down pass to Chase is incomplete, somewhat shockingly. Here comes the punting team. Powell takes Huber’s punt to the Los Angeles 47. Solid starting position for the Rams on the other side of a commercial break. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 5:38, third quarter Gay’s kick goes into the end zone for a touchback. I really should just set up a keyboard shortcut for that phrase, it would save me precious seconds. The Bengals start at their own 25 where Mixon picks up four yards on first down. Rams 16-20 Bengals, 5.58, third quarter Stafford finds Skowronek for a seven-yard gain. On second and three, however, Akers goes backwards two yards. That puts the Rams back at the Cincinnati 23. On third and five, they try a trick play of their own, but Cooper Kupp is no Joe Mixon and he can’t find a wide open Stafford for a first down. It’s fourth down and here comes the field goal unit. Gay’s field goal attempt is good. Rams 13-20 Bengals, 8.06, third quarter Henderson picks up a single yard on first down. It’s second and nine at their own 43. Stafford finds Kupp for a 13-yard gain to the Bengals 44. Stafford goes to Hopkins for a 16-yard gain and they’re already at the Cincinnati 28. He looks determined to tie this back up right here. Rams 13-20 Bengals, 9.48, third quarter McPherson’s kick hits the end zone for another touchback. Let’s see if this offensive possession goes better for the Rams. Akers runs for … a two-yard gain to the LA 27. On second and 10, Stafford throws incomplete. It’s third and eight now and it would be deflating for this drive to die here. It doesn’t! Stafford finds Henderson who picks up 15 yards and takes them to their own 42. The Bengals now have a touchdown lead and if they can hold on, and there is a lot of time still to go, that period will be remembered as the turning point. The Rams, however, have something to say about that. Rams 13-20 Bengals, 10.19, third quarter Mixon picks up two yards to the Los Angeles 16. On second and eight, Burrow finds Uzomah for another five yards. On third and three, Aaron Donald does what Aaron Donald does: he sacks Burrow for a nine-yard loss that is going to force a field goal here. That’s probably LA’s best case scenario here. McPherson doesn’t miss field goals in the postseason so the kick is good and the Bengals tack onto their lead. Rams 13-17 Bengals, 13.09, third quarter Burrow passes to Mixon for no gain and then is sacked for a one-yard loss on the next play. It is third and 11 on the Rams 32. The Rams’ defense is coming up big right when they desperately need it to. Burrow finds Chase for a 10-yard gain. So, it’s fourth-and-one and the Bengals have a decision to make here. And they go for it! Burrow doesn’t just quarterback sneak, he picks up four yards to the Rams’ 18-yard line. Rams 13-17 Bengals, 14.38, third quarter What is going on here? The Rams take McPherson’s kickoff to their own 17-yard line. On their very first offensive play of the second half, Stafford throws an interception right to Chidobe Awuzie! The Bengals get the ball again and will start at the LA 31. This game has turned almost instantly! Rams 13-17 Bengals, 14.48, third quarter Oh wow, that’s super-fast! Burrow finds Higgins for a 75-yard touchdown pass. Jalen Ramsey wanted a face mask call there, but he didn’t get one. After a successful extra-point attempt, Cincinnati takes a four-point lead! Rams 13-10 Bengals, 14.51, third quarter Bengals get the ball to start the second half. After a touchback, the Bengals start on their own 25. Burrow finds Boyd for 11 yards, that takes them to their own 36. Alright we’re headed back to real football here now that they’ve cleaned up after the halftime show. That was an extremely good musical half-time show. Also, you should not forget about the NFL’s treatment of Colin Kaepernick or this: And Eminem actually does kneel on-stage despite the NFL telling him not to. Is that Anderson.Paak on drums? And here comes Eminem, singing the chorus of Forgot About Dre before going into Lose Yourself because it is the only Eminem hit that’s remotely Super Bowl-appropriate. Mary J Blige is out next, wearing a somewhat Beyoncé-esque outfit but wielding her own distinctive voice. Then, Kendrick Lamar comes out to perform Alright. This is certainly star-studded. And we have 50 Cent. In Da Club which will be 20 years old next year. Just in case you wanted to be reminded of your mortality for some reason. Snoop Dogg comes out first, with Dr Dre emerging to do a brief version of California Love that just makes me miss 2Pac. And here we have the NFL’s ridiculously calculated all-hip-hop half-time show. I can already tell I’m going to enjoy this musically and loathe the cynical reasons that the NFL selected Dr Dre, Snoop Dogg and company to perform today. An email from Graham Searles entitled “Mixon MVP”: Its on! Let’s go Joe! Hope the live blog’s going well Hunter Thanks, it’s ... uh, going. If the Bengals make a comeback, I will say that Mixon might just earn the hardware for that TD alone. Email from Ben Bronx: This Cincinnati Bengals team reminds me of the New York Giants that won Super Bowl XLII. Constantly defying the odds each week in the playoffs and starting the Super Bowl as massive underdogs. They started off a bit rusty here, but I guess they get better as the game goes on. Again: Burrow has yet to throw a touchdown pass and this is still just a three-point deficit. They’ll take that. Halftime thoughts The Rams looked in-control early, but the Bengals punched back with a nifty trick play. Meanwhile, the Beckham injury looms very, very large here. He was making an early case for game MVP before getting hurt. A three-point game at halftime is essentially a tie in the NFL. Rams 13-10 Bengals, end of the first half Stafford throws incomplete on first down and then finds Kupp for a nine-yard gain that takes them to midfield. LA take a timeout here before this third and one situation. Stafford tries a deep throw that’s incomplete. On fourth and one, the Rams go conservative and bring out the punting unit. Hekker’s punt goes into the end zone. It’s a touchback but it doesn’t matter because there’s only a few seconds left and there’s no reason for the Bengals to risk anything here. Rams 13-10 Bengals, .42, second quarter After the timeout, Brandon Powell takes Huber’s punt nine yards to the Rams 41-yard line. That’s decent opening field position, but the Rams don’t have much time to work with here. Rams 13-10 Bengals, :48, second quarter Okay, the penalty was that one of the Bengals came onto the field when they weren’t allowed. On first and then, Burrow finds Higgins for a five-yard gain. Second and five, Burrow finds C.J. Uzomah for a six yard gain. First and ten, Burrow is going shotgun as the clock winds down. He throws incomplete. Second and ten, Burrow finds Boyd for four years. The Bengals take a timeout. Whatever they discussed didn’t work, as Burrow gets sacked on the next play and they have to punt. The Rams take a second timeout. Rams 13-10 Bengals, 2.00, second quarter Akers picks up a single yard to put the Rams at their own 43. Then, however, Stafford’s ball control problems flare up at a very bad time as his deep pass to Jefferson is picked up by safety Jesse Bates III in the end zone! It’s Bengals ball and they will start at their own 20. Never mind, make that their own 10-yard line after an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty on Cincinnati. Rams 13-10 Bengals, 2.46, second quarter It’s a third and nine situation, Stafford finds Brycen Hopkins for a 16-yard gain that puts them at the Bengals 39. That’s a new set of downs as well, obviously. On the next play, the Rams get hit with a five-yard false start penalty. On first and 15, Stafford’s pass is incomplete. Email from Paul Mack: Cocky by the Rams to go for a two pointer in the second quarter ...while they were ahead. Hope it comes back to bite them. Well it’s now a one field goal game because of that failed conversion. Beckham is being taken to the medical tent, which is never a great sign. Rams 13-10 Bengals, 3.54, second quarter On 4.38, Akers picks up a yard. It’s second &amp; nine on the Rams 45 and Stafford’s pass is … incomplete and we go to commercial as Beckham was hurt on the play. Rams 13-10 Bengals, 4.38, second quarter That’s Mixon’s first pass in the NFL? Wow. Okay, McPherson’s kickoff goes for a touchback. The Rams start again at their own 25. Akers picks up six yards on first and 10. On second and four, Stafford finds Jefferson for a 13-yard gain and a new set of downs. Rams 13-10 Bengals, 5.47, second quarter Mixon picks up four yards on two straight possessions and the Burrow-to-Chase connection gets them to the LA seven-yard line. Mixon gets them one yard closer. It’s second and goal and … Mixon gets the ball and the running back tosses a pass to Higgins for the first Bengals touchdown! Who had their first TD pass coming from anybody but Burrow? This game is going to break Vegas. Meanwhile, the extra point is good! Rams 13-3 Bengals, 8.58, second quarter Mixon picks up 14 yards to the LA 37. First and ten, Mixon picks up four to the 33-yard line. The Bengals are putting together a drive. Second and six, Burrow finds Mixon for no gains. Key third and six here and … Burrow fins Tee Higgins for a 14-yard gain that puts them in the Rams’ red zone. Rams 13-3 Bengals, 11.34, second quarter Correction: that actually goes in the books as a failed two-point conversion! Sorry for the confusion, bettors, but it’s the same score. In any case, after a Gay kickoff, the Bengals start at their own 25. Burrow finds Boys for a 11-yard gain and a first down. Mixon then picks up three yards to the Bengals 39 where Burrow finds Chase again for a 10 yard again. The Bengals are already at their own 49. Rams 13-3 Bengals, 12.56, second quarter Sorry, that’s a second down and four, not that it really matters. Stafford finds Kupp in the end zone and that’s the second Rams touchdown. The Bengals, yet again, are going to have to come from behind if they want to win this one. They do, however, block the extra point attempt! That’s something you don’t see often in the Super Bowl. Rams 7-3 Bengals, 12.56, second quarter Stafford finds to Henderson, who can run and catch, and he takes for 25 yards to the Bengals 16. Henderson gets the ball again and takes it to the Bengals 11. Second and five … the Rams take a timeout. Rams 7-3 Bengals, 14.56, second quarter Stafford’s second and 11 pass is incomplete, but his third and 11 pass finds OBJ again for a 35-yard gain that puts them at the Bengals 41 yard line. It was really just a lost opportunity there for the Bengals. Rams 7-3 Bengals, end of the first quarter McPherson’s kickoff is another touchback. The Rams start on their own 25, where they will be at the start of the second quarter after an Akers run goes nowhere on first own. Rams 7-3 Bengals, .30, first quarter However, Burrow’s next three throws end up being incomplete. Here comes, McPherson and his magical foot, but what a great near-goal line stand by the Rams defense. The 29-yard field goal puts the Bengals on the board, but that’s a huge missed opportunity there. Rams 7-0 Bengals, 1.32, first quarter Finally, Mixon breaks loose, piling through defenders for a 13-yard gain and a first down. They’re at their own 43-yard line now. This time, Burrow throws an extraordinarily LONG throw to Chase who somehow corrals it at the Rams 11-yard line! 46 yards! Wowzers! Yes that warranted a “wowzers.” Rams 7-0 Bengals, 2.23, first quarter Stafford passes to Ben Skowronek for a five-yard gain. It’s second and five at the LA 33 and just when I’m about to type that we haven’t had any penalties this game, the Rams get tagged with delay of game. So they will be pushed back five yards here. Second and 10 back at their own 28, running back Sony Michel gets just three yards. Third and seven, Stafford’s pass to Van Jefferson only gets them four yards and so they will be punting here. Hekkers punt is fielded at the 11-yard line by Trent Taylor, who takes it for a 20-yard gain to the Cincinnati 30. I’m the biggest fourth-down guy ever and I was stunned by that decision. I literally was writing “they will punt here” when it happened and had to delete it real quick. Rams 7-0 Bengals, 4.54, first quarter Matt Gay’s kick goes for a touchback. The Bengals are at their own 25. On first and 10, they need Mixon now more than ever … but he runs for no gain. On second and 10, Burrow throws to former college teammate JaMarr Chase for the first time this game, and it’s a six yard gain. It’s third and four at their own 31. Burrow throws incomplete to Evans and that will be a wrap here. Here comes the punting team. Kevin Huber’s punt will put the Rams at their own 28 on the other side of more commercials. You see? That article I shared early this liveblog about Beckham? That was called foreshadowing! Rams 7-0 Bengals, 6.22, first quarter Henderson picks up four yards to put them at the Bengals 20. It’s second and six now, Stafford finds Henderson again, and he gets it to the 17-yard line. It’s third and three now here, with the Bengals hoping to hold them to a field goal. THEY DON’T. Instead, Stafford finds Odell Beckham Jr for the first touchdown of the Super Bowl! With a successful extra point attempt, the Rams take a 7-0 lead! Rams 0-0 Bengals, 8.46, first quarter Akers gets the ball on first &amp; 10 at the 50-yard line and gets taken for a one-yard loss. Second and 11, Stafford takes the ball himself and scrambles for seven yards. Third and four, Stafford finds Cooper Kupp for a 20-yard gain that puts them on the Bengals 24 yard line. Going for it on fourth and one might be backfiring for Cincinnati here. No clue, but take the over. I’m going to take notes on how many commercials are for gambling sites and/or crypto. Rams 0-0 Bengals, 10.00, first quarter Well, oddly enough, the Rams have had some protection issues on that opening drive. Let’s see what Cincinnati can do here. Joe Burrow finds Tyler Boyd for an eight-yard gain right to half field. 2nd &amp; 2, Joe Mixon squeezes out a yard. And that’s all they get. The next two plays go nowhere, so the Rams will get the ball back at the 50-yard line. Rams 0-0 Bengals, 12.04, firstquarter Oof, Stafford gets sacked for seven yards to make this a 3rd &amp; 17 situation. On the very next play, Darrell Henderson gets taken for a three yard loss. So, here comes punter Johnny Hekker, whose 40 yard punt is returned by the Bengals to their own 42 yard line. Rams 0-0 Bengals, 13.52, first quarter The Rams start at their own 25, Cam Akers gets the ball for the first offensive play of the game and picks up four yards. 2nd &amp; 6 at the Rams 29, Matthew Stafford finds Akers again for seven yards. That’s an instant first down on the LA 36. Rams 0-0 Bengals, 15.00, first quarter We’re off! The Bengals’ opening kickoff goes into the end zone for a touchback. Okay, we’re almost to opening kick and I will admit to 100% being distracted by the commercial for this nostalgia-trap of a “Jurassic Park” sequel. Oh here’s The Rock for no reason. This is promising to be a celebrity-packed Super Bowl, even more so than usual. Coin toss Billie Jean King comes out for the coin toss. It’s heads and the Bengals win and they choose to defer (wisely) so the Rams will get the ball first. National anthem Mickey Guyton! I love her! Say one thing about holding a Super Bowl in LA, the league has their pick of musical talent at their disposal. 8/10 Just, one slight mistake was made here: Jhené Aiko is singing “America the Beautiful,” alongside the biggest harp I think I’ve ever seen. Quite gorgeous. Email from our old friend Roger Kirkby: Hi Hunter, a number to look out of in the game is 34 points, the reason being the biggest score by a team not to win is 33 by New England. So if a team hits 34 they should be the winners. I’ve been on the Bengals bandwagon through all of the playoffs, but I’m switching to The Rams as they will become the first away team to win at home without moving cities in the process. And a moment of silence for the late John Madden, followed by the Rams’ Andrew Whitworth receiving the 2021 Walter Payton Man of the Year award. And here come the Cincinnati Bengals, we are around 20 minutes or so from opening kickoff now. Time is flying by here, apologies if I don’t catch every single tweet and email here. From Tom: Hi Hunter, When Adam Fletcher says living down south he means southern England and not Mississippi cos he lived up the road and I remember well those heady days of getting into NFL, The Fridge, Dan Marino et al, and The Shuffle was pretty good too. Cheers, Tom I won’t lie, I was five at the time so I don’t have many memories of that particular era. My Super Bowl era was the Period Of Inevitable Buffalo Bills Futility. As the LA Rams take the field, here are two of you who think they are going to be the ones to come out on top when this game comes to an end. My longtime Guardian liveblogging cohort David Lengel is a fan of SoFi Stadium, no matter what the cost: Plus, he has the Bengals winning this one. Email from Amy Moran: Hey Hunter, It’s been a crazy season, so a crazy Superbowl seems appropriate. Are the Bengals really the underdogs we make them out to be? Or are we just razzle dazzled by the big names on the Rams? With you on this thing going to overtime, gonna stock up on some energy drinks. The Rams are favorites based on talent, but not overwhelming ones. We’ve seen the Bengals win three straight games, two of them as underdogs, and it’s impossible to count them out. I think everybody is expecting this to be a relatively evenly-matched game and nobody should be shocked at either team winning. Email from Peter Evans: Good Evening Just wondering why does the NFL use Roman numerals for the branding of Super Bowl. Is Latin the new modern language to learn in American schools? Peter from Swansea This is a great question that I had to look up real quick! I always assumed it was just because it looked cool and that the Roman numeral thing emphasized the whole gladiatorial combat feel of the entire sport. As it turns out, it’s because of the weird thing that the Super Bowl played in any given year, is the last game of last year’s NFL season: “The Roman numerals were adopted to clarify any confusion that may occur because the NFL championship game – the Super Bowl – is played in the year following a chronologically recorded season. Numerals I through IV were added later for the first four Super Bowls.” How this is supposed to clear up this confusion is not exactly clear to me, but this is the official explanation according to the Sporting News. Predictions Your predictions are coming in as the pregame ceremonies begin. (The duo Mary Mary is doing an astounding version of “Lift Every Voice And Sing” as I type this.) Email from Will Murphy: I would love the Bengals to win but I don’t think the O-Line will protect Burrow enough. Although after nine sacks last week anything is possible … Still Rams will win with less than a seven-point advantage. Cheers! The Rams’ defense against the Bengals’ offensive line could very much be the story of the game. Meanwhile, via Twitter: Well, McPherson was my “Bengals player to watch,” so I would be down with that. Email from Dan Hare: Watching in a bar in San Diego and it’s unseasonably roasting hot. The pre-match reminds me of when the FA Cup build-up started at 11 am, just with more ads. Kind Regards Oh yeah, the hours and hours of promoted content before the Super Bowl: an American tradition like no other. I’m going to assume that, following the Chargers’ departure, the feeling in San Diego is decidedly anti-Rams (or at least anti-Los Angeles). Email from Adam Fletcher: My first Super Bowl was the crazy Bears year, in January ’86. I was 17, we drank Colt 45 because the offie had run out of Budweiser. We’d discovered the American Forces Radio Network during the year, living down south and close enough to some USAF bases, and had been listening to Sunday night double headers all season. Tonight, well, I’m back at work (at school) tomorrow after a week isolating because of a positive Covid test, so I’ll watch until I fall asleep. Which might not be too long ... Ah yes, the Super Bowl Shuffle Chicago Bears, definitely a high watermark for the league: Sorry to hear about the positive test though and hope that you end up okay. I will use this opportunity to mention that while I’m mostly recovered from the side effects of my vaccine booster shot on Friday, I am 100% going to blame any and all future typos and mental slips on lingering brain fog. Email from Andrew Benton: Hello Hunter, How many years of profit will it take to recoup the cost of the $5bn for the stadium? Looks great in the pic, but wow, that’s quite a commitment to take on. Personally speaking, I’m not going to spend too much time worrying about the owners of this privately funded stadium, but I will point out that both the Rams and the Los Angeles Chargers occupy the stadium, so that will help things. If you would like to read more about the Chargers’ cohabitation with the Rams, Andrew Lawerence also has you there: Predictions As you have already noticed, I (and other, worthier Guardian writers) have already made a multitude of Super Bowl-related predictions. Now, obviously, I would like to be right, or at least not terribly wrong, but what I’m always rooting for in these liveblogs is a competitive game. Normally, I would add “no overtime”, but after the AFC championship game, I am now officially pro-overtime. So, I’ll open it up to you, the general public: how do you see the Super Bowl playing out? Who is the winner? Who is your MVP favorite? You can send us an email at hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com or tweet @HunterFelt. Since we have some time before the big game officially begins, it’s a perfect time to do some reading to catch up on some of the major plot lines of today’s game. Let’s start with the Guardian’s Andrew Lawrence on the unusual career arc of Rams’ wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr, who is rebuilding his reputation after high-profile exits from the New York Giants and the Cleveland Browns. When is a home team not a home team? Okay, this is going to be a potentially confusing detail. The Rams are playing in their home building but they are not the designated home team. It’s the Bengals who have that designation instead because the AFC and the NFC exchange “home field advantage” every other year. Got that? Not really? Me neither, but that’s the reason why it is Rams v Bengals rather than the other way around. My esteemed editor Tom Lutz has an update straight from SoFi Stadium itself: “It’s a glorious February day in Inglewood with temperatures around 87F (31C). That’s far from normal at this time of year, even in southern California, and perhaps doesn’t bode well for the future, but for today, the fans are in good spirits and sunglasses as they make their way in to the stadium. And speaking of SoFi Stadium: it is a beauty, which is just as well for something that cost $5bn. Contrary to popular belief, it turns out there ARE Rams fans in Los Angeles and plenty were lining the street on the way to the stadium. But there has also been a good share of Bengals fans too for the last few days in and around the city and they may be edging their opponents in the (politely) drunk stakes.” Preamble Just as everybody expected, this year’s Super Bowl is between the Los Angeles Rams and the Cincinnati Bengals. I know, we’ve had three weeks and it still doesn’t sound right! Tom Brady? Retired. Ben Roethlisberger? Likewise. Back-to-back MVP winner Aaron Rodgers? At home and most likely plotting an escape from the Green Bay Packers. The New England Patriots? Done in one. The Dallas Cowboys? Oh man, don’t even ask. Now, the Rams always thought they belonged here. They’ve been in win-now mode for the last two seasons and are now one win away from having it pay off, particularly by making the decision to move on from Jared Goff at quarterback and replace him with the Detroit Lions’ Matthew Stafford. (We also welcome all long-suffering Lions fans who are rooting for the Rams solely for this reason. We understand, sometimes you have to take whatever victories you can get.) In the NFC championship game, the Rams defeated the San Francisco 49ers, a well-rounded team that decided to stick with their own questionable quarterback in Jimmy Garoppolo. That, not unpredictably, ended up being the difference in the game. Sometimes in sports, it very much is the moves you DO make. The Bengals? Nobody except them expected the Bengals to get this far. They hadn’t won a playoff game since 1991. Now they have won three straight and are somehow in the Super Bowl. Talk about a quarterback changing a team: Joe Burrow has transformed the Bengals from the dispiriting “Bungles” of yore to the year’s most unexpected underdog story. If anybody doubted their chances at winning a championship, the results of the AFC championship game should have set them straight. With their comeback win over the Kansas City Chiefs, who were aiming to appear in their third straight Super Bowl, the Bengals have ensured that on paper, at least, this matchup should be something of a toss-up. It’s the final game of a terrific NFL postseason and you have one final chance to contribute to one of our NFL liveblogs. Contact us with your comments, questions, predictions and whatnot and we’ll use them throughout today’s coverage. You can email them to Hunter.Felt.Freelance@theguardian.com or send them to my online home on Twitter at @HunterFelt. It’s Super Bowl LVI with the Los Angeles Rams against the Cincinnati Bengals at their home at SoFi Stadium! Kickoff is scheduled around 6:30 pm EST/11:30 pm GMT but we’ll be back with regular updates as we get closer to actual football. Stay tuned! Hunter will be here shortly, in the meantime here are our writers’ predictions for today’s game. Rams 24-27 Bengals. This is tricky. The Rams can score points in chunks and have the kind of defense that could elevate any side to a championship team. On the other hand, there is Joe Burrow’s coat. There are the cigars. There’s the chain. There’s McPherson’s icy veins. There’s something about this Bengals team that makes you want to ditch any sense of intelligent analysis in favor of picking what’s fun. Oliver Connolly Rams 35-22 Bengals. I can’t get over the mismatch that is the Rams’ elite defensive front against the Bengals’ below average offensive line. The Rams also have a huge advantage playing in their hometown. No, not because they have a robust fanbase, but because they have spent the week in their facilities, sticking to their routines. The Bengals, on the other hand, are sleeping in a hotel and dealing with the insane logistics that come with the Super Bowl. Melissa Jacobs Rams 34-28 Bengals. Despite the Bengals’ team-of-destiny vibes, few teams make it to the top without taking some lumps in the beginning. (The legacy of lumps don’t apply.) Meanwhile, the Rams have a prime chance to take their city back – and if they flop a second time, there’s no telling if they will have another. GM Les Snead mortgaged the team’s future to win right now. If their stars align, I just don’t see how they miss this moment. Andrew Lawrence Rams 24-30 Bengals (OT). The Rams lose without touching the ball in overtime, something which finally forces the NFL to change its silly rules. Everyone wins (except, obviously, the Rams). Hunter Felt Rams 21-24 Bengals. The pressure is on but who will blink first? The Bengals have been excellent in the clutch and that will shade the Rams’ flashy roster. McVay’s failure from three years ago could also negatively influence his decisions. Burrow grinds against the odds to set McPherson up and McFearless drills the game-winner home. Who Dey think gonna beat them Bengals? Nobody … finally! Graham SearlesIvan Reitman, the influential film-maker and producer behind beloved comedies including Ghostbusters, Animal House and Twins, has died at the age of 75. Reitman died peacefully in his sleep on Saturday night at his home in Montecito, California, his family told the Associated Press. No cause of death was given. “Our family is grieving the unexpected loss of a husband, father and grandfather who taught us to always seek the magic in life,” his children Jason, Catherine and Caroline Reitman said in a joint statement. “We take comfort that his work as a film-maker brought laughter and happiness to countless others around the world. While we mourn privately, we hope those who knew him through his films will remember him always.” Film-makers and comedians lined up to pay tribute on Monday. The director of the 2016 Ghostbusters reboot, Paul Feig, wrote: “I had the honour of working so closely with Ivan and it was always such a learning experience … All of us in comedy owe him so very much.” Comedian Kumail Nanjiani tweeted: “A legend. The number of great movies he made is absurd.” Known for big, bawdy comedies that caught the spirit of their time, Reitman was born in Komarmo, Czechoslovakia, in 1946. His mother had survived Auschwitz and his father was in the underground resistance and the owner of the country’s biggest vinegar factory. Reitman was only four when his family fled communist oppression, travelling in the nailed-down hold of a barge headed for Vienna in 1950. The family joined a relative in Toronto, where Reitman displayed his show business inclinations – starting a puppet theatre, entertaining at summer camps and playing coffee houses with a folk music group. He studied music and drama at McMaster University and began making movie shorts. In 1975, he produced the off-Broadway National Lampoon Show, starring Bill Murray, John Belushi, Brian Doyle-Murray, Gilda Radner and Harold Ramis – all unknowns who would go on to star in Reitman’s films. His big break came with the raucous, college fraternity sendup National Lampoon’s Animal House, which he produced. He directed Bill Murray in his first starring role in Meatballs and then again in Stripes but his most significant success came with 1984’s Ghostbusters. Not only did the irreverent supernatural comedy – starring Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Rick Moranis, Harold Ramis, Ernie Hudson and Sigourney Weaver – gross nearly $300m worldwide, it earned two Oscar nominations and spawned a veritable franchise including a sequel, spin-offs, games and television shows. In 2021, Ghostbusters: Afterlife was released – directed by Reitman’s son Jason, also a film-maker, and produced by Reitman. Other notable films Reitman directed include Twins, Kindergarten Cop, Dave, Junior and Six Days, Seven Nights. His last directorial effort, the Kevin Costner film Draft Day, was released in 2014. Deadline reported last year that Reitman was set to direct and produce a sequel to Twins, titled Triplets. Shooting was scheduled to begin in January 2022, with Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito set to reprise their roles with comedian Tracy Morgan playing their long lost sibling. Reitman also produced several hits, including Beethoven, Space Jam, Old Schooland EuroTrip. He produced two of Jason’s films , Ghostbusters: Afterlife and the 2009 film Up in the Air. “That was a learning experience for me,” Reitman told the Guardian in November. “At one point we were having a terrible disagreement and Jason said to me: ‘I’ve worked with a lot of different producers and none have talked to me the way you do.’ And I thought: ‘Whoa! He’s right!’ I had to think of him as a professional, not my son, whom I could boss around.” Reitman is survived by his wife, Genevieve, and their three children.Thousands of nurses will strike across New South Wales on Tuesday, defying orders from the Industrial Relations Commission (IRC) to call the action off. The IRC ruling was made on Monday afternoon after the NSW health department argued the protests would pose a risk to public health and safety. It is the first statewide industrial action by nurses in a decade, with the union calling for stricter nurse-to-patient ratios and a 2.5% increase in pay following unsuccessful negations with the government. The union was ordered to stop organising, call off the strike and not authorise members to take part. In a statement, a health department spokesman said the IRC was enlisted to “minimise disruption to important health services”. “NSW Health acknowledges that any strike action would cause disruptions and delays to health services throughout the state,” the statement read. “Whilst local health districts have plans in place to minimise potential disruptions and delays, to ensure all those in need of emergency and urgent care continue to receive it as quickly as possible. “NSW Health urges the union to comply with the orders handed down by the IRC.” Earlier in the day, an industrial officer for the the Nurses and Midwives Association told the IRC discussions had not resulted in a resolution which would “go any way to satisfying the association the real concerns of nurses are being addressed”. Following Monday’s hearing, a spokesperson for the union confirmed the actions would proceed as planned, despite an order to stop the strike. “The IRC has placed orders and directions against us late [Monday] afternoon,” the statement read. “The NSWNMA council supports the decision of our branches to take industrial action statewide. The strike and rallies will go ahead, as we are unable to comply with the orders.” The department launched the court action arguing the strike would place too high a burden on hospitals and endanger public safety. “Should the strike action occur it will cause significant disruption to the safe staffing of health facilities and presenting a risk to employee and public health and safety,” the court notification read. Union officials met with department and ministerial officials on Monday to discuss the demands from nurses and midwives ahead of the strike. NSWNMA assistant general secretary Shaye Candish said the government had not meet the association’s requests. “He [health minister Brad Hazzard] is interested in continuing to talk,” she said. “I’m not as convinced that he’s interested in solutions but we’ll wait to see. We’re very happy to continue talking but we want to start to see solutions.” Candish said nurses had been under significant pressure even before the pandemic and the situation for many was now unbearable. “It’s an incredibly challenging time,” she said. “We’re coming through the downturn of the [Omicron] peak now and we still have members who are routinely working double shifts, multiple overtime shifts per week.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Speaking on ABC radio on Monday morning, the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, said the demands being made by nurses had been reasonable. “The demands that the nurses are making are very reasonable,” he said. “We greatly respect their work and we’ll work through them in the appropriate process. We want to make sure that we listen to what they’re saying and that we put forward the best offer that’s in the state’s interest and in the nurses’ interest.” Last week NSW premier Dominic Perrottet said setting nurse-to-patient ratios “hasn’t actually worked so well in other states”. Speaking on Monday, he said it was “unlikely” a resolution would be reached before tomorrow, but that his government would continue working with officials. “We want to reach resolution and the sooner we reach resolution, the better,” he said. The department has been contacted for comment.What began as a daily slice of bliss is in danger of turning into something of a strain, some say. Some players of the viral word game Wordle have complained that it has become harder since it was bought by the New York Times late last month. The addictive online game swept the internet over the past few weeks, capturing the hearts and minds of millions, before it was quickly secured by the news giant for an undisclosed seven-figure sum. But several Wordle players have said they feel that it’s getting more difficult to guess the target word. “It must be a coincidence, but the NY Times puzzles are hard and suddenly Wordle has questionable words,” author and columnist Anna Spargo-Ryan tweeted over the weekend. “Is it me or has Wordle got so much harder since NYT took it over?” fellow author Michelle Elman asked. Dr Kirstin Ferguson, a researcher and writer, also questioned the recent change, asking: “The words seem a little harder since the move to NYT … or maybe I am imagining it?” The feeling was shared by other fans of the game. Tiger Webb, an editorial adviser and researcher at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation who specialises in language, isn’t so sure the game’s complexity has increased. “Two things could be going on,” he said. People may be seeing “a pattern where there may not be any and maybe in the backend something could be different with the sale to the New York Times … but we don’t know”. Webb acknowledged that with the puzzle’s transfer to the New York Times, the publication may want to “put their mark on it”, adding: “You’d have to imagine there’d be some element of curation there.” “It could be harder, they could have changed something, we don’t know. But even if they haven’t changed anything … open a dictionary at a random page and you will find a five-letter word in English you don’t know,” he added. The New York Times has denied any changes have been made to Wordle since the acquisition. “Nothing has changed about the game play,” New York Times communications director Jordan Cohen said in an email. Created by a Brooklyn-based Reddit engineer Josh Wardle and launched in mid-October, Wordle gives players just six guesses to determine a five-letter word that changes every day. With the “elegance of a daily newspaper puzzle”, the game’s simplicity is its charm. Wardle, who designed the game for his puzzle-loving partner, recently spoke of feeling overwhelmed by the game’s viral success. “It going viral doesn’t feel great, to be honest. I feel a sense of responsibility for the players. I feel I really owe it to them to keep things running and make sure everything’s working correctly,” Wardle said. Worldle’s popularity continues to rise. From 90 daily players in November to 300,000 at the beginning of January, the game is thought to have now attracted nearly 3 million players across the world.The Morrison government is spending more than $31m on an advertising campaign claiming Australia is “making positive energy” under its leadership and cutting greenhouse gas emissions. A Senate estimates hearing on Monday was told a second stage of the advertising campaign, which began in December and runs until April, will cost $17.9m (plus GST). It follows $12.9m spent on the first stage which started last September. The campaign, which includes advertisements across the web, billboards and broadcast, print and social media, says “it’s a fact” that “we’ve made good progress in reducing emissions and switching to renewable energy” and “we’ve got big plans for the future”. Its central claim – that the Australian government has a plan to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 – is widely disputed. The government plan, released before the Cop26 climate summit last year included no new policies, largely relied on unproven technology and did not actually map a path to the mid-century goal. Labor Senator Jenny McAllister asked departmental officials why the advertising did not explicitly mention climate change. Jo Evans, a deputy secretary from the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources, said the absence “wasn’t deliberate on our part or any others. I don’t think there’s anything in that.” McAllister asked if the energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, had any communication with the department about using the phrase “climate change”. Evans replied: “Not that I recall.” Helen Bennett, also from the department, told the hearing that spending on the program included $67,000 on focus group research to understand how people responded to the advertising. She suggested the results of the focus groups could not be released as they were part of a document before a cabinet subcommittee. Chris Bowen, Labor’s climate and energy spokesman, said the advertising campaign was evidence of the government “using taxpayer money as their own election campaign slush fund again”. “This time [it is] more than $30m on pre-election greenwash to advertise the success of renewables policies they tried to abolish,” he said. Bowen said the amount spent on advertising dwarfed the sum paid to consultants McKinsey &amp; Company to model the impact of it net zero emissions plan, which estimates heard was about $6m. A spokesperson for Taylor said when Labor was last in government it had spent $69.5m on “advertising its carbon tax” and “ proudly sent a publication to every post box in Australia” labelled “what a carbon price means for you”. The advertising was defended by then prime minister Julia Gillard at the time on the grounds “when you give people the facts, the facts make a difference”. The Coalition ads claim that Australia is “rolling out rooftop solar at record levels”, “investing billions into projects like EV charging stations” and that national emissions are 20% below 2005 levels. All are true statements, but critics say the government has reduced support for renewable energy, backed fossil fuel expansion as part of its promised gas-fired recovery from the pandemic and offered less support for EVs than state governments. Government data shows the bulk of the national emissions reductions since 2005 happened when federal Labor was in power between 2007 and 2013, and was largely due to changes in forest and land clearing overseen by state governments. The hearings were also told that officials had revised the expected emissions from the development of the Beetaloo gas basin in the Northern Territory – backed by both the Coalition and Labor – since the last hearing four months ago. Then, it was 0.1m tonnes of carbon dioxide by 2030. Last year’s national emissions projections increased the expected total to 4.9m tonnes between 2025 and 2030 as the basin is expanded with taxpayer support, with more expected beyond that date. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said it equated to the government admitting a 5,000% increase in expected emissions from fracking in the NT by 2030, with more to come after that date. “Neither the Coalition or Labor have accounted for Beetaloo emissions in their climate plans, despite both voting together to give public money to gas companies to subsidise this emissions bomb,” he said.Independent federal MP Zali Steggall has defended a $100,000 donation from the family trust of former coal company director John Kinghorn which the Australian Electoral Commission found was not properly declared to comply with disclosure laws. The Sydney Morning Herald reported on Monday that a compliance review undertaken by the AEC found that a $100,000 donation made to Steggall’s Warringah campaign from the Kinghorn Family Trust was split into eight separate donations that were under the disclosure threshold of $13,800. Kinghorn is the founder of Rams home loans and a former director of Cascade Coal and Felix Resources. According to the compliance report, the financial controller of Warringah Independent Ltd – the entity controlling Steggall’s campaign finances – advised AEC that the donation of $100,000 from the Kinghorn Family Trust consisted of eight individual donation amounts from Kinghorn family members. At the time, the financial controller of the Warringah campaign was Damien Hodgkinson, who is now a director of Simon Holmes à Court’s Climate 200 movement, which is supporting independent MPs prioritising climate action. “He [the financial controller] provided eight individual pledge forms and donation receipts generated by Warringah Independent Ltd to the Kinghorn family members,” the report said. “Notwithstanding the donation consisted of eight individual pledges, one cheque of $100,000 was given to Warringah Independent Ltd from The Kinghorn Family Trust. “Under the Electoral Act, the details of individual receipts exceeding the threshold must be disclosed in the annual disclosure return.” Steggall said she had received more than 1,700 individual donations ahead of the 2019 election and the eight individual pledges had come from a “large family living in my electorate”. “These are donations from a number of members of a large family who nearly all live in Warringah. If you ruled out taking donations from anyone who has invested in coal at one time or another, you pretty much rule out everyone as most people have through their superannuation,” Steggall said in a statement. “What is important is for people to now turn away from fossil fuel investment and support Australia’s transition to clean energy and support MPs with solutions.” Steggall has become a vocal advocate for greater action on climate change policy, including through the introduction of a private member’s bill that would establish an independent climate change commission and introduce risk assessment and adaptation plans to work towards carbon neutrality. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie, who is pursuing campaign donation reform through a private member’s bill to be moved on Monday, said there remained a pressing need for political donation reform in Australia. He said: “To that end, I moved a private member’s bill today that requires real-time disclosure, lowers the donation disclosure threshold to $1,000 aggregated, implements caps on donations and electoral expenditure, expands the definition of gift, and prohibits political donations from particular industries, including fossil-fuel entities, gambling companies, liquor companies and the tobacco industry.”The key Ambassador Bridge trade link between Canada and the United States has reopened after police cleared the last Covid restriction protesters, ending a six-day blockade. Police moved in to clear and arrest the remaining protesters on the border bridge early on Sunday, trying to end one of the main demonstrations that have broken out across Canada against Covid-19 vaccine mandates and other restrictions to bring the pandemic under control. After issuing warnings, police said arrests would be made and vehicles towed just after dawn near the bridge linking Detroit and the city of Windsor, Ontario. By Sunday afternoon, most protesters had gone and vehicles that were blocking the way had been removed, and the bridge reopened just before midnight on Sunday. “Today, our national economic crisis at the Ambassador Bridge came to an end,” Windsor’s mayor, Drew Dilkens, said. Television and social media images and clips showed officers detaining protesters and removing vehicles. Only two pickup trucks and fewer than a dozen protesters had been blocking the road to the bridge after numbers dwindled overnight and before police moved in. Afterward, police barricades remained. Police on Saturday had persuaded demonstrators to move their pickup trucks and others cars that they used at the entrance to the crossing that sees 25% of all trade between the two countries, though it remained closed. In the Canadian capital, Ottawa, meanwhile, small-scale protesting there swelled to what police said were 4,000 demonstrators. The city has seen that on past weekends, and loud music played as people milled about downtown where anti-vaccine demonstrators have been encamped since late January. The protests at the bridge and elsewhere have reverberated outside the country, with similarly inspired convoys in parts of France, New Zealand and the Netherlands, showing how small numbers can lead to huge disruption. The US Department of Homeland Security warned that truck convoys may be in the works in the US. An ex-cabinet minister in Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau’s government took the unusual step of calling out her former federal colleagues as well as the province and city for not putting an end to the protests. “Amazingly, this isn’t just Ottawa. It’s the nation’s capital,” Catherine McKenna tweeted. “But no one – not the city, the province or the federal government – can seem to get their act together to end this illegal occupation. It’s appalling … Just get your act together. Now.” Trudeau has called the protesters a “fringe” of Canadian society. Ottawa police said in a statement late Saturday that a joint command center had been set up together with the Ontario Provincial Police and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. They said that would beef up enforcement capabilities that had been limited by “safety concerns – arising from aggressive, illegal behavior by many demonstrators – limited police enforcement capabilities”. Police earlier issued a statement calling the protest an unlawful occupation and saying they were waiting for reinforcements before implementing a plan to end the demonstrations. “The whole city is furious at being abandoned by the people who are supposed to protect us. They have completely abandoned the rule of law. @OttawaPolice have lost credibility. #OttawaPoliceFailed,” tweeted Artur Wilczynski, a senior government national security official at Canada’s Communications Security Establishment. Ottawa’s mayor, Jim Watson, declared a state of emergency last week for the capital, where hundreds of trucks remained in front of the parliament buildings and demonstrators have set up portable toilets outside the prime minister’s office where Trudeau’s motorcade usually parks. Even after protesters’ vehicles were removed early Saturday, hundreds more arrived to bolster the crowd and settled into a face-off with police about two blocks away, waving flags and yelling. While there were no visible physical confrontations, the crowd still controlled the road to the bridge. On Friday, a judge ordered an end to the blockade of mostly pickup trucks and cars, and the Ontario premier, Doug Ford, declared a state of emergency allowing for fines of C$100,000 and up to one year in jail for anyone illegally blocking roads, bridges, walkways and other critical infrastructure. With the bridge closed, auto plants on both sides have been forced to shut down or reduce production.Anti-vaxxers in France are buying fake vaccine passes online to get around the country’s Covid restrictions, which are often promoted on mainstream social media platforms, research has revealed. Many buying the forgeries, which can be used across the European Union (EU), are being redirected from websites such as Instagram and Facebook to the Telegram encrypted messenger where they can be bought discreetly, according to a study by the Institute for Strategic Dialogue (ISD). The report also raised concerns that social media algorithms are automatically directing people disillusioned with the French government’s handling of the pandemic towards far-right online spaces. ISD’s research coordinator, Zoé Fourel, who led the study, said that while some Facebook groups dedicated to the sale of fake Covid passes had about 1,000 members, there were Instagram accounts with as many as 17,000 followers. “I think, in terms of platforms, the main issue here is the scale to which this is available and with platforms such as Facebook and Instagram,” she said. “Obviously because they have such a wide audience, they are enabling this content on a larger scale. “For Instagram, one of the most alarming things we observed was that its algorithm is actually recommending accounts that are offering fake sanitary or vaccination services, so if you are a person who is following a couple of accounts with Covid disinformation or anti-vax content, your algorithm will recommend more accounts offering fake passes. “There is a really large issue here with the business model and the design of the platform and how it operates.” France introduced “health passes” during the coronavirus pandemic, which also allowed people to prove their status with a negative lateral flow test, as well as being vaccinated. But the French government last month gave approval for a vaccine pass that excludes unvaccinated people from restaurants, sports arenas and other venues. That has made acquiring a fake pass, which can be used across the EU member states, more desirable for anti-vaxxers, according to ISD. Fourel said: “These passes are valid across the EU, so we can see in, for example, a Telegram group that’s dedicated to European far-right movements and there are people selling fake passes. It really is a transnational issue. “You can be in Italy and sell a fake pass to French people and we have seen people from France being redirected in the comments section to Italian Telegram channels.” ISD is calling for more accountability for social media companies, including Snapchat, Meta – which owns Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp – and Telegram, as well as legislation to protect users. Fourel said the upcoming application of the European Digital Services Act, which aims to tackle the spread of disinformation and illegal content, was “necessary”. She added: “When it comes to platforms, it’s quite clear that there needs to be more proactivity to take measures to counter the spread of this type of content because clearly, this does violate the policies that are upheld by them. “There also needs to be more proactivity on behalf of the French government.” Meta says it prohibits anyone from buying or selling fake, or genuine, medical documents on its platforms, including Covid vaccine certificates. It added that it would remove adverts when identified and disable any accounts, pages or groups that break its rules. The Guardian also contacted Snapchat and Telegram for comment.New Zealand’s prime minister has warned that the country is entering a new phase of its pandemic response that is “like nothing we’ve experienced to date”, as case numbers begin to explode. “We are embarking for the first time in the two years since the start of the outbreak into a period where New Zealanders will see more Covid in the community,” Jacinda Ardern said on Monday. “It is a period of disruption and, I know, of risk and will be like nothing we’ve experienced to date.” Ardern was speaking to reporters after a political reporter produced a positive rapid antigen test moments before the press conference. The empty seats in front of her – and the decision to forge on with the standup regardless – helped illustrate the new era for New Zealand, in which the government expects Omicron to reach every part of the country. New Zealand has been reporting near-daily record highs in case numbers, as infections begin to hit an exponential growth curve. On Monday, officials announced 981 cases in the community, up from previous all-time highs of 810 on Sunday and 454 the day before. The latest additions mean there are 4,960 active cases recorded across Aotearoa – but experts say the true number is likely much higher, given the lag in test results, and the fact testing is only advised for those with symptoms or who have been a direct contact of a case. On Monday the prime minister announced that the country would enter “phase 2” of its Omicron response – where home isolation times will be reduced, and it will rely more on contact tracing through the apps and online questionnaires, rather than investigations of each case by health officials. The latter is an admission that hands-on contact tracing is already reaching capacity – while the country has nearly 5,000 active cases from the last three weeks, the government has publicly listed only 135 locations of interest. Monday’s announcement follows regulations last week that will exempt key workers from isolating if exposed, as long as they return negative tests. The next phase is designed to try to carry the country through a period with extremely widespread cases, without having crucial workforces or supply chains paralysed by mass isolation. Ardern and director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said they were trying to avoid a “ping-mageddon” – the phenomenon similar to the “pingdemic” seen in the UK where so many people were simultaneously notified of being in contact with a Covid-positive person that workforces ground to a halt and many people stopped using the apps. Bloomfield said the country would no longer be requiring self-isolation for everyone who was in a Covid-positive location, nor would they necessarily be notified. “Where we put the effort will focus on places like age groups, dental care, corrections, facilities, places where there might have been the risk of a super-spreader type event … But we won’t be following up nor expecting people to isolate if they have, for example, been in a hospitality venue, just generally in that place [where another case was present].” The prime minister was questioned on how New Zealanders were dealing with the rapid rise in cases – and the mindset shift required after years dedicated to stamping every Covid case out. “My honest take is that New Zealanders are highly adaptable,” she said. “It’s a different phase, but I think New Zealanders are ready for it. I think they know that what we’re dealing with an Omicron – yes, we need to be vigilant, and we don’t want to be cavalier, but I think we also recognise it’s very different than the other stages of the pandemic and we have protections now that we didn’t have before.”Vittorio Lai, nicknamed Pistol, still drives and hunts wild boar, and on Saturday became the latest person in Perdasdefogu, a remote mountain town on the Italian island of Sardinia that set a world record for longevity, to celebrate his 100th birthday. He will be joined this week by another sprightly centenarian, Piuccia Lai (no relation), who has no qualms about hopping on a plane to visit her sons in Milan, bringing the total number of over-100s in the town to 10 among a population of 1,765. Sardinia has been identified as one of five regions in the world that have high concentrations of people who have eclipsed the century milestone. There are 534 people across the island who are 100 or older, or 33.6 for every 100,000 inhabitants. But Perdasdefogu, a town tucked high up in the rugged mountains of south-eastern Sardinia accessible only by a narrow, winding road, is unique in the sense that the number of centenarians in a town of its size is 16 times the national average. “The presence of 10 centenarians confirms the exceptional longevity of the inhabitants of Perdasdefogu, and moves the bar even higher,” said Luisa Salaris, a demographics professor at the University of Cagliari. Perdasdefogu shot to fame in 2012 when the Melis family, made up of nine brothers and sisters, entered the Guinness World Records as the oldest living siblings on Earth, with a combined age at the time of 818. The town’s longest-surviving citizen to date is Consolata Melis, the eldest of the siblings, who died in 2015, aged 108. Antonio Brundu, who turns 104 in March, is the current oldest resident. Vittorio Lai earned his nickname after killing his first wild boar at the age of 13. “I took my father’s rifle, the head of the hunting group,” he told the newspaper La Nuova Sardegna in an article written by historian Giacomo Mameli. “In those days, hunting freed the town from hunger.” The whole town ordinarily comes together to mark a 100th birthday, but owing to coronavirus restrictions, Lai celebrated by treating family and a few friends to lunch. He said he has worked “hundreds” of jobs over the course of his life. “I was a shepherd, a labourer, a warehouse worker and a cook, but without knowing how to cook.” His wife, Maria, is 97. “She wanted to become a nun,” said Lai. “And so I said: ‘OK then, I’ll become a priest or a friar.’” Piuccia Lai is celebrating her birthday on 21 February in Milan, where she will meet the mayor, Giuseppe Sala. “I’ve lived through hunger and war, during fascism and democracy,” she said, adding that she had voted as a woman for the first time on 2 June 1946, and she had known 10 popes, although she was born just after the death of Benedict XV, meaning she has been alive during eight papacies. Several scientists have studied Perdasdefogu, with explanations for the town’s longevity ranging from clean air and active lifestyles to a diet containing plenty of fresh vegetables. Lai said he never leaves the table with a full stomach, eats little meat and drinks little coffee. For Mameli, the key is the town’s sense of community. “It’s close-knit; there are some exceptions, but we all love and look out for each other.” • This article was amended on 14 February 2022 to clarify details about the papacies and to correct the date on which women were first able to vote in Italy under full suffrage.A $400m mine expansion earmarked for approval by the New South Wales government would become the dirtiest thermal coal project in Australia, a public hearing has heard. Whitehaven Coal’s Narrabri underground expansion was incompatible with the state government’s 2030 climate targets and should be rejected, environment group Lock the Gate told the NSW Independent Planning Commission (IPC) on Monday. The project will extend the mine’s life by 13 years to 2044 and increase the total coal mined from 170m to 280m tonnes. Nic Clyde, of Lock the Gate, told commissioners that Whitehaven’s extension was to an underground area to the south that would release high levels of the potent greenhouse gas methane. Clyde said the project would emit 1.36m tonnes of CO2-equivalent a year, making it the dirtiest thermal coalmine in Australia. Three other coalmines were dirtier, but they were mostly mining coal for use in steel making, he said. Almost all of those direct emissions occur from the release of methane when the coal is mined. A further 456m tonnes of CO2 would be released after the coal is sold and then burned. “This site is simply not a suitable location for a new coalmine expansion … it is not in the public interest, it’s not ecologically sustainable and it’s contrary to intergenerational equity,” said Clyde, who urged the commissioners to reject the project. Anatoli Smirnov, a coalmine methane analyst for London-based climate thinktank Ember, which is working with Lock the Gate, said methane was about 86 times more potent than CO2 over the first 20 years of its release. This very high near-term impact on the climate meant that reducing methane levels was crucial for meeting emissions reduction targets, he said. Smirnov pointed to Europe, where the European Commission is proposing a ban on venting and flaring methane from coalmines. When the NSW government backed the mine in a report in January, it said it would ask Whitehaven to prepare a plan to cut methane emissions and would set performance targets. Earlier in the IPC hearing, officials from the NSW Department of Planning, Industry and Environment said they had recommended the project could be approved based on the department’s current policies. But they acknowledged the state’s climate policies were “rapidly changing” and that the work of the NSW advisory council on underground mining should be expanded to better cover greenhouse gas emissions as the world looks to limit global temperature rise. In the department’s report last month, senior officials stated NSW lacked clear and consistent policy to consider the impact of new developments on the climate crisis. The report said the project’s “benefits significantly outweigh its residual costs, and that it is in the public interest and is approvable”. The project would add about 20 new construction jobs, extend the 520 jobs at the existing mine and add $259m in royalties to the government. Clay Preshaw from the department told the hearing the project was a particularly gassy mine – a concern for fugitive emissions and it would require construction of extensive ventilation infrastructure, which would necessitate clearing of habitat. He said the department had proposed establishing a mechanism to review the mine’s emissions regularly and that such an approach could allow for a “ratcheting down” of emissions in line with current state government policy. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Several local residents and environmentalists expressed concern about the project’s impact on water and subsidence. Others backed the project, saying it would ensure the region’s prosperity. A second day of hearings is scheduled for Friday, with the government and Whitehaven Coal scheduled to address the commission. A statement from Whitehaven Coal said the NSW government had “clearly outlined that it sees an ongoing role for coal production as part of the global energy transition”. The company said it would “play our part” in cutting emissions and that the federal government’s plans related to net zero emissions “include a continuation of Australia’s coal and gas export industries to 2050 and beyond, recognising that net zero emissions does not mean zero emissions”. The commission is expected to make a decision no later than 20 May. Analysis from the Australian Conservation Foundation found NSW authorities have approved 23 new coal and gas projects with the potential to release 3bn tonnes of greenhouse gases since the start of the Paris agreement five years ago.A China-style internet gateway scheduled to be imposed in Cambodia this week would grant the government far greater powers to conduct mass surveillance, censor and control the country’s internet, rights groups have warned. Human rights experts and media advocates fear the gateway could be a step towards the kind of censorship enforced through China’s Great Firewall – though some question what technical capacity Cambodia’s systems currently have, and say the process has lacked transparency. Under the changes, all online traffic must pass through a National Internet Gateway (NIG), which the government says will protect national security, help with tax collection and preserve “social order, culture and national tradition”. Rights experts say the internet is one of the few spaces that still allows for free expression, including criticism of the government of prime minister Hun Sen, who has been in power for more than three decades. Under his rule, the main opposition party has been outlawed, independent media severely curtailed and peaceful protesters have faced violence. Having stamped out dissent elsewhere, the government is now seeking to further expand its control over the online sphere, rights advocates have warned. “They want to have a hermetically controlled political environment where they are lord and master and anything they say goes - and anybody who objects gets sent to prison,” said Phil Robertson, deputy Asia director of Human Rights Watch. Internet service providers were required to reroute their traffic through the gateway by this week. The Cambodian government did not respond when asked about the timeframe for implementation, or the human rights concerns which have been raised. It has previously rejected comments by UN experts that the legislation is repressive, with the country’s Permanent Mission to the UN Offices in Geneva accusing the experts of making unfounded allegations and interfering in Cambodia’s domestic affairs. The authorities have increasingly taken steps to clamp down on online expression, including by jailing individuals over posts, messages and even music. Last year, at least 35 individuals were arrested, five had arrest warrants issued against them, and 21 were convicted for online posts, according to the Cambodian Centre for Human Rights (CCHR). Those targeted in recent years include the rapper Kea Sokun, who spent a year in prison after he was convicted of incitement in 2020 in relation to music he shared online; three activists belonging to the environmental group Mother Nature Cambodia, who had shared information on social media about plans to march to the prime minister’s house; and Kak Sovannchhay, the teenage son of an activist and opposition politician, who spent four-and-a-half months in pre-trial detention. Sovannchhay, who is autistic and was 16 at the time, had defended his father in comments made on Telegram, and shared Facebook posts critical of the government. The authorities have also found other ways to suppress online information, including ordering internet service providers to block certain pages, such as news sites. According to civil society groups, internet service providers have also slowed down the speed of the internet to disrupt their activities, including livestreams, while activists and media have faced localised power cuts. “It is therefore very likely that the NIG will become another instrument for the Royal Government of Cambodia to control and monitor the flow of information in Cambodia,” said Sopheap Chak, CCHR’s executive director. The gateway, she added, facilitates mass surveillance, the interception and censorship of digital communications, and the collection of personal data. Naly Pilorge, director of the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defence of Human Rights, said the enforcement of such a gateway would be devastating, and that it violated the constitution, as well as several conventions and treaties to which Cambodia is a signatory. “It would completely close off the ability of citizens to express themselves to share information. It would lead to even more of a closure in terms of civil society, in terms of activism in terms of issues that are affecting Cambodians,” she said. There are also concerns the system could slow down internet speeds, damaging business activity and foreign investment. Despite the looming deadline for implementation, there is little information about how the gateway will work, said Robertson. The Cambodian government might want to give the impression that it was introducing a China-style firewall, he added, but it was not clear if it had the capacity to do so. “There’s no clarity on how they’re doing this, what sort of form it is going to take, what sort of technology is being brought in,” he said. The law will, however, likely lead to a rise in self-censorship, just as the country prepares for commune elections in June, and a national election next year. “If you’re putting something up on the internet that is critical of the government, who knows maybe the NIG is coming to get you?” said RobertsonThe German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv on Monday as western leaders voiced concerns of a Russian invasion of Ukraine could happen at any moment, sending stock markets tumbling and the price of oil soaring. On the eve of his departure, Scholz said that any Russia attack would lead to “tough sanctions that we have carefully prepared and which we can immediately put into force”. “(These trips are) about how we can find a way to ensure peace in Europe,” he said. Scholz and Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy are expected to talk about how Germany could help stabilise Ukraine’s economy after fears of an imminent war took a toll on its currency. A moratorium on Ukraine’s eligibility for Nato accession was not on the table for Germany, a German source told Reuters, though Die Welt reported earlier a compromise whereby Russia would be assured that Ukraine would not join Nato “in the next 10 years” had been discussed in Scholz’s circles as a “thought experiment”. Ukraine’s ambassador in London, Vadym Prystaiko, suggested to the BBC earlier that Kyiv “might” consider shelving its Nato plans if “pushed to it”. The prospect of a Russian invasion sent shares plunging when the trading week began in Asia on Monday morning. The Nikkei in Japan lost 2%, the Hong Kong market was off 1.2%, and futures trade pointed to more selling on European bourses when they open later in the day. The price of Brent crude soared 1% to a seven-year high of $95.46 over worries that a conflict in the region could disrupt supplies from Russia, a major oil producer. On Tuesday Scholz is expected to use a trip to Moscow to press home the economic cost of an invasion of Ukraine, German government sources have said. Meanwhile, Boris Johnson said he would hold further talks with world leaders to bring Russia “back from the brink” of war. His office did not say which world leaders Johnson was hoping to talk to or where he plans to travel, but it was understood he is keen to engage with Nordic and Baltic countries. On Sunday, Zelenskiy urged Joe Biden to visit Kyiv “in the coming days” in a show of moral support. The White House made no mention of the invitation in its readout of the 50-minute call. A White House statement said Biden made clear the US would “respond swiftly and decisively to any further Russian aggression” and the two leaders agreed on the need to continue pursuing diplomacy and deterrence. Biden has already ordered a near-total evacuation of the US embassy in Kyiv. The latest moves come amid a signals in the west that time is running out to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis. US intelligence over the weekend claimed that Russia had accelerated plans for an invasion and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday, before the end of the Winter Olympics on 20 February. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, told the CBS News programme Face the Nation: “We have seen over the course of the past 10 days, dramatic acceleration in the buildup of Russian forces and the disposition of those forces in such a way that they could launch a military action essentially at any time. “But of course, it still awaits the go order. And so therefore, we cannot predict the precise date or time that they make any action.” Reflecting the West’s concerns, Dutch airline KLM cancelled flights to Ukraine until further notice. The Ukrainian charter airline SkyUp said on Sunday its flight from Madeira, Portugal, to Kyiv was diverted to the Moldovan capital. And Ukraine’s air traffic safety agency Ukraerorukh issued a statement declaring the airspace over the Black Sea to be a “zone of potential danger” and recommended that planes avoid flying over the sea from 14 to 19 February. Russia denies it plans to invade Ukraine, but there were reports on Sunday of attack and troop-carrying helicopters being moved close to the Ukrainian border. Moscow failed to reply to a formal request from Ukraine to clarify the purpose of its military manoeuvres in Belarus by the 48-hour deadline set by the Vienna document, an international agreement intended to provide transparency and reduce the risk of war. The Belarus government responded to a similar request from Baltic nations, but said that some of the Russian units on its territory were there to guard its southern border, suggesting they would not be leaving on 20 February, when the military exercises are supposed to end. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said the “next step” was requesting a meeting within the next 48 hours for “transparency” about Russia’s plans. A submarine armed with cruise missiles from Russia’s Baltic fleet also sailed through the Bosphorus towards the Black Sea. Meanwhile, Lithuania announced a delivery of Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Ukraine while the US embassy said a 17th planeload of US military hardware had arrived in Kyiv, including shoulder-fired grenades. German government circles on Sunday talked of a “very worrying overall picture” on the Ukrainian border but rejected the suggestion that Scholz’s trip represented a “last attempt” at averting a war. German government sources said Scholz would press home the “unity of the EU, the US and Great Britain” when it came to economic sanctions in response to an invasion. Biden has said a Russian invasion would spell the end of the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, something Scholz has been more reluctant to spell out. Scholz’s options during his trip to Moscow are limited. The Russian president is demanding “security guarantees” from the west, which would in effect undermine the sovereignty of independent states in east-central Europe and the Baltics. German government sources said on Sunday Scholz would offer Putin a dialogue and seek to find out more what Russia’s grievances entailed. The broadsheet Die Welt said he could stress Ukraine joining Nato is not a realistic prospect in the near future, adding that a compromise whereby Russia would be assured that Ukraine would not join Nato “in the next 10 years” had been discussed in Scholz’s circles as a “thought experiment”, though not as a concrete plan. Ukraine has expressed an interest in joining since 2002 but it would require the unanimous approval of existing members, based on factors such as a functioning democracy and an absence of “unresolved external territorial disputes”.As we have had no snow this year – so far – there are no tracks to reveal which animals have passed this way. I have to look to other means: a fallen feather, footprints in mud, hairs caught in fence wire. A dramatic sight, though, is a dismembered pigeon in the field near our house. Plucked feathers lie scattered in a wide circle like spume on a beach. The head has gone and the flesh has been ripped from the breastbone, leaving only wings and feet splayed on the ground. A drama unwitnessed, it’s a sign that a sparrowhawk has fed. Only a female sparrowhawk would have taken a bird the size of a pigeon. The male, being smaller, preys on tits, finches or sparrows, not catching anything larger than a mistle thrush. The svelte sparrowhawk, Accipiter nisus, with its short rounded wings and long tail, is built for quick sprints in woodland, where it can manoeuvre at speed through the trees. Able to turn on a sixpence, it is thrilling to watch as it hurtles through close-set trunks with complete focus. I had heard sparrowhawks calling in late summer as the young learned their way around a nearby wood. A messy nest of sticks will have been built in the dense cover of the lower tree canopy, the female staying tight while the male did all the hunting to feed both her and the chicks. Males are blue-grey above with rufous underparts; females have beautifully barred chests with grey-brown rippling lines rather like a cuckoo. In fact, it is thought that cuckoos evolved plumage to mimic hawks in order to scare their hosts and get easier access to their nests. Returning home at teatime, I round the corner of the house and startle – and am startled by – a sparrowhawk, zooming towards me just two feet from the ground. In that flash of a moment we make eye contact, before the bird veers off in a smooth arc and slips through the narrow gap between the log store and a wall. I stand there, feeling the quivering of air that is all the sparrowhawk has left behind. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryEviction costs the average renter more than $4,000 and up to 30% of renters in New South Wales will experience it – often through no fault of their own – according to a new report from the NSW Tenants’ Union. The report, titled Eviction, Hardship, and the Housing Crisis, calculated the costs of eviction to the renter, the landlord and the public more broadly. It found that the average cost of a move ranges from $3,215 for a single-person household in greater Sydney through to $5,400 for a family household in regional NSW. The Tenants’ Union is calling for the NSW state government to abolish “no-grounds” eviction, bolster hardship provisions for renters, and provide landlord insurance, compensation or similar schemes to prevent the need for unnecessary eviction. The call comes as the state’s renters embark on a renewed period of precariousness, with 12 February marking the end of the final phase of the 2021 eviction moratorium, which protected NSW renters from being kicked out of their homes during last year’s lockdown. Moving house was “a significant, traumatic and costly event” that needed to be taken seriously, said the NSW Tenants’ Union chief executive, Leo Patterson Ross. Between 20% and 30% of renters in NSW move due to eviction – that is, because a landlord has terminated the lease agreement, and the renter does not have a choice about whether or not to move out. In many cases, these are no-grounds evictions in which the landlord is not required to provide a reason. Sally, a renter in a regional NSW town who requested a pseudonym as she fears repercussions from her landlord, experienced the trauma of no-grounds eviction first-hand. Her landlord told her in June last year that her lease would not be renewed. Sally departed Sydney four years ago after family court matters meant she had to leave her successful career in the public service. She moved into a three-bedroom house with her three school-age children, with the rent at $500 a week. Despite a substantially reduced income, and the rent taking up between 50% and 75% of her weekly income, she still managed to regularly pay on time. Sally was told over the phone by the real estate agent that they would not be renewing her lease after four years in the property because the landlord wanted to move in. She initially tried to appeal against the decision, fearing it would make her homeless, which would affect the decisions being considered in family court. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They said, ‘there’s nothing we can do’ and they sent me the official termination notice,” Sally said. Sally spent a month frantically searching for properties – “a month or so of utter, utter stress, because there was literally nothing” – until she heard through a friend about a vacancy with the same real estate agent that had not yet been advertised. It cost more, but it was nearby and she was desperate, so she applied for it and was accepted. “That night after I’d paid a deposit – I hadn’t even packed anything for the move yet – and looked on my phone, and there’s the house I’m leaving advertised for $50 more a week. I nearly vomited,” Sally said. Sally estimated her moving costs at about $3,000, not including the bond for the new house or the amounts she agreed to pay to fix minor damage in the house that did not fall under reasonable wear and tear provisions – “exorbitant rates for everything, because I was so worried about getting things sorted so I wasn’t homeless”. The costs were exacerbated by the forced move during NSW’s hard lockdown, which meant her children were at home from school and her friends couldn’t come and help. The risks of eviction, particularly into homelessness, are especially high for people who are experiencing personal crisis, the NSW Tenants’ Union report found. The report argues that in cases where the landlord has terminated the lease for anything other than a breach of agreement – that is, a “no fault” or no-grounds eviction – the landlord should pay the renter’s moving costs. “No-grounds eviction has such a big impact on renters, particularly when it’s so competitive to find a home, and it has a particularly pervasive effect on the way landlords and tenants relate to each other,” said Patterson Ross. He said eviction had become the default tool for landlords and real estate agents to use to manage a property, even when it wasn’t necessarily in anyone’s best interests to do so. “It doesn’t matter if a no-grounds notice is served; it’s the relationship it creates between tenant and landlord,” Patterson Ross said.Kaillie Humphries of the United States validated her reputation as one of the best pilots in the history of bobsleigh, surging to victory in the debut of women’s monobob and adding a third Olympic gold to her career haul with a strong chance for a fourth by week’s end. The 36-year-old, who captured two-woman golds with Canada in 2010 and 2014 before joining the US team in 2019, finished with a four-run combined time of 4min, 19.27 sec to win by 1.54sec, the widest margin in any bobsleigh event in 42 years. She becomes the second athlete to win a Winter Olympic title for two different countries, joining short track speed skater Victor An. Elena Meyers Taylor, the 37-year-old mother from Georgia who put down a scintillating time on her third run to move into bronze medal position, was even cleaner on her fourth descent to claim the silver, finishing 1.32sec behind Humphries and ensuring the United States’ first one-two finish in any Olympic bobsleigh event since 1932. Canada’s Christine de Bruin entered Monday’s final runs in second place but a yawning 1.04sec behind Humphries, by far the biggest halfway lead in Olympic women’s bobsleigh history. She was unable to match Meyers Taylor’s blistering starts and settled for bronze despite a pair of clean runs, coming in 1.76sec off the pace and completing a rare North American podium for the sport. Australia’s Bree Walker completed a memorable Olympic debut with a fifth-placed finish, her country’s best ever performance in bobsleigh. The day amounted to a victory lap for Humphries, whose 130kg sled careened to speeds in excess of 75mph near the bottom of the daunting course known as the Flying Snow Dragon on her third run. She then played it safer on her final trip to bring home the gold by the largest winning margin at an Olympics since Switzerland’s Erich Schärer won the two-man event by 1.57sec in 1980. She sprung from her sled after sliding into the finish area and hoisted an American flag above her head amid chants of “U-S-A! U-S-A!” from the gallery, a third Olympic gold in her possession and the hot favourite to add another in the two-man event later this week. “This one does feel more emotional for me,” Humphries said afterward. “Although each Olympic journey has been different, I’ve had to choose to walk away from my original birth nation. I’ve had to fight. There have been a lot of people that have tried to stand in my way. And there have been a lot of obstacles to get to this point. “And so to know that everybody that supported me and that all the work that I put in has amounted to being the best year, it’s very heartwarming to say the least. It hits the heartstrings a little bit more to know that I chose a nation and it chose me back and that we could do this together as a team.” Humphries and Meyers Taylor, two of the most decorated pilots of their generation, had initially campaigned for the addition of a four-man event to the Olympic programme eight years ago with the intent of offering women the same medal opportunities as men, even driving four-man sleds against men’s teams to make their point. But international officials opted for the addition of women’s monobob instead – where only the driver is in the sled – citing the lack of depth in female bobsleigh programs globally and framing it as a better choice to increase diversity. “This is huge,” Humphries said. “I still remember back in 2002, the first women who won: Jill Bakken and Vonetta Flowers. I hope in the future young girls are going to go, ‘I remember Kaillie’, and then they get involved. They now have two opportunities and hopefully even more opportunities to win more medals in the sport. That’s super cool and I will continue to fight for that. The women before me have allowed this to happen and I want to make sure that continues for all future generations. “This is a huge step forward. By no means do I think we’re done. I really want to see women do four-woman and I would love to see men do monobob as well. Three events for all genders. “To know that in a couple days we get to go back and do this all over again with two-woman, I’m really excited at that challenge and to be able to have that opportunity. So I’m very grateful to everybody who made this event happen and I look forward to all women, long past when I’m retired, being able to have this opportunity to pursue themselves.” The journey to Monday’s podium was anything but a smooth run for both of the women who topped it. Humphries, who is married to an American, joined the US national team after a protracted two-year saga in which she alleged she was verbally and mentally abused by a Canadian official to the point where she no longer felt safe as a member of Bobsleigh Canada Skeleton, the sport’s national governing body. An initial investigation found there was insufficient evidence to support the claims against the official, who denies the allegations. However an arbitrator subsequently found the initial probe “was neither thorough nor reasonable”, and the matter remains under investigation. Meyers Taylor, already the only woman to win three Olympic bobsled medals for the US before Monday’s fourth and the mother of a special-needs toddler, was selected as a flagbearer for Team USA along with curler John Shuster but was forced into isolation after testing positive for Covid-19 upon arrival at Beijing, which limited her opportunities to get to know the course and kept her apart from her two-year-old son longer than ever before. “I came out today knowing I had absolutely nothing to lose,” Meyers Taylor said. “The difference between fourth and 20th wasn’t going to make a difference. All I had to do was lay it all on the line and that’s exactly what I did. I just went out there, enjoyed the heck out of this race and fortunately it paid off.” She added: “Two days ago, I said to my coach Brian Shimer, I sat on one of the containers and said, ‘I don’t even know if I should do this right now’. I was that bad mentally, I was that put out, I didn’t know if I could, I didn’t know if I should. My runs showed it, my runs were just terrible and I just couldn’t clear my head. There was so much fog in my head from everything that had been going on. I was really questioning whether I should come out. Thanks to my team. Thanks to everybody. They lifted me up and they lifted me up to silver medal.” Only five US Olympians have won more medals at the Winter Games than Meyers Taylor’s four: Apolo Ohno (eight), Bonnie Blair (six), Bode Miller (six), Eric Heiden (five) and Chad Hedrick (five).What do poets talk about when they talk about love? The first poem I ever wrote was a love poem. I was 14. I don’t remember any of the lines but I do remember it expressed a sickly, naive, messy soup of feelings. It was obsessional, devotional, incantatory – all those things that form a part of romantic love. Its emotions were outsize, its imagery floral and baroque. Very probably, the colour of the addressee’s hair was compared to something in nature, and their complexion to a rose. The addressee was someone specific, with whom I was convinced I was in love. This would be embarrassing to admit – or at least more embarrassing – if it weren’t so commonplace. But penning love poems is one of the great human pastimes. They are central in the so-called canons of global literature. They’ve been around for as long as love itself, for as long as there has been language to describe love. Haven’t you written one, at some point? My first love poem was addressed to someone, a “you”. More importantly, it was told through an “I”. It expressed feelings or emotions from a personal point of view – it was a lyric poem. These have their origins in antiquity and continue unabated today. Sappho circa 600BC: “You came and I was crazy for you / and you cooled my mind that burned with longing.” Lil Nas X in 2021: “Call me by your name / Tell me you love me in private / Call me by your name / I do not care if you’re lying.” What poets talk about when they talk about love has little to do with the “you” and almost everything to do with the “I”; with the fantasies that the speaker of the poem has created and perilously, thrillingly projected on to the beloved. Lil Nas X freely admits that he doesn’t much care about the subjectivity of his beloved – he cares about his personal fantasy of possessing, or being possessed by, the beloved. The poet Anne Carson summarises this in Eros the Bittersweet: “The people we love are never just as we desire them. The two symbols never perfectly match. Eros is in between.” Eros is poetic rocket fuel, the electric current that surges through and animates so much love poetry. It transforms that lyric “I” into an axis around which all love’s erratic, inconsistent feelings revolve: pleasure and pain, adoration and contempt, devotion and hatred. Carson explains that Eros is the reach of desire, and that this “involves every lover in an activity of the imagination”. The mid-century American poet Jack Spicer, whose work has recently enjoyed a renaissance, understood this intimately. His own Love Poems conclude: “Eros / Do that. / I give you my imaginary hand and you give / me your imaginary hand and we walk / together (in imagination) over the earthly ground.” Eros also depends, entirely, on lack. To actually attain the beloved is to extinguish desire, to “cool the mind” as Sappho says. It is, possibly, to end the love poem altogether. Rachel Long neatly encapsulates this in Thanksgiving, from her debut collection. To keep her lover’s desire running, the speaker understands that she has to maintain an illusion of lack: “I will be so light / upon his life he won’t realise / he’s kept me.” Conversely, to lose or let go of the beloved is to pitch headlong, again, into Eros, a return where pain is redoubled. As Sharon Olds puts it: “I let him go, I lay and stretched on love’s / fucking stretcher.” When I was 20, and still writing bad love poems, I was introduced to Richard Siken’s 2005 collection, Crush. It was actually loaned to me by a “crush” of my own. Siken’s poems, as the title suggests, are intoxicating and luscious, pulverising and shattering: “Tell me how all this, and love too, will ruin us.” After returning the book to its owner, I’d look for Crush in bookshops, rereading the poems but never buying it. I still do this. It’s as though the book itself has assumed the characteristics of the beloved, in my imagination. To attain it might extinguish the charge the poems hold for me, might extinguish the memory of how and why I first came to read them. What my crush and I loved about Crush, and why it remains a touchstone for today’s generation of love poets, is that the emotions Siken expresses feel so hard-hitting, so urgent. He writes how love and desire really feel. This is what we demand from a love poet. We task them with making love legible, with articulating the quicksilver of desire in a way that elucidates our own. And because what we feel is real, or authentic, the love poem must feel real and authentic, too. But a poem is not some unfiltered explosion of feelings. It is carefully crafted: it is a performance. The lyric “I” is a selective, constructed “I” – the poet’s persona, offering up what Olds called the “apparently personal”. Like Vaseline smeared over the lens of a camera, this lyric “I” casts a weird aura over the poem, folding real life into reverie. To put it another way, we could think of the lyric “I” as a costume the poet wears while performing the poem. The task of the love poem is to perform well enough, authentically enough, that the reader does not dismiss its performance as shoddy artifice but instead permits it to work its magic on them. Is this possible for a love poet today? As readers, we have our hackles up. Our current cultural moment is characterised by charlatanism. Truth and falsehood have become nonsense words, making volatile the meaning of “reality” itself. What’s more, the very language of love – of any emotion, for that matter – risks being cheapened by the forces of advertising and consumerism. I don’t mean the pat Hallmark-ification of love, or the consumerist excess of Valentine’s Day; I mean the deleterious, shapeshifting tactics through which late-stage capitalism divests love and other emotions of any meaning whatsoever. Love today is fungible: it is McDonald’s and Cartier, and the heart-shaped button we tap on Twitter to feed data into the algorithm, spawning targeted ads. Corporations vow to “love” us, their customers; they vow to “care” about our struggles – provided we keep buying. And this is to say nothing of the Eros that lubricates the machine of capitalism itself, deployed to generate desire in the consumer. In this new terrain, can love correspond to anything real at all? The insouciant, offhand poetry of Frank O’Hara remains hugely popular today, outshining many of his New York School contemporaries. A video of O’Hara reading his most famous love poem, Having a Coke With You, has racked up more than half a million views on YouTube. It’s typical of O’Hara’s love poems, which are conversational, casual and peppered with brand names and references to icons of American consumerism. As a poet, O’Hara was wise to an emergent confluence of affect and advertising, of the personal and the product. Although his poems reflect an era of consumerism less steroidal than our own, and so feel cosily nostalgic or dewy-eyed, they hint at a solution to the love poet’s current bind. If love is denuded by the forces of capitalism, maybe the task of the poet today is to integrate the language of capitalism into a new metaphorics of love. “I’m cranking out oodles of love / the way an old spaghetti machine / cranks out spaghetti / baby it’s hard work,” writes Emily Berry in The Old Fuel, brilliantly routing love, undiminished, through a metaphor in which affection is production, and production is labour. Maged Zaher, one of my favourite contemporary poets, elevates these concerns to a formal level. His poems are set in an itinerant world of offices, lunch hours and emails. In a Zaher poem, the syntactic and conceptual sense of an individual line is often undone by bearing no coherent relationship to a subsequent line. “Love in the frozen vegetables aisle / lap-dance security forces,” one poem begins. This technique mirrors the decay of language, the nonsense of corporate speak and political jargon, and the distracted, fitful exhaustion of life under the regime of a neoliberal economy. Love is repeatedly invoked in Zaher’s poems, but he lets it teeter between the possibilities of redemption and failure, sincerity and irony: “So what if you just ate an overpriced burger / It is love that will eventually make a difference.” In doing so, he creates an ambivalent iteration of the contemporary love poem where the reader is forced – or liberated – to decide for themselves whether or not love still has meaning. When I ask myself what poets talk about when they talk about love – when I write my own love poems today – the lyric “I”, Eros, and the twisted language games of advanced capitalism are on my mind. Well, they’re in the junk shop in the back of my mind. My 14-year-old self’s ur-love poem is still rattling around in there, too, saccharine and rose-coloured. There’s something sustaining, or tenacious, about the memory of its adolescent ardour – something, perhaps, that argues for a fundamental unassailability of the heart of love. Ralf Webb’s Rotten Days in Late Summer is published by PenguinI hear Johnny Knoxville’s Tennessee drawl before I see him. “I’m gonna getcha!” he barks – part children’s entertainer, part axe murderer – as he chases the small child of one of his entourage down the hotel corridor. “Where’s my little honey bunny?” His infectious cackle and her giggling shrieks ricochet into the room where I am waiting to meet him. Knoxville has been provoking shock and delight for 22 years, ever since his TV show Jackass first aired on MTV. The formula was beautifully simple: a ragtag group of skateboarders and oddballs with a punk-rock aesthetic filmed themselves undertaking painful, grotesque DIY stunts – no context necessary. Audiences tuned in for the back yard suburban anarchy, but stayed for the gang’s camaraderie. It was absurd and puerile – the New York Times dismissed the film that followed the TV series as “a documentary version of Fight Club, shorn of social insight, intellectual pretension and cinematic interest”. Not many would have described Knoxville and co as visionaries when they started hitting each other in the testicles for laughs. But years before YouTube or Twitter, let alone the Kardashians or TikTok, it showed where culture was heading: towards reality TV and would-be celebrities putting themselves in danger for viral footage; towards the constant documenting of our lives for content. Knoxville, 50, was born Philip John Clapp Jr. He grew up in the Tennessee city from which he took his stage name, the third and youngest child of a tyre company boss and a Sunday school teacher. He has often suggested the genesis of his career lies with his prankster father. “I grew up idolising him; he was my biggest comedic influence,” he says. Philip Sr liked to trick his employees with laxative-spiked milkshakes or fake letters from sexual health clinics. His son was also a target. “Sometimes he would wake me up by throwing a glass of water in my face,” Knoxville recalls, as if that was the most natural thing in the world. “I’d wake up and, of course, I would laugh. He would just start telling me jokes – he couldn’t wait for me to be up so he could start telling me jokes!” But his father’s influence ran deeper than giving him a bug for buffoonery. “I grew up always wanting to please people, because my dad drank pretty hard,” says Knoxville. “And when you grow up with an alcoholic father, you want to put out fires and make sure everything’s OK. That’s what you think as a kid, right? That you can help it that way. “Maybe I didn’t love myself so much a lot of the time,” he suggests. “Maybe my self-worth had taken some hits.” Knoxville’s body has taken plenty of hits, too. The “comedic masochist”, as he calls himself, has been hit by a riot-control mine, knocked unconscious by a heavyweight boxer and mauled by bulls on multiple occasions. He has suffered breakages, concussions, vertigo and a ripped penis, from his attempts to backflip a motorcycle. It has all been in pursuit of “good footage”. His career is one of the purest expressions of “no pain, no glory”. But his sense of humour has remained intact throughout. He rarely stops laughing, often breaking into a smile that consumes his face, his eyes turning to slits behind thick, black-rimmed glasses. Knoxville created Jackass with two longtime collaborators, the film directors/producers Spike Jonze and Jeff Tremaine, but of the trio only he did stunts. “It just naturally happened,” he says. “I have a big personality and sometimes I have to reel myself in. That’s something that, in therapy, I realised: like, wow, I can be a lot! So just have some cocoa and settle down.” He has been in therapy since 2006. Although he admits he “probably got addicted to doing larger stunts”, he has so far resisted delving into that side of his psyche. “There’s other stuff that needs work,” he says. “I’m like: ‘Fix everything else. Let’s not mess with the side of me that does stunts, because I don’t want to know.’” We are talking before the launch of Jackass Forever, the fourth of the films that grew out of the initial TV series. He was in his late 40s when it was filmed and you can see the mileage creeping in – the blows hit harder, recovery takes longer. But, judging by early box office results, audiences are not bothered. Even the critics have finally caught up, with GQ asserting that Jackass operates “at the intersection of a number of ancient American traditions”, with “traces of Buster Keaton and the Three Stooges”. The New Yorker has saluted its “joyous vision of resilience in the face of obvious traumas”. “Some things make us laugh when we read them, you know, when it gets too highbrow,” says Knoxville. “But who doesn’t like being compared to Buster Keaton? He’s a legend. And he’s as funny today as he was back then. Someone running and falling down is timeless. It’s just funny. Thank God, or I would have no career.” Jackass Forever very nearly wasn’t funny. In one stunt, in which Knoxville stood in front of a charging bull, he was flipped, spinning into the air before landing on his head. He sustained a broken wrist, broken ribs and a concussion that left him with brain damage. It took him months to recover, including a course of antidepressants. Did that brush with death change his perspective? “No,” he says, after a long pause. “I knew going into this film that this will be the last time I’m gonna be doing big stunts. I didn’t know I was going to get as injured as I did, but I brought that on myself. I have nothing to complain about, only things to be grateful for.” His father died in hospital just before filming began on Jackass Forever. “He was my hero,” says Knoxville. “In the back of my mind, I was like: ‘God, I wanted to tell him we were making another film, because that would have made him so happy and lifted his spirits.’ But I didn’t get to do that.” Despite his father’s drinking, Knoxville had a happy childhood and did well at school – for a while. “As soon as I hit puberty, I cast my protractor aside,” he says, with another of those big smiles. “I was no longer interested in school, because I didn’t feel like it was going to be very useful to me.” He set his heart on showbiz, moving to Los Angeles at 18. “I wanted to be remembered,” he says. “I wasn’t making much money at all. I’m sure I was struggling, but I didn’t really look at it like that, because I was young and pursuing something I believed in.” Plus, he adds: “I was young and in Los Angeles! It was so much fun that I took my eye off the ball for a number of years. I was more interested in going out and partying. It wasn’t until my then girlfriend, who became my first wife, got pregnant and we had a daughter on the way that I was like: ‘OK, I really have to figure out what I’m going to do to support this child.’ That’s what really kicked everything into high gear.” He started writing for Big Brother, a southern California skateboard-and-culture magazine, where Tremaine was the editor and Jonze a photographer. He acted in TV commercials, with little concern about compromising artistic integrity. “Oh, are you kidding? I was fucking thrilled!” he says. “You work for a day and then you get residuals. When Jackass got on TV, there were a handful of people who were like: ‘Oh, he sold out.’ I’m like: ‘Fuck you! I sold out years ago.’ I was advertising Dentyne Ice gum, Taco Bell, whatever I could do to support my family.” One day, he pitched Big Brother a story in which he would test self‑defence equipment on himself (pepper spray, stun guns and so on). Tremaine suggested he film it. The resulting video was widely circulated on VHS, like a sort of analogue viral video. Before long, they were making Jackass for MTV. The outrage at the resulting show was inevitable. There was disgust at its aggressively lewd, low-brow larks – and alarm that others would imitate them. The moral panic was fuelled by the Connecticut senator Joe Lieberman, who said: “There are some things that are so potentially dangerous and inciting, particularly to vulnerable children, that they should not be put on TV.” “I didn’t really care about the moral outrage,” says Knoxville. “But I didn’t like when we would have copycat incidents and kids would get hurt.” The public outcry forced MTV’s hand; lawyers and health-and-safety officials got involved. Defanged and demotivated (“They said you can’t jump off anything higher than 4ft!”), Knoxville quit – to make movies exactly the way he wanted to. The franchise that began in 2002 with Jackass: The Movie has since spawned spin-off films such as Bad Grandpa, more TV shows, a video game and countless imitators. “I went from no one knowing my name, working in a restaurant, waiting tables, to the cover of Rolling Stone, which is a big jump from a small town in east Tennessee,” says Knoxville. “It took a while for me to get my feet under me.” Numerous Jackass cast members have spoken about their battles with drug and alcohol addiction, most notably Stephen Glover (Steve-O), who spent time in a psychiatric hospital (he is now sober). Knoxville doesn’t think you can blame his creation. “Everyone was doing that, quite honestly, before we started,” he says. “I guess you get a certain personality that does what we do, that lives hard and laughs hard. But we’re never loaded during shooting. If someone’s drinking, they can’t do stunts.” Jackass Forever was the first film without Ryan Dunn, one of the original cast members, who died in a drink-driving accident in 2011. “It was crushing to have that spirit extinguished,” Knoxville says. “It’s something that we all are still dealing with and will be dealing with the rest of our lives. We all lost a brother.” For a while, he wasn’t sure he should make another film without Dunn. “But we all felt we still had something to say.” Does Knoxville worry about dying? “I have fear, but I have a way to manage it. I’ve almost died a few times making Jackass over the years. But I’m still here,” he says, knocking the wooden table between us. No nightmares about former stunts? No bulls hurtling toward him in his sleep? “No, the opposite. I laugh in my sleep. I just cackle,” he says. “My wife hears it. So, yeah, I go to bed feeling pretty good.” What does scare him, then? “Something happening to my children, my family,” he replies, earnestly. “I’m a father first, right? And I worry about them. That scares me.” Knoxville lives with his second wife, Naomi, and their two young children, Rocko and Arlo (he also has a grownup daughter, Madison, by his first wife). He had tried to keep the younger kids blissfully unaware of his career – but then six‑year-old Rocko found out about the show from school friends. “I said: ‘Yeah, Dad has a silly show where he does pranks and stunts, but it’s not really appropriate for you to see.’ Especially for him, because he’s wired like my father. He has that rambunctious spirit and I’m afraid that he would want to do it. And that’s just not going to be on the cards.” Does Knoxville ever think he is being selfish by putting his life on the line? Does he worry about how his wife and children might be affected? It is not as if Jackass is his only career option. As well as running Dickhouse Productions with Tremaine and Jonze, he has had acting roles in The Dukes of Hazzard, The Ringer and Men in Black II. He will soon be filming a new show for Hulu – a Steve Levitan project called Reboot. Then there is Big Ass Happy Family Jubilee, the radio show he does with his cousin, the singer-songwriter Roger Alan Wade. “There’s risk,” Knoxville admits. The stunts “upset everyone. During filming, they’re worried – and for good reason. But, at the end of the day, this is what I do. And there’s a lot of people who have jobs that are dangerous. Can you imagine how a policeman’s wife feels? Or a fireman’s? I’m just a half‑assed stuntman.” Jackass Forever is in cinemas nowFor nearly two decades, Afghanistan’s TV industry developed popular hits, from medical shows and family dramas to Afghan Star, a music competition based on American Idol. Now, nearly six months after the Taliban seized control, many Afghan television and film workers are jobless and in hiding. Some feel abandoned by TV and entertainment industry workers in other countries. A handful of former international colleagues have been fighting to get them to safety, and they say they desperately need more support. (All the names of Afghan TV workers have been changed for this article.) Rahima, a screenwriter, said she was in the middle of teaching a university class when she learned that the Taliban had entered Kabul. She and a female colleague ran out to buy burkas, only to find the shops already closed. She went home and locked herself inside. She has stayed in hiding for the past five and a half months, she said. “In our neighborhood, everyone recognizes me as a woman activist, the university teacher and TV employee,” Rahima said through a translator. Other former media workers described rushing to scrub their Facebook profiles and concealing or throwing out anything in their house that would link them to the entertainment industry. “They’re hiding their cameras, mics, and booms, every single thing,” said Farjaad, a longtime TV producer based in Kabul. One film-maker friend buried her camera “in the earth, like a grave”, he said. Abdul, who worked for a decade as an assistant director and producer, now runs a small food stand to support his family, including his 10-month-old baby. Based in a city full of Taliban checkpoints, he is still afraid that someone will recognize him from his work in TV. Fearful of the risk, he sometimes sends his younger brother to run the food stall instead. Sometimes, he said, when he thinks back on the past 20 years of his life, he can’t believe they happened: “Was it sleep? Or a dream? What was that? “We are looking for help but there’s nobody to help us,” he said. Sayed, who faced multiple threats from the Taliban during years of working in marketing and sales for TV networks, escaped to Pakistan with his family, but is still jobless and feels at risk. “I haven’t heard anything from Hollywood over what is happening with the media people who worked here for 20 years, fighting for the freedom of speech,” he said. “No one from Hollywood, none of the TV or film-makers, are raising their voice.” ‘We betrayed them’ Julie Brown, an American development worker, and Muffy Potter, an Australian TV and film producer, said they have been working for months to help their former Afghan colleagues get visas to leave the country. Some of the TV programming the two had worked on in Afghanistan in the early 2010s had been directly funded by foreign governments, such as Eagle Four, a crime drama modelled on 24 that had been publicly identified as an American-funded attempt to increase citizens’ willingness to trust the police. “They helped get a message of democracy, of women’s rights, of governance, to the people, and now they’re left behind living under the regime that they have spent a lot of time doing anti-Taliban messaging about,” said Potter. “When we say, ‘We will stand by you, we have your back, we’ll stand shoulder to shoulder’, that’s an actual person telling an Afghan that, not just a faceless government entity,” said Brown. “We feel like we betrayed them.” Brown and Potter estimated their group of about five volunteers was trying to help several hundred Afghans who are still inside the country, including former colleagues and their family members. “A lot of the ones that are left are the ones that don’t have rich families,” Potter said. “People that don’t have any kind of connections overseas and didn’t have a financial means to seek asylum.” Some have been denied visas, they said. Others have seen their applications held up in the state department’s bureaucracy. Meanwhile, the situation for many former TV workers has only grown more desperate. Since July, Brown said, she has spent time every day working across time zones to get her former colleagues food, secure places to stay, even medical care, including finding a way to get a pregnant woman an emergency C-section. “A lot of them are in danger,” she said. Amid a worsening economic crisis, half of Afghans are facing “extreme” levels of hunger, according to the United Nations. International medical experts have warned of severe shortages of basic supplies at public hospitals. Brown and the other volunteers have crowdfunded and drawn from their own bank accounts to keep support flowing to their colleagues. But, more than six months in, they need more money and visibility, she said. “We need a champion,” she said. “The Screen Actors’ Guild: please, we would love for you to care about our colleagues in Afghanistan. “I don’t think Hollywood realizes the magnitude of the problem, the difficulties that we have in these evacuation groups,” she added. “I think they think the government is just doing this stuff.” ‘Our darkest days’ In the first 100 days of Taliban rule, more than 70% of journalists lost their jobs, and at least 250 news outlets closed their doors, according to a report from an Afghan press watchdog this fall. By September, fewer than 100 of Kabul’s 700 female journalists were still working, according to a report from Reporters Without Borders. The widespread job losses and shutdowns come from both political and economic pressures. A wide variety of programming, such as music shows and game shows, have been taken off the air, former Afghan TV workers said. Cooking shows need to have male presenters. The Taliban has announced new dress requirements for women onscreen. Approved programming is “simple”, one producer said: “one man, one mullah, sits in the corner, and talks about Islam and talks about traditions”. Comedians are afraid to appear on air, uncertain of which attempted jokes might bring the Taliban to their doors. Radio stations have reported decreases in their number of listeners, as some Afghans fear punishment if they are caught playing music on the radio. At least three people were killed after gunmen opened fire at a wedding in October to stop music from being played. While larger TV stations are still reporting the news, and a few women still appear as correspondents on larger networks, many of the faces are new, as older reporters have fled or gone into hiding, former TV workers said. Violence against journalists, including the vicious beating of two journalists covering a women’s rights protest, has undermined the Taliban’s pledge that it would allow independent media outlets to continue operating. At least 50 journalists and media workers have been detained or arrested over the past six months, according to Reporters Without Borders. The growth of Afghan’s media and TV sector over the past 20 years had been a real success story of international development, said Wazhmah Osman, a Temple University professor who conducted years of interviews in Afghanistan about the politics of new television programming. In a country without much internet access and with high rates of literacy, TV was an essential medium for cultural discussion, she said. The ordinary Afghans she interviewed were savvy about the role of US and other foreign money in shaping particular shows, but they were also deeply appreciative of the programming, particularly when they felt that local drama had begun to develop some of the polish and sophistication of imported television. Khate Sewom, a scripted series about Afghans from different ethnic backgrounds living together in the same apartment building, had been especially popular, she said. But the flowering of television in Afghanistan had always come at great personal cost to the people who created it, Osman said. Afghan TV workers have been violently targeted for years by the Taliban, Isis and others. In 2016, a suicide bomber killed seven employees of Tolo, a popular independent TV network, and injured more than two dozen. “No employee, anchor, office, news team and reporter of these TV channels holds any immunity,” the Taliban had declared at the time, calling the networks “satanic”. Firoz, an onscreen host and producer for Tolo, said that the 2016 murder of his friends and colleagues had shaken him, but that he and others decided to stay in their jobs, “because it’s our passion”. He said he “still had hope” at the time that the situation would improve. Today, Firoz, who worked as the face of several US government-funded documentary shows, said he is one of the lucky ones: he was evacuated by Save Our Allies in August, and is now in a refugee facility in Abu Dhabi, waiting for a visa to come to the United States. He thought he might stay in the “humanitarian city” for just a few days. Instead, he has been there for six months, along with at least 9,000 other Afghan evacuees. The mental health of the evacuees is bad, he said, and Afghans there have organized multiple protests against being held “in limbo”, the latest in mid-February. “It’s like a prison,” Firoz said. “We feel like we are prisoners.” Still, he feels safer than his friends in Kabul. Some of them are now “working on the street, selling vegetables”. Farjaad, who is still in Kabul, says that he feels like a hostage. “We are waiting for a miracle, or a Superman to come and catch us,” he said. Rahima, the female screenwriter, said that the non-profit for women that she ran is closed, and she can no longer teach at the university. “We are living our darkest days,” she said. “We lost everything we had, everything that we achieved.” “Help me to get out of Afghanistan in any way possible,” she said. “I need a peaceful life.”This week, watch the full moon rise between the two brightest stars of Leo, the lion. On Wednesday, the moon will rise in the gathering twilight at around 4.52pm GMT. About an hour later, the stars Algieba and Regulus will be visible on either side of it, against the darkening sky. The chart shows the view looking east from London at 7pm GMT on 16 February. The moon will have 99.8% of its visible surface illuminated at the time, and so will appear full. Find the clearest eastern horizon that you can. Settle in from 4.40pm GMT onwards and watch for the first sign of the moon to peep above the horizon. Earth’s natural satellite appears to be much larger when it is close to the horizon, rather than high in the sky. This is called the moon illusion, and is a purely psychological effect, as measurements of the moon show that it does not change its apparent diameter as it crosses the sky. The moon is always about the width of the nail on your outstretched index finger. The moonrise is also visible from the southern hemisphere. In Sydney, Australia, the moon rises at 7.52pm AEDT on 16 February. Look to the north-east.Hopping on stage in a cropped grey hoodie and baggy blue sweatpants, Melanie C arrives at the first night of her solo UK tour like she’s entering the ring. Bouncing from foot to foot, the pop star best remembered as Sporty Spice launches with fierce intensity into Who I Am, the disco-inflected opener from her 2020 self-titled album. At 48, Melanie C retains the energy that bestowed her her 90s band nickname. Flanked by drums and keys, she pounces across the stage, adding flourishes of fist pumps, shimmies and jumping jacks to her high-energy tracks about self-love. “It’s a going out album, not a sitting in album,” she chides. It’s not long before her hoodie is flung off – as well as her shoes – and she takes an adoring audience back in time with a rendition of her 2000 No 1 hit, Never Be the Same Again. In front of a pulsing screen of neon pinks and blues, Melanie C weaves with nimble ease between her early R&amp;B solo singles and the invigorating nu-disco of her most recent album. Accompanied by minimal onstage instrumentation, she sings over a backing track; it’s a shame she’s not on tour with supporting singers to better accentuate her own vocal performance. But the intimacy of a club-night set suits the pop star’s queer icon status and feelgood pop advocacy. Here, an extravagant Todd Terry remix of her song, Overload, with its lyrics of empowerment (“I’m not gonna be your acceptable version of me”), transcends cliche as an inclusive rallying cry. “I’ve got an important question to ask … are there any Spice Girls fans here?” she asks with a theatrical wink, to roaring cheers. She brings the night to a close with the singalong 90s duo 2 Become 1 and Who Do You Think You Are. Despite some acknowledged early tour nerves, the singer declares that she is exactly where she wants to be: on stage with a mic in hand. A performer with British girl group star legacy, Melanie C has nothing she needs to prove – which is why the sinewy pop punch of her set is all the more impressive. • At O2 Ritz, Manchester, 14 February; and touring.In 1995, the celebrated Indian film-maker Saeed Mirza made a film called Naseem. Set in Agra, a town in Uttar Pradesh, between June and December 1992, it portrays the lead up to the demolition of the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya by rightwing Hindu organisations, led by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). The film’s titular character asks her grandfather why he did not go to Pakistan at the time of partition. He says: “Your grandmother loved the neem tree in the back yard.” In the middle of the partition riots of 1947, when thousands of Muslims were being massacred in India, as were Sikhs and Hindus in Pakistan, Naseem’s grandmother was so emotionally connected to the neem tree, to the mother Earth, that she would rather take the risk of being killed than leave. One hundred and twenty-five miles from Agra, in Delhi, my father, Haneef Hashmi, also refused to go to Pakistan during the riots. He was a student leader, a freedom fighter, and had spent years in the British jail. He refused to leave India, despite an attack on his family, because he believed in the idea of a diverse, democratic secular country, which was not formed on the basis of religion but on the principles of fraternity, equality and justice. The most important things I learned during my childhood were compassion, love and, later, rationality. My parents loved kitchen gardening, planting all kinds of fruit trees in our home’s little garden space. When a snake ate our chickens, we all cried for hours. Years later, in the 90s, hate campaigns started again across India. Today, when asked what story my body wants to share with the world, there is only one answer I can give: the story of the capturing of the mind. To me, the most important part of the body is the mind: not the eyes, not the ears, not the nose, not the vagina, not the bosom. If minds are controlled and polluted, then everything else can be destroyed. After India attained freedom in 1947, people taught their children the meaning of love, peace, living together, studying, building the nation and working for progress. But those who were opposed to the idea of a diverse, peaceful India kept spreading hatred, targeting and othering sections of the society on the basis of caste, religion, region, sexuality, telling lies a hundred times over until they seemed like the truth. Today, they have captured power; they have captured the minds of a large section of the population and filled it with hatred. My mind, the most important part of my body, is restless. It is in grief. And it wonders when the people of my beloved country will relearn compassion and how to love others again. Shabnam Hashmi is a social activist and human rights campaignerHair stylist Joel McCauley had seen too many colleagues burn out after a perpetual cycle of work, eat and sleep, so when he opened his own salon in Cardiff he was determined to do things differently. Staff at Slunks in Morgan Arcade now work a four-day week for no less pay than for working five days. They are happier, more productive and provide a better service, said McCauley. “When you have more time, you can think about life in a different way,” he said. “At work, you’re likely to have more energy and fewer non-productive days. Outside work, you can be a better person, a better parent, a better member of the community. I feel better, staff feel better – we’re all working better.” More people could be working a four-day week across Wales after the country’s future generations commissioner, Sophie Howe, called on Monday for the Welsh government to launch a shorter working week trial. Howe, whose role – enshrined in law – is to protect the interests of future generations, said the public sector should lead the way and inspire other businesses to follow suit. She acknowledged there would be a heavy cost to the public sector in the short term, but argued that it could eventually mean increased productivity and savings for society if it led to a healthier workforce and more cohesive population. Howe said: “It’s clear that following the pandemic, people across Wales are re-evaluating their priorities in life and looking for a healthier work-life balance. “The escalating demands of caring for loved ones due to an ageing population and an increase in mental health issues, exacerbated by working long hours, are just some of the factors that make a shorter working week more appealing. “The working week has not changed for more than 100 years and now seems the perfect opportunity for the Welsh government to commit to a pioneering trial and build evidence for greater change across Wales.” A report by the commissioner and thinktank Autonomy found that about two-thirds of Welsh people would ideally work a four-day week and almost 60% said they would support the Welsh government piloting a scheme to move towards it. The report says moving to a four-day week in the Welsh public sector could be particularly effective as sickness rates are high and giving staff an extra day off could help to tackle this. It says it would foster better cohesion by giving people more time to take part in community groups and projects, and could cut carbon emissions by reducing commuting. It also argues that a shorter working week would especially help women, who have less free time on average than men. The report calculates that if the public sector in Wales moved to a four-day week for full-time workers, an extra 27,000 employees would be needed, which would cost £1bn. If productivity gains were to increase above 10%, the cost of the policy “would quickly become negligible”. Jack Sargeant, the chair of the Welsh parliament’s petitions committee and a supporter of a shorter working week, said: “We work some of the longest hours in Europe and this is clearly detrimental to workers’ lives and, the evidence suggests, to productivity as well. “Those that oppose it make the same tired arguments that opponents of progress have always made. The workplace and our lives are changing. Automation and AI will change it even more. A shorter week would be a great way of giving working people some of the fruits of these changes.” Shavanah Taj, the general secretary of Wales TUC, said: “The fight for decent working hours has always been at the heart of union campaigning. We welcome this call for a shorter working-week trial.” A Welsh government spokesperson said: “We recognise potential benefits in a shorter working week and some businesses in Wales are already expressing an interest in moving in that direction. We are considering the progress of pilots in other countries and examining the lessons Wales can learn.” Chelsea Thompson, 28, a salon manager at Slunks, said she was more focused and content. “I’m commuting less and when I’m in, I’m definitely more focused. Since we started the four-day week, everyone says they’re happier. People feel well-rested, mentally prepared. That extra day is for me. I go for long walks, listen to a podcast, see friends who don’t have weekends off. Time is precious.”April may be the cruelest month, but February straight up sucks. This is the “news” that was broken by local reporter Kevin Killeen of St Louis’s KMOX, in a 2016 video segment declaring February “an honest month” because it is one that “doesn’t hold up life any better than it really is”. The segment mixes Killeen’s straight-faced, deadpan local news delivery with an almost avant garde absurdity. At one point, Killeen stands atop a parking garage in St Louis, gesturing at the dark office buildings behind him and says, “Something great happened here but it’s over with.” In a voiceover describing images of the city’s downtown, he declares, “This looks like a place where people who are being punished are sent.” When the camera cuts to a shot of bare trees against a gray sky, things get a bit weird – and existential. “The trees that once cheered us, they’re hard to look at this month,” he intones. “It’s as if there is some awful truth out there in the trees. It’s hiding in the branches. Look at them. Something that’s been bothering you for a long time is out there. What is it? You can almost see the shape of it when all the color is gone and life is stripped down to the starkness of February. The segment was a “throwaway piece”, Killeen told me by phone this week, done spur of the moment back in 2016 and largely forgotten. But the video keeps getting rediscovered every February, thrusting the reporter into the spotlight and making him feel, he said, “like Jack and the beanstalk”. “At first it’s like someone singing happy birthday to you because everybody loves you,” Killeen said of the experience of going viral. “But then if they keep singing happy birthday all weekend and you’re like, stop it already.” A general assignment reporter, Killeen also does three two-minute feature stories each week for a “morning drive” series called Whole ’Nother Story. A recent segment featured a story about a chihuahua snatched away by an owl that dropped the dog about an hour away, where some motorists pulled over for a rescue. I asked how Killeen pitched a news segment that essentially amounts to “February sucks”, but it turns out he didn’t pitch it at all. The video is one of about five he experimented with before returning to audio when the logistics of pulling off video features while also covering City Hall and crime proved to be too burdensome. The parking structure he stood on is the one he parks his car in every morning. The umbrella he tosses to great comedic effect was “absolutely organic”, he says. “I saw the umbrella as I was going into the office thinking, ‘Oh, I gotta do one of those crummy videos today.” In the video, the busted green and pink floral umbrella that has been abandoned, still opened, atop a garbage bin in the parking garage, becomes a totem for February. “This says it all,” Killeen remarks to the camera. “Somebody on this February day has abandoned it with its broken shaft like a desperate flinging off of something that’s not true any more. The expedition is getting desperate. People are throwing things aside.” He credits KMOX with always giving him a lot of editorial freedom to explore and be playful and said the popularity of the video should be “a lesson to news editors”. “They don’t know half the things their people could create for them if they just let them be creative,” he said. “News editors are always saying what’s on the wire, or what’s on the New York Times, when they could be asking, what can you not stop thinking about? What have you been talking about at parties?” How much they hate February, apparently. “You ever have that feeling that something’s bothering you, but you don’t know what it is? It feels like you could almost get up to the point to see what’s wrong with life itself,” he elaborated. But we can’t: “It’s an elusive target.” What about February being an “honest” month? Does that mean there are months that are not to be trusted? Killeen answers with zero hesitation. “December, with all the vanities of the holiday season.”The manipulation of aid by Bashar al-Assad’s government in Syria is a unique and persistent form of control that needs to be urgently addressed, according to a new report. Based on interviews with UN officials and humanitarian workers in Syria, the 70-page Rescuing Aid in Syria report has been released by a Washington thinktank, the Centre for Strategic &amp; International Studies (CSIS). “There aren’t many situations in our history, where someone who has committed mass atrocities to the level that the Assad government has, stays in power and controls the aid apparatus,” said the author, Natasha Hall. The Assad regime has such a tight grip on aid groups’ access, including through visa approvals, that it had become normalised for relatives of senior regime officials to have jobs within UN bodies, the report says. “How could you not know who these people are, when you have their CV in front of you? I find it a dereliction of duty,” one UN official said on condition of anonymity. “This is a massive protection issue, not only for the beneficiaries, but for other national staff you have working with you.” A spokesperson for the United Nations Development Programme said: “The UNDP has found no evidence of having contracted with these entities, nor have we found any records of them in our vendor database. We are nevertheless carrying out a thorough internal review to verify that no such contracting took place either by UNDP or our subcontractors.” The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) said it “hires its staff based on merit, and on their ability to deliver”. The spokesperson said: “Employees are expected to fully abide with humanitarian principles and the UN code of conduct. All UN staff are required to take an oath to act in the best interest of the UN and not to seek or accept instructions in regard to performance of duties from any government or other source external of the organisation, as mandated by the UN staff regulations.” Relations are warming between the Assad regime and Arab states such as Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Algeria – as well as with the US, which is reworking sanctions in the war-torn country. Meanwhile, the report says, there has been an increase in threats, arbitrary detention and torture of Syrian aid staff in the past year. Employees of one local humanitarian organisation were detained and killed, and their relatives ordered to evacuate their houses or be arrested. The threat of coercion and murder hanging over aid workers prevents independent monitoring of UN agencies and NGOs, the report said. “If the Assad government is going to stay in place, which it seems a lot of governments are resigned to, this needs to be sorted out, because aid is probably going to continue to go into this hostile environment,” Hall said. Beyond the diversion of UN food to the military, people directly responsible for human rights violations are benefiting. The report found Mohamad Hamsho, a businessman close to the Fourth Division, an elite army unit, and the president’s brother, Maher al-Assad, had won UN procurement contracts to strip metals in areas retaken by the government and rework them for sale at his Hadeed Metal Manufacturing Company. “It’s a very perverse cycle that’s being created,” said Hall. The UNDP allegedly contracted the Aleppo Defenders Legion, a pro-regime militia responsible for forcibly displacing residents, to clear rubble and rehabilitate the city they helped destroy, as outlined also by Human Rights Watch. Sara Kayyali, HRW’s Syria researcher, said: “The UN did zero human rights due diligence when contracting people; we’re not talking about them contracting for tens of thousands of dollars, we’re talking about millions of dollars that are going to … companies owned by individuals who we know have committed human rights violations. “When you consider the UN is one of the primary ways that money is going into Syria … [and] plays a huge role in revitalising the economy, it’s playing into the hands of [the regime’s] war economy.” The OCHA spokesperson said the UN’s activities were governed by “core humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence”. They added: “Some governments, such as the one in Syria, insist that UN agencies work with a list of authorised implementing partners. However, we choose our partners from that list based on our own assessments of their capacity to deliver and following due-diligence processes.” When aid was transported across lines of conflict or control, in both north-west and east Syria, known as cross-line shipments, there have been thefts and medical equipment has been distributed haphazardly, the report states. Only two cross-line convoys carrying 43,500 food portions each made it to opposition-controlled north-west Syria between August and December last year compared with 1.3m rations delivered from Turkey in November alone. Supplies took four months to reach people in need as it sat in warehouses because the regime would not allow opposition-linked NGOs to distribute it, Hall said. The manipulation of aid had grown in the past decade of war, and a thorough audit and evaluation of aid in Syria was necessary, Hall said. “This is part of a systematic issue that needs to be resolved because it will be copied over and over again by other actors … who are learning lessons from what the Syrian regime has done,” Hall said.The NFL has denied reports that it attempted to stop Eminem from kneeling during his performance at the Super Bowl halftime show. The game took place at Los Angeles’ SoFi Stadium and the halftime show was headlined by Dr Dre, who hails from nearby Compton. He was joined by fellow Californian stars Snoop Dogg and Kendrick Lamar as well as Mary J Blige, Eminem and 50 Cent in an electrifying set. As his rendition of Lose Yourself ended, Eminem took a knee and held his head in his hand in apparent tribute to former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who took a knee during the national anthem to protest police brutality during the 2016 season. Other players followed suit after the quarterback’s gesture, and the move created widespread cultural controversy, with the league receiving criticism of its handling of the matter. Kaepernick has not played in the NFL since the end of the 2016 season and it is widely believed he was blackballed by the league’s teams and owners over his stance. After Sunday’s game the NFL denied reports that it had attempted to stop Eminem from making the gesture. “We watched all elements of the show during multiple rehearsals this week and were aware that Eminem was going to do that,” league spokesman Brian McCarthy said. In the wake of the protests following the police murder of George Floyd in 2020, the NFL admitted it had failed to listen to its players’ concerns over racism in the United States. “We, the National Football League, admit we were wrong for not listening to NFL players earlier and encourage all to speak out and peacefully protest,” said NFL commissioner Roger Goodell in June 2020, without explicitly mentioning Kaepernick. “We, the National Football League, believe black lives matter.”The Real Housewives of Belgravia 10pm, Channel 4 Rich-person-meets-poor-person is, typically, a gauche TV format. Does this one – multimillionaire Amanda Cronin and formerly homeless film-maker Martin Read become “friends” who explore each other’s lives for a few weeks – offer anything new and substantial on the UK’s great class divide? On the one hand, Read is in full control of a fair production and no one is left exploited. But, beyond plugging her skincare brand one minute then helping out at a soup kitchen the next, Cronin shares no real learnings from the experience. Hollie Richardson The Big Design Challenge 8pm, Sky Arts This Lauren Laverne-hosted format sees eight creatives competing for the chance to exhibit their work at the V&amp;A. Konnie Huq, guest judge for week one, tasks them with creating a children’s play sculpture. But after being split into two teams, will the rival designers work together effectively? Graeme Virtue Rise of the Nazis: Dictators at War 9pm, BBC Two Bringing something new to TV coverage of the second world war is no mean feat, but this narratively gripping take on the eastern front comes very close. It invites experts, including an ex-MI6 chief and, erm, Garry Kasparov, to provide psychological insights into the main players in the political mind games. Alexi Duggins Squad Dates 9pm, BBC Three Group dating is a thing, apparently. This new show gets two lots of friends to visit each other’s local areas to see if any sparks fly. Tonight, three Lancaster students meet a trio of Middlesbrough students (“I can’t be doing with no ugly dogs,” asserts Tracey). Well, it is Valentine’s Day after all. HR Starstruck 10pm, BBC Three Definitely not to be confused with Saturday’s show of the same name – it’s Christmas in this perfect romantic comedy, but Jessie and Tom spend it apart. Instead, the day sees a great Love Actually reference, drunken voice notes and an offering of ham leftovers. HR Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic Now that Nate and Cassie’s relationship bombshell has dropped – thanks to expert detonator Rue – all eyes are on Maddy. Will she retaliate with her own weapon of mass destruction? It’s Euphoria, so expect some very unreasonable teenage responses. Henry Wong Film choices Jerry Maguire (Cameron Crowe, 1996), 9pm, Film4 A top-notch Valentine’s Day double bill starts with Crowe’s romantic drama. Tom Cruise is at peak Cruise – all sharp dressing and slick patter – as sports agent Jerry, whose “mission statement” about caring more and earning less gets him fired. But the NFL-based story of him and his sole remaining client, Rod (an effervescent Cuba Gooding Jr), is a sideline to his relationship with Renée Zellweger’s infatuated employee Dorothy – as he first gets the girl, and then realises he doesn’t deserve her. Simon Wardell Disobedience (Sebastián Lelio, 2018), 11.50pm, Film4 A subtle choice for a date-night movie, Lelio’s even-handed drama, set in London’s Orthodox Jewish community, is at heart all about love. Rachel Weisz simmers as Ronit, a New York-based photographer who returns to Britain for her rabbi father’s funeral. Having abandoned her religion, she gets a chilly reception, save for childhood friends – and now-married couple – Esti (Rachel McAdams) and Dovid (Alessandro Nivola). Ronit disrupts their committed but passion-free existence, and Esti finds taboo emotions she had repressed for years becoming unavoidable. SWTop story: Johnson ‘plans more military help for Kyiv’ Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are today’s top stories. A diplomatic offensive by western governments to avert a Russian invasion of Ukraine was stepped up again this morning as Downing Street said Boris Johnson would travel to Europe later in the week for talks with allies, and German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, was due to land in Kyiv to meet the Ukrainian president. No 10 said the prime minister would be working to bring Russia “back from the brink” and was also said to be working with allies to provide further defensive and economic support to Kyiv. The immediate diplomatic focus was on Scholz, who is expected to discuss with Volodymyr Zelenskiy how Germany could help stabilise Ukraine’s economy after fears of an imminent war took a toll on its currency. Scholz said on the eve of his departure that any Russia attack would lead to “tough sanctions that we have carefully prepared and which we can immediately put into force”. He will fly to Moscow to meet Vladimir Putin tomorrow. Stock markets fell in Asia overnight amid jitters about Ukraine, while oil soared to a seven-year high of $95.46 a barrel. Dozens of western diplomats in Kyiv were preparing to leave the city last night as many countries issued a clear warning to all citizens still inside Ukraine to get out before any Russian invasion. Governments of 39 countries have warned against travel to Ukraine. US security officials believe a Russian invasion is “imminent”, while UK intelligence services believe their Russian counterparts at the FSB have been tasked with trying to engineer coups in Ukraine’s major cities to coincide with an invasion. The front pages of the UK papers struck an ominous tone on Monday morning. * * * Health inequality – Widespread racial inequality is embedded in healthcare in England and radical action is needed urgently to fix the problem, according to a damning study which found that the problem was harming the health of millions of patients. Racism, racial discrimination, barriers to accessing healthcare and woeful ethnicity data collection have “negatively impacted” the health of black, Asian and minority ethnic people in England for years, according to the review, commissioned by the NHS Race and Health Observatory. The 166-page report, seen by the Guardian, is due to be published in full this week and should be the cue for long-awaited action. * * * Refugee cost – A coalition of hundreds of pro-refugee organisations has estimated the huge costs of five Home Office policies to block refugees, which are due to become law in a matter of months. Taxpayers could face an extra £2.7bn a year in costs to fund the schemes, the campaign coalition Together With Refugees claims in a report today. The Home Office dismissed the calculations as “pure speculation”, but the SNP MP Stuart McDonald said the research “shows in stark terms what many MPs have long feared about the huge cost to the taxpayer”. * * * Letting go – Nearly 230,000 new rental properties are needed in the UK to avoid a shortfall if the current growth in demand continues. The consultancy Capital Economics reckons demand for 1.8m new households over the next decade will keep pressure on the rental market. Private rents in Britain rose at their fastest rate on record in January and average advertised rent outside London was 9.9% higher than a year ago. * * * Covid ‘onslaught’ – Hong Kong is being “overwhelmed” by the latest wave of Covid-19, the city’s leader Carrie Lam said today, as she called in more help from the Chinese government to deal with the crisis. Daily infections have multiplied by a factor of 13 over the past two weeks to more than 1,300 on Sunday, with authorities scrambling to control the deepening outbreak. Lam’s “dynamic zero” Covid strategy has led to growing resentment and possible food shortages. Click here to catch up with all the Covid developments, including rocketing cases in New Zealand. * * * Ivan Reitman, the influential film-maker and producer behind beloved comedies including Ghostbusters, Animal House and Twins, has died at the age of 75. Reitman died peacefully in his sleep on Saturday night at his home in California. Film-makers and comedians lined up to pay tribute with the director of the 2016 Ghostbusters reboot, Paul Feig, writing: “All of us in comedy owe him so very much.” Comedian Kumail Nanjiani tweeted: “A legend. The number of great movies he made is absurd.” Today in Focus podcast You don’t need a partner to have a happy and fulfilling life – so why does society still apply the pressure to couple up? Emma John, author of Self Contained: Scenes from a Single Life, reflects on her life as an unmarried woman in her 40s. Lunchtime read: Johnny Knoxville – ‘I’m still here!’ Johnny Knoxville, star of the anarchic Jackass franchise, is heading for the big screen again with his new film Jackass Forever. Knoxville, AKA Philip John Clapp Jr, explains being inspired by his hard-drinking father, his years in therapy and suffering brain damage when a stunt for the new film went badly wrong. Sport Six years after the team returned to California – after a 20-year sojourn in St Louis – the LA Rams were crowned Super Bowl champions for the second time in their history with a 23-20 win over the Cincinnati Bengals. Eddie Jones believes there is no limit to Marcus Smith’s potential after the England fly-half inspired his side to a comfortable 33-0 Six Nations victory against Italy in Rome. The alpine slalom skier Dave Ryding insists that Britain’s blank medal tally so far at these Winter Olympics has only made him more determined to ride to the rescue by winning gold this week. Kamila Valieva is so talented she does not need to take drugs, her choreographer has insisted, as the brilliant 15-year-old Russian skater waits to see whether she will be sent home from the Beijing Games. David Moyes insisted Kurt Zouma pulled out of West Ham United’s 2-2 draw with Leicester City less than half an hour before kick-off with sickness rather than stress. Pep Guardiola has said he wants Raheem Sterling to sign a new contract at Manchester City but claims any decision over the forward’s future will ultimately be taken by the club. Caroline Weir maintained her record of scoring in every home Manchester derby with a stunning late chip from distance to earn Manchester City a 1-0 win and a crucial three points in the race for the Champions League. And, think you know your Valentine’s Day football trivia? From on-pitch proposals to managerial feuds, passions boil over in our themed quiz. Business UK ministers and the Scottish government have reached a deal over proposed freeports in Scotland, after months of disagreement. A bidding process for the two locations will run from this spring until summer. Europe’s biggest banks, led by HSBC, Barclays and BNP Paribas, have provided £24bn to oil and gas companies that are expanding production less than a year since pledging to target net zero carbon emissions, new data shows. The pound is on $1.356 and €1.193, and the FTSE100 looks like slipping 0.6% or so amid concern about Ukraine. The papers The Telegraph’s splash is “PM urges Russia to step back from brink”, and the story takes precedence on several front pages. “Boris urges Putin to step ‘back from brink’”, reports the Express, “Frantic 48 hours to save Europe from war”, says the Mail, while the Times has “Leaders in final push to avert Ukraine invasion”. The Mirror has a blunter “Countdown to war”, the i says “Tensions rise in Ukraine as West steps up efforts to stop invasion”, and the FT reports “Scholz plans fresh Ukraine talks as west steps up evacuations”. The Guardian has the Ukraine story on its front page but leads with “Damning race report reveals vast inequalities across health service”. The Scotsman’s splash is “Yousaf: Scotland should not be forced into Covid easing”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendWhen I first saw Eugene Ashe’s Sylvie’s Love at the Sundance film festival in January 2020, I remember not so much exiting the theater as floating. “That,” I said to anyone listening, “will surely be a smash, and end up swimming in Oscar nominations.” Well, I was right to a degree on the first part – critics did praise the film – but the coronavirus pandemic nixed its theatrical release, and its end-of-year debut on Amazon Prime did not connect on a mainstream level as it should have. But one good thing about movies that are owned (and not merely licensed) by the major streamers is that they never go away. To that end, if you subscribe to Amazon you’ve done more than just underwrite Jeff Bezos’s jaunts to space. You’ve secured yourself access to one of the loveliest films of the last five years. Sylvie’s Love is made for people who watch older movies and sigh “they don’t make ‘em like that any more”. Its classic nature is woven into its very look, shot, as it is, on the Super 16mm film format, and on backlot sets that clearly aren’t New York City, but not in a hyper-stylized or campy way. Put bluntly, it looks the way films looked when this story is set, the late 1950s and early 1960s. There is, of course, one major differentiator: the lead performers are Black. Tessa Thompson and Nnamdi Asomugha star as the cosmically misaligned lovers hit with unfair obstacles separating them from the happiness they deserve. Even though this is a period piece, the struggle of living in a racist country during the civil rights era is only part of the din of these character’s lives, not the focus. As Ashe put it in an interview with the Los Angeles Times, “all I have to do is open up my family photo albums to see a very different depiction of Black life in the 60s.” It’s a film that, tragically, would have never gotten the funding back then, so it has to be made now. When we first meet Thompson’s Sylvie, she is working in a Harlem record shop owned by her father (Lance Reddick, who really lights up the room in every scene he’s in). One day in walks Robert, a young saxophonist, looking for the album Brilliant Corners by Thelonious Monk. (He’s heard that “Newk” – a nickname for Sonny Rollins – is on it.) Soon he’s working at the shop and, in classic sitcom fashion, the pair end up connecting while locked in the basement after hours. That may sound corny, but it’s driven by the script. As much as Robert is destined for greatness with his music, Sylvie has her own dream of becoming a television producer. Thompson and Asomugha’s romantic sparkle would make a stone swoon, and as their summer fling grows more passionate (mirrored by supporting players Aja Naomi Kim and Regé-Jean Page), the film makes great use of chaste dissolves. It’s not that I’m a cinematic prude, it’s just that some movies call for a little tact. This is nothing if not a classy production. For 45 minutes or so, Sylvie’s Love is a warm, blissful bath of to-die-for costumes, heart-melting glances, and loads of great music. There’s original small combo jazz written by Fabrice Lecomte and performed by Mark Turner, plus hits of the era from people like Nancy Wilson, Little Anthony and the Imperials, and Jackie Wilson. Even a corny, early rock’n’roll track by Bill Haley and His Comets (See You Later, Alligator) is, begrudgingly at first, given its due for being a snappy, catchy tune. (Its silly lyrics eventually become poignant, and if that isn’t a testimony to the magic of this film, I don’t know what is.) But then complications set in, with miscommunication and bad timing the cause of it all. The rest of the film’s running time is spent wondering just when the heck fate will cut our two lovers a break and let them have their happily ever after. One of the many things I love about this movie (and I know I mentioned the costumes, but, oh man, the costumes) is how true to itself the film’s style remains. It could have easily devolved into hammy, over-the-top performances, but Thompson and Asomugha are committed to playing it cool. He’s a sensitive guy who’d much rather express himself with his instrument than his words (I was surprised to learn he had a previous career playing American football) and she’s simply luminous in every scene. It doesn’t take much for you to root for these people. Though it is set in the worlds of classic jazz and early television, Ashe doesn’t waste time with any thinly veiled references to real life figures. There is only one exception, a bit of a gift to jazzbos, with Jemima Kirke’s patron character “the Countess” – a sly reference to Baroness Nica de Koenigswarter. The aim to become an instant classic is achieved, and without any shortcuts. You’ll love it. Sylvie’s Love is now available on Amazon Prime VideoFriends has been stripped of its lesbian storyline for the Chinese re-release of the sitcom, prompting censorship concerns. On Friday a number of entertainment platforms including Tencent – which made headlines earlier this month for carrying a version of Fight Club with a totally different ending – began airing the first season of Friends, which was originally broadcast in 1994. Fans who had seen the programme before were quick to notice the absence of several scenes, including those relating to the character Ross explaining that his ex-wife, Carol, is gay. Other viewers reported cuts or mistranslations of lines by LGBTQI characters or scenes that included mildly suggestive references to strip clubs and orgasms. On China’s Weibo the apparent censorship became a trending topic, with tens of millions of views of related hashtags and comments. “Covering your mouth and ears does not mean non-existence,” said one user, while another wondered how the censors would treat a storyline in later seasons, of Phoebe acting as a surrogate for her brother and his partner. One viewer praised the show for having portrayed LGBTQI characters in “a natural and normal way” at a time when few other pop culture products were. “On the other hand, in today’s China, under a similar environment, not only is there no TV drama with high popularity and high reputation, which can insert gay characters into the play in a similar way, but even introduced foreign TV shows don’t dare to completely show gay content,” they said. “I don’t understand why this line was cut, why it’s still the same here after 30 years, we are even going backwards.” The backlash was itself soon censored and replaced with a more positive “why is Friends so popular” hashtag. Friends is hugely popular in China and was previously streamed online and uncensored until 2018. DVDs of the show are also widely available. However, there has been an apparent rise in censorship of entertainment in recent years, in an increasingly politically sensitive environment under Xi Jinping, which has also targeted non-traditional family values and culture. Guidelines first introduced in 2016 banning the depiction of gay people on TV, as well as presentation of extramarital affairs and one night stands, have tightened further. Last year regulators ordered broadcasters to avoid what it called “abnormal aesthetics”, and “sissy men”. LGBTQI online accounts, university groups, and publications have been shut down. Foreign productions have also struggled to gain access to China. Major Hollywood blockbusters, including the recent Marvel film Shang-Chi, have been denied releases apparently over perceived slights to China or its government. Earlier this month the discovery that the plot of Fight Club had been changed on Tencent to tell viewers police had “rapidly figured out the whole plan and arrested all criminals” sparked widespread backlash and subsequent restoration of the original ending. Scenes were also cut from Bohemian Rhapsody, the 2019 film about Queen and Freddie Mercury, before its theatrical release in Chinese cinemas.Three candidates have emerged as frontrunners to replace Leigh Sales as the host of 7.30 – David Speers, Bridget Brennan and Sarah Ferguson – as the ABC prepares its flagship current affairs program for a new era. Speers, the current host of Sunday morning’s political panel show Insiders, and Brennan, the broadcaster’s Indigenous affairs editor, are two contenders the ABC is seriously considering alongside Ferguson, Guardian Australia understands. ABC chiefs have approached potential hosts after Sales announced on Thursday she would step down as 7.30’s anchor in late June following the federal election – some 12 years after taking over from Kerry O’Brien. Speers, who joined the ABC from Sky News in early 2020 when he was picked to replace longtime Insiders host Barry Cassidy, is understood to be viewed as a safe option for the broadcaster. This is in part because of his two decades in the federal parliamentary press gallery as political editor of Sky and his reputation as a sharp interviewer. However, Brennan – a former Europe correspondent for the ABC based in London – has already been unofficially approached about replacing Sales. A source says a senior ABC figure discussed the role with Brennan in recent days and asked her to consider throwing her hat into the ring. Ferguson, a longtime ABC journalist who has worked as a foreign correspondent for the broadcaster as well as prominent international outlets, has also been widely floated as a potential replacement. Ferguson is without a permanent role given she has been unable to take up the position of Beijing bureau chief due to diplomatic tensions. Laura Tingle, the veteran chief political correspondent for 7.30 who has become a regular fill-in host for Sales, is not currently understood to be a top contender. However, if Tingle remains in her prominent role on 7.30 with Brennan as host, it could be seen to bolster the political credentials of the team while gaining from Brennan’s experience as Indigenous affairs editor. Despite Speers’s senior status and the fact Brennan has not worked in a dedicated political reporting role, her experience across various ABC bureaux – including covering Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities for more than a decade – has her well-placed to assume the position. Brennan – a Dja Dja Wurrung and Yorta Yorta woman – has been a regular fill-in host on ABC TV’s breakfast program since returning from a two-year stint with the broadcaster in London. She first joined the ABC in 2010, when she began a cadetship, before moving to its Darwin bureau. Speers is based in Melbourne, where he moved with his family from Canberra to take the Insiders job. Sales has lived and worked in Sydney, where 7.30 is filmed, however, it is understood that would not be a deciding factor in selecting a new host. Guardian Australia understands the ABC is unlikely to make an official decision on Sales’ replacement until after the broadcaster announces its new director of news. The ABC is yet to announce who will take over from Gaven Morris more than four months after he resigned after six years in the job. Guardian Australia asked the ABC if it had a timeframe to appoint replacements for Morris and Sales but a spokesperson declined to comment. Stan Grant, the ABC’s international affairs analyst, and Virginia Trioli, the host of mornings on ABC radio in Melbourne and a former News Breakfast host, have also been touted as potential new anchors at 7.30.Warren Entsch has come under fire for abandoning an offer to help first-term Liberal MPs vote up religious discrimination bill amendments to protect LGBTQ+ students. A Liberal MP told Guardian Australia that Entsch had “promised the ‘youngsters’ in the party that he would provide them cover” to stand up to the Morrison government before refusing to join five colleagues who crossed the floor. The comments are the latest salvo in a battle over the government’s decision to ditch the bill due to amendments preventing religious schools discriminating on gender and sexuality. On Friday, Entsch and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, accused unnamed Liberal MPs of breaching commitments to the government. As Guardian Australia revealed, while Bridget Archer and Trent Zimmerman were the first two to cross, Fiona Martin provided the crucial third vote. They were then joined by Dave Sharma and Katie Allen who had said they would cross if the government were already set to lose the vote. Entsch expressed concerns about the religious discrimination bill, but told the House of Representatives on Wednesday he had chosen to “bank the successes” of improvements removing the Folau and conscientious objection clauses. Entsch also secured a shorter six-month timeframe and broader terms of reference for a review into gender and sexuality discrimination in schools. But a Liberal MP told Guardian Australia Entsch had “loudly and proudly claimed last year that after 19 years of defending the LGBTIQ+ community he would not sell them out on religious freedom”. “But once he got his North Queensland reinsurance scheme, his objections evaporated.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Entsch rejected the charge, noting the reinsurance pool was announced in the May 2021 budget, shortly after he promised to recontest the 2022 election. Details of the design of the scheme were finalised and announced on 7 February, with minor changes to benefit strata properties and provide small business marine property insurance. “I’m not going to perpetuate this bullshit,” Entsch told Guardian Australia. “People can do their mischief but it has nothing whatsoever to do with the religious discrimination bill.” Asked if he offered “cover” to junior MPs, Entsch said he “did, over time” but decided to bank successes on the religious bill because he could see his own party room wouldn’t shift and Labor would support the bill anyway. “They were trying to jam us – and that’s exactly what they did. You’ve got to know when you’d be able to win and when you’ll lose.” On Sunday Scott Morrison said he was “devastated” by the failure to deliver the religious discrimination bill, claiming the government had shelved it because he “would rather lay down our attempt to secure those additional [religious] protections than see them compromised or undermined” by protections for LGBTQ+ students, which conservatives claim would harm schools’ ability to set rules enforcing their religious views. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said on Monday that Labor would “deal with” religious discrimination legislation if elected. “We think that everyone should be free from discrimination. That includes people of faith,” he said. “You can do that without increasing discrimination against others.” Albanese said the government legislation “was not consistent with what the prime minister himself said would happen last year and put in writing to me in December” when he promised to prevent “any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of sexuality or gender identity”. On Monday the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, confirmed the religious discrimination bill was “something we’ll have to revisit post-election”. Stoker said she was “certainly surprised to find that people other than Ms Archer and Mr Zimmerman acted as they did” in crossing the floor. The deputy Liberal leader, Josh Frydenberg, told ABC Radio he had consulted Martin “ahead of that vote” and acknowledged she was in a difficult position. “I would like all our members of our team to stick together when it comes to votes on the floor of the house – but at the same time I want to see her re-elected in her seat.” Frydenberg confirmed “there was an understanding that there would be more support than there was on the floor of the house, but that’s now behind us”. On Friday Martin responded to claims she had breached a commitment to the government by saying: “I protected the human rights of our most vulnerable in our parliament. I did what was right. I supported the religious discrimination bill, I supported people of faith and I protected the rights of vulnerable young students. To me, that was the right balance.”Ben Roberts-Smith told his wife Emma Roberts she would lose access to their children if she didn’t lie publicly about him having an affair, during the tumultuous break-up of their marriage, a court has heard. During emotional evidence before the federal court Monday, Emma Roberts said her now ex-husband – when confronted with evidence of his extramarital affair – said they both needed to lie to the press that they had been separated at the time. “Ben had suggested that the only way we would survive that if we said we were separated, that I was to lie,” Roberts said. “I didn’t want to lie. There were enough lies.” Roberts told the court: “He [Roberts-Smith] pointed to our children sitting in the loungeroom, and he said ‘if you don’t lie you will lose them’.” Roberts says she was told to pose for a photograph to accompany a front-page story in The Australian newspaper the next day, saying the couple was separated. Roberts told the court the story was false. Roberts also said she gave a false statement to lawyers for her husband, claiming they were separated. “Ben asked me to lie,” she told the court. Roberts-Smith, a recipient of Australia’s highest military honour, the Victoria Cross, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. In court Monday, Roberts was asked to recount in detail her marriage to the decorated soldier and her growing suspicions he was being unfaithful between October 2017 and April 2018. Ben Roberts-Smith watched his former wife give evidence from the back corner of the courtroom, accompanied by his father Len, a former judge and a Major General in the army. On their wedding anniversary in December 2017, Roberts received a letter, addressed to her husband, detailing his affair, including the number of the hotel room he was sharing with his girlfriend. Confronted with this, Roberts-Smith denied the affair and said another soldier, antagonistic towards him, had sent the letter. Over the next few months, Roberts-Smith’s behaviour was “erratic”, his phone was often switched off, and his wife suspected he had a second secret phone. Roberts-Smith finally conceded he was having an affair when his girlfriend, anonymised before court as Person 17, turned up at the family house and confronted his wife. Roberts’ parents were also there at the time. Person 17 showed Roberts text messages between her and Roberts-Smith during the course of her affair. Roberts read them over three hours. Person 17 had a black eye at the time, which she said was caused by a drunken fall following a function at Parliament House she had attended with Roberts-Smith. Person 17 said Roberts-Smith had refused to see her any more “because of this”, pointing at her eye. Roberts told the court her parents were also involved in the conversation: “My mum said ‘are you saying that Ben did that to you?’” “She [Person 17] didn’t answer.” Roberts said Person 17 told her she had fallen pregnant with Roberts-Smith’s child - “it was definitely Ben’s” - but was no longer pregnant at the time of their meeting, having lost or terminated the pregnancy. One of the allegations against Roberts-Smith in the newspapers’ defence is that he committed an act of domestic violence against Person 17, following the event at Parliament House. He denies this and has given evidence he assisted Person 17 after she drunkenly fell down stairs. Roberts was asked about a series of anonymous letters allegedly received by a fellow SAS soldier. The soldier, Person 18, received letters warning him to recant evidence to a military inquiry into war crimes allegations, the court heard. When the contents of the letters were reported publicly, Roberts confronted her husband. “What the fuck have you done?,” Roberts said she asked Roberts-Smith. “He told me he had written the letters, had printed them at the Seven office, had sealed them in the envelopes, addressed them, and had given them to [family friend and occasional employee] John McLeod to post.” Roberts told the court she had previously seen her husband walk into the house carrying a grey shopping bag carrying blank paper, a packet of envelopes and a packet of gloves. She said Roberts-Smith had asked her about the PO Box for the SAS regiment in Perth, and whether there were security cameras on post boxes. Roberts-Smith allegedly told his then wife that McLeod - who is also set to give evidence later in this trial - crossed the border from Queensland into New South Wales to post the letters. In his evidence last year, Roberts-Smith denied any involvement in the letters and said the conversation with his wife never occurred. “That’s not true,” he told the court. He told the court during his evidence his ex-wife was “extremely bitter”. “She has done things along the way that have been detrimental to my family, and particularly to me, because she thinks it will hurt me.” Roberts denied being motivated by bitterness or anger towards her ex-husband. Roberts was asked about the first publication of the war crimes allegations in the press, which named a soldier only as ‘Leonidas’, a Spartan king and war hero. Roberts said Roberts-Smith believed the stories referred to him, and that “he was devastated”. Roberts said the media allegations were mentioned to her at the school their children attended, and people in their social group broke off friendships in response to the reporting. It caused immense stress within their family. One of the couple’s daughters asked: “why does Dad not smile anymore?” Roberts broke down in tears in the witness box, and the judge briefly adjourned the hearing. Bruce McClintock, SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, accused Roberts of “fabrication” in her evidence about the timing of her separation from her husband, and about accessing emails on a business account. She consistently rejected this. In a parallel court action, Roberts-Smith sued his ex-wife over access to emails on a joint business account, to which she had lawful access. His action against his ex-wife failed. Emma Roberts will resume in the witness box under cross-examination Tuesday morning. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.The reputation of the Canadian writer Sheila Heti, who came to prominence amid the reality-hungry vogue of the last decade, rests largely on a pair of candid comic novels mingling philosophy, performance art and self-help. In 2013’s How Should a Person Be?, a divorced playwright, Sheila, is kept from her work by an alarmingly submissive sexual liaison; in Motherhood, from 2018, the Heti-adjacent narrator, nearing 40 in a long-term relationship, doesn’t want kids (“I don’t care about passing on my genes! Can’t one pass on one’s genes through art?”). In both books, an ambling narrative drew a measure of urgency from a dilemma that turns on stubbornly cleft logic: to be a writer, or a lover? Make art, or a baby? More either/ors drive Heti’s brazenly strange new novel, less openly autobiographical than her past work. It follows Mira, a young female student infatuated with a standoffish peer, Annie, whose eye Mira is busily out to catch when her father dies, unleashing a psychodrama of regret that she didn’t spend more time with him. The stuff of a normal, if momentous, rite-of-passage tale, you might think, except that these events unspool retrospectively from the vantage point of an imminent apocalypse as God contemplates a “second draft” of creation, and that’s just for starters. Mira’s cohort, living in a kind of bizarro version of Toronto, are all in training to become art critics, a uniquely sought-after occupation (one of the novel’s many hard-to-parse jokes), and everyone in the book is said to resemble a bird, fish, or bear, a strict taxonomy conferring pivotal personality traits. And halfway through the novel, Mira finds herself trapped inside a leaf, talking to her father, thanks to the transmigration of souls… Getting the measure of all this is like trying to weigh a gas. Initially the narration seems whimsical and fey, caught between cosmic musing in a lofty first-person plural and the fable-like timbre of Mira’s story, although Heti’s metaphorical range keeps you on your toes, to say the least: when Mira first meets Annie, we’re told their horizons widen “like a vagina… stretching for a very large cock”, and when her father dies, she feels “his spirit ejaculate into her, like it was the entire universe coming into her body, then spreading all the way through her, the way cum feels spreading inside, that warm and tangy feeling”. Still, I was losing faith that Heti had any kind of purpose in sight by the time the leaf business came along to put a welcome rocket up all the meandering drollery, allowing the novel to work an impressive spectrum of meaning and feeling, both abstract and tangible, solemn as well as silly, hitting notes that recall Ovid, Kafka and, oddly, the climax of Christopher Nolan’s Interstellar. The wacky metaphysics generate a what-if? comedy that gains voltage from Heti’s refusal to milk it for allegory, as grieving Mira, shut off from humanity, tries to signal to Annie as she passes her tree in the company of another woman. You might see Pure Colour as the last in a tragicomic trilogy of fretful overthinking: after sex and potential procreation, now comes mortality and the fate of childhood. Puberty, here, is provocatively figured as betrayal (“the body becomes a grown-up and it cannot turn back”), an opening salvo in a ceaseless push-pull of filial obligation and independence. Freedom, previously a Heti watchword, in this book tastes of guilt, not least when Mira wonders why it was only when her father lay dying that she felt free to embrace him. Heti’s questing idiosyncrasy means there’s little time for any of this to get treacly. “In the next draft of existence, everyone will love everyone, and they will consider our lives and think with a shudder, Until they pushed a person out of their dirtiest parts, they had no one they could truly love, and no one who could truly love them – except for their own parents, who also pushed them out of their dirtiest parts.” How about that for another crack at outlining the ambivalence behind Motherhood? And amid the weirdness, it’s also very funny: we’re told that the reason we lose touch with what’s cool, the older we get, is that God “doesn’t want the criticism of the most dynamic parts of culture coming from someone in the middle of life… God doesn’t care what you think about a band.” At one point, we’re told that Mira doesn’t know “why she spent so much of her life… looking at websites, when just outside the window there was a sky”. The ensuing riff earns a bittersweet laugh, but the thought nags: why not both? Online and outside, sex and writing, art and a baby? Yet while Heti’s binary-mania isn’t always persuasive, this one-of-a-kind novel, curious in two senses, still feels nothing less than vital, even if only because, in tackling the bond between the living and the dead, she now has the mother of all either/ors on her hands. Pure Colour by Sheila Heti is published by Harvill Secker (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe first song I remember hearing You Can’t Hurry Love by the Supremes gives me this weird feeling of intense nostalgia that can only be quashed by the pictures in my mother’s downstairs toilet of me and my brother as toddlers. *** The first single I bought My brother was trying to be an 80s, glitter ball, mobile DJ. I used to go around the record shops in Ilkley with him and bought Keep Your Hands to Yourself by country hair rockers the Georgia Satellites, on 7-inch. *** The song that is my karaoke go-to I tend to belt out Circle of Life from The Lion King. It’s just a nice bit of silliness. *** The best song to play at a party Shake It Off by Taylor Swift got me through lockdown. I probably listened to it 15 times a day. *** The song I inexplicably know every lyric to A Boy Named Sue by Johnny Cash. *** The song I stream the most The Whole of the Moon by the Waterboys fits every occasion. *** The song I secretly like but tell everybody I hate I definitely had some misplaced snobbery towards Starz in Their Eyes by Just Jack because it was in the charts around the same time as we had Ruby. I used to say it was rubbish, even though I secretly knew every word. *** The song I can no longer listen to For some reason I can’t listen to Tell Me on a Sunday by Marti Webb without crying and I don’t know why it sets me off. I’m not coming across very cool, am I? *** The best song to have sex to The theme tune to Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit. Obviously. *** The song I wish I’d written American Pie by Don McLean, even though I get bored after about three verses. *** The song I can’t help singing If anyone starts singing: “Country road,” from Take Me Home, Country Roads by John Denver, I defy anyone to not go: “Take me home.” It’s perfect for belting out when you’re driving on your own, in a minibus full of acquaintances, birthdays and weddings. *** The song I want played at my funeral I don’t care. They can play what they want. I won’t be there. I assume they’ll play Ruby. Or they can play Take Me Home, Country Roads by John Denver. Just as long as it’s not Starz in Their Eyes by Just Jack. Ricky Wilson co-hosts Britain’s Best Young Artist on CBBC and iPlayer.The prosecution of a New York husband and wife arrested last week on suspicion of stealing $3.6bn in bitcoin in what has been described as “the heist of the century” may test US authorities’ ability to crack down on cybercrime. It may also test the bounds of believability as more and more colorful – and downright bizarre – details emerge of the couple at the heart of the saga which seems to lie at an unlikely nexus between the cryptocurrency, rap, self-help advice and New York eccentricity. The couple targeted in the sting, Ilya “Dutch” Lichtenstein and Heather Morgan, a self-described “badass money maker”, were charged with conspiracy to commit money laundering and conspiracy to defraud the United States. They are currently on $5m and $3m bail, respectively, but held in custody after a judge in Washington granted an emergency request by the government to keep them detained. But prosecutors are not trying to tie them to the actual theft from a British Virgin Islands cryptocurrency exchange in 2016. Instead, the case unveiled by the Department of Justice on Tuesday alleges that the couple used a complicated web of transactions to transfer about 25,000 of the 119,754 bitcoin stolen by hackers. The couple’s lawyer, Samson Enzer, argued in a court filing on Wednesday there were “significant holes in the government’s case against them”. But according to Money Laundering News, the case may be the first time the government has brought a case not on the basis of an alleged theft, but on the couple’s alleged efforts to conceal their identity from virtual currency financial institutions with obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) to report transactions to regulators. At the time of the heist, the coins were valued at $71m but are now worth about $4.5bn – according to various virtual currency exchangers. According to the government’s Statement of Facts, the stolen bitcoin was “layered” and “chain-hopped” through a series of virtual wallets to the “darknet market AlphaBay” and then back, and finally on to accounts where it was converted into fiat currency, gift cards and precious metals and withdrawn as cash from bitcoin ATMs. What may be more fascinating is that the couple at the center of what US prosecutors have described as the largest financial seizure in the history of the Department of Justice were able to utilize so little of the stolen cryptocurrency. Authorities said more than 80% of the stolen currency remained untouched in accounts associated with the couple and money-laundering allegations against them identify only small sums, including the purchase of a $500 Walmart gift card and gift cards for Uber, Hotels.com and PlayStation. Indeed the entire lifestyle of the pair hardly matches what one might imagine criminals whose alleged theft has such an astonishingly high value. Their Manhattan apartment was rented and cluttered with cat toys and exercise equipment. They walked their Bengal cat named Clarissa on a leash. The pair had a huge social media and internet presence with many hours of video and other postings. In one, unearthed by Vice, Lichtenstein apparently was filmed eating cat food. Morgan presented herself variously as “the Crocodile of Wall Street”, “Razzlekhan”, a surrealist artist and rapper with “more pizzazz than Genghis Khan”, as well as the “Turkish Martha Stewart” and the “Waffle Queen of Korea”. She wrote on her website that she was always pushing the limits. “Whether that leads to something wonderful or terrible is unclear; the only thing that’s certain is it won’t be boring or mediocre,” she said. In that respect she was not wrong. In a column for Forbes magazine that reeks with cheeky hindsight she wrote about “Experts Share Tips To Protect Your Business From Cybercriminals” accompanied by an author biography that puffed “when she’s not reverse-engineering black markets to think of better ways to combat fraud and cyber crime, she enjoys rapping and designing streetwear fashion”. She posted singles and videos on YouTube, including a 2019 song, Versace Bedouin – described as an “anthem for misfits and weirdos” – while dressed in a gold lamé jacket in front of a statue of George Washington in New York’s financial district. She gave a talk at the Williamsburg hotel in Brooklyn titled “How to Social Engineer Your Way Into Anything”. Her husband disclosed in a Facebook post that he was planned his marriage proposal around “a weird, creative multi-channel marketing campaign” that featured posters and digital ads that “captured the essence of Razzlekhan: surreal, mysterious, creepy and sexy”. But their downfall may have come because bitcoin is more easily traced on blockchain – a financial ledger – than other cryptocurrencies and because they simply had too much of it. “It [would be] mindbogglingly stupid to steal this much bitcoin,” Frank Weert, the co-founder of Whale Alert, a blockchain tracking and analytics company, told the Financial Times. “If they had stolen 500 bitcoin, no one would have bothered trying to find them, but this was the heist of the century.”When Sandya Narayanswami was invited to a dinner by a friend who worked at Nasa’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, she was excited. Many of the guests flew planes. “I must have expressed some yearning,” she says, because someone told her: “You should join the flying club!” The next day Narayanswami, who was 57 at the time, arranged to meet an instructor. “I said: ‘Aren’t I too old?’ He said: ‘We’ve got students in their 80s.’” On her trial flight, her instructor took her over Pasadena. “You are very close to the air, because the plane is really small and the windows are big. I felt the air, I felt the motion. I felt as a bird might feel,” she says. Narayanswami first flew when she was eight. Her mother worked for British Overseas Airways Corporation at Heathrow, her father for Global Air Freight. Every summer they visited family in India. “Flying in the 60s was like private flying,” she says. Her mother made her a “beautiful fitted dress of white lace”. At fuel stops in Zurich, Tel Aviv or Frankfurt, Narayanswami got “a feel for what it was like to be in a different country”. Back then, “children were invited into the flight deck to meet the pilots”. Narayanswami remembers looking out at “vast clouds”; the plane appeared not to be moving. “The captain explained that the clouds were so vast, it took a long time to fly past them.” Narayanswami’s own logbook notes that she needed 423 flight hours to earn her pilot’s licence. She was 64. “It took a long time because I had a lot of confidence issues,” she says. At the time, she worked as a fundraising director at California Institute of Technology (which runs the flight club), and now consults for other institutions. But she grew up in Southall, west London, and at grammar school suffered horrific racist bullying. The library provided sanctuary. But, as she reached her late teens, she felt family pressure for an arranged marriage to a south Indian; her parents were from Kerala. Southall was mostly Punjabi. “I really protested,” she says. “‘But I want to be an astronaut! I don’t want to marry a boy from the village.’ “My mother made a promise. ‘As long as you are getting an education, we will not look for a husband for you.’” Narayanswami studied biological studies at Leicester University, then did a PhD at St Andrews, followed by postdoctoral research at the University of Strasbourg and the University of California. “Every time you move you get further away,” her dad remarked on the phone. “I didn’t feel I would be able to escape unless I did that,” she says. “I felt I was a pioneer … When I was young I wanted to be able to look back on my life and realise I had seen the world. It has been that way. But it has been quite hard because I am Indian and I’m a woman, and I never got married and I had no children.” These days, she says, she does “sort of hanker” for marriage. As for the astronaut career, in 2020, aged 64, she finally applied to Nasa’s astronaut corps, and received a very appreciative rejection. Even now, at 66, she says: “I haven’t been able to figure out how to deal with [rejection]. It doesn’t go away.” The racist bullying she received as a child has cast a very long shadow. Flying has helped. It is a workout: she has to tow the plane out to the taxiway. And being airborne offers a different perspective. “You can see eagles, bears, coyotes, mountain lions, birds of prey. “I love the beauty of the clouds. They are like hills. Vaster than our hills,” she says, recalling the pilot’s words on those childhood flights. “It gives me a sense of freedom.” New possibilities have arisen – Narayanswami chairs the board of the General Aviation Awards in the US – but she finds relaxing difficult. “I can’t switch off. I’m always churning something, something. But when I’m in the plane I focus totally on flying.” In flight, she is “part of a huge network of people who are communicating by radio frequency. There is no sense of skin colour. We are all tied together by our voices.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?Q I am nearing the end of the fixed-rate deal for the mortgage on my flat. My partner and I are planning on moving in together sometime in the next 12 months. My flat doesn’t suit both of our needs, so we would probably need to rent a new property together. Am I better off selling my flat and having the equity (and existing cash savings) ready to put down as a deposit on a new home, either jointly or independently, in a year or two; or should I seek to rent out my flat? I don’t have much knowledge of agents’ fees, and other costs and taxes associated with renting it out; what can I expect? Based on my initial workings, I suspect I would be hoping to at best break even rather than to make a profit from renting it out. If I decided to (and was able to) rent it out, I would want to be a good landlord, including by offering the option of longer-term tenancies. Regardless of any changes to my relationship status, I do not want to remain living in my flat for the long term. Selling the flat seems like the simplest option, and would give me a bigger deposit for my next home, but what are the risks in doing so? Would keeping my flat serve me better as a long-term investment? SH A Given that you don’t want to stay in your flat long term and are going to sell it at some point, I wondered why you don’t just sell it now and buy another property that does suit both of your needs. But maybe your partner doesn’t want to live in a property that is owned by you (not that I can think why that would be a problem). If that is the case, then your choice, as you have laid out, is between selling your flat and renting it out. Selling is, as you say, the simplest option but if you are not planning to buy somewhere else straight away, you’ll miss out on any growth in the flat’s value in the next year or two. Any interest you earn on the cash made by selling is unlikely to match property price growth. This would not be the case if you chose to rent the property out. Taking that option would also mean that you had somewhere to move back to if living together doesn’t work out. But that assumes you can let your flat. It could well be that your lease says that you’re not allowed to. Even if you can, you will need to establish that you are able either to convert your mortgage to a buy to let or get permission from your current lender to let the flat. Converting to a buy-to-let mortgage is only an option if the mortgage would represent 75% or less of the value of the flat. If your current mortgage is more than 75% of the flat’s value you’ll have to hope that your current lender will give you permission to let the property. There is another potential barrier to getting a buy-to-let mortgage: the rent you get from the flat must cover the mortgage payments by 125%. The other factors to take into account are agents’ fees – which can be as much as 20% (including VAT) of rent paid if you choose a full management service, the cost of safety checks and income tax on the rent less expenses. Rightmove has a useful guide to becoming a landlord at rightmove.co.uk/advice/landlord. • Want expert help finding your new mortgage? Use our new online tool to search thousands of deals from more than 80 lenders with the Guardian Mortgage Service, powered by L&amp;C.Sometime in January someone started falsely using my car’s number plate. The first I knew about it was a parking charge at Stansted airport, which was quickly sorted out when I explained it wasn’t me or my car. However, shortly afterwards I received two charges from Transport for London for supposedly driving in the ultra low emission zone. At the time of the violations, I was alone in my flat in St Ives, Cambridgeshire, and my car was in a nearby car park. Due to my schizoaffective disorder, I spend a lot of time alone in my flat. As a consequence, there are no witnesses who can vouch for me and no evidence I can provide to prove my whereabouts. This is fairly normal for my type of disability and doesn’t usually cause any problems. I explained all this to TfL via an online form but it is demanding more evidence, including photographs of my car. I tried to upload the photos but can’t find the online button to do so. TfL is now demanding I post them but I don’t own a printer and my agoraphobia and paranoia are such that I can’t access anywhere to print them. It seems someone else with the same Peugeot car as me is driving around with cloned number plates. Can you help? RM, St Ives For most of us, having a car number plate cloned would be hard enough but it has been particularly challenging for someone in your position. Car cloning seems to be a growing problem in this country. Fraudsters and criminals spot a car of the same, make, model and colour, and get a fake set of number plates made up. It saves them having to buy insurance or tax and to pay parking fines and other charges, as the bill is sent to the real owner, who then faces a battle to show it wasn’t them. I took up your complaint and was able to email the photos of your car which has slightly different wheels to the one caught driving in London. TfL now accepts it wasn’t your car. It has dropped the two £80 demands, and has noted the cloning on its database. The DVLA advises those in your shoes to contact the police. You should also write to the DVLA with the crime reference number, allowing it to “keep a record of the matter for future reference”. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditionsMichael Tonkovich spent the week after Thanksgiving at deer processors around Ohio, swabbing the carcasses to test for Sars-CoV-2, the virus that can cause Covid-19. When he explained his goal to hunters, a common reaction was: help yourself. And perhaps you can butcher it too, they joked. Whether or not the hunters saw the utility of a study testing deer for the Covid-causing virus, Tonkovich, deer program administrator for the Ohio department of natural resources division of wildlife, certainly did. White-tailed deer infected with the virus have been found in 15 states, according to the US Department of Agriculture. Scientists working in Staten Island, New York, also recently discovered the highly contagious Omicron variant circulating among the species for the first time. Although Covid-19 itself has not been found in deer, how serious the presence of the virus in deer could be for humans remains unclear. Whether anything could even be done to limit its spread is equally uncertain. “If they are getting it through sewage or garbage or runoff … there is likely nothing we can do about that,” said Tonkovich. Scientists nevertheless think the surveillance is urgent. Deer could act as large reservoirs for the virus, and serve as a source for new variants that could then spill over into humans. If you don’t know where the virus is, they reason, the already difficult task of managing it becomes impossible. “When you have a population as large and as close as it is to humans” as white-tailed deer that serves as a reservoir for the virus, “it just makes sense to keep an eye on it”, said Tonkovich. The study, which has not yet been peer reviewed, illustrates the need for “more targeted surveillance to better understand the circulation of Sars-CoV-2 in wild animals,” said Suresh Kuchipudi, a veterinary microbiologist at Penn State University who led the Staten Island research team. “Before we can conclude whether or not something can be done, we need to define the problem first.” Researchers also recently found that pet hamsters and mink were capable of catching the virus from humans – and spreading it to them. While there is no evidence that deer are capable of infecting humans with the virus, they could infect other animals – and because they are in the wild, rather than in captivity like hamsters and mink, that risk “is much more significant”, said Kuchipudi. But controlling the spread of a virus among animals is often difficult or impossible, said Sarah Olson, an epidemiologist at the Wildlife Conservation Society. She points to how Covid-19 has been able to spread among humans despite visits to health providers and tools such as vaccines. She also cited the devastating impact of diseases such as white-nose syndrome, which, despite scientists’ protection efforts, has killed more than 90% of three North America bat species, according to a study in the journal Conservation Biology. As for addressing the spread of the virus among deer, Olson does not think that applying our standard responses to Covid in people – such as trying to vaccinate them – is realistic. Instead, the research is “a call to redouble our efforts, to pay attention to wildlife health, to understand what is going on in these spaces that are currently kind of black boxes”, Olson said. One goal for scientists is to learn whether the virus spread from human to deer via wastewater, which would then allow public health officials to consider: “How are we protecting waste sites to prevent spread of diseases from people to wildlife?” Olson said. Prevention efforts could get a boost after the House on 4 February passed the America Competes Act, which calls for the US government to work with other countries and NGOs to close commercial wildlife markets – where some scientists think the pandemic originated – and to end the trade of terrestrial wildlife for human consumption, aiming instead to reduce the demand for wildlife as food. But only one Republican voted in favor of the bill, and it is unclear if it will die in the Senate. In the meantime, Kuchipudi said uncertainty about the spread of the virus among deer and other animals means that talk of the end of the pandemic is premature. “The Omicron variant could continue to spill over into animals and evolve, and therefore we can’t let our guard down and must continue to follow the precautions,” such as masking and social distancing, he said. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to emphasize that the risk of catching Covid from animals is very low. Jennifer Ramsey, wildlife veterinarian with Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks, fields calls from hunters about it, whom she urges to wear gloves and use good hygiene when handling carcasses. Indeed, for many hunters, talk of a potential virus in deer is nothing new. The CDC has long urged people hunting in areas with chronic wasting disease (CWD) to test the deer or elk before eating the meat, but there is no evidence of infection in people. The same appears clear with Covid, at least for now. “It doesn’t seem like it’s anything to panic about – but just something to be aware of,” said Ramsey.Families bereaved by Covid want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group fears the current arrangement, where Johnson has a final say over inquiry topics, could allow him to water down examination of how his own conduct and that of senior officials may have undermined public trust in infection control measures that the bereaved say cost lives. The group, which represents more than 6,000 families, is calling on the prime minister to commit to accepting terms of reference presented by the chair to the inquiry, Lady Hallett, after a public consultation. Under the Inquiries Act it is for the minister in formal charge to set the terms of reference, in this case the prime minister. “It’s becoming increasingly clear that it’s not good enough for him to just take the chair’s recommendations for the terms of reference as advice and he needs to commit to implementing them in full,” said Hannah Brady, a member of the bereaved group. “The fact his office is under police investigation for breaching the rules shows he is compromised and cannot be allowed to have a final say on what the inquiry looks into.” More than 159,000 people in the UK have died within 28 days of a positive Covid test and more than 180,000 had Covid on their death certificates. The call for control over the inquiry’s terms of reference to be handed to Hallett was backed by the Labour party. “This inquiry is one of the most important in living history yet it is being supervised by a government paralysed by total chaos,” said Fleur Anderson, the shadow paymaster general. “If the prime minister had any respect for the bereaved families he would accept and implement the chair’s recommendations in full, not half-heartedly or under advisement. We cannot allow an administration currently under police investigation to mark its own homework on how it handled the pandemic.” A government spokesperson said: “As the prime minister has previously stated, the Covid inquiry is set to begin its work in spring 2022. Bereaved families and the wider public will be consulted on the inquiry’s terms of reference before they are finalised.” Johnson wrote to Brady on Thursday reiterating his apology over the Downing Street gatherings. The death certificate of Brady’s father, Shaun, was signed on 20 May 2020, the same day a “bring your own booze” party was held in the Downing Street garden. Downing Street officials and Johnson have received questionnaires from the Met police as part of “Operation Hillman”, an investigation into events on eight dates between May 2020 to April 2021. Brady wrote to Johnson on 11 January after he claimed he did not know if he had attended the garden party. He later admitted he had. Brady accused him of treating it as “one big joke”. His reply, a month later, said: “Following the publication of Sue Gray’s report on 31 January, I apologised personally for the things that we simply did not get right and how this matter has been handled. I want to reiterate that apology to you.” But he said it would be “inappropriate for me to comment on particular dates while the Metropolitan police is currently carrying out its investigation”. The call for Johnson to step aside from setting the public inquiry terms of reference comes amid signs of slow progress in setting up one of the most wide-ranging and politically challenging public fact-finding processes in British legal history. In May 2021 Johnson announced that a statutory public inquiry would begin in spring this year and on 15 December he named Hallett chair, but it is looking increasingly unlikely that proceedings will start anytime soon, with some observers believing it may not begin until late summer. In December Johnson told parliament that after consulting the devolved administrations on the terms of reference for the inquiry – with Scotland having already announced its own inquiry – he would publish these in draft “in the new year”. Two months later they remain under wraps.Alexis Danielsen sat down and rolled up her sleeve. When the shot went into her arm, one thought flooded her mind: “Finally!” It was May 2021, and she was receiving her first Covid shot – in fact, her first immunization of any kind. She was 39. Danielsen grew up in an anti-vaccine household, views she held well into adulthood. When her son was born, she declined all vaccines for him. Then she hit a personal crisis, and started rethinking all her beliefs – including on vaccinations. It was like pulling on a thread and watching an entire sweater unravel, she said. “The Covid vaccine was the only logical choice after really re-evaluating what I believe in, what I actually believe is true,” Danielsen said. Danielsen partly credits her about-face to Lydia Greene and Heather Simpson, the founders of Back to the Vax, a support group for people like themselves: one-time vaccine skeptics who’d had a change of heart. “I want to be able to help stop people from going down that road, having been down it myself,” said Greene, now a nursing student. They say their goal is to help families find evidence-based answers to their questions. Vaccine hesitancy was a growing problem even before the pandemic, particularly among parents. Now, nearly one-third of American parents are opposed to vaccinating their children against Covid-19. Although parents still have a lot of questions about vaccines, advocates say that answering them can help. Online support and in-person community groups can help address longstanding hesitations, some of which arise from poor experiences in the medical system. For example, parents tell Greene they are still waiting for more information to come out on the Covid vaccines before deciding whether to vaccinate their children. “What’s missing is that, in the US right now, millions of children in that age group have been vaccinated and are followed closely with V-Safe and other databases to show the safety of the vaccine,” Greene said. Parents also believe that Covid is mild in children and poses a low risk to them. But kids can suffer from long-term effects – and continued transmission also affects their emotional wellbeing. In the US, more than 167,000 children have lost a caregiver to the virus, Greene said. “We’re seeing this massive epidemic of not just Covid but kids becoming orphans before their time.” Her two older children are vaccinated, but her three-year-old isn’t eligible yet, and when Covid struck their household the older children developed mild cases, but the younger boy needed to be taken to the hospital. “It affected everything,” Greene said: his lungs, his eyes, his ears. The decision isn’t between getting vaccinated and doing nothing, she said. It’s between getting vaccinated and getting Covid. “The question is, do you want to be vaccinated before you go through it?” Still, she understands exactly how vaccine hesitancy can be driven by the healthcare system. Back when she was anti-vaccine, Greene said she remembers doctors reacting with vitriol when they found out. “It just made me close myself off further – I felt really judged and upset and hurt and embarrassed.” Many people feel that way about the healthcare system, particularly those who haven’t been well-served by it in the past, said Jason Autar, chief operating officer of Oyate, a non-profit that has vaccinated 30,000 people in underserved communities in New York City. If you don’t have a regular physician or pediatrician, it’s difficult to find good answers to your questions, he pointed out – which is often the case due to “decades of negligence within our communities”, especially among communities of color, where Covid vaccine hesitancy is built upon years of inadequate healthcare and other systemic problems. “That’s what’s leaving us behind, and that’s what’s causing that hesitancy.” Being consistent and visible within the community is important, Autar said. “It can’t be just a moment here and now type of thing – ‘When we have a surge, we’re going to come back out and galvanize all those resources.’ No, we still are in a pandemic. And we need to still remain visible within hesitant communities. And that’s hard work.” He added: “Our approach has always been ‘we’re here to educate you about the vaccine, your options, your choices’, rather than take the approach of ‘you need to get this vaccine’.” Greene echoes that. Reaching hesitant families means withholding the kind of judgment that kept her ashamed, and understanding that people have legitimate concerns that need to be addressed. “It’s almost a knee-jerk reaction to just stop them in their tracks and correct them, but that’s only going to further alienate them. You have to listen to them with an open mind,” Greene said. And then health workers can start responding to those specific concerns and opening the lines of further communication. “Hear them out fully and say, ‘Oh, let me look into that for you.’ “They may not change their mind overnight, but by taking your time, you’re ensuring that they could change their minds,” Greene said. “But if it becomes this conflict and it’s a negative experience, you’re basically closing that door off completely.” Women make about 80% of health care decisions for families, on average, and vaccination decisions frequently fall to mothers. “There’s so much pressure for moms to do everything perfectly,” Greene said. Among middle-class mothers, for instance, there’s a message that “you can afford all these products to do better, and so you don’t need vaccines – vaccines are for poor people. “There’s so much influence on social media, on how to parent. Everyone wants to do their best. And it’s easy to kind of hack that desire to profit.” While social media has played an outsized role in driving this misinformation, it can also be used to provide accurate information, Greene said. “You can text a pediatrician or tweet at an infectious disease pediatrician who actually knows about kids and infectious disease, and they will answer your questions. It’s amazing.” When Danielsen told the public health nurse giving her the Covid shot that it was her first ever vaccination, the nurse was thrilled. “She was super excited for me,” Danielsen said. They kept in touch, and the nurse gave Danielsen and her son all of their vaccines over the next few months. For people who have skipped vaccinations in the past, building relationships like these can be incredibly helpful, Greene said. That way, “you’re not having to re-explain why you’re catching up on all these vaccines – because even just explaining yourself can bring a lot of anxiety.” Danielsen agrees about the importance of medical professionals creating a bond with patients. “Doctors and nurses need to know that there’s a lot of people who are really scared of them,” she said. “So many people have bad experiences in the medical system … [which] makes it really hard to trust them.” As for her own decision to finally get vaccinated, she was embarrassed to have waited so long, and worried she might face mockery or contempt for putting her son at risk. Instead, she’s been surprised to be welcomed into the scientific community. “Everyone is like, ‘Yeah, you changed your mind. That’s fucking awesome.’”The green tree dominates the image’s centre, towering over a tangle of highways, which are themselves rendered in shades of dull, newsprint grey. Printed along the bottom in red is a poetic message: Und Neues Leben Blüht aus den Ruinen – “And new life blooms from the ruins.” Created in 1979, this is just one of many anti-car posters created by the German political activist and graphic designer Klaus Staeck. Born in 1938 in the German town of Pulsnitz, north-east of Dresden, Staeck moved to West Germany in 1956. There, he trained as a lawyer and became active in the West German Social Democratic party before teaching himself graphic design. Beginning in the early 1970s, Staeck created posters that mimicked the iconography and language of political campaigns to poke fun at leaders whose policies, he believed, mainly benefited the wealthy and powerful. Occasionally, the car would become a stand-in for such policies, such as in 1974’s “For wider streets, vote conservative,” which shows a Rolls-Royce driving down a narrow street past modest houses, none of which have driveways. While his work now hangs in museums, his posters were originally plastered on buildings or displayed in store windows; smaller versions were handed to people as flyers and postcards. None of Staeck’s work bears his signature; he believes that having people engage with the central questions he poses in his art has always been more important than identifying the creator behind it. As Staeck said in a 1977 interview: “I have developed a technique that can be used to reach many people who have no interest in politics, but who are nevertheless concerned about inequality, injustice and social problems.” “He calls himself a ‘disturber of comfortable conditions,’” says Juliet Kinchin, a former curator at New York’s Museum of Modern Art, which holds a large collection of Staeck’s posters. “He uses humour and irony to make you laugh and yet your laughter is undercut constantly by the political provocation he offers.” This is certainly true of Staeck’s more blatant anti-car posters, which take the techniques the auto industry uses to sell happy motoring and turns them on their head. Consider, for example, a 1987 poster featuring a car beneath text that reads, “The new 12-cylinder: Our contribution to the general frenzy,” which sharply undercuts the notion that purchasing a luxury sports car benefits anyone, and least of all the society in which it is driven. A 1991 poster showing a sporty red car above text that reads, “This model performs particularly well in traffic jams” accomplishes something similar. That both posters use German-made BMWs to make their points is hardly a coincidence. The car’s threat to safety is highlighted in 1987’s “Car from the perspective of a traffic victim,” in which an automobile’s undercarriage takes up almost the entire poster, presenting the car not as the stuff of motorist fantasies but of pedestrian nightmares. “Right of way for bicycles” (1985) shows a tiny cyclist riding below a gigantic car tire as if to suggest that merely asserting that cyclists have the right of way on public streets is not enough to protect them from harm. When it comes to one of the car’s biggest harms, Staeck also pulls no punches. In “The future belongs to the car” (1984), no vehicle can be seen, just a clearcut forest that represents the auto industry’s pillaging of natural resources to fuel its continued growth. “No freedom without waste” (1979) shows a happy couple standing behind a muscle car as a plane takes off against an ominous burnt-orange sky, as if to say that nothing good can come from rampant consumerism. At 83, Staeck is still creating works that take on the powerful and call attention to the climate crisis. While his anti-car posters are a small fraction of his overall body of work, Kinchin sees them as a natural subject for an artist and provocateur from a country that pinned much of its postwar recovery on manufacturing cars and enabling their use. “The autobahn was, on one level, a signifier of Germany’s postwar economic miracle which, by the 70s, was being questioned everywhere,” she says. Today, with the car’s place in society continuing to be questioned, Staeck’s work remains as relevant as ever. “He’s very aware that this isn’t just a British or German or American issue,” says Kinchin. “It is truly a global debate.”Garth: “You ever get the feeling that Benjamin is not one of us?” Wayne: “Good call. It’s as if Benjamin wants us to be liked by everyone. I mean, Led Zeppelin didn’t write tunes that everyone liked. They left that to the Bee Gees.” Thirty years later, that exchange in Wayne’s World seems both righteous and quaint, a cultural relic from a time when battle lines were drawn more sharply between independents and mainstream “sellouts”. After all, young adults of today have more consequential things to worry about than whether their favorite indie band signed to a major label. But as Wayne (Mike Myers) and Garth (Dana Carvey), the hosts of a freewheeling cable access hit in suburban Illinois, fret about Benjamin (Rob Lowe), the corporate slickster imposing changes on the show, the point still stands. Not all art needs to have universal appeal. Nor does stupid nonsense. How the premise of Wayne’s World might land with different people of different generations and backgrounds is a fascinating litmus test, but a large part of the film’s enduring appeal is its 1992-ness. All movies are destined to become period pieces no matter when they’re set, of course, and there’s no doubt director Penelope Spheeris, the brilliant creator of the Decline of Western Civilization documentary trilogy, had a better sense than anyone about what independence stood for at the time. Yet Wayne’s World is a wondrous repository of pop arcana, with carbon-dated references to the babes of the day (Heather Locklear, Claudia Schiffer), Robert Patrick in Terminator 2, and commercials for Grey Poupon, Nuprin, Chia Pets and “The Clapper”. The extreme self-awareness owes something to the roots of the film itself, which began as a wildly popular recurring segment on Saturday Night Live, a mainstream institution if there ever was one. Wayne’s World frequently reminds the audience that it knows about the inherent hypocrisy of celebrating integrity and outsidership through a Paramount Pictures adaptation of an SNL skit. In the middle of Wayne and Garth’s tussles with Benjamin over the creative direction of the show, there’s a whole sequence where Wayne looks into the camera and says: “Contract or no, I will not bow to any sponsor” while smiling over Pizza Hut and Doritos. They will have their cake and eat it, too. And they will tell you about it with cake in their mouths. Still, selling out isn’t a binary proposition, but a matter of degrees. And Wayne’s World, both the movie and the show-within-the-movie, has a canny sense of what’s essential to its point of view. When Wayne first breaks the fourth wall and confides to the camera – a device the film uses to varied and hilarious effect – he confesses to still living with his parents and shares his “extensive collection of name tags and hair nets”. Wayne and Garth are thrilled to take real money for hosting the show out of a suburban basement and desperate enough not to bother sweating the details of the contract. They unwittingly sell their souls for two $5,000 checks and an oversized rum cocktail. Benjamin isn’t one of them. Lowe plays him as a corporate alien worthy of The Man Who Fell to Earth, the type of guy who would turn up at a football game wearing an NFL hat. He needs his latest girlfriend to explain the appeal of the show, just as he needs his advertising partner (Brian Doyle Murray), the owner of an arcade chain, to explain the appeal of video games to him. (“Gelatinous cube eats village. I think it’s terrific.”) Benjamin thinks in demographics and dollar signs, glomming on to whatever hip widget keeps him in his Chicago high-rise apartment, a “fully functional babe lair”, as Garth puts it. And even then, he needs to consult multiple books on how to pick up chicks. For SNL fans who already knew Wayne’s World as a skit exactly as silly and low-rent as the show Benjamin acquires, the plot confronts the question that hovered over the film: can this work at longer than five minutes? The answer would be an emphatic no every other time producer Lorne Michaels would try it: Coneheads, Stuart Saves His Family, A Night at the Roxbury, Superstar, The Ladies Man. But Spheeris and the screenwriters, Myers and Bonnie and Terry Turner, not only excel at supplying enough quality gags to fill 90 minutes, but sketch out Wayne’s actual world with more care and detail than expected. Their Aurora may be a suburban dead end, but it has character. The famed Bohemian Rhapsody singalong in Garth’s AMC Pacer represents everything the film does well: the camaraderie between friends, a genuine love of music and popular culture, and an eye for the redeeming quirks of suburbia, even though the Illinois landmarks were piped in via second unit. In order to sell out, you have to have something of value, and Spheeris finds it in the chemistry between Wayne, Garth, and their long-haired buddies in the crew, and how the show speaks to other humble bros who dream of partying with Alice Cooper, but are stuck ranking supermodels on the “stroke-ability scale”. Wayne’s World is about the fantasy coming to life, including Wayne winning romantic interest from a singer (Tia Carrere) several galaxies out of his league. It’s also aware that such fantasies only happen in the movies, no more plausible than a “Scooby-Doo ending”. Though Wayne’s World unloads an exhausting battery of catchphrases (“Schwing!” “… NOT!,” “Party on!” “That’s what she said”), most of it is still hilarious, particularly anything to do with Garth, who Carvey plays as a burnout and tech savant who thrives on the margins. Garth cannot function without Wayne – when he tries to do the show solo, he shrinks from the camera like the victim in a slasher movie – but Carvey uses his sidekick status to drift off into an unpredictable stream of consciousness. (“Did you ever find Bugs Bunny attractive when he put on a dress and played a girl bunny?”) Selling out does nothing for an authentic weirdo guy like Garth. No matter what happens, he’ll always be in a forest with Heather Locklear.For two straight days, the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, has fronted reporters to fend off questions after being drawn in to a slow-burning public service integrity saga. The complex story involves the removal and alleged wiping of an Integrity Commission employee’s laptop, amid questions over how to ensure the independence of the body charged with regulating lobbying in Queensland. The situation, which is largely separate from recent issues with the state’s Crime and Corruption Commission (CCC), has blossomed into what the state opposition and some media outlets are calling an “integrity crisis”. And now Palaszczuk is in their sights. What is the central allegation? Last month the state’s integrity commissioner, Dr Nikola Stepanov, announced her resignation amid complaints about interference in her office by the Queensland Public Service Commission (PSC). The integrity commissioner is an independent statutory office, whose responsibility is to advise MPs and public servants on ethics matters, and to regulate lobbying activities. The PSC – which is a central government agency assisting departments with managing their workforce – controls the integrity commissioner’s budget and staff. Stepanov raised concerns last year about interference in her office by the PSC, and complained thatthe PSC had gradually stripped her of resources and key staff. The Courier-Mail reported that in late 2020 Stepanov also raised concerns about the way an employee in her office had handled confidential documents. She requested a forensic examination of the employee’s laptop. In March 2021, the PSC removed and allegedly wiped the contents of a laptop. The CCC is currently investigating a complaint related to the deletion of files from the laptop. What was on the laptop? The Australian has claimed in a report that while Stepanov was unable to comment on what material was on the laptop “given the contents were subsequently deleted without my knowledge or consent”, the laptop contained documents relating to former Labor lord mayor of Brisbane, Jim Soorley and that, at the time, Stepanov was delving into a complaint that he had been involved in unlawful lobbying. Guardian Australia has been unable to independently verify those claims and understands that Soorley denies the allegations. How does the premier fit in? In April last year, Stepanov met with the former Department of Premier and Cabinet director-general Dave Stewart to raise concerns about interference by the PSC and the seizure of the laptop. Stewart agreed to commission an investigation. On Sunday it was revealed that about two weeks after this meeting, Palaszczuk referred historic complaints about Stepanov’s own conduct to a parliamentary committee that has oversight of her office. Those complaints were initially made in January 2019 and previously dismissed by the CCC. Is there any evidence the referral was improper? No, though the timing of the referral has certainly amped up the “integrity crisis” rhetoric that has dominated political debate in Queensland in recent weeks. “Stepanov Affair explodes at the top of Queensland corridors of power,” read the front page of the Sunday Mail this week. Stepanov told the Australian the timing of the referral was “of great interest to me, particularly in light of the fact I had raised formal concerns about conduct I was suspicious of through to the Public Service Commission in late 2020”. “I was dissatisfied with how those concerns were handled by the PSC and I escalated the matter to the Department of Premier and Cabinet.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It is unclear who brought the matter to Palaszczuk. She says she sought the advice of the solicitor general and was legally required to refer the matter to the committee, regardless of the seriousness. “I can’t discuss who made the complaint,” Palaszczuk said on Monday. “I pride myself in acting in accordance with the law and discharging my legal obligations according to that. “I have absolutely discharged my obligation that I was required to do.” Palaszczuk told reporters on Sunday she “never, never, never” wanted Stepanov to resign. What happens now? The CCC investigation into the alleged deletion of documents from the laptop is ongoing, and for the moment, that process provides some cover to calls for a more broad-ranging inquiry. Guardian Australia understands the fundamental issue raised by Stepanov is not that she believed direct political interference had occurred, but that interference in her office was part of a broader culture of opposing activities that might undermine public confidence in agencies or reflect poorly on governments. Key questions remain about the PSC’s effective defunding and alleged interference in the integrity commissioner’s office, which is supposed to be independent.A hidden forest of algae sponges and hydroids photographed at low tide; a stunning night image of green button polyps under ultraviolet light; and a beautiful shot of a honeycomb moray eel stuck on a ledge on a rocky shore. Mumbai may be a bustling metropolis, but photographer Sarang Naik’s aesthetic and vibrant images of marine life show a different side of the city. When Naik first started exploring the coast of urban Mumbai, India’s financial capital and home to Bollywood stars, he was astounded by the diversity of creatures that he came across – from hermit crabs, barnacles and a baby octopus to zoanthids (colourful disc-shaped relatives of coral) and prickly sea urchins. The intertidal zone or foreshore – where the land is exposed at low tide and is under water at high tide – is home to diverse marine life over different terrains, from mudflats to beaches and mangroves. “Most of my images have the creatures against the city in the background, reminding us that these creatures have been here way before us,” says Naik. “Even after three years of taking these shore walks, I am often blown away by the sight of some new coral or rare species. You don’t expect this kind of biodiversity in this concrete jungle.” Clockwise from top: a honeycomb moray eel stranded at low tide at Breach Candy; a nudibranch sea slug on coralline algae; zoanthids glowing in UV Light at Malabar Hill rocky shore; squid babies inside an egg mass; an Elysia sea slug feeding on algae in a tide pool Naik, who was born in the city, is a member of the Marine Life of Mumbai (MLOM), a collective of volunteers, marine biologists and enthusiasts co-founded by Pradip Patade, who played on Girgaum Chowpatty beach in southern Mumbai as a child. After he quit his job in human resources, Patade started teaching water sports and would walk along the shore taking pictures of the creatures he found there. He started MLOM with Abhishek Jamalabad, a marine biologist and certified diver, and Siddharth Chakravarty, an independent researcher in industrial fisheries, in February 2017. Exploring Juhu Beach at low tide Members upload their findings to iNaturalist, a biodiversity database accessed by expertsand have logged more than 484 species to date. MLOM’s Instagram page has records of sightings from common hairy crabs to pistol shrimp, nassa mud snails and even portuguese man o’ war. An octopus at Juhu Beach Jamalabad, who was born and raised in Mumbai, believes the intertidal zone has been largely neglected, not only in India, but across the world. “This is ironic because it’s one of the most accessible of all marine habitats and has a multitude of unique creatures. It also plays an important part in the ecology and lifecycle of creatures which live in the deeper parts of the ocean. “The Indian Ocean squid, a commercially important species, breeds and lays its eggs in the intertidal zone. Many reef fish spend their juvenile period in this zone to avoid predatory creatures. Many fishermen not only depend on the high seas for their catch but also on the intertidal zone. Oyster picking is restricted to this zone and is a female-dominated occupation, unlike fishing. It is also important for the physical integrity of the coast, as it keeps it safe from the impact of storms,” he says. Sejal Mehta, editor at MLOM, says that the resilience of the creatures found on Mumbai’s shores is constantly surprising. “As I started discovering the shores on different walks, from Haji Ali to Nepean Sea Road, what hit me was how prolific the marine life was in spite of all the plastic, sewage and marine pollution. It reminded me of the resilience of Mumbaikars who, despite all odds, thrive in this crowded and chaotic city. “Some creatures, like the gorgonian sea fan corals, which you expect to only see in crystal clear pristine waters, are found here along the shores. Every time the tide recedes, it’s a new world that you are looking at. It’s as dynamic as the ebb and flow of the tides,” she adds. A sea fan coral at Breach Candy; sponges, zoanthids, hydroids and algae at the Marine Drive shore; colourful nudibranch sea slugs Shaunak Modi, director of Coastal Conservation Foundation, a nonprofit organisation that evolved from MLOM in 2019 to extend the model beyond citizen science and take it to other parts of India, says: “Though I grew up close to Juhu Beach, the narrative was always about the pollution, dirt and garbage, and I never expected to find any life on these shores. On one of my shore walks, I saw a cratena sea slug, an alien-looking creature that wowed me and cemented my place in MOLM. I was amazed at how much biodiversity existed on these shores.” The diverse marine life exists despite the constant onslaught of development in the city. “We clearly should not build over the intertidal zone, but over 200 to 300 years this has been happening in Mumbai, with the shores getting landfilled for development,” says Jamalabad. The controversial Coastal Road project, which will run alongside the Arabian sea for 18 miles (29.2km), threatens corals and olive ridley sea turtles among other creatures, say campaigners. “There was a lot of noise about the corals and some of it was translocated, but what about the other creatures and their habitats that would be affected by this development?” says Modi. “The people who come on our walks are an extremely diverse bunch – from graphic designers to doctors and architects. All want to get to know their city better,” says Mehta. “Hopefully, this will translate into an increasing awareness and desire to protect the precious shores so that future generations can enjoy them.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresUnderdogs win Super Bowls by creating turnovers, playing clean and entering the fourth quarter within a score with a quarterback capable of creating some off-script magic. The Bengals hit on all three on Sunday. The game was right there for Cincinnati to close out. Then the Rams’ stars took over, and the flaws in a far-from-flawless Cincinnati roster were ultimately exposed – with a dose of help (as ever) from the league’s officials. The Bengals couldn’t tackle Cooper Kupp, at least not in time. And they could not block Aaron Donald, who led a defensive front that wound up dropping Joe Burrow seven times, a Super Bowl record. Sean McVay coached his Rams team into a hole, and his players dragged him out. What now for Burrow and the Bengals? There is a feeling when a new team rises that they will be plenty more chances for them to win a Super Bowl. Once they break through, it is believed, they will continue to do so as long as the foundations remain in place. “We’re a young team,” Burrow said after the game on Sunday. “You like to think that we’ll be back in this situation multiple times over the course of the next few years. We’ll take this and let it fuel [us] for the rest of our careers.” By any objective measure, the Bengals are primed for long-term success. They have one of the most promising, young rosters in the league – an all-world wide receiver room and talent dripping all over the defense. In Burrow, they have one of the NFL’s most valuable building blocks: a true franchise quarterback who can elevate average players into difference-makers. They head into the offseason with the third-highest amount of cap space in the league and a bevy of draft picks with which to try to upgrade a roster with obvious defects. This was not a team that was perfectly constructed to challenge for this title. They were two to three years ahead of schedule, at minimum. Only two quarterbacks in the salary cap era have been selected first overall in the draft and guided the team that drafted them to a Super Bowl: Peyton and Eli Manning. On average, it takes seven years. Burrow took the Bengals to the promised land in two. Burrow posted the second most valuable season of any quarterback in the league by EPA, a measure of a player’s down to down efficiency. He led crucial come-from-behind victories and piloted the team through the playoffs. And he did so while playing behind a gaggle of saloon doors. Burrow was pressured on nearly 40% of his dropbacks over the course of the season. The Bengals’ finished 30th in the league in pressure rate, the lowest ranking for any team that has reached the Super Bowl since such records began. Few quarterbacks have ever done so much with so little help. An MVP-caliber quarterback on a rookie-scale deal represents the greatest market inefficiency in the NFL. Land someone like Burrow and you’re able to reshuffle, re-enforce and beef up the roster in all three phases, adding depth and top-tier talent through free agency. Burrow and his receivers wreaked havoc over some of the league’s finest defenses in just their second season together. Can you imagine what they will do when Burrow gets some protection? What about if a Bengals defense loaded with B-pluses could sprinkle some stardust on its secondary? Sunday should, by all indications, be the first waypoint on a trip to championships, plural. But NFL championship windows are always shorter than anyone anticipates. Teams splinter. They become mired in cap hell. They lose key contributors, get sapped by injuries, or fall prey to the Disease of Me. Cam Newton’s Panthers disintegrated in record time. Russell Wilson and the Seahawks have not been back to a championship game since losing on the one-yard line in Glendale in 2015. Aaron Rodgers has not been to the Super Bowl in more than 10 years, and may retire with only one title to his name. The Bengals have cracks. Head coach Zac Taylor was not presiding over a 13-win juggernaut, rather a 10-win team that snuck into the playoffs on the back of a pair of late-game comebacks, then rolled past a pair of competent-to-bad teams in the playoffs, before upsetting the Chiefs with a one-off, second-half masterplan. Everything had to go right just to make the final dance. The path to the Super Bowl through the AFC next season and beyond is sticky. Even with fresh additions, the Bengals will trail the Chiefs and Bills as the favorites in the conference. Then there’s Justin Herbert and the Chargers to worry about, and Lamar Jackson and the Ravens. The league’s top, young quarterbacks are all concentrated in the same conference – and that’s without factoring in the looming specter of trades for Wilson, Rodgers, Deshaun Watson, and perhaps even Kyler Murray. For the next 10 years or more, the path to the Super Bowl in the AFC will run through the best and brightest that the league’s most important position has to offer. And there are only so many seasons and championship berths to go around. In the immediate aftermath of a Super Bowl defeat, it’s natural to look forward. To think of the next opportunity, the next shot at a title. But winning is hard. It requires skill and luck, for your starting right guard to stay healthy and your secondary to coalesce in time for the postseason; to find four quality pass-rushers, and your holder not to bobble any snaps. All the little things went Cincinnati’s way throughout the postseason, but they ran out of the players to push them over the line at the very end. Burrow and the Bengals should be back. But it’s hard to imagine a team getting a better crack to win the whole thing than leading late in the fourth with a quality defense against an ailing, stale offense. Two things can be true: the Bengals are years ahead of schedule; they missed a crucial opportunity to win it all. One final stop, one more explosive play, and the Bengals would be champions. Now, they’re back on the merry-go-round with everyone else.The home affairs department paid $16,000 to a senior official to rent his house through Airbnb for staff who needed to quarantine after returning from overseas. The deal was part of a $522,000 program to accommodate returning staff and comply with Australian Capital Territory Covid quarantine requirements. In Senate estimates on Monday the Labor senator Raff Ciccone said it was “mind-blowing” the department rented a house from the unnamed first assistant secretary on the basis it was the only suitable property available. But departmental secretary, Michael Pezzullo, defended the official’s conduct as “proper” because he identified the conflict of interest and offered to opt out of the program. According to officials, the department intended to use accommodation at the Australian National University for quarantine from September 2021, but was advised by ACT Health on 23 August to find alternatives. The chief operating officer, Justine Saunders, said that the department contacted owners of suitable properties through Airbnb “without knowing who the owners of the properties were”. Only “freestanding houses” were considered suitable under ACT guidelines, Pezzullo said, and there were “no other properties available” that fit the bill, according to Saunders. After he was contacted by a government department to rent his house, the home affairs officer contacted a senior member of the department to seek advice in relation to a conflict of interest, said Saunders. Pezzullo said: “The officer in question … went out of his way to suggest ‘this is going to be an issue in Estimates and elsewhere – best if I don’t participate in the program’. I think that’s exemplary conduct.” But due to the lack of accommodation available at short notice, the department proceeded with the rental, paying $15,981 to rent the employee’s property from 12 September to 30 November. Pezzullo said he had inquired into the contract and he was satisfied that “unless something else comes to my notice there was proper conduct engaged in”. Pezzullo said that if the officer attempted to disguise the transaction, or had not drawn it to the department’s attention, or had not offered to opt out of the program, he “might have a similarly jaundiced view” of it as Ciccone, but “those conditions aren’t apparent”. In total, 72 federal government officials including ministerial staffers returning from overseas were housed at a cost of $522,067 including $344,137 on accommodation and the rest on Covid-19 testing, cleaning and transportation cost. The department gave details of 18 properties ranging from one at Kaleen costing $155 a night to a $390-a-night rental in Kambah, but declined to identify which was owned by the first assistant secretary. Saunders said the department “explored hotels and apartments knowing they would be lower cost options, but they weren’t agreed by the ACT government due to the higher Covid risk”. “The other option we explored was … for officers to share facilities, noting they were homes – that wasn’t agreed to in all instances,” she said. “So as a result of our understanding of the demand, and meeting ACT government requirements, the option that was agreed to by the ACT government and home affairs as the most suitable was properties that could be identified through Airbnb.”The commonwealth has reached a “historic” financial settlement with three women who were found to have been sexually harassed by the former high court justice Dyson Heydon after an independent investigation. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, announced the compensation payout on Monday, along with an apology to the three women who have been negotiating with the commonwealth since the findings of an independent investigation undertaken by Vivienne Thom were released in 2020. In 2019, three former high court judges’ associates lodged complaints about Heydon’s behaviour, with Thom finding the former high court judge had sexually harassed six complainants. Asssociates Chelsea Tabart, Alexandra Eggerking and Rachael Collins have signed a non-disclosure agreement as part of the settlement, which Cash said reflected the commonwealth taking the claims “very seriously”. Josh Bornstein from Maurice Blackburn, who was representing the women, said he believed the claim was the first time a settlement had been reached for sexual harassment claims under the Sex Discrimination Act arising from findings against a serving federal judge. Speaking on behalf of the associates, Bornstein said the women were relieved the claims had been finalised, and happy with what he described as a “historic” settlement of compensation. “They have asked me to convey their strong conviction that women should not feel ashamed to pursue financial settlements in sexual harassment cases because sexual harassment will only start to recede when there is a clear recognition that it has a substantial cost to organisations and individuals who are implicated,” Bornstein said. “The settlement of these claims is of particular importance because it shows that women can succeed in the quest for truth and accountability in cases of sexual harassment, even involving some of the most powerful individuals and institutions in the land. “It’s not always the case, but sometimes the legal process can overcome a severe power imbalance.” Bornstein said the women’s complaints had led to a “profound effect” on the legal profession and had also prompted others to come forward with allegations, with a number of other investigations under way. “A cultural revolution is under way in the courts, law societies, barristers’ associations and law firms.” Bornstein said the settlement figure reflected the fact that the women had been unable to pursue the legal careers they had aspired to as a result of their harassment, with actuarial material presented as part of the negotiation showing the “loss of a legal career for a typical high court associate”. “Many former high court associates pursue successful careers as barristers and some are then appointed as judges.” In a statement, Cash praised the “bravery” of the women for coming forward. “These women have told us about what they have been through during, and since, their times as associates of the high court and the serious impacts on their lives,” Cash said. “We have listened to them and we apologise.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In response to the Thom inquiry, six recommendations for the high court were accepted and implemented, with Cash saying the court’s practices had been “transformed” as a result. Last year, Heydon issued a statement through his lawyers denying “emphatically any allegation of sexual harassment or any offence”. “In respect of the confidential inquiry and its subsequent confidential report, any allegation of predatory behaviour or breaches of the law is categorically denied by our client,” the statement said. “Our client says that if any conduct of his has caused offence, that result was inadvertent and unintended, and he apologises for any offence caused. “The inquiry was an internal administrative inquiry and was conducted by a public servant and not by a lawyer, judge or a tribunal member. It was conducted without having statutory powers of investigation and of administering affirmations or oaths.”That is where we will leave the live blog for Monday. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: The federal government will not try to pass controversial voter ID laws before the federal election but may seek to pass it if it is returned to government. Independent MP Zali Steggall has defended a $100,000 donation from a coal investor saying most people have through superannuation. The federal parliament marked the anniversary of the National Apology to the Stolen Generations. A 41-year-old man died in a helicopter crash in northern Tasmania, after crashing in a paddock while fighting a nearby fire. There were 19,680 new Covid-19 cases reported including: 6,184 in NSW, 7,104 in Victoria, 3,750 in Queensland, 1,027 in South Australia, 375 in the ACT, 408 in Tasmania, 757 in the Northern Territory and 75 in Western Australia. There were 25 Covid-19 related deaths reported including: 14 in NSW, two in Victoria, six in Queensland, and three in South Australia. We will be back again tomorrow with all the latest from the House and Senate estimates. A report into allegations against education minister Alan Tudge was given to Scott Morrison on 28 January, more than two weeks ago, but the government can’t confirm whether the matter will be dealt with before the coming election. Tudge stood aside from the ministry in December, following allegations from former staffer Rachelle Miller – with whom Tudge had a consensual relationship – that he had been emotionally and on one occasion physically abusive. Tudge denied the claims, but Morrison announced former bureaucrat Vivienne Thom would carry out an investigation into the allegations. Miller was critical of the process for not allowing investigation of conduct which might constitute criminal conduct. She declined to participate, claiming a “rush to judgment” and a “political fix” in a statement to the Sydney Morning Herald two weeks ago. Stephanie Foster, deputy secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, told a Senate estimates hearing on Monday evening that the report was complete, and had been given to the department on 28 January. It was then sent to the prime minister’s office on 28 January. Foster said she understood Morrison had been briefed on the contents of the report, and that he “has had the report available to him”. A spokesman for Morrison’s office told Guardian Australia that the matter is still in progress. Foster said the next steps were for those who participated in the investigation to have the opportunity to request parts of their testimony be kept confidential from any public release of the report, and that she would consider such requests. Finance minister Simon Birmingham, representing the prime minister in the hearing, said the report would eventually go to Tudge and Miller, but he could not confirm when. Birmingham said he did not believe Tudge had received any information on the report’s findings. Labor senator Katy Gallagher noted that Tudge has stood aside since early December, with Stuart Robert acting as education minister, and asked whether the matter would be finalised before the federal election. Tudge has already said he plans to contest his seat of Aston. Birmingham responded “I’m sure that’s the hope” but said he wouldn’t “pre-empt” the next steps or timing. Oh I should add, they took on notice questions about the procedure for searching phones, and how often it’s done. Those are questions the department wouldn’t provide a response to me on. Australian Border Force officials in Senate estimates have defended powers they have to examine people’s phones going through customs on entry into Australia, in response to this story I wrote last month. The home affairs secretary, Mike Pezzullo, said the powers under the Customs Act to ask people to hand over their phones and passcodes don’t allow officers to just go through people’s phones looking for anything: You can’t just, to coin a phrase, surf the phone looking for any matter, it has to be related to matters that are within the jurisdiction of the Border Force. Importantly, he clarified people are not obligated to hand over their passcodes: The compulsion to hand over a passcode is not in the act, it’s a request, expedite the process by which a seized phone can be examined. Border Force commissioner Michael Outram said there were “a lot of people” who bring into Australia prohibited materials such as child abuse material on their phones. Not suggesting this person for me had that sort of material on their phone, but there are other things they may search for as well but they won’t be on some, some surfing exercise just to look for, you know, satisfying for fun. He says who is picked to be searched can be based on intelligence, and defended the fact that warrants were not required for searches. This is a global, sort of customs issues is there’s an entitlement for customs services, to search passengers goods and bags for things that either dutiable or that may be may contain prohibited imports ... So an international airport doesn’t operate exactly in law the same as somebody in the street. I accept that. Sad news out of Tasmania, the 41-year-old man in the helicopter crash has died, police have confirmed: Following next of kin notifications to family, police can now confirm a 41 year old Northern Tasmanian man has died following a helicopter crash near Pipers Brook this afternoon. A report will be prepared for the coroner. The scheduled 5.45pm press conference has been postponed with no time yet set. AAP has some of the contents of LNP MP Andrew Laming’s valedictory speech. Laming has represented the Queensland electorate of Bowman – made up of parts of Brisbane and North Stradbroke Island – since 2004. In his valedictory speech, Laming detailed some of his proudest moments in parliament – and some self-confessed failures. He recounted his challenge against then prime minister John Howard for Liberal party leadership in 2007 as “messy”. “I was tired of what was happening between Howard and [Peter] Costello and decided I would announce my leadership bid for the following day at party room,” he said “I thought I’d run those lines past a group of staffers ... it was only later I was told one of the staffers in the group was John Howard’s son.” He called the Queensland LNP team a “rag tag band who do great stuff” in Canberra and said he had been an activist from the backbench. “It is now this side of politics that is potentially the most progressive in reforming, rebuilding and re-imagining social policy,” he said. Victoria police have fined five state Coalition MPs for not wearing masks at parliament last week, including leader Matthew Guy. An update on the helicopter crash in northern Tasmania. Tasmania police say a man has been critically injured following the crash near Pipers Brook just after 3pm this afternoon. The pilot was the sole occupant, and was critically injured in the crash in the paddock. The man is believed to have been fighting bushfires in the Lebrina area. TFS acting deputy chief Jeff Harper said that it was a tragic incident and our hearts go out to the man’s family and loved ones at this difficult time” Our thoughts are also with our people and others who have been working very closely with the man involved to help fight the Lebrina fires. We will be working with Police, the Australian Transport Safety Bureau and other authorities so that this incident is fully investigated. It is a very tragic situation, especially because it has involved someone who was working hard to fight the Lebrina fires to help our community safe. Understandably this is a very distressing incident for everyone involved and we will be ensuring our people have access to all available support. The Australian Transport Safety Bureau will be advised and will undertake an investigation. Just circling back on the financial settlement over sexual harassment claims against former high court justice Dyson Heydon, Labor’s shadow minister for women, Tanya Plibersek and shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus have called on the government to explain why the settlement is being kept secret. They welcomed the settlement, and the way the chief justice Susan Kiefel dealt with the allegations but said taxpayers deserve to know how much the settlement has cost. They said: Australian taxpayers who are paying for this settlement, have every right to know precisely how much Justice Dyson Heydon’s appalling behaviour has cost them. The only basis for such confidentiality would be a specific request from the victims. The Dyson Heydon case also highlights the need to fully implement all 55 recommendations of the Sex Discrimination Commissioner’s groundbreaking Respect@Work Report to help keep Australians safe from sexual harassment at work. In April last year Scott Morrison promised he would adopt every recommendation in the Respect@Work Report. As always with Mr Morrison it’s all announcement and no delivery and to date he has failed to deliver the legislative changes proposed by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner. An Albanese Labor Government will fully implement all 55 recommendations of the Sex Discrimination Commissioner’s Report to help keep Australians safe from sexual harassment at work. Per Capita research fellow Osmond Chiu has written that the amping up of the political rhetoric around China in the lead-up to the federal election could not only cause issues for the government electorally, but have longer term implications for the country: He said: There is a much larger, more important, and longer-term danger from the tactics. If the government is understood to be weaponising national security intelligence about foreign interference for domestic political gain, like the boy who cried wolf, it will have a hard time getting people to trust in such claims in the future, when national security may actually be at stake. Voters may suspect any given allegation has been driven by political motives. The opaqueness of the allegations, based on leaks from anonymous sources, including those to which the government may imply it has special access, already make it difficult for journalists or opposition politicians, much less citizens, to verify details. Last year the TGA changed the rules for GPs prescribing ivermectin to treat Covid-19, banning it from being used for anything other than approved conditions. Here is government MP Russell Broadbent saying he used the unproven treatment when he got Covid. The ABC reports he hasn’t responded to questions on how he obtained the ivermectin. The Australian federal police have moved protesters who were camping out of the Exhibition Park in Canberra, with three arrested. Police said the operation was generally peaceful but a man and a woman were charged with trespass and a second man was charged with trespass and resisting a territory official. No vehicles were towed and no camping equipment was seized. The EPIC site will now be available for the Canberra Show and other events. The AFP said the campers who are trying to find alternative camping sites must only camp in designated sites otherwise it is an offence and they can be moved on. The AFP also said “low level protest activity” may occur around parliament this week. Here’s some more on today’s 62 cases in Western Australia, via AAP. The tally includes a person in a southwest regional area who was infectious while in the community. Thirteen travel-related cases were also recorded, taking the number of active cases to 509 with no one currently in hospital. But WA Health noted on Monday that testing numbers remained low with just 4351 people receiving PCR tests in the reporting period. Premier Mark McGowan acknowledged over the weekend that state-run PCR clinics were well below capacity. “The chances are that there are cases out there we don’t know about – probably in large numbers – but we are encouraging people to get tested,” McGowan said. The Australian Medical Association WA president, Mark Duncan-Smith, has speculated the number of cases in the WA community could be up to five times higher than the reported figures. The premier said PCR testing remained WA’s preferred method for now despite the state continuing to add to its stockpile of rapid antigen tests. Tasmania police have released this statement about reports of a helicopter crash in northern Tasmania: Police and emergency services are responding to a report of a helicopter incident in northern Tasmania. Initial reports suggest a helicopter has crashed in a paddock while responding to a bushfire near Lebrina in north-east Tasmania. Details of injuries are not able to be confirmed at this stage. More information will be released when available. New Zealand has announced 981 cases of Covid-19 today, continuing a run of record-breaking rises in infections. The latest additions mean there are 4,960 active cases recorded across the country – but experts say the true number is likely much higher given the lag in test results and the fact testing is only advised for those with symptoms or who have been a direct contact of a case. Prof Michael Baker, an epidemiologist, told RNZ that actual case numbers could be around five to 10 times higher than those recorded. “Most people with the infection, particularly when they’re highly vaccinated, will have very few symptoms, and many will have no symptoms at all – but they can still transmit the virus,” he said. “For every case that’s recorded we might have another five people out there who have very mild symptoms that are not being tested.” The numbers also reflected the situation of a week ago – actual daily infections would be several multiples higher, he said. The government also announced travellers coming to New Zealand from Australia will have to self-isolate for just seven days, down from 10, under new guidelines announced by the New Zealand government. The border opens to New Zealanders coming from Australia on 27 February. Tehan is asked whether the potential for conflict could lead to a rise in petrol prices in Australia. He says: It could depend on the type of action that occurs – I mean, I must say again, we hope it won’t occur – but if it does, depending on the type of action that occurred, I think that would depend on the type of magnitude we would see. On whether the Australian LNG industry could see this as a sale opportunity, he says: There potentially is, and I’m sure they’re looking at those others opportunities, but the Australian government is mindful that we have to ensure that we have plenty of supplies here, and that our industry can continue to operate and have a price which means that the gas is affordable here. The trade minister, Dan Tehan, is on ABC News’ Afternoon Briefing and is asked about whether people should be alarmed about the situation in Ukraine. He says: The signals are pointing to the fact that there might be something that’s going to occur in the next few days, so that’s why the Australian government is acting. He says the intelligence is based on what other countries are doing: [It is based on] assessments that we get from either our own agency or from foreign governments, and then just watching what other governments are doing. So for instance, I think we’ve seen what the US is doing, we’ve seen what other like-minded countries [are doing], whether it be the UK or European countries. We’re obviously taking action ourselves in moving ... embassy personnel from Kyiv. All these things point to the fact that there is a deep concern about what might occur. The head of the home affairs department says the prime minister’s WeChat troubles look to be a case of terms and conditions, but couldn’t completely rule out foreign interference, AAP reports. Scott Morrison was denied access to his WeChat account last year and was unable to regain control despite numerous attempts to contact parent company Tencent, in a move labelled as foreign interference by his own MPs. But department secretary Mike Pezzullo told a Senate estimates hearing the case appeared to be a prima facie terms and conditions matter instead of foreign interference. “I couldn’t rule it out completely but on the surface it appears to be a terms and conditions issue,” he said. “But sometimes things can be manipulated in a way that can be opaque and nefarious.” Pezzullo said any matter involving the prime minister should be treated with caution. “I would take a very sceptical and cautious view until I got to the bottom of who the actor is, who was behind that transfer, who impelled it,” he said. “Until I got to the bottom of that I wouldn’t be drawing conclusions either way.” Pezzullo said he didn’t have any personal concerns with politicians using WeChat, with it not constituting a “vector” of foreign interference. But the secretary noted the platform formed part of a larger question about how social media interacted with electoral integrity. Deputy secretary Andrew Kefford said the onus remained on all people, not just politicians, to ensure they understand the rules and conditions of platforms they sign up to and use. Kefford reiterated that Tencent was dealing with the matter as a potential breach of its terms and conditions. “The advice we’ve had from the company most recently is that it’s being dealt with as a transfer of ownership under the platform’s rules,” he said. “Generally speaking we have found Tencent to be keen to assist to the extent it can to ensure the election is not compromised by foreign interference.” Still plenty more to come, but I’m going to leave you now in the capable hands of Josh Taylor. See you tomorrow! Police have confirmed that human remains found last year are those of missing campers Carol Clay and Russell Hill, the ABC is reporting. A $70m contract for a western Sydney business powering the city’s shift to electric buses will begin a “manufacturing renaissance” in NSW, according to the premier. AAP reports that Dominic Perrottet says the contract for Custom Denning to deliver a further 79 electric buses from its St Marys factory will create 40 apprenticeships, as local manufacturing becomes a “substantial focus” of the government: This is all about creating local jobs for local people to help our local communities thrive. Custom Denning’s electric bus was approved by the Transport for NSW procurement panel last year and more than 20 had previously been ordered after trials by bus operators around Sydney. The new buses are slated to deliver services in Sydney’s inner west. Committee for Sydney resilience director, Sam Kernaghan, said the contracts for electric buses were “a big step in the right direction”: We encouraged the government to use its procurement power to help local industry help the state reach its net zero targets, and that’s exactly what’s happening here. The government plans to transition about 8,000 diesel and gas buses to electric by the end of the decade. The NSW transport minister, David Elliott, said the electric shift was part of “the next industrial revolution” that will “see cities evolve as much cleaner destinations”. The Unions NSW secretary, Mark Morey, said the announcement wouldn’t “make up for a decade of neglecting local manufacturing jobs and industry”. The government should commit to building the remaining 7,900 buses it will need before 2030 in NSW as well, he said. Adam Morton reports: The Morrison government is spending more than $31m on an advertising campaign claiming Australia is ‘making positive energy’ under its leadership and cutting greenhouse gas emissions. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has announced that three former high court judges’ associates who made sexual harassment claims against former high court justice Dyson Heydon have had those claims resolved. “We have listened to them and we apologise,” Cash says. Embattled Liberal MP Andrew Laming is giving his valedictory speech. The health minister, Greg Hunt, has quite the filing system. Back in Senate estimates, some strange scenes as Labor’s Katy Gallagher asks about those leaked text messages between Scott Morrison and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, back in November. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, as well as the finance minister, Simon Birmingham, are up before the finance and public administration committee. Gallagher is asking Birmingham, representing the PM, about how those texts ended up in the Daily Telegraph newspaper. You might remember it came in the wake of the Aukus agreement and French fury over Australia scrapping the Naval Group’s contract to make our submarines, and then Macron’s famous “I don’t think, I know” line when asked at the G20 if he thought Morrison had lied to him. Gallagher asked a line of questions about how the texts were leaked, and who knew. Birmingham initially claimed he had answered those questions previously in Senate estimates, and simply referred Labor senators to the Hansard. But Labor senator Tim Ayres pointed out that the leaked texts were reported on 1 November – after the last round of Senate estimates ended in late October. After an awkward pause, Birmingham apologised, saying he thought he had answered questions on the texts in estimates previously, but admitted he may have been thinking of answers he gave in the Senate’s question time in November. Pressed for more answers by Gallagher, Birmingham responded: I don’t have an answer for particular newspapers and their publications. Gallagher: How did that happen? Who leaked it? Birmingham: I don’t know in terms of newspaper sources. Gallagher went on to ask: How would a private text message from the prime minister, the leader of our country, received from the leader of the French, come to appear word for word in a News Corp paper? If it wasn’t authorised by the prime minister himself? Birmingham and officials of the PM’s department later said that there was no investigation into how the messages leaked. Gallagher responded: So the whole of the APS [Australian Public Service] isn’t worried about this at all? ... In that case, you all must know it’s from the prime minister and his office, otherwise you’d imagine every security agency across the APS would come crashing down, wanting to examine how the PM’s private communications ends up in a newspaper. And ... back to questions. Labor asks if the prime minister regrets spending money to support Clive Palmer’s lawsuit against Western Australia. “After further discussions... I took the decision to withdraw from that case,” Morrison says. Western Australia has recorded 75 new Covid cases, 62 of them local. WA Health says no one is in hospital. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese seeks leave to move a motion that the house notes the story I linked below on rapid antigen tests, what the prime minister knew and when, and an entire litany of other failures he is claiming are the PM’s fault during the pandemic. He’s trying to suspend standing orders to debate the motion. Now there’s a division over whether Albanese should no longer be heard. And the ayes have it. (Labor’s Clare O’Neil had another go. Another division. We can probably move on to other matters now.) Can the PM confirm he didn’t order enough rapid tests or vaccines, didn’t hold a hose during the bushfires, and so on, asks Albanese. Morrison is reeling off a list of the federal government’s achievements, from electricity bills to job creation. Let me know if you want the full list. Labor’s deputy leader, Richard Marles, raises a point of order. And that point of order is “irony”, he says. (Irony is not recognised as a valid point of order.) Further to the below about rapid antigen tests, News.com.au reports today that Morrison had been briefed on the potential for rapid testing . The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, asks why the government did not order enough rapid antigen tests. They weren’t even approved at the time, Scott Morrison said: At no point [before Omicron] had any health advisory body, any chief health medical officer, any health department, not the prime minister and cabinet department or any department, had a recommendation that the government should be engaged in rapid antigen testing. In fact, they were not even approved by the TGA until November of last year. Then he mostly spoke about vaccinations, so Labor’s Tony Burke calls another point of order. Frydenberg has turned another Dixer into an attack on Labor. Albanese says, pointing at Peter Dutton: This can’t be in order for him [Frydenberg] to just go on for three minutes, not in his portfolio, with a character attack on myself and the leader of the house. If you don’t think of me, think of Peter! (I’m not sure why Dutton is invoked.) “I thought he was going to table another set of finger paintings,” Frydenberg responds. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor asks: Has the prime minister asked the Australian federal police to investigate the source of the major cabinet leak designed to undermine the prime minister? Morrison says he’s “mistaken”. Leave has not been granted for Albanese to table a hand-written essay from his first year studying economics. Dutton complains, saying it’s a two-pager with pictures drawn in crayon. Oh dear. Frydenberg is attempting to conflate the Greens and Labor, and has even dragged the idea of “death duties” out of its grave. (The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, talked about an inheritance tax 30 years ago, and they’re trying to jolt it back to life.) Independent MP Helen Haines wants a new hospital for Albury-Wodonga (she represents the electorate of Indi). She asks if the federal government is funding regional hospitals. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, says the feds will considering helping, but that state governments have a role to play (in terms of infrastructure). The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, says: It has been widely reported that last week a number of the prime minister’s colleagues blocked an anti-corruption commission with retrospective powers. Why are the prime minister’s colleagues concerned about an anti-corruption commission with the power to investigate corrupt acts committed before it was established? Fletcher is up again (I forgot to say earlier, he’s representing the attorney general Michaelia Cash in the house). He says the question is misconceived and that the integrity legislation has hundreds of pages. Hundreds! He says: We have a detailed model. We have committed ... $150 million in funding and it is clear the commonwealth commission will be able to investigate past conduct and matters prior to its commencement. A federal integrity commission would “become a reality” if Labor supported his legislation, Morrison says. The government proposal has been criticised as being too weak. Scott Morrison is in full flight on Russia’s coercion and “threats of violence” against Ukraine in response to a Dorothy Dixer. He also calls on China to denounce Russia. Normally we’re not that interested in Dixers, but that was pretty hairy-chested, and interesting that he dragged China into it. The urban infrastructure minister, Paul Fletcher, says it is “quite curious to be on the receiving end of lectures about probity and public policy from the member for Ballarat”, but that he won’t comment on cabinet discussions. Labor’s Catherine King kicks off with a question about a cabinet leak about a federal integrity commission discussion, and the price paid for a piece of land. Aaaaaand, the to-and-fro over points of order begins again. Albanese asks if Dutton can withdraw, the speaker says it’s too late – the request should have been made at the time. And that’s question time off and running (you can be the judge about whether Beahan was successful in lifting the standards). Speaker Andrew Wallace is talking about last week’s brouhaha, in which the defence minister, Peter Dutton, was making unfounded comments about the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, and his relationship with China. Belatedly, the speaker says the comments were out of order. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, says Beahan exuded geniality, and is talking about a tragic event where a younger Beahan survived a car crash but his girlfriend did not. He wanted to get things done in the Senate, Albanese says, even though he didn’t initially like the idea of being there – and, as Senate president, he tried to lift the standard of question time. Scott Morrison is now paying tribute to Michael Beahan, a WA Labor senator who died earlier this year. He’s referring to a speech Beahan once made about the importance of being civil to those you disagree with, and his advocacy for having more Indigenous art in the parliament. In just a minute ... Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to political reporter Amy Remeikis about how this tumultuous year inspired her book On Reckoning: The “Jacqui Lambie of the left”. Intriguing. Paul Karp on the candidate challenging the health minister, Greg Hunt: Here’s Tess McClure on the prime minister’s ukulele rendition: There have been 375 new Covid cases and no deaths recorded in the ACT. Fifty-one people are in hospital, with four in intensive care and two on ventilators. The Coalition won’t pursue voter ID laws again before this election but could try again if it is returned to office later this year, finance minister Simon Birmingham said. Appearing before a Senate estimates committee on Monday, Birmingham was asked by Greens senator Larissa Waters about the government’s controversial push last year to require voters to provide identification at the ballot box. The Coalition decided to scrap the push, following a fierce backlash from Labor, the Greens and civil society groups. With just two Senate sitting days between now and the next election, due before the end of May, it was unlikely that the bill would come back up for consideration again anyway. But while Birmingham confirmed it wouldn’t be tried again in this term of parliament, he said: If after the election, there were an opportunity to look at those sorts of reforms, which have been recommended by multiple reports of the joint standing committee on electoral matters, then I’m sure we would do so. Liberal senator James McGrath, chair of that electoral matters committee, introduced a private senator’s bill on voter ID last week. Birmingham said any senator was entitled to introduce private bills, but that the government wouldn’t be calling it on for debate in this parliament. Birmingham said it was “not the government’s intention to pursue that matter before this election”, adding: “Disappointingly, we would say.” Waters, asking if the government might revisit the proposal if the Coalition won the election, added: “Hopefully you won’t be in a position to do so.” Liberal senator James Paterson jumped in to make a dig about a “Labor-Greens alliance”. A smiling Birmingham called it an “astute observation”, saying: “Voter identification can be done in a way that does not disenfranchise.” Burney speaks about the potential for future failure, and points to the low vaccination rates in Indigenous communities, and how much it worries her: Every day I hold my breath and hope because that failure could mean me, and for far too many that carry our culture and language. Our elders are our libraries. They are our internet and they cannot be replaced. She says former prime minister John Howard didn’t see the apology as a moment for change, and until the government changed, “we had to hold our breath and wait”. And so Kevin Rudd apologised for the hurt our country did to us, our families, and tribal nations. She ends her speech (and all speeches in the House on the anniversary) by looking forward as to the next steps for reconciliation, including a voice to parliament. Now is the moment straight on the time. It’s here to give First Nations people our voice in the decisions made about us ... A Labor government will not force this country to hold his breath again. We will move on a referendum to get the voice established in the constitution ... These steps in your statement are fundamental, necessary and urgent. But they are not magical. They do not arrive out of the blue. They are not a storm to be weathered. They are the next steps in our reconciliation journey, a journey over a century-long, a journey Aboriginal people started on decades before we were counted as citizens ... It is up to us as a parliament, as a people, to resolutely take the next steps and lay down our own marker. We can do this. Labor MP and Indigenous Australian Linda Burney is now speaking. She is emotional as she says the apology was a “cultural moment shared by the country”, but noted it would be two more years after the speech before a First Nations person would be in parliament to mark it. We should never leave it unstated just how long the reconciliation journey has been in our country. The apology was not the work of one person only, was not the sentence that ends the story. It was a way marker and a century of work – a marker that shows how far we have come, but showed us what we can achieve and how much further we have to travel. Wyatt says survivors of the stolen generations are still disconnected from their families: Culture interrupted, and families disrupted. Wyatt has announced survivors from the NT and the ACT will get free financial and legal advice while they are applying for redress through the national scheme. “We cannot give back lost childhoods,” Wyatt says. Here are some photos from Mike Bowers as people arrived: The minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, has greeted the other Indigenous MPs, saying their numbers are small “but growing”. It was “profound” to hear the government announce the wrongs against his people, he says. “Together, we said sorry, and we are still sorry.” Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is now speaking on the Stolen Generations, and has again committed to adopting the Uluru Statement from the Heart. Morrison said: Our journey ... continues. If the apology itself was a milestone in that journey, each anniversary has been a yardstick of how we have travelled since. But because of a “misguided faith” in “telling over listening”, the government came up with a new national plan. He is talking about redress schemes, and a new national cultural precinct planned for Canberra, Ngurra. “It will tell stories long after all of us who are here have departed,” he said. It would tell those stories in truth, honesty, love, patriotism and pride, he said. Parliament is marking the anniversary of the National Apology to the Stolen Generations today. Scott Morrison is making a ministerial statement. The prime minister has apologised for brutality, for “lives damaged and destroyed”. “We are sorry,” he said, but: “Sorry is not the hardest word to say. The hardest is ‘I forgive you’.” Hm. New guidelines here – hopefully will help families see their loved ones: This morning, home affairs officials have confirmed that the department paid $15,981 to an unnamed first assistant secretary in the department for a property listed on AirBnb used to house a ministerial delegation from September to November. Chief operating officer Justine Saunders said the department contacted owners of suitable properties through AirBnB “without knowing who the owners of the properties were”. Saunders said: One of those properties was a home affairs officer. The home affairs officer, upon receipt of a request from it, was only referred to a government agency seeking to rent the premises, identified that perhaps it could be particularly related to this initiative that home affairs was now responsible for. And as a result, he reached out to a senior officer of the department to seek advice in regards to a conflict of interest. The department secretary, Michael Pezzullo, said he inquired into it but was satisfied that “proper conduct was engaged in” because the officer self-identified to the department that his property was being rented and offered to remove the property from the pool. According to Saunders there were “actually no other properties available” and property was required at short notice. Labor’s Raff Ciccone said it was “mind-blowing” that only one property fit the bill. Pezzullo said hotels and student accommodation were deemed not suitable, so the department needed a freestanding house at short notice. Pezzullo said that if the officer had attempted to disguise the transaction, or not drawn it to the department’s attention, or not offered to opt out, he “might have a similarly jaundiced view” of it, but “those conditions are not apparent”. The Australian Council of Social Services (Acoss) has called on the government to address the climate crisis in its next budget as a matter of urgency. Acoss wants the government to forego tax cuts for the wealthy and invest instead in social security, a green energy transition, and a housing program. The calls form part of the peak body’s submission to the federal treasury ahead of the federal budget – and, of course, the election. The submission calls for increases in all income support payments to at least the level of the pension ($69 a day); investment in energy efficiency improvements for 1.8m low-income homes to the tune of $5,000 per dwelling; emergency energy debt relief of $1,000 a household; the establishment of an Energy Transition Authority to manage “fair and inclusive transition for fossil fuel dependent workers and communities”; and a $7bn, 20,000-dwelling social housing package to be rolled out over the next 3 years. Acoss chief executive Cassandra Goldie said raising the base rate of welfare payments and a focus on employment ought to be “a high priority” for the country, and pointed again to the experience of doubled jobseeker payments during Covid lockdowns as evidence of what investment in social security can do. She said: I can’t tell you, the number of times people have come to us … to say that it was profoundly different, that period when the unemployment payment was more adequate, and the way that changed lives. But what we also showed is that we actually had the real life experiment of what it means for the economy when you properly prioritise putting resources into the hands of people who will actually spend it. The reallocation of resources away from fossil fuel subsidies, on which Australia spends more than $10bn annually, to climate crisis solutions would both address existing and prospective inequity, and contribute to warding off the catastrophic triggers of inequity in the form of climate-related disasters, the submission argues. And it’s not just extreme weather events – renters and people on low incomes are also unable to access large swathes of the renewable energy market as consumers, making a market-based response to climate crisis wholly inadequate. Without appropriate and adequate social security, transition from fossil fuels economy to a green economy would exacerbate inequalities as industries shut down. But this also provides economic opportunities, and transition could be managed in conjunction with appropriate investment in social services. Goldie said: We’ve always known that the effects of climate change would hit people on low incomes both hardest and longest and that’s exactly what’s happening… This is not about a trade off between strengthening the economy and the social services and safety net. We’ve actually demonstrated just how powerful it is both socially and economically, for us to be investing more [in the latter]. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 25 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 375 In hospital: 51 (with four people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 14 Cases: 6,184 In hospital: 1,649 (with 100 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 6 Cases: 3,750 In hospital: 514 South Australia Deaths: 3 Cases: 1,027 In hospital: 214 (with 18 people in ICU) Tasmania Cases: 408 In hospital: 12 (with one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 2 Cases: 7,104 In hospital: 465 (with 66 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 75 (62 local, 13 ‘other’) In hospital: 0 A pandemic plan written two years before Covid hit should have been shown to the minister, the home affairs department says. In estimates, secretary Mike Pezzullo said he and then minister Peter Dutton knew there were stress tests being done to see how the department would handle a crisis, but hadn’t seen a submission. AAP reports the Australian National Audit Office revealed a submission on that testing had been written but it wasn’t sent up the chain. Pezzullo said: We did our job on the substance, we didn’t do our job on the paperwork. Six people have died with coronavirus in Queensland. The state recorded 3,750 new cases, and 514 people have been hospitalised. Tasmania has recorded 408 new Covid cases, with 12 in hospital and one in intensive care. Trade minister Dan Tehan warns Russia faces strong economic sanctions if it invades Ukraine. “We’ll have to play our part in that regard,” he says, according to AAP. Earlier, treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the situation had reached a “dangerous juncture”. Australia’s diplomatic staff have been evacuated from Kyiv and are in a temporary office in Lviv, closer to the Polish border, as the situation deteriorates. The Guardian team is closely watching Senate estimates – Adam Morton is watching the environment department: Crown Resorts paused trading this morning to announce it has agreed to a $9b takeover by Blackstone. Blackstone will acquire all of Crown’s shares for $13.10 each. Crown chairman Ziggy Switkowski said that despite some uncertainty, the board believed the deal was “an attractive outcome for shareholders”. More to come, but you can read Ben Butler’s piece here as background to the takeover bid: Thousands of nurses in New South Wales will strike this week, AAP reports. The protest is part of an ongoing dispute over staff levels and pay. The aged care workforce and pay are sure to be hot topics in Canberra this week as well. Haven’t heard much from the protesters this morning (they were moved on over the weekend but vowed to return). But if you missed it, have a gander at Van Badham’s piece. It’s vaguely (read: specifically) terrifying: Two deaths in Victoria over the past 24 hours, and 7,104 new Covid cases. Sixty-six people in intensive care, 18 on ventilators. In New South Wales, 14 people have died with Covid. 1,649 were hospitalised, and 100 are in intensive care: Michael McGowan has taken a look at the weekend’s byelections: “It is potentially going to be a real problem in a few years’ time.” Calla Wahlquist has written about living with cancer during the pandemic: Prime minister Scott Morrison’s 60 Minutes interview is hot on everyone’s lips this morning, with a fair bit of shade at the ukulele bit – I’ve heard half a dozen Labor doorstops or interviews this morning, and they’ve all had a go at the PM’s shaky rendition of April Sun In Cuba. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese told AM radio: This government doesn’t have an agenda for parliament this week. I don’t know what we are dealing with this week. That’s why you have a prime minister who is engaged in pretending he’s a fighter pilot, or hair shampoo-er, or a racing car driver, or a ukulele player. Morrison’s wife, Jenny, said she was “disappointed” at the reception former Australian of the Year Grace Tame gave them when she visited the Lodge last month. Deputy PM Barnaby Joyce said he was at dinner last night and didn’t watch the interview but had seen some clips, and defended Jenny Morrison’s comments on Sunrise: Jenny can say it but we can’t, but I agree with Jenny ... if you’re going to see the prime minister, you respect the office, if nothing else. You can still have your strong political opinions and [you’re] entitled to voice them, but I don’t think people roll with the theatrics. Labor MP Joel Fitzgibbon, appearing alongside Joyce, accused the PM of “desperation” in moving to “roll the family out” for the soft profile, but said he had no criticism for Jenny. Liberal MP Tim Wilson told Sky News that Jenny Morrison had “the right to reflect on the manners of others” who are invited to visit their home. Labor shadow minister Pat Conroy went on a tear at a doorstop, calling the Coalition “the dodgiest government in history”, claiming Australians “don’t want a prime minister who is interested in making curries and playing ukulele”. But when we asked what he thought of the 60 Minutes interview, Conroy admitted he didn’t watch it, claiming he was “very happy watching something on another station”. Earlier treasurer Josh Frydenberg, appearing on Radio National, admitted some of the results in the NSW byelections were “disappointing” for the Liberals. When asked if the dramas around the Coalition at the national level had seeped through to the state election, Frydenberg conceded there had been “a difficult few months federally”, but sought to distance the Morrison government from the result. The Sydney Morning Herald reported on Monday that the $1,080 low- and middle-income tax offset (LMITO) may not be extended this year, with fears over inflation. It was due to finish this year, but its possible extension for another year had been seen as a potential pre-election “sweetener”. Frydenberg told RN that the government hadn’t yet made a decision on LMITO for the March budget, but declined to comment further on budget speculation. Speaking of Boothby (held by retiring MP Nicolle Flint), independent candidate Jo Dyer writes this morning: As disillusionment with the Morrison government grows in Coalition-held seats across the country, a new generation of independents is emerging. Prime minister Scott Morrison was in South Australia yesterday, shoring up support in the marginal seat of Boothby. Footage from a press conference shows him accidentally referring to Adelaide as a “shitty city”, but the official transcript this morning (on the announcement of the next leg of a transport corridor) reads: This brings to completion the full financial commitment of the commonwealth government to this shcity [sic] city shaping. Got to be careful with that, this city shaping, I’m sure that’ll get a run. More from that Frydenberg interview earlier: NSW treasurer Matt Kean is talking about the weekend’s byelection results. He says: This wasn’t a referendum on the government ... these were four byelections that had unique issues in each of the seats. He does concede that there are “huge threats” from independent candidates. And he thinks the federal government should abandon its religious anti-discrimination legislation. Calls for the Morrison government to make rapid antigen tests free for everyone have not subsided, Elias Visontay reports: Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is certainly doing the rounds this morning. He’s on ABC television, where he’s again asked about the possible axing of the low-income tax offset. He’s asked if he realises it’s effectively a tax increase. He doesn’t “accept that characterisation”. He said: The low- and middle-income tax off-set is not a permanent feature of the tax system. We’ve introduced it due to the particular economic circumstances of the time. Here are the details on that ANU survey I mentioned earlier. Paul Karp writes: The ANU’s Centre for Social Research and Methods found 34.5% of adult Australians had confidence or were “very confident” in the federal government, down from a peak of 60.6% in May 2020. The result is only slightly higher than the low of 27.3% recorded during the 2019-20 bushfires. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese has been on ABC radio this morning. Host Sabra Lane asked him about reports he was “a bit vanilla” (as far as I know, this is unrelated to the bread and milk questions that came up last week). Albanese says he’s “very confident that our positive messages that we will put forward of a better future” and frustration at the current government will be voters’ focus. He also has a push back at government attempts to portray him as a friend of China (Asio chief Mike Burgess will be up in Senate estimates this week, which will be interesting). Did you watch the 60 Minutes episode on the Morrison family last night? Katharine Murphy did. The teasers released last week sparked ridicule, but I’m sure a decent-sized audience would have tuned in to watch Karl Stefanovic chum up to the prime minister. Katharine Murphy isn’t convinced the show will solve prime minister Scott Morrison’s problems: If you missed it over the weekend, there’s speculation beer taxes will be cut. Some have pointed out that’s quite blokey, as far more men enjoy beer than women. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg declines to blow the froth off that one. Frydenberg says the Morrison government is getting the “big things” right. He points to the low unemployment rate and high vaccination rate as proof. He says there was “an understanding” the government would have more support on the floor of the house for the religious discrimination vote. (That’s in the context of five Liberal MPs crossing the floor.) On the NSW byelections, he says the situation “could be very different” by the time we get to the federal election. He cites international tensions, such as a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. (Straight to the national security button.) On that tax offset mentioned below, he refuses to pre-empt the budget. But he does say that the situation has changed, that the government has brought forward other tax reform. “We haven’t made a decision,” he says. Young women (24 and under) have been paying less tax, he says. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is talking up tax cuts for women this morning, but there are also reports the government will axe a low-income tax offset for those who earn less than $126,000. (Those at the lower end save $1,080 on their tax bills.) He’s on the ABC’s Radio National also talking about those weekend byelections and the latest Newspoll. What will be revealed in Senate estimates this week? Will Canberra see its own version of the Capitol invasion? Is Russia about to invade Ukraine? What do the NSW byelections mean for the federal election? Will ukuleles, curries and his wife Jenny ensure prime minister Scott Morrison’s second coming? So many questions as parliament resumes this week, just the second week for 2022 and the last before the pre-election budget. And while there’s sure to be more talk about the religious discrimination bill, which floundered so spectacularly last week, the Senate isn’t sitting so it’s not going anywhere for now. The results of the New South Wales weekend byelection are still being counted and will be seen either as a reflection of the federal government’s actions or an indication of the trouble stirring for all incumbent governments. Today’s Newspoll shows very little shift for either major party, despite the Coalition’s turbulent week last week. But the Coalition was already in pretty poor shape, with a primary vote of 34%, and a two-party-preferred of 45% to Labor’s 55%. The news for the government in the latest Australian National University survey is less reassuring – only about one in three Australians have confidence in the Morrison government. That’s the lowest approval since the bushfires a year ago. More scenes from the “freedom” motley crew over the weekend. Morrison said he “understood” the protestors in Canberra, who continue to camp out and threaten chaos, while there are various reports of illnesses spreading through the group. And shortly we’ll hear from treasurer Josh Frydenberg – newspapers this morning are reporting that the federal government might axe the low-income tax offset as it tries to claw back budget deficits. Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Josh Butler, Daniel Hurst and Paul Karp will be your guides this week. Mike Bowers will be out there, snapping all the action.One card reads “Happy unimaginative consumerist entirely arbitrary manipulative shallow interpretation of romance day”, “Meh” – emblazoned on a pink heart – is the message on another, while an animal charity offers the opportunity to have your ex’s name printed on the bottom of a litter tray. An anti-Valentine’s Day movement is sweeping across the country, and suddenly there are all sorts of ways to mark 14 February that don’t involve hearts or flowers. “Valentine’s Day is not something that everyone likes to celebrate – it’s very commercialised, everything is about love, love, love,” said Floribeth Pena de Amador, founder of the Happy Book Place, an online gift shop. “I think people are honestly fed up with the day.” Amador recently created “anti-Valentine’s Day” mugs stating that V is for vodka and video games, to capitalise on the trend. “Some Valentine’s Days, you are alone, with a broken heart. And you just want to make yourself happier. So why not buy something for yourself?” On the popular online marketplace Etsy, a wide range of anti-Valentine’s Day cards, T-shirts and stickers are on sale. “I don’t need a Valentine, I need a nap,” one jumper reads. “Ew, Valentine’s Day” and “Cupid rhymes with stupid” both feature, too. While a few of the anti-Valentine’s Day cards celebrate being single most are aimed at couples who eschew stereotypical declarations of love. “I suppose you’ll do” and “I love you because you’re just like me and I am the best” are among the most romantic. Earlier this week, Bristol Animal Rescue Centre began inviting its supporters to donate £5 to have the first name of a person of their choice written on the bottom of a cat litter tray. The charity is filming the cats they have rescued using the trays and will share the “photo or video evidence” on social media each day up until Valentine’s Day. “We’ve had quite a bit of demand so far,” said a spokesperson, Gina Jones. The anti-Valentine’s fundraiser means those who think the tradition is exclusionary or over-commercialised can still do something positive for a charity, Jones said. “If you want to be romantic, that’s lovely. But there are people who don’t really like that.” At one Etsy shop, World Of Twigg, sales of anti-Valentine’s cards have overtaken sales of Valentine’s cards this year. “I’m almost sold out of them now,” said a card designer, Holly Showell. She finds Valentine’s Day “completely pointless”. She said: “I’m in a relationship and I don’t need to buy the person I love loads of stuff on Valentine’s Day. I can just tell him that I love him every day.” It is ironic, she acknowledged, that a card she designed to express her own anti-consumerist feelings towards Valentine’s Day is selling so well. “I designed it because I was fed up with Valentine’s Day. And it’s just become really popular.” At the Royal Vauxhall Tavern in southeast London, 14 February will be celebrated with “hate, venom and gore” at an anti-Valentine’s Day ball. Planned activities include a “crap Valentine’s Day card” competition, a ‘blind date’ gameshow featuring characters from horror movies and a “broken-hearted disco” where attenders can only dance to famous songs about relationship break-ups. “The normal fare on offer on Valentine’s Day is quite cliched and not particularly interesting,” said the promoter, Paul Joseph. “People want to mark the day by doing something that’s reflective of their sentiments towards it.” Tickets to the ball cost £15 and, despite all the uncertainties that surround any event during the pandemic, it is currently on track to sell out. Joseph thinks this is because both couples and single people are rebelling against the idea that they must celebrate Valentine’s Day in a particular way. “I think that irritates people,” he said. Juliet O’Brien, founder of WaxyWix, decided to create her range of “sassy” – and often sweary – anti-Valentine’s Day candles for similar reasons. She dislikes the sense of being obliged to buy roses and go out for dinner because it’s Valentine’s Day. “Prices are hiked up and you feel like you’ve got to celebrate it.” Her candles are designed to appeal to both couples and friends. “One of our candles says: ‘roses are red, chocolates are brown, you’re getting neither so calm the F-word down.’” Valentine’s Day is no longer an Americanised “Hallmark card” type of holiday, she said. “It’s almost like we are reclaiming it, saying: this is how we want to celebrate it.”In the basement of the Herbert Gallery in Coventry, Daniel Lismore is wearing a gown of pink chiffon and silver lame, a chainmail headdress and a full face of makeup, and wielding a glue gun over a brooch. It’s a striking scene for a Tuesday morning. But, for artist Lismore, it’s the norm. He is, as he says, a “living sculpture”. Lismore wore something similar for his Ted talk in 2019, for a campaign for H&amp;M in 2015, for a photo with Nigel Farage in 2016 (for this occasion he accessorised, with the word “cunt” and an arrow on his forearm), and for a selfie with the Princess Maria-Olympia of Greece posted a day after we meet. He says it typically takes abut 20 minutes to get ready and he wore the same throughout lockdown, albeit with “a big pair of slippers”. Today, he is surrounded by about 30 sculptures that will be displayed in Be Yourself, Everyone Else Is Already Taken, Lismore’s exhibition that opens at the Herbert this month. Each one is a collage of clothing items, fabric and ephemera. One wears an Anthony Price jacket given to Lismore by Steve Strange. Also included are Boy George’s hat, a tribute to the Colston Four, Adam Ant’s stage outfits, an Extinction Rebellion flag, an XXXL FFP2 face mask, a Mickey Mouse glove and a jacket that Lismore made for Mariah Carey. “This stuff I wear nearly every day,” says Lismore. “I reuse things … people have given me things from all over the world. Every single thing in here has a story.” Be Yourself, Everyone Else Is Already Taken (a phrase often erroneously attributed to Lismore’s hero Oscar Wilde) has been touring the world since 2016, but Lismore grew up in Coventry. He was brought up by his antique dealer grandparents – whom he calls mum and dad – in Fillongley, outside the city. So the Herbert is something of a homecoming. “It’s a 20-year journey,” says Lismore. “This show is like a mirror of what I’ve seen, in material objects.” Lismore stops traffic with what he wears but he’s far from a loud personality. He has the poise and grandeur of an Old Hollywood star. “As I said in that Ted talk, confidence is a concept you can choose,” he says. Thankfully, this poise isn’t matched with Old Hollywood discretion. His anecdotes are peppered with his famous friends, from going to the Houses of Parliament with Vivienne Westwood and Pamela Anderson to meeting Stephen Fry as a teenager while dressed like Wilde. His brushes with fame began early when his mum, worried about him being bullied, faxed Patrick Stewart. As a result, Lismore, a longtime Trekker, met Stewart at a fan convention. “He said, ‘You can more or less do anything you want to do in your life,’” remembers the artist. “And it just changed my confidence.” He continues: “When you’re a young, queer person, you don’t know why the world hates you, don’t understand it. And you probably don’t understand yourself.” First experimenting with dressing up as a young teenager, he then moved to London to work as a model, and found kinship in the 00s club scene – at nights such as Nag Nag Nag and Boombox. It was here that he met Boy George, Pete Burns and more. “Everything was inclusively exclusive,” he says. “If you were weird and wonderful, you were in. The opposite of how society might treat you.” Another formative experience was travelling to Kenya in his 20s and living with Maasai and Samburu people, working with charities to combat HIV and Malaria. “I realised that there was so much more to humanity than the western world,” he says now. Maasai jewellery is included in some of his sculptures but he is clear it’s not cultural appropriation. “Everything in here has been a collaboration or a moment with someone from the cultures of where these things come from.” Lismore is often compared to Leigh Bowery, who was also friends with Boy George. He is resistant to the comparison. “I was introduced to Madonna a few weeks ago, as ‘the new Leigh’,” says Lismore. “And I was like, ‘I’m nothing like him really because I’m not a performance artist … I’m not out to shock.’” While Bowery wore his outlandish outfits for performances and at nightclubs, Lismore’s take is 24/7. Living as a sculpture means he is sadly accustomed to abuse. “If we walk around, somebody somewhere, will say something,” he says. “If you follow 10 steps behind you will hear it. And that’s just the norm.” He has had “anti-gay zone” stickers stuck on his door, been punched in the face and receives anti-LGBTQ+ messages on social media. Lismore is an activist as well as a living sculpture. He is an ambassador for Cool Earth, has worked with Greenpeace and campaigns for the release of Julian Assange and for LGBTQ+ rights, speaking out against a proposed anti-LGBTQ+ bill in Ghana and, in October, calling out politicians who had failed to help LGBTQ+ people to leave Afghanistan. The ultimate aim, for him, might be “live and let live”. He is clear “I just want to be left alone” and describes a rare occurrence when this happened, though he was dressed up. “I went to a mountaintop in Iceland to practise my Ted talk,” he says. “This guy was hiking up and I was sitting there. He didn’t acknowledge me. He didn’t look at me. It was almost like I didn’t exist. It was great.” Be Yourself; Everybody Else Is Already Taken is at the Herbert, Coventry, from 18 February to 26 June, part of the Coventry UK City of Culture programme.Joelle Taylor, the 54-year-old Lancastrian and poetry slam champion, is a fighter on the page. C+nto, the bold, combative and moving winner of the TS Eliot prize, is a passionate reconjuring of 1980s-90s butch lesbian counterculture in London (there used to be dozens of lesbian bars in the city; now there is only one). This is a dramatic narrative that does not reflect any improvement in attitudes towards the LGBTQ+ society; its context is turbulence. In her preface, she declares: “There is no part of a butch lesbian that is welcome in this world” and reminds us that 72 countries still criminalise same-sex relationships and that there are “11 jurisdictions that support the death penalty for lesbians”. She believes the loss of face-to-face encounters in clubs and the divisive nature of the internet have unravelled gay unity and her poetry is a rallying cry to put that right. Once you have heard Taylor recite on YouTube, looking sharp in her tweed suits, her poems on the page seem unattended without her. There is swank, swagger and firecracker protest in her writing and the ideal is to hear her perform. The book’s title is from the now obsolete Italian literary verb cuntare (to recount) and much of it is divided into “rounds” as though in a boxing ring. But the past is also envisaged as a series of vitrines, their stillness in contrast to Taylor’s pounding blood. Nostalgia’s first cousin, it turns out, is rage. She introduces four characters – composites of real people encountered “on the scene” – all dead now: Dudizile, Valentine, Jack Catch and Angel. Valentine is a stud, “a black masculine presenting lesbian”. The first poem in Valentine’s name is about invisibility, the need to be “where the road cannot reach us”. Like many of the poems, there is a sense in it of the combustible: the story will end in tears or fire. Occasionally, there is a hint of Jeanette Winterson (from a comparable working-class Lancastrian background) to the writing. The reliquary of dead women, one of C+nto’s finest stretches, could be read as a companion piece to Winterson’s novel Written on the Body. With pugilistic grief, Taylor treats each bone as an exhibit: “this femur belonged to the first boi who over-extended her stride… ” and continues: When breath eddies the dust, we are all born again, my pretty Pompei, settling into the shape of a street fighter her petticoats snarling That “snarling” is great – Taylor glories in garb as language. She can be flamboyant yet can also write with efficient economy. A man’s unwelcome attention is succinctly described when he “stubs his kiss out” on a cheek. But there were moments when I felt undecided about C+nto’s intended audience. When you suspect someone is not addressing you directly, it can feel rude to stare (heterosexual readers might feel like wallflowers). At the same time, it could equally be argued that it is this access to her world, this invitation to watch her fight her corner, which makes the book powerful. What I particularly admire is the way Taylor allows undressed lines to surface, such as: “I can’t remember the names of all my dead friends.” And she ends with an extraordinary poem about the names of dead strangers – murdered lesbians across the world. The searing effect of the recitation of names is not new but what Taylor pulls off is a fresh desolation: her poem is register and receptacle. She carries each woman within her and draws grief out, decants it into cantos. Valentine Born right body wrong day, Valentine flicks her lighter in the corner of the club &amp; white women flutter. Tonight, she has dressed as the inside of a mouth a handsewn suit excised from a cured night sky black leather has its own skin care routine it listens to its mother I have heard it said some girls give birth to themselves on the back of motorbikes invent the wind let the road uncurl from between their legs, the infinite motorway something British &amp; unbidden i know why we are drawn to the corners it’s where the road cannot reach us. Every part of a woman is a weapon if you know how to hold it Valentine says. The corner flicks a Morse &amp; in the dark white hearts beat like moths against a headlight. • C+nto &amp; Othered Poems by Joelle Taylor is published by Westbourne Press (£10.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyOne of the main promises of modern capitalism – of modern life, really – is that you will always be able to buy more and better stuff. It’s not true, of course. Capitalism takes away as well as provides. And for poorer people, or those who are just financially stretched, the constantly advertised pleasures of consumer life often lie tantalisingly out of reach. But for more than half a century, enough people have been able to afford them – or been able to borrow the necessary money – for society to be largely shaped around consumer habits in Britain and other rich countries. City centres, suburban retail parks, huge stretches of the internet and the inside of our heads: all are alive with, and constantly remade by, our acquisitive desires. The social and environmental costs of this – for the low-paid workers needed to produce and sell cheap goods, for the non-consumerist parts of our lives that get neglected, for the climate – increasingly worry many people. Yet there is little sign that consumerism is receding as a social or political priority. Most British shops may have been made to close, some of the time, during the early phases of the pandemic, but since last spring they have been allowed to stay open regardless of its resurgence. Going to the shops has been seen by government and many citizens as almost as important as public health. So the onset of the cost-of-living crisis, which looks likely to last many months and quite possibly years, is a direct challenge to how many of us live. Already squeezed by a dozen years of falling or stagnant wages, Britain now faces its worst inflation and fuel prices for decades, rising taxes and interest rates, more expensive loans for students and extra import duties thanks to Brexit. To an extent that has yet to be fully appreciated, many people will become significantly poorer: on its own, the recent increase in the household energy price cap of £693, which is expected to be followed by others, represents more than 2% of the average full-time salary. And unlike the last time we faced such a significant threat to our standard of living, in the 1970s and early 1980s, most Britons will not be protected from inflation to some extent by the negotiating leverage on pay of strong trade unions. Instead, we are about to learn what it’s like to live in an inflationary economy dominated by corporate interests, such as the fossil fuel companies, which can profit from the crisis without being required by the government to pay windfall taxes that might soften it for their customers. Some of the consequences of this new economic reality are already with us. Instead of choice, bargains, instant gratification and easy access to European goods – all the modern British shopper’s customary privileges – we are encountering empty shelves, suddenly marked-up prices and shipping delays. The change is all the more difficult to adjust to because it comes after what for many consumers was a golden age. Between the mid-1950s and mid-2000s, despite periodic recessions and government cuts, the average disposable income grew consistently faster than inflation, according to the Resolution Foundation. During the 1990s, the steady improvement in living standards accelerated as a whole new world of cheap consumption opened up in Britain: low-cost supermarkets, budget airlines, factory outlets, bargain fashion and furniture chains. Some of these businesses had traded here before, but never previously on such a scale. Their expansion was partly made possible by moving manufacturing to countries with lower wages. Even shrewd business commentators expected this highly convenient arrangement for western consumers to last a long time. In 2006, the veteran retail analyst Richard Hyman told me: “Our forecasts do not anticipate any major increase in retail price inflation ever again.” Instead, the golden age gradually ended. Wages stopped rising in Britain, and then the Conservatives disempowered poorer consumers further through their austerity policies. For a time, the new pressures on British consumerism were partly hidden by low inflation and more borrowing. Between 1990 and 2019, the amount of unsecured (non-mortgage) debt held by the average household more than trebled. But by the mid-2010s the increasingly tense and angry quality of British politics and everyday life suggested a country where many people were barely coping financially. Last year, the Resolution Foundation said that 2007 to 2022 was expected to be “the worst [period] on record for household income growth”. What sort of society might the cost-of-living crisis produce? One where millions don’t eat or heat their homes as often as they should, according to reports published last week by the Food Foundation and the National Institute of Economic and Social Research. For many less vulnerable Britons, the crisis will be less awful. Essentials will still be paid for, but they will absorb more and more of people’s incomes. Even during the golden era for consumers, Britain still had high housing and travel costs – trying to offset those was partly what made us such bargain-hunters. Now the personal financial trade-offs between escapism and realism will be even harder. But probably not for the rich. A week ago, after walking along Oxford Street in London with its abandoned department stores and thinned-out shopping crowds, I went to Harrods in Knightsbridge. Its narrow marble corridors were as clogged as ever with expensively groomed customers. As shopping for pleasure becomes less affordable, it may revert to what it was in past centuries: the elite competing for luxuries. Some people won’t be sad if that happens. Plenty of Britons hate shopping. And the planet needs us to do less of it – or at least, to do it in a more sustainable way, for example by buying secondhand. It’s even possible that the internet, through its constant flood of novel facts and images, is making us less interested in acquiring new material possessions. But digital commodities, from artworks to fashion, are increasingly being offered instead. And the internet also keeps us window shopping and wanting physical goods in ways that did not exist before. Under capitalism, for there to be social and political stability, common expectations about living standards need to be satisfied. It’s no coincidence that British consumerism’s best years were also years of relative political calm – or that populism began to take off here, in the late 2000s, when the rise in wages started to stall. Once people feel life is getting too expensive, they often believe everything is getting worse. If enough people feel like that, governments don’t last long. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistIn 1988, shortly before the Winter Olympics got under way and amid rising concerns about the event suffering from good – which for the purposes of the Games would be bad – weather, 500 residents of Calgary with the surnames White, Winter or Snow gathered to perform a snow dance. The event concluded with them chanting “White winter snow, white winter snow, let it go!” before releasing helium balloons with their names on. It did not help: warm winds soon arrived to melt much of what snow there was, temperatures peaked at 18.1°C and 33 events had to be rescheduled. “We simply must make better calculations when awarding future Winter Games,” grumbled Walter Troeger of the International Olympic Committee, an organisation that has since graduated from awarding winter events to places that might not have enough snow to giving them to places that will definitely not have any. And so to the barren, brown wastelands that at least until the blizzards on Sunday surrounded many of Beijing’s venues, with athletes propelling themselves down the kind of unnatural smears of shocking white rarely witnessed since Adam Ant put away his face paint. There is no point doing snow dances at the Yanqing National Alpine Skiing Centre or at Big Air Shougang, the venue for the ski jumping because, however cold it is, they hardly get any. It is this, more than anything, that makes it an ideal host city. The idea of awarding these Games only to snowy places is romantic but deeply flawed, akin to awarding the Summer Olympics only to inclement locations, getting them to build open-air swimming pools and then hoping it rains enough to fill them up before anyone dives in from a 10m platform. The difference between using a hose to fill an empty pool with water and some clever freezers to cover a dry hillside with snow is only one of – in several senses – degrees. When Beijing was awarded the Games in 2015 the only rival bid came from Almaty, who used the pointed slogan “Keep it Real”. The Olympics long ago gave up on that. The Winter Olympics has relied on fake snow since at least 1964, when the slopes in Innsbruck were constructed using 22,000 ice bricks carved from nearby Lake Herzsee, topped by 25,000 cubic metres of snow hand-lugged from the Brenner Pass and more created by experimental American air compressors. “The runs look peculiar as they plunge twistingly downhill through brown meadows where, one believes, cows will appear any day to munch the spring grass,” wrote the New York Times. But, beyond the hassle of importing or creating snow, warm winter weather has led to some of the great Olympic injustices, foremost among them the tale of Irving Jaffee, a young American who in 1928 headed to St Moritz hoping for speed skating glory. Jaffee was an interesting character, a frustrated wannabe baseball player and protégé of the great Norval Baptie, speed and figure skater, inventor of the airplane spin – performed with the male skater holding his partner by one hand and an ankle – and world record-holder in the disciplines of barrel jumping and stilt skating. In St Moritz that year a warm wind and heavy rain ruined many events – the 50km cross-country skiing was contested, very slowly, in temperatures that peaked at 25C – and the 10,000m speed skating became a race against time as much as anything else. As the ice melted, the event neared its conclusion with Jaffee in the lead, only a handful of stragglers and no-hopers still to go and the Norwegian favourite Bernt Evensen out of contention, the Norwegian referee suddenly declared it abandoned. The Americans appealed – “We don’t want to raise a row,” said their splendidly named official Gustavus T Kirby. “We prefer to win the race on the ice, not in committees, but this action does not seem fair to us.” The IOC agreed and awarded Jaffee the gold only for the International Skating Commission – led by another Norwegian – to overturn the decision on the tenuous basis that US’s appeal had not been received by them within the stipulated three hours of the race’s cancellation. That night many skaters – including Evensen himself – gathered to protest against the decision, but to no avail. Jaffee demanded a rerun. “This is a tough break,” he said, “but I will race them again on skates, skis or at foot-running.” Sadly by then all the ice had melted and many competitors had gone home, so Jaffee had to wait four years to right the wrong. In 1932 Lake Placid hosted the Games and more weather worries. The Scotsman described a venue featuring “black mountainsides, rough with rocks instead of being soft white slopes of snow; bobsleigh runs down which not happy parties of winter sportsmen but streams of thaw-water are coursing; and anxious villagers whose vision of prosperity is, like the snow, slowly melting before their eyes”. Among other problems the meltwater created a large pond precisely where the ski jumpers came to earth, forcing them to attempt their second runs while shivering and soaking wet. “It led,” the British Olympic Committee noted, dryly, “to a lot of complaints.” With admirable prescience Lake Placid had constructed the Olympics’ first artificially frozen skating rink, so the only thing threatening to stop Jaffee racing was the antisemitism of his own teammates, which was so virulent that he ended up – at the suggestion of one of the coaches – in a boxing ring with one of them two days before the 5,000m final and eventually fled the Olympic Village altogether (the Games was based around the spectacular local golf club, founded by the fiercely antisemitic Melvil Dewey, which had a strict policy of not admitting dogs or Jews). He won that event and the 10,000m, with Evensen among those left in his wake in both races, to create a tale of redemption so satisfying one would need ice in one’s veins not to feel warmed by it. In that case I would suggest keeping quiet about it or the IOC might try to host an event in you.1) Cornet has wings clipped in wide position Jürgen Klopp has described this as the strongest Liverpool squad he has had at his disposal. That Joe Gomez, Curtis Jones, Takumi Minamino and Divock Origi could not even make the bench supported the theory. Sean Dyche has lesser resources but by his own standards, he had a luxury of riches. Dwight McNeil was dropped for the first time this season. Tuesday’s scorer Jay Rodriguez and new signing Wout Weghorst started in attack. But both missed chances and the reality is that Burnley have scored three goals in nine games. Meanwhile, Maxwel Cornet took McNeil’s spot on the left. The Ivorian can seem a one-man goal-of-the-season contest, but a berth on the wing gave him less chance to let fly. Cornet rarely formed much of a strike partnership with the sold Chris Wood, but at least he offered explosive shooting. For Dyche, the decision is whether to restore him to the forward line. Richard Jolly Match report: Burnley 0-1 Liverpool 2) Wolves a few goals short of a top-four challenge At what point do we start taking Wolves seriously as challengers for the top four? They don’t have the resources of Manchester United, Arsenal, Tottenham or even West Ham, but what they do have is a defence. Under pressure in the second half against Spurs, they were admirably unruffled. The bigger issue is goals; only Burnley and Norwich have scored fewer this season than Wolves’ 21 – which puts them on track for a paltry 36. To put that in context, no side has finished in the top four of the Premier League with fewer than the 45 Everton managed in 2004-05. Perhaps Daniel Podence, if he gets off the mark, will go on a spree or perhaps the return of Hwang Hee-chan will bring goals. Either way, if they are to qualify for the Champions League they probably need some from somewhere, no matter how good the rearguard. Jonathan Wilson Match report: Tottenham 0-2 Wolves 3) City show faint hints of weakness In an entertaining first half-hour of Manchester City’s visit to Norwich, there were a few elements that might have aroused Jürgen Klopp’s curiosity. City were sometimes sloppy under pressure inside their own half, giving away possession cheaply, while it was clear enough that Oleksandr Zinchenko and Nathan Aké are downgrades on Aymeric Laporte and João Cancelo. Those concerns proved short-lived, Grant Hanley missing Norwich’s big chance when he headed against the post and City ultimately winning with characteristic ease. They show no sign of letting up and, once they go ahead, invariably control games masterfully. The crumb of comfort for Liverpool is that they are not flawless and, just as Arsenal did last month before shooting themselves in the foot, better opponents might punish those laxer moments. It needs to happen soon if we are to see a title race: Klopp will hope Harry Kane and Son Heung-min are primed to pounce on any early errors at the Etihad next weekend. Nick Ames Match report: Norwich 0-4 Manchester City 4) Race for fourth is starting to look crowded West Ham showed their spirit again with a late equaliser at Leicester but it left them only just clinging to fourth place. Now that there’s a clear bottom three, the race for fourth ought to be the most interesting thing about the Premier League. There’s just one problem: the contenders don’t seem very bothered. Spurs have lost three games on the trot, Manchester United have become draw specialists and West Ham’s only win in four is a meagre 1-0 against Watford. Chelsea, who led the table on 1 December, have slumped so badly that they may yet join the dogfight. And so could Wolves, who suddenly have four wins in five. They are now above Spurs. The same goes for Arsenal, whose winner at Molineux on Thursday was their first goal since New Year’s Day. If any of these clubs can go on a decent run, they’ll find themselves in the Champions League. Tim de Lisle Match report: Leicester City 2-2 West Ham United 5) Question marks over United’s fitness Ralf Rangnick admits he is worried about Manchester United’s prospects of a top-four finish. “It has always been a concern since Ole [Gunnar Solskjær] left the club. That was one of the reasons why he probably had to leave,” the 63-year-old said. This was a third time in the last five league matches Rangnick’s team have let a second-half lead slip, Aston Villa and Burnley also coming from behind to share a draw. After 24 matches United are fifth on 40 points. One theory proposed to the German is that his footballers tire late on in games due a lack of fitness that stops them maintaining his high-pressing style. “To be honest I don’t know if we are fit enough to play that way because I came in the middle of the season, we had no pre-season [together] - in essence we had in total two weeks in total where we could train in a normal way,” Rangnick said. “I wouldn’t allow myself to say we are not fit enough to play like that.” Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester United 1-1 Southampton 6) Irrepressible Lamptey buoys Brighton Beyond the three points and an impressive team performance for Brighton, a first 90 minutes of the year and a second assist of the season made Saturday’s a landmark game for Tariq Lamptey, who continued his return from serious hamstring injury. “It’s hard for any player to expect to be fantastic every week,” Graham Potter said. “Today I thought he had everything.” It was telling that both Watford’s left-back, Hassane Kamara, and Emmanuel Dennis, who played on the left wing in the second half, were booked for fouling Lamptey as the home side struggled to control his surges; he has only had more touches in three other Premier League games than he did on Saturday, and never pressed players in possession on more occasions. It was also a key game for another player recovering from injury, Ismaïla Sarr playing for the first time since damaging a knee ligament in his club’s last victory, three months ago next week; he had Watford’s one shot on target, in the 88th minute. If his seems to have been a swift and impressive recovery, his club is running out of time to stage one of their own. Simon Burnton Match report: Watford 0-2 Brighton 7) Gordon shining under Lampard’s mentorship Frank Lampard joined the standing ovation for Anthony Gordon when the 20-year-old was substituted towards the end of a precious win over Leeds. A host of Everton players deserved such acclaim – any of Alex Iwobi, Jonjoe Kenny, Donny van de Beek and Richarlison could also have laid claim to the man of the match award – but the blossoming talent, involved in all three goals and in Leeds’ faces from the first whistle, enthralled his supporters and manager. “He can go a really long way in the game and his job now is to keep his head down and keep working,” said Lampard. “But I’ve no worries about that. I can see he wants it.” The feeling is mutual. As Gordon said of his new manager: “I feel the trust he has got in me. He tells me daily. He has surprised me, really, with how good he is tactically. We need to start giving recognition to young English managers such as the gaffer. He is a tactical genius and I am thriving off that. I’m learning from him every day, stuff I hadn’t heard before.” Andy Hunter Match report: Everton 3-0 Leeds 8) Vieira calls on Zaha for goals Crystal Palace’s draw with Brentford meant it is now just one win in eight Premier League matches since beating Everton on 12 December – a statistic that does not please Patrick Vieira. Having passed up the opportunity to seal what could have been a crucial three points against Norwich in midweek after slipping while taking a penalty, Wilfried Zaha was singled out by his manger as someone who can provide a regular goal threat for a team that has scored only three in the last four games. “There was a cross delivered by Joel Ward at the end when I wanted Wilfried to be there. To compete for that cross,” said Vieira. “We have to work on that, as well as the desire for other players to get into the box.” Ed Aarons • Match report: Brentford 0-0 Crystal Palace 9) Burn makes glorious hometown return At the final whistle Dan Burn looked almost shellshocked. Twenty years after being released by Newcastle’s academy as a nine-year-old he had just made his debut after a £13m move from Brighton and shone in central defence. Small wonder that, as Burn joined his new teammates in applauding all corners of St James’ Park, he sometimes stopped and simply stared. Born and brought up in Northumberland, Burn used to cheer Newcastle on from the stands he now gazed at and, as he began his career with Blyth Spartans and then Darlington, he can rarely have imagined one day returning as man of the match. Eddie Howe may have failed with January bids for Lille’s Sven Botman and Sevilla’s Diego Carlos but on this evidence Newcastle’s manager could not have bought a defender with more assured positional sense. Louise Taylor Match report: Newcastle 1-0 Aston Villa 10) Wasteful Saints have not replaced Ings Manchester United’s misfiring marksmen hogged the headlines as usual, but at Old Trafford it was actually Southampton who were more culpable. Only four of their 13 attempts were on target (United managed seven out of 12). Ralf Rangnick rightly argued that United should have scored three by half-time, but failed to add that the same was true of their opponents. On the right, Stuart Armstrong kept bustling into good positions without finding the finishing touch. In the middle, Armando Broja bothered the United centre-backs with his strength and ingenuity but only troubled David de Gea once. The other centre-forward, Che Adams, took the equaliser beautifully but only after wasting a couple of early chances, one of them when he slipped in front of a near-open goal and ended up heading the ball sideways. For all their energy and cohesion, Southampton are missing Danny Ings. Struggling to break into Steven Gerrard’s Villa side, he would surely be starting if he’d stayed at St Mary’s. Tim de LisleFor a big-budget blockbuster game, Horizon Forbidden West is extremely weird. It is a detailed sci-fi story about a red-haired outcast warrior, the tribes that inhabit a post-apocalyptic Earth a thousand years in the future, and a bunch of robot dinosaurs. It’s a tangle of different ideas and complicated systems that only reluctantly interact with each other. It’s also a damn good time, and especially on PlayStation 5, a stunning example of just how good video games can look in 2022. You kind of get used to its beauty while you’re playing, but I found that whenever I returned to the game after making a cup of tea I was newly struck by whatever awesome scene was frozen on the pause screen: Aloy mid-roll away from a murderous mechanical hippo, or standing in the foreground in her war paint with an extraordinary view of mountains and snow behind. It’s when I was out in this world, following whatever trails I found, that Horizon made me happiest. I lost hours out there, retrieving random artefacts from old train stations or crashed planes, collecting so many plants and materials to stuff into Aloy’s magic backpack, and scrapping with the intimidating mechanical creatures that stalk the place. Getting into fights with these things is the absolute highlight of the game. They are aggressive, impressive and varied in both appearance and behaviour; they respond to you intelligently, and the combination of bows, traps and elemental weapons that you hunt them with can make each encounter feel like a battle of wits. It just feels incredible. I could play around all day in this place, trying to shoot the tail off a screeching flying metal monster so I can upgrade my bow. Following the story, I was less interested. Forbidden West’s plot is – and I say this with some affection, after more than 30 hours immersed in it – a barely decipherable load of MacGuffin-laden sci-fi, all painstakingly written and acted by an engaging cast and scriptwriters who’ve done the best they could with such a sprawling, unwieldy story. Briefly summarised, it boils down to this: Aloy must find a bunch of artificial intelligence subfunctions (riveting, I know) to rebuild a super-AI that can save her world. Conveniently these fleeing AIs have confined themselves roughly to the west coast of the former USA, whose deserts and ruins and mountains make up the enormous map that we’re given to explore with Aloy. (It’s always America, isn’t it? We’re never wandering the post-apocalyptic, overgrown remnants of, say, Liechtenstein, or Norway.) Horizon’s linear chapters highlight its less endearing quirks – the controls, for instance, which are unbelievably convoluted. The first couple of hours give a terrible first impression, introducing all of the slightly annoying things that you’re going to need to get used to. Climbing involves three different buttons. Spend a couple of days away from the game and your fingers will entirely forget how to find their way around the controller in a way that makes Aloy do what you want. The game pulls up little text tutorials throughout, which always made me laugh; I’d suggest that if, after 20 hours with a game, you still need to remind players how to throw a rock or jump backwards off a ledge, then the controls might be a little idiosyncratic. Other random minor frustrations, such as healing being tied to an ever-depleting stash of magic berries, or having to craft ammo mid-fight from collectible resources that can run out, cause minimal suffering out in the wilds – but not in the middle of a tough boss fight at the end of a long story mission, when they can stop you in your tracks. There are a lot more of these weirdnesses, but I became almost fond of them over time. I always enjoy games that come up with entertaining justifications for the extremely video-gamey abilities and goals that they give you, for instance, and Aloy uses old-world technology to scan creatures for weaknesses and highlight all of the collectible doodads on the screen. This is just so bare-faced and convenient as to be straight-up endearing. And though I lost interest in a lot of the (many) conversations that Aloy engaged in out in the Forbidden West, I never lost interest in her. She is a great person through whom to experience this wild and stunning place, competent and inspiring even when you’re fumbling around trying to remember how to call your robot horse, but end up accidentally scarfing a plate of virtual stew instead. I don’t think I’ve seen half of what Forbidden West has to offer. It bored me sometimes with endless dialogue and exposition, but is equally generous with things to do and places to explore and creatures to unwisely provoke. Unlike many open-world games it is continually offering you something new, and a couple of the tools you acquire later in the game really open the whole place up. It’s got the spirit of a Metroid or Tomb Raider-style puzzle adventure on the scale of an Assassin’s Creed. And once again: by god, it is beautiful. I’ll happily endure 10 minutes of being lectured about terraforming, in exchange for marvelling at these sunken caves, forbidding plains and mechanical T-rexes. Horizon Forbidden West is out February 18; £59.99 (PlayStation 4)/ £69.99 (PlayStation 5)Grants awarded under the Coalition’s $184m Safer Communities Fund were “not appropriately informed by departmental briefings”, with more than half delivered without a “clear basis for the decision”, an auditor general’s report into the program has found. The auditor general also found that a total of $1.12m in grant funding was paid out to five separate applicants despite them having projects deemed “ineligible” under the program’s guidelines. The fund, which was under the responsibility of the home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, was established in 2016 to combat crime and antisocial behaviour. It has paid out almost 700 grants to community organisations across eight selection processes, with more than 80% going to religious organisations. While it was initially aimed at boosting the safety efforts of local councils and community organisations, the fund was expanded in response to the Christchurch terrorist attacks to include protecting schools, preschools and community organisations facing security risks “associated with racial or religious intolerance”. The report found that Jewish and Christian groups were most likely to receive funding, with “relatively few” applications received from other religious groups. Labor’s Kristina Keneally had asked the auditor general to examine the program after revelations that Dutton had asked his department to fast-track a proposal weeks after an industry body made a political donation. The ABC’s 7.30 program reported last year that Dutton had slashed millions in grant funding from organisations that were strongly recommended by the department to improve community safety, with funds directed to projects that did not follow his department’s recommendations. According to the report from auditor general Grant Hehir released on Monday, while largely “appropriate” grant opportunity guidelines for the program were in place, applications were not assessed fully in accordance with the guidelines. “Funding decisions were not appropriately informed by departmental briefings and, for the majority of decisions, the basis for the decisions was not clearly recorded,” the report found. “The recorded basis for the funding decisions did not adequately explain decision making around the award of partial funding to applications, the inclusion and ranking of applications on the reserve lists, or how information other than the results of the assessment process resulted in decisions to award funding.” For 54% of approved applications involving 60% of approved funding, the basis for the funding decision was either not clearly recorded or did not address the eligibility requirements and merit criteria published in the grant opportunity guidelines. While the department clearly identified applications it recommended be awarded for funding, the auditor general found that in all but one of the eight selection processes, “the department did not provide adequate information on the results of the assessment of each eligible application against the published merit criteria”. For six selection processes, the department put forward lists of candidate applications for inclusion on “reserve” lists without any recommendation as to which of those should be selected, or why. Another key shortcoming identified was with the application of a merit-based assessment, with a decision in one round to have a non-competitive selection approach failing to achieve the desired “rapid result”. “The approach meant that applications with relatively low merit scores were approved for funding before applications that had achieved higher scores against the published criteria,” the audit found. It also found that the merit criteria employed in the three most recent selection processes – all within the fifth round of the program – were “less comprehensive than had previously been employed”. The report also found that after the second round of the program, some projects that were not eligible were eventually funded, with no examination of whether items of proposed expenditure were eligible under the grant opportunity guidelines. Instead, this happened during the negotiation of grant agreements once applications were approved for funding meaning “it was not only eligible applications that proceeded to be assessed against the merit criteria”. Even when the merit assessment criteria were applied, the standard of assessment was not to a “consistently appropriate standard” with shortcomings identified in how merit scores were used to recommend projects. A total of five applications assessed as ineligible were approved for funding in two selection processes, with $1.12m in grant funding awarded to those five applications. While the report found that grants were paid out in a way that “was reflective of the population of applications received” in terms of geographical areas and electorates, the audit also found that funding was largely awarded to Jewish and Christian groups. “Applications were received from, and consequently funding was largely awarded to, community organisations that identified as Jewish or Christian. “Relatively few applications were received from, and funding awarded to, community groups identifying as Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu or Sikh. Identified cultural groups were also not well represented in terms of either applications received or grant funding awarded.” Keneally said the report confirmed the Safer Communities program “is yet another example of the Liberals spending taxpayer money like it’s Liberal party money.” “There were many great projects funded through this program, but many missed out because this Liberal Government loves a rort,” Keneally said on Twitter. The Australian National Audit Office report has made five recommendations to the Department of Home Affairs and the department of industry and science about how to improve the program, including a recommendation that the department outlines the “merits of eligible applications against the eligibility requirements, assessment criteria and any other factors relevant to decision making that were included in the grant opportunity guidelines”. The departments have agreed to the recommendations. Dutton and the Department of Home Affairs have been contacted for a response.In late August last year, four inmates at the Washington county detention center in north-west Arkansas contracted Covid-19. In the days that followed, the four men were relocated to a quarantine block in the prison. In the block, the inmates were given a cocktail of drugs. They soon began to suffer a series of side effects including vision problems, diarrhea, bloody stools and stomach cramps. It was only later that they discovered they had been prescribed, without their consent, significantly high doses of ivermectin, an anti-parasitic drug commonly used on livestock animals including cows and horses. The story of what may have happened in a small slice of Arkansas nestled against the Ozark hills has shocked many in America and come to symbolize the political divides triggered by the pandemic. The scheme reflects a growing obsession with ivermectin as a Covid-19 treatment – especially among rightwing communities in the US. But it also repeats America’s dreadful history of racism, as the alleged experimentation forced on the Arkansas inmates recalls a grisly history of medical exploitation by American authorities towards communities and inmates of color. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as well as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), have warned against using ivermectin for Covid-19. The treatment has nevertheless gained wide popularity among many on the right, including anti-vaxxers. Last month, the Arkansas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit on behalf of the men against Washington county jail, the Washington county sheriff, Tim Helder, and jail physician Dr Robert Karas. One of the plaintiffs was recorded as 6ft 1in and weighed 158 lbs (71.6kg) on 22 August 2021. At his size, the approved ivermectin dosage to treat worms is 0.2 mg/kg in a single dose, which given his size, is 14 mg. According to the lawsuit, he was given 48 mg over four days, 3.4 times the approved dosage. Another plaintiff, who has a history of heart conditions and suffered three heart attacks in 2018, was recorded as 6ft 1in and weighed 191 lbs (86.6 kg) on 21 August 2021. The approved ivermectin dosage to combat worms for someone his size is 0.2 mg/kg in a single dose, or 17 mg. He was prescribed 36 mg of the drug on 22 August, followed by 24 mg daily from 23-25 August. The total dosage, 108 mg, was nearly 6.3 times the approved dosage. At the time, the plaintiffs were told that the treatments merely consisted of “vitamins”, “antibiotics” and “steroids”, according to the lawsuit. The FDA has warned against using ivermectin to treat Covid-19. The agency’s listed side effects of ivermectin overdose include nausea, diarrhea, low blood pressure, allergic reactions such as itching and hives, seizures, coma and even death. “No one – including incarcerated individuals – should be deceived and subject to medical experimentation,” said Gary Sullivan, legal director of the ACLU of Arkansas. Despite the widespread outrage at the allegations, last week some local Arkansas officials praised Karas for a “job well done”. “Dr Robert Karas and Karas Correctional Health have effectively treated … cases [in the jail] which have resulted in zero fatalities from the virus,” said a resolution recently passed by a local court’s jail and enforcement committee. The exploitation faced by the Arkansas inmates reflects America’s longstanding history of medically abusing vulnerable communities of color, including inmates. From 1946 to 1948, the US Public Health Service (USPHS) and the Pan American Sanitary Bureau worked alongside multiple Guatemalan agencies on medical research funded by the US government. The research involved deliberately exposing Guatemalans, including soldiers, prisoners, prostitutes and mental patients, with syphilis and other sexually transmitted diseases. In two years, more than 1,300 people were exposed to syphilis, gonorrhea or chancroid. In 2011, the Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues revealed that only about 700 of those infected received some form of treatment, while 83 others died. According to details that only emerged 10 years ago, one of the researchers, John Charles Cutler, injected gonorrhea and syphilis bacteria into the eyes of patients, often in the form of pus. In one study, he infected prostitutes with gonorrhea by inserting a cotton swab carrying the bacteria into their vaginas with “considerable vigor”. Cutler then ordered the prostitutes to have sex with the men he wanted to study, including prisoners and army members. Other researchers scraped men’s penises with needles and then applied syphilitic material around the abrasions. At times, women were subjected to injections of infected pus into their spinal cords. According to experts, the research came up with no useful medical information and was instead concealed for decades until a Wellesley College medical historian uncovered the medical records among Cutler’s papers. Cutler then went on to become a primary researcher in the later half of the infamous Tuskegee syphilis experiment. Starting in 1932 and continuing for 40 years, American government officials in rural Alabama withheld treatment from unsuspecting Black men infected with syphilis so doctors could monitor the disease and dissect their bodies when they died. The study was inspired by harmful pseudoscientific and racist beliefs, including ones that assumed that African Americans had under-developed brains and over-developed genitals. Researchers also believed that Black people were significantly prone to sexually transmitted disease and that all Black people could not be persuaded to receive treatment for syphilis. As a result, the experiments, which involved 600 Black men, became known as the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. The USPHS called the research a “study in nature” rather than an experiment, meant to merely monitor the progression of syphilis in a community that allegedly refused to seek treatment. The men were mostly sharecroppers and many had never visited a doctor. Doctors from the USPHS told them that they were being treated for bad blood, a general term used at the time to refer to a variety of diseases. In exchange for their participation, the men received free medical exams, free meals and burial insurance. Many of them died, or went blind or insane. Cutler later said in a 1993 documentary, “It was important that they were supposedly untreated and it would be undesirable to go ahead and use large amounts of penicillin to treat the disease, because you’d interfere with the study.” Similarly, from the 1950s to the 1970s, inmates in Philadelphia’s Holmesburg Prison, many of whom were Black, were subject to a series of medical experiments. In conjunction with the University of Pennsylvania, doctors and prison officials experimented on hundreds of prisoners for nearly two decades. Prisoners were used to test products for facial creams, perfumes, detergents and anti-rash treatments. Others were subject to experiments that involved far more hazardous substances, including radioactive isotopes, LSD, chemical warfare agents and dioxins, a highly toxic group of chemical compounds often used to bleach paper pulp and manufacture pesticides. One inmate said he was paid $10 to be injected with a “rare disease from India”, and was paid an additional $5 when he developed an abscess. In 2018, the dean of Penn Medicine issued an apology for the experiments, saying that the “work done … was terribly disrespectful of individuals – many of whom were imprisoned Black men – denying them the autonomy and informed consent which the medical community now considers to be foundational underpinnings for conducting ethical research.” Fast forward to present day, Karas has filed a motion to dismiss the ACLU’s lawsuit against him and the Washington county jail. Karas’s actions encapsulate not only the horrific history of the carceral system in the American south, but also the continued exploitation of vulnerable communities, including inmates of color. As one inmate said when he learned he’d been subjected to ivermectin treatments, “I’m scared. If you were so willing to put something in my pills and give me a pill without my acknowledgement, you could do the same thing and be deceptive and put it in my juice, my food … I can’t trust any of the medical staff. I can’t trust any of the guards.”The scheduling was surely not a coincidence as the ice dancing pairs served up some much-needed Valentine’s Day cheer at the Capital Indoor Stadium in Beijing, on a day figure skating was overshadowed by the Kamila Valieva case. The gold medal, won with a world record score of 226.98, went to France’s Gabriella Papadakis and Guillaume Cizeron, who danced to Gabriel Fauré’s Élégie. That also added a redemptive twist to the competition. In 2018, they became breakout social media stars of the Pyeongchang Games in South Korea for all the wrong reasons. At the last Olympics a wardrobe malfunction left Papadakis falling out of her dress on the ice while the skaters tried to execute their short dance. “I felt it right away and I prayed,” she said at the time. “It was pretty distracting, kind of my worst nightmare happening at the Olympics.” After that mishap the French dancers missed out on winning, despite setting a world record n their other routine, and had to settle for silver, losing by less than a point to the Canadian duo of Tessa Virtue and Scott Moir. Papadakis and Cizeron have gone on to dominate ice dancing, and they went into Monday’s session with a commanding lead. The British pair Lilah Fear and Lewis Gibson finished in 10th place with a combined score of 191.64. Ice dancing is surely the most sensual of Olympic disciplines, with many of the pairings through the years being couples on and off the ice. Though not every dancing pair in Beijing are romantically entangled. Indeed, from the winning pair, Cizeron is gay and in October 2021 the International Skating Union had to investigate an allegation of homophobic comments made about him by a Russian coach at a tournament. This year the Czech Republic have sent Natalie Taschlerova and Filip Taschler to the Winter Games – siblings who consequently dance in a slightly different style to the close entwinements often seen on the ice. Japan’s husband and wife duo of Tim Koleto and Misato Komatsubara missed out on a Valentine’s Day Olympic ice dance as they finished 22nd in Saturday’s rhythm dance session, meaning they did not qualify for Monday’s medal stage. Maybe being in a relationship is not an advantage anyway. Evan Bates and Madison Chock of the US danced for years before becoming a couple off the ice and despite an intimate routine early they finished outside the medals in a frustrating fourth place. They had performed an avant garde intergalactic space love story set to the electronic tones of Daft Punk. Above them in third were their US teammates Madison Hubbell and Zachary Donohue, who used to be an a relationship, but ended it two-and-a-half years ago, while continuing to compete together. They had picked perhaps a more conventional love theme with Anne Sila’s 2016 piano-driven ballad Drowning as their soundtrack. The bronze medallists kissed the ice as they left an Olympic competition for the last time. “It was just a moment for both of us to say goodbye to Olympic ice,” Hubbell said, “and thank this journey that’s created the people that we are today.” They are both retiring and intend to go into coaching – separately. The silver medal went to Victoria Sinitsina and Nikita Katsalapov of the Russian Olympic Committee. But if there was a prize for the most appropriate music choice for the day, it would surely have gone to Ukraine’s Oleksandra Nazarova and Maksym Nikitin as they danced to the song Backstage Romance from the soundtrack to Moulin Rouge. Every Winter Olympic Games since Innsbruck in 1976 has fallen in such a way that it includes 14 February. But maybe nothing will be more tailored to Valentine’s Day than the special trousers that Norway’s curlers wore for the occasion in Pyeongchang four years ago.On a loose sheet of paper from 1995, when she was in her 80s, Louise Bourgeois wrote: “The beautiful clothes from your youth – so what – sacrifice / them, eaten by the moths.” The statement represented a turning point in the French-American artist’s life and work. Schooled in the importance of self-presentation since childhood, Bourgeois observed that the “beautiful clothes” of her youth were, by this stage, amassing dust in her Manhattan townhouse. But to sacrifice them didn’t mean to dispose of them. She took up the needle and began to repurpose her clothing in a new sequence of fabric works – textile figures, collages, tactile drawings, books, prints. Bourgeois is known for her “spider” sculptures: towering arachnids carved in foreboding bronze and stainless steel. But the spider, as she frequently reminded her spectators, is also a deft weaver and repairer – and working with fabric was always part of her life. Born in Paris in 1911, she grew up mending vintage tapestries as the daughter of a seamstress. After a stint selling books in the family’s Paris showroom, she met Robert Goldwater, an American art historian. Wanting to escape France, she married him and relocated in 1938 to New York City, where she would remain and build an astonishing career until her death in 2010. Bourgeois’s fabric works are now on display in The Woven Child, a major retrospective at London’s Hayward Gallery. Though the title references the artist’s origins, the focus of the exhibition is a late chapter in her output, from the mid-1990s to 2010. Working night and day in her townhouse, she returned to cloth as medium, creating a version of her parents’ atelier in her home and revisiting the decades of couture that her fashion-conscious father had encouraged her to wear from a young age. The capacious show surveys close to 90 works, often displaying jagged, running stitches, and edges that are ripped and fraying. Being in the presence of Bourgeois’s creations is unnerving, at times disturbing and unsettling. There are severed heads; exposed bodily orifices; bulbous and dismembered dolls. Hayward director Ralph Rugoff reflects: “It’s easy to go to art shows these days when you don’t have a strong emotional response to the work. No one has gone so far out as Bourgeois did in terms of pushing an edge; not that many artists so radically undo our idea of form.” The works refute the classical view of the female body as a glossy object or passive muse. Endless Pursuit (2000), a blue-cloth feminine figure with flattened breasts and an enormous, globe-like belly, articulates the anguish that can come with trying to conceive. Lady in Waiting (2003) satirises the housewife waiting for a man to come home by making her a violent insect, seething on a plush tapestry chair. The works probe what inhabiting a body feels like, as opposed to how it looks. Since her death, Bourgeois has been celebrated, sometimes caricatured as a triumphant “spider woman”, or “ladyboss” of contemporary art. The Woven Child makes a case for her work instead as vibrantly material and three-dimensional. It is deeply moving to encounter the artist’s determination to make something from the scraps and traces of her childhood – and save the pieces of a life from “the moths”. Stitches in time – four works by Louise Bourgeois Couple IV, 1997 An entwined, headless couple lies prostrate in a vitrine. The glass case creates a claustrophobic feeling. The piece comments on the oppressive nature of intimate relationships but also our desperate need to feel close to other people. The Good Mother, 2003 (pictured top) On initial viewing, it could be a straightforward ode to Bourgeois’s mother, Joséphine. Yet threads issuing from the nipples suggest women’s entrapment in webs of reproductive duty. The title’s reference to being “good” evokes psychoanalyst Donald Winnicott’s model of the “good enough mother”, but also the trope of the “good girl” Bourgeois sought to expunge and reject through her work. High Heels, 1998 Adapted from a sequence of pencil drawings Bourgeois made of female cats in heat, High Heels presents an ambiguous feminine form both warped and enraptured by a pair of shoes. The piece evokes the ambivalent pursuits of fashion and femininity, how they straddle both pleasure and pain. “There is no better image for everything that fashion wants you to forget,” says Rugoff. Single 1, 1996 The work precariously dangles a roughly stitched, ambiguously gendered figure from a circular hook. A sense of surrender and intense vulnerability confronts the viewer. Bourgeois has said: “My early work is the fear of falling. Later on it became the art of falling. […] Later it became the art of hanging in there.” Louise Bourgeois: The Woven Child is at the Hayward Gallery, London, to 15 MayEurope is closer to war than at any point over the past 70 years, a UK government minister has warned, as Russian troops amass on the borders of Ukraine and western leaders warn that an invasion could take place early this week. The armed forces minister James Heappey told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he feared “we are closer than we’ve been on this continent” to war “for 70 years”. The comments have caused confusion as there have been several wars in Europe over the past seven decades, including conflicts in which the UK played a military role, such as in Kosovo. Heappey also appeared to discount the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974, and the war that has been continuing in Ukraine for the past eight years. Heappey said: “There’s 130,000 Russian troops around the borders of Ukraine, thousands more on amphibious shipping in the Black Sea and the Azov Sea. “All of the combat enablers are in place and my fear is that if all of this was just about a show to win leverage in diplomacy, that doesn’t require the logistics, the fuel, the medical supplies, the bridging assets, the unglamorous stuff that actually makes an invasion force credible, but doesn’t attract headlines. Yet all of that is now in place, too.” Western leaders are mounting a final effort to negotiate diplomatic solutions after US intelligence said an attack could be imminent. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv for talks with Ukrainian officials and Boris Johnson said he would hold further talks with world leaders to bring Russia “back from the brink” of war. His office did not say which world leaders Johnson was hoping to talk to or where he planned to travel, but it is understood he is keen to engage with Nordic and Baltic countries. The Foreign Office has asked British citizens to leave the country while roads are still open and commercial airlines are still flying. Heappey said there was “real urgency” to ongoing negotiations. He said: “That is why this is a very serious time for the whole world, really, to come together and to send a message to Russia that this is behaviour that will not be accepted and that we stand behind Ukraine, and that the financial sanctions if he were to cross the border would be absolutely profound.” In an interview with BBC Breakfast, Heappey said that although he could not comment on whether parliament would be recalled from recess this week as this was a decision for the Speaker, the prime minister and opposition party leaders, if it happened it would offer an opportunity for MPs to show the UK’s resolve that if Russia crossed the border into Ukraine, it would encounter more than “febrile tactical responses”. He said: “We’re entering into a period of sustained, strategic competition with Russia, in which we need to make sure that Putin’s wider aims beyond any territorial aim he may have in Ukraine, but his wider aims about Russia’s role in the world, his wider aims around constraining Nato, that he fails to achieve those and that Nato shows its resolve within its own borders.”Ivan Reitman was a director and producer with a golden touch for Hollywood comedy and feelgood entertainment – the heir, perhaps, of Ernst Lubitsch or Gregory La Cava from the golden age, but with a multiplex talent for the 80s and 90s – able to detonate serious box-office explosions. His great heyday, importantly, coincided with the great heyday of video rental and home entertainment – an era of couples and families browsing the VHS racks at video rental stores on a Friday and Saturday night and deciding that comedies were the best bet: Reitman’s comedies. And this, most famously, was for the glorious high-concept fantasy comedy Ghostbusters in 1984, which brilliantly absorbed SNL-type comedy into the movie mainstream and made stars and serious players of its leads: Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd and Harold Ramis. I have a happy memory of Ivan Reitman appearing on stage in London just last year, to deafening applause, joining his son Jason before the premiere of the newest film in what became the Ghostbusters franchise: Ghostbusters Afterlife. Reitman was able to hyper-evolve a comedy style which started in the wacky, boisterous, non-PC style of the frat house – there was his Canadian debut Meatballs (which was also Bill Murray’s acting debut) and the army comedy Stripes (again Murray, developing his miraculously laidback droll style). Before this, Reitman had produced National Lampoon’s Animal House, a movie that showed what a huge mainstream market there was for goofy, borderline-crass guys’ comedy. Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II took him to the stratosphere: an effects-laden spectacular with the heft and power of a big sci-fi or action movie – but a comedy with cool, even subtle performances. The same can’t exactly be said for his other directing coup, but it showed his pure Hollywood genius: realising the family comedy potential of Arnold Schwarzenegger in movies such as Twins and Kindergarten Cop. Those movies put Arnie’s muscular power and box office chops at the service of Reitman’s inspired talent for popular comedy. He was a titan of showbusiness and a master of the impossible task of making people laugh.Police have been ordered to reinvestigate a complaint from Caroline Flack’s mother that her daughter’s fame had influenced the decision to charge the TV presenter with assault. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) has instructed the Metropolitan police to look again at whether Flack was treated differently because of her fame when she was charged with assault rather than receiving a caution, which prosecutors had initially indicated would be the preferred course of action. The Love Island host took her own life at the age of 40 in February 2020 after learning prosecutors would press ahead with the charge over an incident involving her boyfriend, Lewis Burton. Her mother, Christine Flack, told the BBC she still wanted to know why her daughter had been charged with the assault. “I just want those answers to make me feel better and to make me know that I’ve done the right thing by Caroline,” she said. “It leaves us really sad and really angry because we want to know why they charged her. I just want the truth out there. I know it won’t bring her back but I’ve got to do it for her.” Asked if she felt the decision to charge her daughter had contributed to her death, Flack said: “Oh, totally. Totally. She couldn’t see a way out.” She said as a result she had lost trust in the police: “There’s no trust at all. No trust at all. I just want the truth out there.” Flack found out the day before her death that she would be prosecuted with the charge that she hit Burton with her phone while he slept, over concerns he had been cheating on her. Friends said she was expecting the case to be dropped after her lawyers applied for it to be thrown out. After her death, Flack’s management team and her mother accused the Crown Prosecution Service of preparing a “show trial”, since Burton had said he did not support a prosecution and Flack had denied the charge against her. The coroner, Mary Hassell, found that Flack had killed herself because she knew she was being prosecuted and could not face the media coverage. At the inquest in August 2020, Lisa Ramsarran, a deputy chief crown prosecutor, said the CPS’s original intention was to caution Flack, rather than charge her, but that was overturned after an appeal from the Met, who felt Flack had not made full admissions in her police interview. In December 2019, Burton had dialled 999 claiming Flack was “trying to kill him” while he was asleep and that he was bleeding “profusely” after he was hit on the head with a lamp, she said. In the police interview, Flack admitted making a “flicking gesture” with her phone, which made contact with Burton’s head, after reading texts that questioned his fidelity, but said she was surprised to see an injury and blood, Ramsarran said. Prosecutors decided a caution was not appropriate, and that there was sufficient evidence and it was in the public interest to authorise a charge of assault by beating, she added. Flack’s mother accused the police and prosecutors of having it “in for” her daughter, accusing them of taking her to court because of her celebrity status. The Met spokesperson said: “Following a review, the IOPC agreed with the MPS [Metropolitan police service] that service was acceptable in relation to seven areas of the complaints relating to the response and handling of the incident by the MPS. “The IOPC has directed the MPS to reinvestigate one element of the complaints. This relates to the process involved in appealing the CPS decision to caution Ms Flack. We will re-examine this element of the investigative process. Our thoughts and sympathies remain with Caroline’s family.” This is not the first investigation into how Flack’s case was handled. In March 2020, a freedom of information request from the Daily Mirror revealed that the CPS would launch an internal review, which was not uncommon especially in complex or sensitive cases. Around the same time, the IOPC decided against investigating how the Met dealt with the assault case on grounds there was no indication of a causal link between the actions or omissions of the police and Flack’s death. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.The first literary work to emerge from Myanmar since the military seized control of the country a year ago reveals the altruism and courage of a new generation of writers, its editor has said. Picking Off New Shoots Will Not Stop the Spring is an anthology of poems and essays, many of which were written during the military crackdown after last February’s coup. Others date from 1988 to 2020. Since the coup, “scores of poets have been persecuted, executed or killed in resistance”, said Ko Ko Thett, poet and co-editor of the anthology. The deaths of Myint Myint Zin and K Za Win in March 2021 sent shock waves through Myanmar, he said. In the book’s introduction, Ko Ko Thett and co-editor Brian Haman wrote: “Many poets … have been jailed for taking part in the protests. We are honoured to include poems by a number of these poets, including some best-loved poems by Khet Thi who died at the hands of the junta’s inquisitors on 8 May.” After the military seized control, hundreds of people, including children, were killed in street protests. Security forces used water cannon, rubber bullets and live ammunition to disperse protesters. The military imposed restrictions, including curfews and limits to gatherings. “In the wake of the military’s overthrow of Myanmar’s democratically elected government in February 2021, we found the online literary outpouring of outrage, grief and dissent particularly generous, altruistic and courageous,” said the book’s editors. The relatively recent introduction of the internet and social media in Myanmar became a powerful vehicle for the circulation of what Ko Ko Thett terms “witness writing”. “The removal of so much of the censorship following the 2010 election in the so-called ‘transitional Myanmar’ coincided with the introduction of the internet and social media,” he told the Guardian. “Many poets and writers became active online overnight. In the instantaneity and virality of social media, protest poets who posted their poems online got easily known, easily identified and easily tracked down.” In the decade after, the internet became a “major vehicle for poetry and voices of protests,” he said. Witness writing was distinct from protest writing, said Ko Ko Thett, who was a student activist in Yangon in the 1990s and now lives in the UK. “All protest writings may be witness writings, but not all witness writings are protest writings. Witness writing is more subjective and does not usually have an explicit political agenda – however politicised it might be or become.” The book’s editors said there was an “urgently felt need to preserve these online writings in a more durable and enduring format. Not only does this corpus of writing demonstrate the power and possibilities of the written word when faced with the barrel of a gun, but it also reveals Burmese writing to be aesthetically accomplished and significant.” Among the pieces in the anthology is Portrait of the Need for Oxygen by Zeyar Lynn, which compares the suffocating grip of the military on the country with that of Covid on an individual. Residual Lives by Mi Chan Wai is a first-hand account of the terror the poet felt in her neighbourhood on the outskirts of Yangon. In Whose Footfall is Loudest, Thawda Aye Lei described how “flip-flops had always been important witnesses to our revolutions”. In 2021, “every time a group of people were chased by guns and batons, dozens of ownerless flip-flops would be left abandoned on the street … When the security forces were gone, people picked them up and organised them in pairs for their owners to come and collect them.” Last year was extraordinarily tragic for Myanmar, and there was “no sign of abating conflict in the year to come, if not years”, said Ko Ko Thett. “The stage is set for protracted conflicts, poverty beneath human dignity, human suffering and environmental degradation.” Picking Off New Shoots Will Not Stop the Spring was published on 29 JanuaryThe Australian federal police commissioner has sounded a warning about disinformation ahead of the federal election campaign, telling a parliamentary inquiry police will use the “full force” of the law when conduct reaches a criminal threshold. Reece Kershaw used an opening statement to a Senate estimates committee on Monday night to tell senators he was concerned about the impact of disinformation “on the integrity of our institutions and the election itself”. The commissioner said police were alert to heightened security risks, including domestic protests, as well as the risks of foreign interference and disinformation that incited violence. He said the objective was “protecting our community, high-office holders, our democratic institutions and democratic values”. Kershaw’s intervention followed a public vow last week by the director general of Australia’s domestic spy agency to counter any attempts by other countries to interfere in the upcoming federal election. The Asio boss, Mike Burgess, also revealed in his annual threat assessment a “recent” meddling plot had been disrupted. The police commissioner said during the past two months, Australian Capital Territory policing and the AFP had been maintaining public order in Canberra “in challenging circumstances”. Protests against vaccination mandates have been escalating in the national capital. Burgess warned last week more “angry and alienated Australians” could turn to violence after being exposed to “an echo chamber” of extremist messaging, misinformation and conspiracy theories during the coronavirus pandemic. When it came to foreign interference, Kershaw told senators the AFP was working closely with Asio. He said police were “aware of increased espionage and foreign interference threats”. The police commissioner noted the AFP had worked with Asio last year “to bring an individual before the courts on the first foreign interference charges laid since the new offence was introduced in 2018”. In November 2020, police charged Duong Di Sanh, also known as Sunny Duong, with preparing to commit foreign interference. Duong has previously vowed to fight the charge , saying he had “nothing to hide” and rejecting allegations he had worked on behalf of the Chinese Communist party. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The AFP commissioner noted on Monday that foreign interference was an invisible crime for most Australians “but it has the potential to affect every Australian because it erodes democracy and our institutions”. Kershaw said Australia’s counter foreign interference taskforce had achieved a number of successful disruptions, “most significantly in relation to democratic institutions” during the past 18 months. In relation to disinformation, Kershaw noted police had charged a person with computer, carriage service and electoral offences, for their alleged role in an offensive spam email campaign and sending over 23m messages during the 2019 Wentworth and 2020 Eden-Monaro byelections. The individual will be sentenced later this year. When asked to explain how the AFP responded to threats to the personal safety of parliamentarians and their staff, Kershaw said it “sadly will probably be a growth part of our business”. “We’re very concerned,” Kershaw told the committee. “We have seen that during the Covid times a lot of people are online now, there is a lot of hate unfortunately and racial slur and discrimination and attacks personally on people, and often you don’t even know where it’s coming from. “We have been working with all the MPs in this building to better provide a service to yourselves about what numbers to ring, who to contact, what we can offer, and we do a threat risk assessment to work out whether or not you do need protection.” But Kershaw said threats made online “can be challenging for us to resolve” because some people used VPN services to hide their identities. The updates from the spy agency and the police chief come as the Morrison government is using the remaining parliamentary sitting weeks to set up an election contest where national security will be a significant theme. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, generated a furore last week when he motioned to the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, in parliament last week and declared: “We now see evidence that the Chinese Communist party, the Chinese government, has … made a decision about who they’re going to back in the next federal election, and that is open and that is obvious, and they have picked this bloke as that candidate.” The Nine newspapers last Friday reported “multiple security sources” had said a Chinese intelligence service was behind a recently disrupted foreign interference plot that had “attempted to bankroll [New South Wales] Labor candidates in the upcoming federal election”. Albanese said Asio had not raised any concerns with him about Labor’s federal election candidates. He characterised Dutton’s conduct as “desperate”, given the major parties had the same position on Beijing’s trade sanctions, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the South China Sea, human rights concerns, foreign interference and cybersecurity. On Monday, the Speaker of the lower house, Andrew Wallace, cautioned Dutton against repeating last week’s claim, ruling that it had been out of order. But the Speaker did not insist Dutton withdraw his remarks.Though many people are having no issues obtaining the dental care they need, some NHS dental patients including children are experiencing long waiting times and delays to treatment in parts of England, according to local media reports. In Enfield and Haringey, for example, children have waited up to 89 weeks for treatment. We would like to hear about your experiences of accessing NHS dental care for yourself or your children in the UK. Have you found it easy to get the care you need or have you experienced long waiting times or delays? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Film Yes, it all takes place after Joel (Jim Carrey) and Clementine (Kate Winslet) have bitterly broken up, but Michel Gondry’s inventive, mind-scrambling sci-fi Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind is actually perfectly romantic. On the pretext of annihilating the painful memories of his ex, Joel relives them, learning not just how much this elective amnesia will cost him, but also how much happiness is locked in the permafrost of the past, waiting to be thawed out. Inasmuch as any film this entertaining can be, it’s really an exhortation to listen to what your future self is screaming at you from another dimension right now: to turn off your TV, wrap your lover in your arms and notice this present, perfect moment as it’s happening. Jessica Kiang *** Games Globe-trotting action game Uncharted 4: A Thief’s End contains, in its opening few hours, one of gaming’s sweetest relationship scenes. Charming treasure hunter Nathan Drake has settled down with Elena, a fellow adventurer and photographer. The two both miss the excitement of their former lives, but we play through a moment of adorable domestic bliss when Nate picks up a PlayStation controller and proceeds to be absolutely terrible at Elena’s favourite game. Listening to their affectionate ribbing, this feels like a couple who have actually been through things. Uncharted 4 ends up being about a few different kinds of love – for family, for adventure, for your partner – and how that love can change us. Not quite what you’d expect from an epic pirate treasure hunt. Keza MacDonald *** Art One of ancient Greece’s great queer icons, Sappho embraces her fellow-poet lover, Erinna, in Sappho and Erinna in a Garden at Mytilene, a pioneering painting of same-sex love. Its maker, Simeon Solomon (1840-1905), was a Victorian outlier, depicting gay desire for a public audience. Tragically though, he fell from art world grace following an arrest for having sex with another man in a public lavatory. Looking towards her viewers, Erinna’s hesitancy – the raised knee, the stilling hand – suggests a fear of exposure. Skye Sherwin *** Comedy “This show is literally the dictionary definition of love in the 21st century.” London Hughes is not given to understatement but maybe she has a point when she identifies her breakout 2019 show To Catch a Dick as the last word on modern romance. These 60 uproarious minutes find the Croydon comic reviewing her life so far in love and sex, from presenting smutty TV to flings with foot-fetishists and smack-addled bankers. Throughout, Hughes sends up and celebrates in lurid terms her will to power, glory and sexual success. If it’s finally less concerned with love hearts than with other bodily organs, To Catch a Dick is sure to turn up the temperature on your Valentine’s Day. Brian Logan *** Music If you are looking for a Valentine’s soundtrack that evokes the dizzying sugar rush of youthful embrace, it doesn’t come better than lovers rock, the swooning Jamaican reggae pop that found a home in Britain in the mid-1970s. Released originally in 1981, Sonya Spence’s album Sonya Spence Sings Love takes that blueprint and sprints, infusing the genre with her own delicate twist of soul. Let Love Flow On – samples of which can be found on 2021’s I Have a Love by Dublin dance artist For Those I Love – is a guaranteed floor-filler at a big Caribbean family wedding, while Fantasy is the embodiment of a perfect first date, riding off into a palm tree-lined sunset. Its keen sense of nostalgia will add some much-needed sparkle to any dull British winter. Jenessa WilliamsI start with my body in stillness: my eyes closed, my head bowed, my sternum soft, my pelvis weighted, my knees supple, my legs wide. The soles of my feet touch the dance floor. I widen my toes and my metatarsals, opening up the pathways between the Earth and my heart. I soften my joints – my ankles, my knees, my hips –making more space for freedom and possibility. I take in the deepest breath, expanding my lungs and rib cage to capacity, until I can feel the tiny intercostal muscles between my ribs begin to stretch. As I exhale, I allow my body to move as it needs. A small sway moves through my spine. My arms follow behind like fabric in the wind, sequencing from my shoulders to my fingertips. My pelvis starts to rise and fall, swelling and crashing like ocean waves, forcing my legs to follow suit to manage the momentum. I feel my thighs begin to awaken to the glorious burn of activity. It feels good. As my body continues on its journey, I feel those first beads of sweat arise: along my hairline, in between my breasts, on the small of my back. An indication that I am warming and opening. I bring my attention to the music playing. Layers of percussion cue my body to get wide, get low, get deep, get earthy. I feel the urge to lean into tension … to say yes to the arrest of my muscles, then to break it apart, and arrest again. My shoulders rise to my ears, my spine curves forward, my biceps flex, my knees bend deeply, my fingers ball into fists. An explosion comes in the music. My arms and legs respond, erupting from my centre, sending me hurtling through the air, across the space. I land and feel my feet immediately connected to rhythm, digging and trudging forward as if the dance floor is soil. I let my body get lost in this foot chant that it’s building, enjoying the ride of the beat. Another explosion comes in the music. My feet slide outwards, escaping from underneath me, leaving me straight-legged, wide, splayed, cracked open, vulnerable with only my palm touching the Earth. I hold there and feel my abs begin to quake. I place my other hand to the Earth and follow the urge to crawl forward, feeling like a human morphing into an animal, uncomfortable and ripe with tension. I pause, hunched over the floor, like a cat ready to pounce. Then I exhale, I soften, melting into the floor, releasing that movement idea from my body. My breath is heavy and quick. Sweat rolling and dripping down my face and neck. I can taste the salt of it, the work of it. I relish in the discomfort, knowing that this is where I must go for honesty. I lie there in stillness, memorising the feeling, waiting to arise and go again. Chanel DaSilva is a dancer, choreographer and co-founder of MOVENYCAs the French New Wave was starting to crest, and with the Cuban missile crisis just under a year away, Soviet film-maker Mikhail Romm directed what might have been the nuclear physicists’ version of Jules et Jim. This was the very intriguing Nine Days in One Year, now restored for its 60th anniversary. It’s a poignant love triangle, a story of broken hearts represented, in a rather David Nicholls-ish device, by the events of nine separate days over one year in the romantic lives of those whose duty was to the Soviet motherland – and to the great cause of the USSR gaining nuclear power. Dmitri Gusev, played by Aleksey Batalov, is a dedicated scientist working on thermonuclear physics in Siberia, whose work has for years taken him away from his humble family in the country. His more playful and worldly scientist friend Ilya (Innokenty Smoktunovsky) is back in Moscow. They are both in love with the same woman: the passionate, focused, beautiful scientist Lyolya (Tatyana Lavrova). At the beginning of the story, Lyolya and Ilya are engaged to be married, but a visit to her former lover Dimitri reveals to Lyolya his heroic dedication and the fact that he has endangered his life with potentially fatal irradiation. Aware of a certain kind of patriotic and personal vocation, Lyolya nobly resolves to marry Dimitri instead, but Ilya, masking his feelings with a certain kind of cynical gaiety, remains in their lives, perhaps sensing Lyolya’s frustration and unhappiness in her marriage. There is a dark, shadowy expressionism in the film, an occult sense of mystery and danger in the underground corridors of the lab. Irradiation is maybe a metaphor for lovesickness, but perhaps the symbol only works if we understand love to mean love of science, or love of country. This is a story of people who unquestioningly sacrifice personal considerations for the Soviet nuclear cause, and yet this lost love looms alongside the Soviet Union’s nuclear destiny with equal potency. • Nine Days in One Year is screening on 15 February at the Institut Français in London.In 1982, I started work, joined a union and bought my first Tottenham Hotspur season ticket with my first week’s wages. As a bolshie teenager I figured before too long that I could rely on the three S’s: Spurs, the Smiths and socialism. They’ve all let me down since. Yet I continue to fork out on a season ticket, just as my dad and his dad did, along with thousands of other Jews who lived alongside them in Stepney and Whitechapel. My son is following the tradition. After 2,000 years of suffering, what’s a few more decades? However, unlike his dad and previous generations, his experience at Spurs is unlikely to include the kind of antisemitism we faced from away fans, particularly in the 1970s and 1980s. The Chelsea fans singing: “I’ve never felt more like gassing the Jews,” the West Ham fans with their version of I’m Only a Poor Little Sparrow, which included the Y-word and also the line “I hit him with a brick”. Spurs fans, mostly non-Jewish, adopted the Y-word in their own chants as a form of defence and defiance. If we owned the word, then its use by others would cease to be so offensive. But in recent years, the whole Y-thing has become the subject of increasing debate about whether it is time to drop it from chants, particularly those emanating from the Park Lane end. On Thursday, Tottenham put out a long and, it must be said, well-argued and considered statement calling time on the use by fans of the Y-word. It claimed most of the 23,000 supporters who took part in a club survey were, at the very least, uncomfortable with its use. I suspect many of them are from the greater Spurs diaspora rather than those who go to matches – particularly away games, where songs such as The Thing I Love Most is Being a Y** and Y** Army are sung by, if not the majority, then a substantial minority. It’s no surprise that Tottenham have acted now. Football is trying hard to eliminate racism and discrimination and the club, quite naturally, feel chanting the Y-word is incompatible with this. For what it’s worth, I don’t chant it, but that’s not because I object. It’s because I sit in the section reserved for grumpy old men who spend the whole game kvetching about players and their inadequacies. I have always been defensive about our use of the word against those who campaign to ban it, notably David Baddiel, a Chelsea fan with whom I agree on almost every other matter pertaining to antisemitism. I’ve felt the chants, and the spectacle of thousands of non-Jewish Spurs fans identifying with Jews, to be a source of pride. For me, it spoke to inclusivity, acceptance and solidarity. But when I speak to Jewish friends who obstinately support other teams – mostly Arsenal, some West Ham – they tell me they genuinely feel uncomfortable about the chants. And that makes me feel uncomfortable about its wider impact, however it feels to us in the stadium at Tottenham. It is hard, perhaps impossible, to dictate to a football crowd. So don’t be surprised if official disapproval results, for a while at least, in the chants being voiced more loudly than ever. If they peter out, it will be because something equally scabrous but less culturally loaded replaces them. I won’t be sad. Perhaps it’s time. Mark Solomons is a journalist and PR specialist“At what point do you think a relationship becomes a long-term relationship?” I ask my boyfriend, while sitting on the toilet having a post-dinner wee. He is in front of the mirror, trimming the single thick black hair that grows out from a mole on his cheek. Our son is in the bath next to us, squirting water from one stainless steel mixing bowl into the other using a Calpol syringe. “About here,” he says, gesturing towards the room, past my naked thighs, with a pair of nail scissors. After nearly two years of intermittent lockdowns, working from home, reduced opportunities for travel, socialising and, in many cases, making money, and more illness, a lot of long-term relationships are looking a little tired, a little frayed. Tempers have run short; desire has faded. Especially on this most “romantic” of days, many us will be thinking that we need to address things. To freshen up. To repair. This calls for more than a box of chocolates and a bunch of flowers. But where to start? I’ve been gleaning advice from those who have gone before me – from friends, relationship counsellors, old colleagues, writers and philosophers, even my family. Lower your expectations Your partner is not psychic: they cannot know what you think and feel and want at every turn. Nor is your partner an extension of you: they will frequently and unconsciously contradict you. So lower your expectations and try, as much as possible, to be kind. Standing at the hob, cooking yet another vat of soup (my partner and I have both decided that we need to eat fewer meals centred on butter and flour), I re-read Alain de Botton’s famous New Yorker essay Why You Will Marry the Wrong Person: “We need to swap the Romantic view for a tragic (and at points comedic) awareness that every human will frustrate, anger, annoy, madden and disappoint us – and we will (without any malice) do the same to them. There can be no end to our sense of emptiness and incompleteness. But none of this is unusual or grounds for divorce. Choosing whom to commit ourselves to is merely a case of identifying which particular variety of suffering we would most like to sacrifice ourselves for.” I add some salt. And a knob of butter. Well, come on… Mind your language My sister’s dad (who, for the genealogists in the room, is not my dad) once told me that people don’t break up over big things; they break up over how they talk to each other. Yes, in the end, your partner might sleep with someone else or steal your rent. But in most cases, the damage is done when you stop saying goodbye at the end of phone calls, stop saying thank you for dinner, stop asking the other person how their day was. However, blaming someone else’s behaviour is unlikely to change it. “People could really do with saying what they need, not what they think the other partner should do,” says Relate counsellor Josh Smith, who has been working with couples and families for more than five years. “Also, set a time and space when you’re going to talk about things but give it a time limit. A person who is feeling anxious might want to talk about an issue, but their partner might be more inclined to avoid difficult conversations and worried it will go on for ever. So you could say: ‘Let’s talk for half an hour and then stop.’” Smith also recommends giving yourself a timeout during those exhausting, essential conversations. “When our nervous system gets very aroused, we might say things we don’t mean, or not be able to say very much at all and disconnect emotionally. Being able to take a timeout, with a planned time to return to [the discussion], will help you listen.” Go to counselling while you still like each other When you hear counsellors talk about their clients, says Smith, the one thing that comes up time and time again is that they wish they’d come sooner – before the fight-or-flight response got so ingrained and the conflict so advanced that partners could no longer hear each other. So, to use a rather threadbare analogy, maybe treat relationship counselling like going to the gym: something that you use regularly to keep things healthy, to nip small problems in the bud, rather than turn to when things have seriously gone to seed. It is a privilege that many people can’t afford, of course, but it might also be money well spent. Get into bed and see what happens Sex is a pretty fundamental (and free) way to cement intimacy in a relationship. It can also act as a microcosm for the relationship: when people are feeling stressed, anxious, avoidant, low in self-esteem, bored or overlooked, it will almost inevitably lead to a drop-off in bouncing bedsprings. “For most of the couples I see, sex is an issue,” says Smith. “It’s not unusual for people in long-term relationships to have very little sex.” Well, who’d have guessed? “But that’s not a problem if it’s not a problem,” he adds. “Don’t let normative ideas about sex get in the way.” That doesn’t mean you have to give up just yet. When I asked my family WhatsApp group how to reboot a long-term relationship, one cousin replied: “Actively listen, be nice to each other and have sex even in times you might not feel like it (and then remember how much you do actually like it).” Flirt with other people If you still need a little boost, remember what the psychotherapist Esther Perel says about desire in her Ted Talk, The Secret to Desire in a Long-Term Relationship: “If there is a verb, for me, that comes with love, it’s ‘to have’. And if there is a verb that comes with desire, it is ‘to want’.” The journalist Katie Antoniou puts it like this: “Go to a party and watch your partner flirt with other people and remember why you find them hot. And flirt with other people and remember people find you hot. Then go home together.” Do at least one thing separately every day One of the great challenges in a long-term relationship is judging how much time to actually spend together. “During the pandemic, I noticed that people’s lives became a bit enmeshed,” says Smith, in possibly the greatest understatement of 2022. “Having different experiences and being able to bring those back into the relationship can be really healthy.” As Perel points out: “We come to one person, and we are basically asking them to give us what once an entire village used to provide.” We want security, companionship, perhaps children, a best friend, a trusted confidante, a red-hot lover and someone to help us fulfil our daily domestic tasks. This is, probably, an unfair expectation of any single person. Put too many eggs in the long-term partner basket and cracks are going to show, if not yolk and leaking albumen. So don’t be afraid to look outside your relationship for other connections. It is not a criticism of your romantic relationship to go on holiday, share childcare, work, go to dinner, play football and watch films with other people. And, whether it’s a hobby, a shed or a separate bed, don’t be afraid to carve out a private sphere within your relationship. My greatest – and possibly only – bit of advice about sustaining a long-term relationship is to share a bed but have two separate duvets. The Germans, as is so often the case, have the answer. Feel the fear … “Long-term relationships aren’t like warm baths; they’re like holding a tiger by the tail.” I’m on the phone to a friend who has been in his current relationship – I say “current” because, honestly, who am I to say? – for a mere 43 years. When it comes to relationship advice, as he admits, his understanding of dating, casual sex, breakups and asking people out is minimal. “She moved in when I was 19 and that was it, really.” But he is rather useful on the long-term front. “There are two main approaches, as I see it,” he says. “There is the passive state, which some people can find very sustaining, when it would basically be such a faff to split up that you’re staying together.” I think of my mortgage and our son and the fact that I still cannot replace my brake pads. “Or there is the active approach, where you’re always opting in. That’s what I chose.” The reason he and his partner didn’t marry for the first 42 years of their relationship, he says, is that they always wanted to know that they were together because they were choosing to be so. “I quite liked the jeopardy,” he says. “It’s a constant dialogue between exhilaration and exhaustion. At any time, I could have walked away. We had made no promise; there was no contract. Which meant that, every day, I knew I was there because I wanted to be there.” But what about the days when you don’t want to be there, I ask, picking a used teabag off the lid of the compost bin and putting it into the compost bin. “Well, that’s when the exhaustion comes in,” he says. “And you have to have those conversations about where you are and what you want.” … but don’t be afraid of all change A priest once told me that, over a lifetime, you will be married several times – and if you’re lucky, that will be to the same person. Children, work, where you live, money, health: the things that change your life will change your relationship too. So do the work to make those changes happen with, and in parallel to, your partner. Talk to each other about the ways you are developing and how you can adapt the dimensions and texture of your relationship to fit. Few of us would really want to be the person we were 10 years ago (in my case: single, recently redundant and staying in my mum’s spare room), so don’t expect your partner or your relationship to be held in aspic either. It is also worth pointing out that the things that bring you stress outside your relationship – money worries, illness, unemployment, housing insecurity, the demands of parenting, grief and moving home – will create stress within your relationship. So check if there are things you can do to improve your own situation before blaming your partner. Make time for quality time (even if you hate the phrase) Date nights worked for the Obamas, who once famously flew to New York, took a limo to dinner, watched a Broadway show and then flew home all in one night, during his presidency. And it was noticeable to me that the first time my partner and I spent a night away together since our son was born four years ago, we ended up not only sleeping in a bedroom covered in photographs of someone else’s whippets, but getting engaged. It doesn’t have to involve money, travel or Instagram. Time spent together away from your usual domestic coexistence – even if it’s just a swim, or a train journey, or a trip to a new launderette – can make a huge difference to how you see your partner. Remember the little joys Finally, having picked up my partner’s socks from the floor, made the bed, rehung the damp, onion-smelling towel he had flung in a heap over the door, and wiped the peanut butter off my forehead, I asked my old English teacher for his advice. This, after all, is the man who taught Philip Larkin’s An Arundel Tomb, with its description of the stone earl and his lady countess, who rigidly persisted, “linked, through lengths and breadths of time”. More to the point, he’s been with his partner since they met at a party aged 20, more than 40 years ago. He must, I reasoned, have some ideas about what sustains and revives a long-term relationship. The reply comes back mere minutes later: “Amnesia, dogged optimism, a robust and shared sense of the contemptibility of public figures, alternating phases of heartfelt loyalty and shameless disloyalty with regard to friends and birth families, lonesome sheds with tools in them, compatible levels of existential angst, sunsets, recreational stimulants, utterly selfish projects, wholly unshared obsessions, a poor sense of smell, frequently sleeping in separate beds, frequently sleeping together, children, finding each other ridiculous, plant life, lakes, oceans, rock pooling, books, solvency, knowing who’s better at what, dreaming of elsewhere, avoiding all board games and exercising dictatorial authority over territories in different areas of daily mundanities.” His wife, he later tells me, probably had a better list. I would happily marry either of them. Oh, and one final note: in all my research, nobody mentioned shutting the door when you’re on the toilet. But I’d say give it a try.Donald Trump has endorsed rightwing Republican candidates who support his baseless claims of a stolen election for key posts in Michigan, raising the prospect of a Trumpist takeover of how the key battleground state might run its elections. Trump and his allies are backing numerous candidates in the coming midterm elections across the US, including in other vital states like Arizona and Georgia. But his intervention in Michigan raises particular eyebrows due to its role in helping Trump to win in 2016, before flipping back to the Democrats in 2020 and helping oust him from office. The former US president and his close ally Mike Lindell, the My Pillow CEO, are giving strong backing to a Michigan lawyer and key promoter of debunked election fraud charges who is seeking the Republican nod to be the state’s next attorney general. Trump plans to hold a fundraiser for lawyer Matthew DePerno on 8 March at his Florida Mar-a-Lago club, where Lindell told the Guardian he will speak to boost DePerno’s chances to be the Republican to take on Michigan’s Democratic attorney general, Dana Nessel. Kristina Karamo, a community college professor who also peddled conspiracy theories about election fraud, and who never held elected office, has received Trump’s backing to be the Republican secretary of state candidate to challenge incumbent Democrat Jocelyn Benson in the fall elections. The secretary of state plays a crucial role in overseeing elections, and Trump loyalists are investing heavily to capture several of these posts this year. And early this month, Trump spoke at a fundraiser at Mar-a-Lago for the gubernatorial campaign of conservative commentator and business woman Tudor Dixon who has backed a vaguely defined “forensic audit” of the state’s election results which Joe Biden won by 154,000 votes. Although Trump called Dixon “very special”, he is not yet made an official endorsement and she is one of 12 Republican candidates seeking to be the next governor. Trump’s varying embraces of DePerno, Karamo and Dixon is emblematic of how he is helping candidates who repeat his false charges that he lost due to widespread fraud, and who could potentially help Trump sway results in key states should he run again in 2024. According to a report from the election watchdog group States United Action, at least 11 candidates who have denied the 2020 results are valid are running for attorney-general posts in 10 states, and at least 21 election deniers are trying to win secretary of state races in 18 states, as of the end of January. “Statewide leaders from both parties who protected the will of the voters in 2020 are being challenged by election deniers,” said Joanna Lydgate, the chief executive of States United Action. “Those candidates are campaigning on lies and conspiracy theories in determining whether the will of the voters is upheld – a dangerous contradiction.” Both DePerno and Karamo have already garnered checks for $5,000 from a Trump Super Pac, according to public records. A Michigan Republican convention in April will decide which candidates get on the fall ballot to take on Democratic opponents, and an August Republian primary will choose the party’s gubernatorial candidate to oppose incumbent Gretchen Whitmer. The Trump Super Pac overall backed a total of 14 Michigan candidates who challenged the 2020 results and roped in $65,000 from the Pac – more than any other state except Texas – according to campaign data. DePerno’s candidacy has been especially controversial given his legal efforts promoting false fraud charges in a lawsuit against 23,000-person Antrim county. The DePerno lawsuit, which was filed on behalf of a local realtor, sought to obtain a forensic audit, but was rejected last May when a judge noted that an audit had been done and dismissed the suit which alleged election machines were purposely designed to produce fraud. Antrim county, a Republican stronghold, was won by Trump after a preliminary tally that Biden won the county was quickly found wrong due to a clerical error, and corrected. Some of DePerno’s fundraising to help fund audits in Michigan and Arizona, and apparently pay for personal legal expenses, have prompted scrutiny for their size and unknown donors. One “Election Fraud Defense Fund” that DePerno used reportedly raked in $384,000 as of last July, and had an overall goal of $1m, some of which was expected to pay for a Michigan audit. Lindell told the Guardian he has not donated funds to DePerno’s legal efforts or campaign and that he met DePerno when the lawyer was featured in Lindell’s film Absolute Proof, which early last year drew criticism for promoting dubious theories about the 2020 election results. After the movie came out, DePerno and his family received “threats”, according to Lindell, which prompted him to give the lawyer “about $20,000 for security”. Lindell has endorsed other candidates for attorney-general and governor posts in states such as Arizona, Georgia and Texas who echo Trump’s false claims of widespread fraud in the 2020 election. When Trump endorsed DePerno last fall, he dubbed him a “super lawyer”, claiming falsely that he “exposed so much fraud in Antrim county, and many more places, in the 2020 elections”. The Trump bash next month at Mar-a-Lago to help DePerno could raise tens of thousands of dollars for his campaign coffers, according to reported ticket prices. For $25,000, a donor can get a photo standing next to Trump and DePerno, while for $10,000 an attendee can have a photo taken next to Lindell and DePerno. Those funds could prove useful: a Detroit News poll last month showed DePerno running behind Tom Leonard, who Nessel defeated in 2018, and who is hoping to challenge her again. According to the poll, Nessel led Leonard and DePerno. Although Trump’s backing for DePerno seems to have drawn the most scrutiny, Karamo and Dixon have also generated controversies. Karamo has said that Trump was the real winner of Michigan in 2020, and used her podcast on 7 January to push conspiratorial and false charges that far-left anarchists led the assault on the Capitol. Last October, Karamo was one of several secretary of state candidates from various states who have embraced Trump’s election lies to speak at a Las Vegas meeting that featured people with QAnon conspiracy links. Although Trump hasn’t formally endorsed Dixon, who has worked in sales and customer service at a steel company her father launched, Dixon has made no secret of her backing for Trump and hopes that he will bless her campaign. “I think that we would be kidding ourselves if we didn’t say that his endorsement will absolutely frame every race in America,” she said last August. Other Republican gubernatorial aspirants are also angling for Trump’s backing, including ex-Detroit police chief James Craig, who met with Trump last fall. With Trump-backed candidates competing in Michigan and many other states, Lydgate of States United Action warned that it’s not a given any more that candidates for high office believe in “free and fair elections … the American people need to pay close attention to those races”.Ukraine has quashed suggestions by the country’s ambassador to Britain that it could drop its bid to join Nato to avoid war with Russia, ahead of a busy day of diplomacy with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, heading to Kyiv. Ambassador Vadym Prystaiko told BBC Ukraine that the country was willing to be “flexible” over its goal to join the Atlantic military alliance, a move the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has warned would be a trigger for war. “We might – especially being threatened like that, blackmailed by that, and pushed to it,” Prystaiko said when asked if Kyiv could change its position on Nato membership. Ukraine is not a Nato member, but was promised in 2008 that it would eventually be given the opportunity to join, a move that would bring the US-led alliance to Russia’s border. In 2019, an amendment was adopted that enshrined the ultimate goal of Nato membership in the country’s constitution. A spokesperson for the country’s foreign minister quickly quashed the remarks, claiming Prystaiko’s words had been taken out of context. “Ambassador Prystaiko rightly noted in his interview that the prospect of Nato membership is established in the constitution of Ukraine, although Ukraine is currently not a member of Nato or any other security alliance,” wrote Oleg Nikolenko on Facebook. “The key for us is the issue of security guarantees. Undoubtedly, the best such guarantee would be the alliance immediately accepting Ukraine. But the threats to Ukraine exist here and now, so the search for security guarantees becomes a fundamental and urgent task. At the same time, no decision can be made that contradicts the Ukrainian constitution.” Asked whether or not Ukraine may reconsider its ambitions to join Nato, Prystaiko told the BBC in English: “No this is not and I am quite happy that I have this chance to clarify my position.” Asked again if Ukraine was shifting its bid to become a Nato member, he said: “No.” Prystaiko said the earlier BBC report was the result of a misunderstanding. “We are not a member of Nato right now and to avoid war we are ready for many concessions and that is what we are doing in conversations with the Russians,” Prystaiko said. “It has nothing to do with Nato, which is enshrined in the constitution. “It is not a delay to our ambitions to be in Nato – what we are talking about is that we are not in the family now so we have to look for something else like bilateral agreements with the UK, with the United States,” he said. “So on top of Nato, we are looking for some other arrangements which would allow us to survive at this particular ordeal right now.” Putin has voiced concerns that if Ukraine grows its ties with the alliance further, it could be made a launchpad for Nato missiles targeted at Russia. He had said Russia needed to lay down “red lines” to prevent that. He has also claimed that accepting Ukraine into Nato would lead to military action by Nato to reclaim the Crimea peninsula, annexed by Russia in 2014. “Do you want France to go to war with Russia?” an angry Putin asked a French journalist during the press conference after his recent Kremlin meeting with the French president, Emmanuel Macron. “That’s what will happen!” The UK armed forces minister, James Heappey, told the BBC that the UK government did not believe that suggestions of Ukraine giving up its goal of Nato membership was official policy. He said on Sky News that “any diplomatic solution shouldn’t be something that compromises Ukrainian sovereignty” and the country’s right to choose to be a member of Nato. However, he added that it was a decision for Ukraine to make, and that the UK would support whichever choice it made because “that’s what sovereignty is”. He cited the example of Serbia as a country that is not a Nato member but with which the UK has close ties.About £42bn was wiped off the value of London’s top 350 listed companies on Monday as mounting fears of an imminent Russian attack on Ukraine triggered a global share sell-off. European stock markets fell heavily, following losses in Asia-Pacific markets, as geopolitical tensions drove oil prices to seven-year highs. The FTSE 100 index lost 1.7%, or 129 points, to close at 7532 points, its biggest fall since the crisis rocked markets three weeks ago. Airline group IAG, which owns British Airways, fell 5.6%. Financial stocks were also hit, with Barclays down 5.1%, and Lloyds Banking Group and NatWest losing around 4.1%, as the blue-chip index lost more than £34bn, falling away from the two-year high set last week. The FTSE 250 index of mid-sized companies lost 1.95%, or £7.7bn, with eastern European airline Wizz Air tumbling 6.3% and cruise operator Carnival down 4.8%. There were heavy falls across Europe amid concerns that energy supplies to the region could be disrupted if Russia were to invade Ukraine. Germany’s DAX index and Italy’s FTSE MIB both shed 2%, while France’s CAC closed 2.3% lower. The selloff came as German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, visited Kyiv on Monday and will travel to Moscow on Tuesday, warning that an attack by Russia would lead to “tough sanctions” being immediately imposed. “Just as the storm of Covid appeared to be receding, the growing expectation of an invasion of Ukraine is the fresh threat now unnerving investors,” said Susannah Streeter, a senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. “Energy markets are clearly on edge and if supplies are threatened, there is a risk oil will shoot up even higher, adding price pressure for companies.” Heightened expectations of a Russian invasion of Ukraine drove the price of Brent crude oil to above $96 a barrel for the first time since September 2014, before it eased back to $94.50. Analysts warned that oil could soon breach the $100 mark as tensions rise, with the price of oil having already risen more than 20% since the start of 2022. Natural gas prices also rose, with the UK contract for next-day delivery up 4%. Russia is responsible for a third of Europe’s natural gas and about 10% of global oil production. Craig Erlam, analyst at brokerage Oanda, said the Ukraine crisis had accelerated the move in crude prices towards $100 per barrel, as the oil market was “extremely tight at the moment” and the Opec oil cartel fell short on quotas. “Demand growth is strong and Opec+ continues to fail to hit output targets. Rather than getting closer, the gap is even widening. We don’t need Opec+ to expand targets – it’s time for unilateral action from Saudi Arabia which reportedly has the capacity to alleviate the pressures. Until then, hope lies with a nuclear deal between the US and Iran. In the absence of either, triple-figure oil looks very possible,” Erlam predicted. The jump in the oil price threatens to push fuel prices higher in coming weeks, with UK petrol prices hitting record highs last weekend. “The big issue for consumers will be the question mark over those rising energy prices. How high can they go; how much extra pain can be inflicted at a time many people are already struggling with rising costs?” said Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst. “Though the price of a barrel of oil has backed off from earlier highs, that will be of little comfort to drivers heading to the pumps this evening and wincing at the numbers displayed on screen.” Nervous investors rushed into safe-haven assets such as the US dollar, pushing the pound down to a one-week low of around $1.352. The falls in European shares prices followed a sell-off in Asia. Hong Kong’s benchmark Hang Seng index fell by about 1.4%, while Japan’s Topix and South Korea’s Kospi closed 1.6% lower. Stocks dipped in New York, adding to losses on Friday night when the US warned that there was a “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days. The Dow Jones index of 30 leading US companies was down 0.5% around midday, while the tech-focused Nasdaq had recovered around 0.6%. “Markets are preparing for the risk of war in Europe, and it’s adding to the complex of issues driving uncertainty and volatility in global markets currently,” said Kyle Rodda, an analyst at IG. “The concern is about the impact such a conflict will have on fragile energy markets, European economic growth, and the broader financial system if sanctions are slapped on Russia.”Midway through Pankaj Mishra’s first novel in 20 years, Run and Hide, the narrator, Arun, predicts something drastic. “The new India will never make it,” he thinks, on a long cab ride from New Delhi to the Himalayas. Arun has just abandoned his girlfriend, Alia, in London and returned to India for the first time since his mother’s funeral. A close friend of Arun’s died by suicide in an American prison not too long ago; another friend is about to make a creepy move on Alia. And yet Arun is beleaguered more by his country’s prospects than his breakup or loss. You don’t have to agree with his opinion of “new India” to realise that his prognosis is superfluous to the story. Ever since his debut novel, The Romantics, was published in 1999, Mishra has established himself as a prognosticating pundit of sorts. His essays have scrupulously documented the dark underside of India’s economic growth: the widening rift between the country’s nouveau riche and the millions who struggle to make ends meet; the decades of military occupation of Kashmir; the reverberatory ascent of Hindu nationalism. In 2017 he published Age of Anger, an ambitious polemic that traced the rise of Modi, Erdogan and Trump to older ideas of discontent with western modernity. Even in the 18th and 19th centuries, Mishra wrote, “the sense of being humiliated by arrogant and deceptive elites was widespread, cutting across national, religious and racial lines”. Run and Hide puts this provocative theory into practice. In the opening pages, when we’re told that Arun and his friends are “self-made men of… lowly social backgrounds”, we’re already being primed to expect a cautionary tale about our unequal world. Aseem is a novelist and a media personality who is perceived as a hero of “petit-bourgeois aspirations” in India. Virendra was born a Dalit, the lowest Hindu caste, once called “untouchables”, but becomes a Wall Street billionaire within a few years. Arun’s father is cartoonishly evil, at once a wife beater, a rioter, a philanderer, a foul-mouthed swindler, and a “libtard-obsessed” supporter of Modi. Arun is the only character allowed some degree of complexity. A part-time translator living in the Himalayan foothills with his mother, he is alone among his cohort in his reluctance to pursue a lucrative career. He rejects the idea of moving to the west with a plaintive remark: “How much further do I have to go for a bit of dignity?” In Arun, the Buddhist desire to withdraw from the world coexists with a sterile self-absorption, which makes for a fascinating case study, but a wearisome narrator. The novel is robbed of a necessary frisson, what Henry James once called “an immense and exquisite correspondence with life”. There is much to be admired about Mishra’s willingness to tackle one of contemporary fiction’s ignored themes: class. But his social – and, frankly, moral – indictments come at the expense of a novel’s inherent imaginative promise. It isn’t just the tediously flat characters; the plot, too, is an assortment of soapbox staples, be it the rags-to-riches story of Arun’s friends, or his own poor-boy-meets-rich-girl trajectory. Women are no more than props in this sweeping inventory of male self-aggrandisement. Arun’s mother is stereotypically submissive: always “working, knitting, when not cooking or cleaning”. Alia, too, is thinly drawn, apparently doomed to vapidness by her well-off upbringing, and later, for posting selfies on social media. The didacticism of Mishra’s essays, bracing in their clarity, works against him in fiction. Arun may be approaching 50, but his misgivings about Alia are the stuff of teenage pop lyrics: “you belonged to a world that could never quite be mine”. The reader is never quite immersed in a credible fictional landscape, because some character is speechifying on every other page about the crisis of liberal democracy or the “unfolding calamity” in India. Mishra doesn’t seem to realise the difference between the illuminating and the trivial detail, what to include and what to leave out. It is one thing to mock the pretensions of a newly wealthy middle class blinded by their own appetites, quite another to repeatedly drive home the point that everything about the rich is fraudulent, down to their “fake fingernails”. Scenes are introduced as “agonisingly vivid” before being laid out, objects are overwhelmingly catalogued as “emblems” before being described. The novel exudes a constant anxiety about being understood: Mishra doesn’t trust the reader to read between the lines. Twenty years ago, Mishra famously criticised one of Salman Rushdie’s novels, The Ground Beneath Her Feet, for merely echoing “the white noise of the modern world”. Now Mishra has himself produced a bristly saga, cloying in its concerns, tailored to appeal to those who, following the literary theorist Fredric Jameson’s edict, breathlessly consume novels from the global south as national allegories. You’ll find in this book a meticulous exposition of India’s illiberal turn, how the country’s pluralist and quasi-socialist founding principles were betrayed in the past three decades. But the story lacks a subtler feeling for life. • Run and Hide by Pankaj Mishra is published by Cornerstone (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyTo … One word is too often profaned For me to profane it, One feeling too falsely disdained For thee to disdain it; One hope is too like despair For prudence to smother, And pity from thee more dear Than that from another. I can give not what men call love, But wilt thou accept not The worship the heart lifts above And the Heavens reject not,— The desire of the moth for the star, Of the night for the morrow, The devotion to something afar From the sphere of our sorrow? To … is associated with the group of poems Shelley dedicated to Jane Williams in 1822, and it remains among the most lastingly popular and frequently anthologised of English love poems. It was one of the first Shelley poems I encountered, and since this week’s feauture is publishing on Valentine’s Day, it seemed auspiciousto revisit a literary “old flame” and see if it still burns as brightly. A little biographical context is unavoidable. The poet and his wife, Mary Shelley, were close friends with Jane and her husband, Edward, and the two families eventually shared a small house in Italy, on the coast of Lerici. Both Edward and Shelley lost their lives in a sailing accident in the summer of 1822. Like a knightly adherent of the Courtly love tradition, Shelley constructs a vow of chaste devotion in this poem, but makes demands beyond the genre in his plea to receive “pity” rather than submit to “disdain”. Jane’s participation in the fantasy romance is required, and there’s a faintly overbearing quality in the paired patterning of the lover’s statements and the woman’s imagined and wished-for responses. The poem is beautifully made. Its flexible, songlike rhythm and verbal formality combine in two stanzas of considerable eloquence and elegance. While the play of anapaests brings a lightness to the metre, the pattern of three and two-beat lines with, respectively, masculine and feminine endings, asserts a control of the medium equal to the emotional control proclaimed. In the first stanza, the sentence-subjects are not quite antithetical and their connection is emphasised by parallel grammatical structures. The subjects are “word” and “feeling”, “hope”, “prudence” and “pity”. The word which is “too often profaned” is carefully withheld, and then disclosed in the opening of the second stanza, “I can give not what men call love …” It’s a strange line, suggesting inadequacy rather than moral restraint, while loftily asserting the superiority of the love that remains physically unexpressed. Those negatives forming the first and third line-endings in the second stanza seem to add a touch of coercion to the argument. Shelley’s atheism doesn’t preclude a reference to the Heavens, and the certainty that his love would find approval there. No doubt these Heavens belong to the classical rather than Christian tradition. As a young reader, I particularly admired the comparison of the poet’s love with “[t]he desire of the moth for the star”. Now, it seems to strike a hyperbolic note, and yet the images it conjures are oddly affecting. The closing lines seem a humbler, plainer and more moving suggestion of the poet’s unhappiness than achieved elsewhere. Overall, the poem is a revealing expression of the pathology of “what men call love”. It’s more complicated than I first thought, and less dependent on the Romantic tradition in which it’s conventionally placed.“Widespread” inequality across healthcare sectors is harming the health of millions of black, Asian and ethnic minority patients, a study has found. The health of minority ethnic patients in England has been negatively impacted by racism, racial discrimination, barriers to accessing healthcare and poor ethnicity data collection, the review, commissioned by the NHS Race and Health Observatory, found. Radical action is needed to overcome the problem. We want to hear from black, Asian and ethnic minority patients in England about their experiences of receiving healthcare. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“This is Not for Clients”, proclaims the title of a two-screen video installation. The significance of these words soon becomes clear as two nine-minute films – one silent – simultaneously unspool the story of a sex worker’s journey from “princess” to “dominatrix” to “low cost”. The camera drifts around a candy-coloured virtual sex dungeon as a voiceover explains: “High volume, low price, in order to survive. I have passed for ever to the side of the a-normals, of the crazy, of the misfits. Only we know when we survive, dirty with their opinions.” You can see why clients would not want to prick their consciences with this glimpse behind the scenes of their erotic fantasies. Letizia Miro, who wrote the text and performs in the film’s framing scenes, caters for such clients in her other life as an “unconventional libertine”. A London-based Catalan writer, poet and philosophy PhD, Miro quotes Virginia Woolf and the poet and novelist Ocean Vuong on her glossy website, which advertises her services as a fantasy girlfriend, “kinky companion” and “sensuality coach”. When we meet via Zoom, Miro explains: “The website is client-facing, which means it doesn’t expose the complexities and darkness. Talking about precariousness is not sexy. My brand is very positive, but that doesn’t mean it’s not true. I’m a positive, empowered woman but I’m also struggling like everyone else to feel alive and to be financially independent in a capitalist system I did not choose.” The work is a collaboration with Yarli Allison and the two are among 13 international artists who were selected from 90 respondents to an open call submissions for the polemical exhibition about sex work, which opens this week at the ICA in London. From moving image to sculpture, from gaming to comics and embroidery, Decriminalised Futures sets out to explore the many facets of the world’s oldest industry, while making a case for it to be fully decriminalised. Technically, Allison points out, simply by collaborating on a sex work-related subject, she and Miro could fall foul of the UK’s sex trafficking laws. “Even as a videographer,” she says, “I could get in trouble, right? Because I’m in the same room – and no two women are allowed to be in the same room.” Miro adds: “It’s insane, because it forces women to work alone in unsafe situations – if there’s a bad client, you can’t go to the police.” The exhibition was the brainchild of curators Elio Sea and Yves Sanglante, and grew out of a weekend conference in 2019 celebrating the 10th anniversary of Swarm (the Sex Worker Advocacy and Resistance Movement) . “There’s a lot of political organising around sex worker rights, and creative stuff, so we thought it would be great to create a space for it that was wider,” says Sea, who comes to the project from a background in community advocacy, while Sanglante’s expertise is archiving and curating. “We know, from sex workers, that their lives are complex,” adds Sanglante. “Sex worker rights are a key intersection point of disability and healthcare, migration and borders, gender and work. We felt an exhibition might be a way to show that complexity.” Although the exhibition has yet to be fully installed – it will take over two storeys of the ICA, which sits in a grand 19th-century terrace just down the road from Buckingham Palace – there is beauty in the pieces that are viewable in advance. London-based Hanecdote uses fine embroidery to depict a sex worker’s dressing table: to one side of the clutter of makeup, masks and sex toys is a pile of books with such titles as Action, Safety, Community. Khaleb Brooks, a Chicago-born artist who has a residency at Liverpool’s International Slavery Museum, has made three arresting lifesize self-portraits in linocut, depicting themself before, during and after a sex session. The artists, who were selected by an independent panel, did not have to disclose whether they were involved with sex work. “In the public view,” says Sea, “there’s often this conflict. Either you say you’re a sex worker and people think, ‘Oh, you’re a victim, your voice can’t be trusted.’ Or you say you’re not a sex worker, then people tell you, ‘Oh, you don’t know what you’re talking about. You’re not an authentic voice.’” For Miro and Allison, as for many, the boundaries are blurred anyway. While Miro created the “semi-fictional documentary” of This Is Not for Clients, Allison was responsible for the filming and the surrounding installation, which will fill a whole room. Her bright, freeform graphics make the whips and manacles of a BDSM dungeon look like soft-play toys. From Hong Kong, though born in Canada and now based in Paris, she came to the project via an interest in east Asian and queer porn. “At the beginning,” she says, “I thought gay porn is porn and my art is my art – I saw them as separate. But now I realise that making queer porn, and queer tattooing in queer spaces, is just as consensual as any other artwork in my practice”. It was a tattoo that brought the two together. Miro holds her arm up to show an image, made by Allison, of a woman emerging from a box. “That’s me getting out of my PhD,” she says. She has published her writing under several different names and would love to bring them all together in an anthology one day, but has not yet dared to do so for fear of losing both her work and her family. Because of the particular interests of the selection panel – which included artists, film-makers, writers and curators – the exhibition is dominated by artists who operate in a queer space. Among them is Aisha Mirza, a DJ, stripper and columnist for Gal-dem magazine, who recently featured in a British Vogue profile of three gender non-confoming trendsetters. Mirza, who is bipolar, describes their installation – the best dick i ever had was a thumb &amp; good intentions – as a meditation on the intersection of pleasure and sacred spaces with mental health and selfhood: “I got involved in the exhibition by answering the callout. I was working as a stripper at LGBTQ club Harpies at the time, and had a lot of thoughts and feelings about that experience, so it seemed like a good match.” Mirza, who lives on a houseboat in east London, has worked as a dominatrix. “With chronic mental health difficulties, sex work has seemed more appealing and attainable than many other jobs. If I can make three months’ rent kicking a man in the balls for 30 minutes, why wouldn’t I? Due to my privileges and safety nets, I’m able to choose what jobs I want to do. I’m able to have firm boundaries around what’s comfortable for me. This is not the norm.” Mirza is referring to the dark side of a global industry that exploits and traffics vulnerable people. The exhibition doesn’t shy away from this, its curators say. “There’s an understanding of what it means to be exploited,” says Sea, “But there’s a cultural preoccupation with talking about trafficking as soon as we talk about sex work, when trafficking is a form of exploitation that can be found at high levels in many sectors, including agriculture, domestic work and construction. There was a report just the other day about the levels of trafficking within farming and domestic labour.” Mirza is more militant. “As we know, sex work is the oldest profession. It needs to be respected, and brought out of the shadows for the safety of people engaging in it. It’s beyond disgusting that politicians and bankers make decisions every day that endanger and harm poorer and marginalised people – while also using the services of sex workers. Yet they are respected and rewarded, while sex workers are reviled and considered sub-human, not even worthy of basic rights and protection. I want the moral hysteria around sex work to die because it is so boring and hypocritical and dangerous that it hurts.” Mirrors are a recurrent motif through the artworks, whether at the centre of Hanecdote’s exquisitely embroidered dressing table, or on the walls of Miro and Allison’s dungeon. Mirza – who uses a large ornate one to lure people into viewing themselves alongside a collection of objects personal to the artist, from zines and meds to a “bedazzled dildo” – sums up this preoccupation with the two-way gaze. “I wanted people to see themselves, in both a ‘You’re welcome’ and a ‘You’re implicated’ kind of way.” Dirty opinions will have to be parked outside the door. Decriminalised Futures is at the ICA, London, from 16 February to 22 MayTwo sorts of rain today. One is bouncing off the brown terrace tiles, and giving them a clean, at least. The other is of polenta, raining down into a pan of boiling water. I’d planned a downpour of instant polenta, but then it went dark and the sky opened, so standing by a warm cooker, stirring and listening to the radio, was suddenly a good idea. Also, I’m convinced that the option of instant – be that polenta, custard, chocolate pudding, coffee or tan – makes the long version more appealing, because it is a choice. In Elena Previde Massara’s Il Grande Libro della Polenta, there is a line illustration in which Italy’s lower half is a familiar boot, but then midway up becomes a cob of maize that mimics the shape of the country and reveals the kernels, ready to be dried and ground into polenta. A half-corn Italy, though, only began in the 16th century, when maize was introduced to Europe from Mesoamerica, where it is thought to have been celebrated, harvested, ground and eaten as early as 10,000 years ago. The word polenta is ancient, deriving from the Latin polĕnta, which means something made of pollen, or “fine flour”, and cooked into a mush, or puls as it was known in ancient Rome, and made from barley, farro, chickpeas or chestnuts. Previde explains that there is some debate and document-waving by both the Friulani and Bergamaschi over who first cultivated maize and ground it into puls/polenta. What is certain is that it became a sustenance food, surrounded by ritual, folklore and wonderful recipes. Traditionalists insist that polenta requires slow cooking, ideally in a copper pan, with constant stirring for at least an hour and up to three, and sometimes even four. The science behind this is starch gelatinisation, the process by which, thanks to heat, water and stirring, the tightly bound starch molecules within each grain loosen and swell, becoming digestible, and giving off a starchy gel that brings everything together. It is also during long cooking that flavour is developed. Harold McGee is right that cooks can develop just as much flavour with less labour by partly covering a pot of just-thickened polenta, putting it into a low oven (130C/250F/gas ½), which heats the bottom and sides in a controlled, even way, and stirring only occasionally. And then there is instant polenta, made with polenta that has been pre-cooked, usually with steam, dried and ground to a fine powder. This process means its absorption is completely different from proper polenta, and it cooks in a fraction of the time. I think instant polenta is best when it is left to set, then cut into slices and brought back to life in a frying pan. And long-cooked polenta is wonderful, especially when you learn that you don’t need to stand still and stir constantly. Two sorts of rain, and two ways to serve the polenta. One is simply more grated parmesan or cubed fontina, the other is a mound of green, which I crave at the moment – broccoletti, cavolo nero or sprouting broccoli (let’s say 500g), trimmed accordingly, boiled in well-salted boiling water until tender, then tossed in gently warmed olive oil, a clove of minced garlic and a good pinch of red chilli flakes. And, for pudding, I suggest instant chocolate pudding. Polenta with butter, parmesan and greens Prep 10 min Cook 50 min (or about 15 min if using instant polenta) Serves 4 Salt 300g polenta (or instant polenta) 500g broccoletti, cavolo nero or sprouting broccoli, trimmed accordingly Olive oil 1 garlic clove, peeled and minced Red chilli flakes, to taste 1 big slice of butter 4 tbsp grated parmesan In a medium saucepan or deep saute pan, ideally copper or with a heavy base, heat 1.1 litres water until boiling, add salt, stir and reduce to a lively simmer. Slowly “rain” the polenta into the pan, whisking as you do, to prevent clumps. Once the polenta is incorporated, swap the whisk for a wooden spoon and stir. If you are using instant polenta, follow the packet instructions; otherwise, cook, stirring very regularly, for 45 minutes, or until the polenta is thick (but not stiff; if that is the case, add more hot water), pulling away from the sides of the pan and cooked through. Meanwhile, immerse the broccoletti, cavolo nero or sprouting broccoli in well salted boiling water, cook for five or so minutes, until tender, then drain. In a frying pan, gently warm some olive oil and add the garlic and chilli flakes. Once fragrant, add the broccoli and a pinch of salt, and turn in the oil. Stir the butter and half the parmesan into the polenta, turn it out on to a large dish, and top with the greens and remaining parmesan. Serve immediately. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoGood morning. Europe is closer to war than at any point over the past 70 years, a UK government minister has warned, as Russian troops amass on the borders of Ukraine and western leaders warn that an invasion could take place early this week. The armed forces minister James Heappey told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he feared “we are closer than we’ve been on this continent” to war “for 70 years”. Western leaders are mounting a final effort to negotiate diplomatic solutions after US intelligence said an attack could be imminent. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv for talks with Ukrainian officials and British prime minister Boris Johnson said he would hold further talks with world leaders to bring Russia “back from the brink” of war. Is Joe Biden involved in the last minute negotiations? Yes but yesterday, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelensky, urged Joe Biden to visit Kyiv “in the coming days” in a show of moral support. However, the White House has made no mention of the invitation so it’s unclear if Biden intends to go. Is time running out to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis? US intelligence over the weekend claimed that Russia had accelerated plans for an invasion and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday, before the end of the Winter Olympics on 20 February. Key US-Canada border bridge reopens after police clear blockade The key Ambassador Bridge trade link between Canada and the US has reopened after police cleared the last Covid restriction protesters, ending a six-day blockade. Police moved in to clear and arrest the remaining protesters on the border bridge yesterday, trying to end one of the main demonstrations that have broken out across Canada against Covid-19 vaccine mandates and other restrictions to bring the pandemic under control. After issuing warnings, police said arrests would be made and vehicles towed just after dawn near the bridge linking Detroit and the city of Windsor, Ontario. By Sunday afternoon, most protesters had gone and vehicles that were blocking the way had been removed, and the bridge reopened just before midnight on Sunday. What about the protests in Ottawa? Small-scale protests there swelled to what police said were 4,000 demonstrators. The city has seen that on past weekends, and loud music played as people milled about downtown where anti-vaccine demonstrators have been encamped since late January. Kamila Valieva cleared to skate at Winter Olympics Kamila Valieva, the 15-year-old Russian skater who charmed these Winter Olympics before her positive drugs test sent shockwaves across the world, has sensationally been cleared to compete in the individual event due to the “exceptional circumstances” of her case. The court of arbitration for sport, which delivered its verdict yesterday, said that banning Valieva while her doping case was ongoing “would cause her irreparable harm”. The three-person panel also ruled that the World Anti-Doping Code was unclear when it came to suspended “protected persons” under 16 years of age and said that a 44-day delay in reporting Valieva’s positive test for the banned angina drug trimetazidine had affected her ability to mount a defence. “The panel considered that preventing the athlete from competing at the Olympic Games would cause her irreparable harm in these circumstances,” Matthieu Reeb, secretary general for the court of arbitration for sport, told the world’s press. Does everyone agree with the decision? No. Sarah Hirshland, the president of the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee said she was “disappointed” by the decision. “This appears to be another chapter in the systemic and pervasive disregard for clean sport by Russia,” she added. In other news … Six years after the Los Angeles Rams returned to California – after a 20-year sojourn in St Louis – the Rams are Super Bowl champions for the second time in their history. They have been accused of trading away their future to build a team of superstars, but their fans are unlikely to care now. And here Sam Wolfson reviews the half-time show by Dr Dre, Snoop Dogg, Eminem, Kendrick Lamar and Mary J Blige. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has said an “onslaught” of Covid-19 infections has dealt a heavy blow and overwhelmed capacity as daily cases surge to record highs. Daily infections have multiplied by a factor of 13 over the past two weeks, with authorities scrambling to control the deepening outbreak. Donald Trump has endorsed rightwing Republican candidates who support his baseless claims of a stolen election for key posts in Michigan, raising the prospect of a Trumpist take over of how the key battleground state might run its elections. Some players of the viral word game Wordle have complained that it has become harder since it was bought by the New York Times late last month. The New York Times has denied any changes have been made to Wordle since the acquisition. “Nothing has changed about the game play,” they said. Don’t miss this: lessons for lifelong lovers After that initial attraction, what keeps a couple together? And as we change and grow over the years, how do we make sure we move in the same direction? Six relationship experts on how to keep that loving feeling. Philippa Perry suggests remembering your partner is not responsible for your happiness, you are. “I don’t recommend entering a relationship believing love will conquer your personal demons and, then, when it doesn’t, blaming your partner for you not feeling happier.” Climate check: small pets at risk of heatstroke as temperatures rise, study finds Dogs are not the only pets vulnerable to heatstroke, and experts are saying that people should be aware of the risk to smaller animals such as guinea pigs and rabbits, especially as global temperatures rise. Researchers say their findings highlight the need for better public awareness of heatstroke and the risk to all animals, and that cases will continue to rise with warmer weather because of the climate emergency. Last Thing: how a mountain lion became Los Angeles’ wildest celebrity The mountain lion known as P22 has become something of a celebrity in the city of Los Angeles. The big cat resides in Griffith Park, a 4,000-acre park tucked in the Hollywood hills, and has inspired murals, songs and even an exhibit about his life. Beth Pratt, California director for the National Wildlife Federation, has a tattoo of P22 and dubbed him the “Brad Pitt of mountain lions” – attractive, enigmatic and unlucky in love. He has plenty of deer to eat, no male competitors in his territory, but also no hope of finding a mate. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAre we all doomed to live in Charlie Brooker’s techno-dystopia? In Metalhead, an episode from season four of his famed Netflix show Black Mirror, a woman navigates an austere post-apocalyptic landscape while running for her life from a murderous robot dog. What makes the mechanized beast in the show particularly frightening is the lethal combination of the single-mindedness of a computer program with the extreme ferocity of an angry, feral dog. But it’s just TV, right? Not exactly. The military, technological, security and political classes in this country appear united in their desire to make robot dogs part of our future, and we should all be worried. The latest example came on 1 February, when the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) issued a press release titled “Robot Dogs Take Another Step Towards Deployment at the Border”. DHS dressed up their statement with the kind of adorable language made to warm the hearts of dog lovers everywhere. “The Science and Technology Directorate (S&amp;T) is offering US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) a helping hand (or ‘paw’),” read the release. Isn’t that cute? A picture of the “four-legged ground drone” accompanied the release, and the “Automated Ground Surveillance Vehicle”, as it’s called, looked remarkably (and scarily) similar to the monstrous quadrupeds seen in the Black Mirror episode. But let’s not judge based on appearance. The real issue is that we keep rushing to militarized and technological solutions to what ultimately are human and political questions, creating more problems along the way. These particular robot dogs are made by Ghost Robotics, which claims that its 100lb machine was “bred” to scale “all types of natural terrain including sand, rocks and hills, as well as human-built environments, like stairs”. Each robot dog is outfitted with a bevy of sensors and able to transmit real-time video and information feeds. The devices are not yet in operation on the US-Mexico border, but a testing and evaluation program is under way in El Paso, Texas. To listen to DHS, it all sounds so utterly charming and so very next-gen – until you realize that what we’re talking about is the further encroachment of government surveillance on our daily lives. As the Electronic Frontier Foundation notes, “people who live along the border are some of the most heavily surveilled people in the United States. A massive amalgamation of federal, state and local law enforcement and national security agencies are flying drones, putting up cameras and just generally attempting to negate civil liberties – capturing the general goings-on of people who live and work in proximity to the border.” Then there’s the question of lethal force. These specific ground drones may not be armed, but Ghost Robotics is already infamous for the combination of robot dog and robot rifle. In 2021, small arms manufacturer Sword International (must these companies choose such dystopian names?) outfitted a robot dog from Ghost Robotics with a custom-made weapon, called a “special purpose unmanned rifle” or Spur. This darling invention was unveiled at the annual conference of the Association of the United States Army. Incidentally, US policy not only does not “prohibit the development or employment” of killer robots (officially known as “lethal autonomous weapon systems,” or Laws) but also opposes any international preemptive ban. Meanwhile, as the Congressional Research Service notes, Israel has already exported what many consider a lethal autonomous weapon system to Chile, China, India, South Korea and Turkey. We’re fast running out of time for robust international dialogue on this issue. Domestically, the short history of the use of the robot dogs in our cities is also troubling. The Honolulu police department used about $150,000 of pandemic funding to buy their robot dog, which they then used to scan the eyes and take the temperatures of unhoused people to check for symptoms of Covid. The practice raised the alarms of advocates who said the practice was fundamentally dehumanizing. Needless to say, no housed person was treated that way. And after public outcry in 2021, the New York police department returned its $94,200 robot dog, Digidog. That robot was deployed to a home invasion in the Bronx and to a tense situation in a public housing building in Manhattan, attracting the angry notice of New Yorkers. Once again, many Black and brown New Yorkers felt over-policed, over-surveilled and under-resourced. “You can’t give me a living wage, you can’t raise a minimum wage, you can’t give me affordable housing; I’m working hard and I can’t get paid leave, I can’t get affordable childcare,” said Representative Jamaal Bowman in a video he posted to Twitter. “Instead we got money, taxpayer money, going to robot dogs?” Bowman is hardly alone. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez criticized both the NYPD’s robot dog in 2021 and the recent news of robot dogs at the border. “It’s shameful how both parties fight tooth + nail to defend their ability to pump endless public money into militarization,” she recently tweeted. “From tanks in police depts to corrupt military contracts, funding this violence is bipartisan + non-controversial, yet healthcare + housing isn’t. It’s BS.” She’s right, of course, as is Bowman. Where exactly are our priorities? The Biden administration has a chance to stop this program in its tracks before the border becomes even more of a militarized, technological dystopia. We’re so easily mesmerized by the massive capabilities of technology, but the fact is that techno-military solutions to human problems too often create more problems than they solve. Just ask the unhoused populations in Honolulu, the urban poor in New York, and – if the program’s not cancelled – asylum seekers on the border. These are the people whose daily realities are increasingly being militarized by this technology. And because they are vulnerable and without political clout, they’re the ones closest to living in a Black Mirror episode. Meanwhile, the rest of us are sold a hi-tech bill of goods that unites everything that Americans love – technology, dogs and guns – and told to believe it’s all for the best. Look, I love my tech and all it can do as much as the next person, but when our embrace of technology reduces rather than enhances our dignity, then we have a problem. Humans deserve better. And frankly, so do dogs – even robot ones. Moustafa Bayoumi is the author of the award-winning books How Does It Feel To Be a Problem?: Being Young and Arab in America and This Muslim American Life: Dispatches from the War on Terror. He is a professor of English at Brooklyn College, City University of New YorkIn the summer of 2012, Wendy was making her annual trip from her home in Austin, Texas, to Phoenicia, New York, where she owned a small cabin outside the town. “I inherited it from my great-grandmother and have been going there since I was a kid,” she says. “I love eating and drinking in the local restaurants there.” That year, she decided she would like to cycle to and from the town centre during her stay. “I didn’t have a bike, so my friend suggested I rent one in town. The shop was tucked away and I didn’t even know it existed.” She walked in and met the owner, Mike, who also ran the shop as a hangout space. “I’d lived off the grid most of my life so it was nice having a social place to be with people,” he says. He found her a bike to rent, but was worried she wouldn’t make it home. “It’s very hilly and I wasn’t used to cycling,” she says. “He gave me his number in case I needed him to pick me up.” Wendy made it home safely, then called Mike to let him know. A few days later, he asked if she would like to join him and a friend on a bike trail across the Hudson. “I really liked the conversations we had and I was impressed with how relaxed she was using curse words, too,” he laughs. After the bike ride, Wendy invited them both to her cabin, to sit on the front porch with a drink. “It’s one of the most relaxing places in the world,” says Wendy. “Mike really liked it there and we spent hours chatting.” She tried to return the bike, but Mike insisted she keep it a little longer. In July, she had to travel back to Texas for an event. “I’d had the bike so long by that point, I thought I’d run up a big bill,” she says. “But Mike didn’t charge me. He just asked if he could visit my cabin and sit outside the front porch while I was away.” When she returned a few weeks later, she considered going to see him, but didn’t want to seem too forward. “My neighbour told me his face lit up when they said to him that I was coming back. It was like high school for seniors,” laughs Wendy. After meeting up again at a local music event, they began going for regular bike trips together, but it wasn’t until September that things became romantic. “It was also complicated by the fact I was going back to Texas for the winter.” Still unsure if their relationship would prove to be more than a summer fling, Wendy returned home. But they stayed in touch and she visited for a week in October. At Christmas, she stayed for a month but Mike, who had already been suffering from hepatitis C, had some more bad news about his health. “I had been waiting for a biopsy for suspected liver cancer,” he says. “When the results came through and the cancer was confirmed, I had to decide whether to go on the transplant list.” Wendy told him she’d be there for him, no matter what he decided. “That’s when I knew she was a keeper,” he says. Over the next three years, he went through chemotherapy and treatment for his hepatitis, before deciding to go ahead with the transplant in 2016. Since his recovery, the couple have divided their time between Phoenicia and Austin. Mike has one son from a previous relationship and six grandchildren, while Wendy has three stepchildren from a previous marriage and 12 stepgrandchildren. “I’ve lived alone most of my life but now I love having Wendy to help me make decisions,” says Mike. “We share similar values and it’s reassuring being with someone who cares so much about you.” Wendy appreciates his calm nature. “He takes care of a lot of things for me without me even asking. I have a live-in Mr Fix-It,” she says. “When you meet someone in your 60s you don’t meet each other’s parents or early friends. A lot of our relationship has been spent catching up on past history. Whenever old songs come on the radio, we tell each other where we were when we first heard them. We have a great time together.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form hereThe UK tax department has seized three non-fungible tokens (NFTs) as part of an investigation into a suspected VAT fraud scheme involving 250 fake companies. HM Revenue and Customs said on Monday it had seized the NFTs and arrested three people on suspicion of attempting to defraud it out of £1.4m. It is the first time a UK law enforcement agency has seized an NFT. NFTs are unique digital tokens that first appeared in 2014 and can be bought and sold in crypto or traditional currencies but which have no tangible form of their own. Nick Sharp, HMRC’s deputy director economic crime, said the NFT seizure “serves as a warning to anyone who thinks they can use crypto assets to hide money from HMRC”. He said: “We constantly adapt to new technology to ensure we keep pace with how criminals and evaders look to conceal their assets.” HMRC said it had secured a court order to seize the three digital artwork NFTs, which have not yet been valued, and other crypto assets worth about £5,000. The suspects are alleged to have used “sophisticated methods to try to hide their identities including false and stolen identities”, HMRC said. Jake Moore, an adviser at the cybersecurity firm ESET, said the seizure showed the police are fast adapting to the threat of cybercrime and how to seize digital assets that are designed to avoid law enforcement. “A key element of cryptocurrencies’ design is to keep them secure and protected against interception by anyone, whether that be a threat actor or law enforcement,” Moore said. “But with a fast-moving digital world where mistakes can be made, police forces are beginning to buck the trend in how they investigate digital crime, locate evidence and finally seize digital assets. “Confiscation also comes with a very tempting reward due to the Proceeds of Crime Act where the investigating police force can request to keep half of the forfeited goods and the other half will go to the Home Office. So with digital currencies, this can be extremely appealing indeed.” The market for NFTs grew to an estimated $22bn (£16bn) last year. Data from DappRadar, a firm that tracks sales, showed that trading in NFTs reached $22bn in 2021, compared with $100m in 2020, and that the floor market cap of the top 100 NFTs ever issued – a measure of their collective value – was $16.7bn.Police are searching for a “dangerous sex offender” who absconded from prison and presents a particular danger to women and children. Paul Robson, who is serving a life sentence for attempted rape and indecent assault, absconded from an open prison in Lincolnshire on Sunday. Robson was jailed at Oxford crown court in 2000 after he entered a woman’s home through a cat flap before tying her up, putting a pillowcase over her head and brutally assaulting her while holding a knife to her throat. Lincolnshire police urged people not to approach the 56-year-old, saying he “can cause real harm to anyone he comes across”, adding he could have travelled abroad. DCS Andy Cox said: “He could be anywhere in the country, and we are really keen to hear from the public with potential sightings so we can take this man off our streets. “Robson is a dangerous sex offender and while he presents a particular danger to women and young children, I believe he can cause real harm to anyone he comes across. Since reports of his escape came to light, we have deployed additional resources to apprehend Robson.” After his conviction, the sentencing judge described Robson as a “menace to females”. He had been released from prison only three weeks before the attack and was on licence. He was reported missing from HMP North Sea Camp in Boston at about 7am on Sunday, Lincolnshire police said He is described as a white male with a bald head and a long goatee beard and is of slim build. “We are still working tirelessly to locate Paul Robson and are still working through numerous lines of inquiry,” Cox said. “If you see Robson, please do not approach him, and do not try to apprehend him yourself. Call 999 immediately. We are really grateful for all the shares so far and rest assured we will continue our efforts to find and arrest him.” Police have urged anyone with information or confirmed sightings of Robson to call 999.What’s the story and why is it important? France elects its next president in two rounds of voting on 10 and 24 April that will determine the course of western Europe’s second-largest country for the next five years. The full list of candidates will not be known until early March, when the names of those who have gathered the necessary 500 endorsements from elected officials in order to qualify for the first-round ballot paper will be announced. But only a handful have a chance of progressing to the second-round run-off. At present they include Emmanuel Macron, the outgoing president; Valérie Pécresse of the rightwing Les Républicains party; and Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Rally. Polls suggest that of the other candidates, only Le Pen’s far-right rival, the anti-immigrant TV pundit and polemicist Éric Zemmour, and Jean-Luc Mélenchon, a hard-left veteran, are on course to secure more than 10% of the vote. Much may yet change, however, with 47% of voters saying they are still undecided and 30% that they have changed their minds in the past two months. The relative vote share of the two far-right rivals, in particular, could fluctuate. The election’s outcome will have an impact in France, in the European Union (France is the EU’s second largest economy) and beyond. Since Angela Merkel left office, the liberal, centrist Macron has become the bloc’s most visible leader, a believer in greater “European sovereignty” and an outspoken defender of western values with a clear desire to shape world events. A Le Pen victory would deal a heavy symbolic blow to the EU and be widely seen as a further populist, nation-first threat to the bloc’s drive for greater integration. Pécresse could also oppose further sovereignty-sharing in several areas. How does the system work? To qualify for the first round, each candidate must secure the backing of at least 500 of more than 40,000 MPs, MEPs, senators, regional councillors and mayors from at least 30 different départements and overseas territories. This is not an easy hurdle to clear, and one or more high-profile names may fail to do so. The elected officials’ signatures must be collected by 4 March and the list of candidates must be announced by 18 March. About a dozen are expected to qualify. Assuming – as is virtually certain – that none wins a majority in the first round, the two highest scorers then face off against each other two weeks later. The winner of that second round needs to score more than 50% of the vote. The two-round system, also used in parliamentary, local and regional polls, was introduced in 1962 by Charles de Gaulle and has thus far proved effective at keeping extremists from power: the French say you vote first with your heart, then your head. Where are the frontrunners on the left? Macron’s victory in 2017 at the head of a centrist political startup blew up France’s political landscape in spectacular fashion, plunging the combined score of traditional left and right parties of government to a historic low. The Socialist party (PS), which in 2012 controlled the Élysée, parliament and most of France’s regions, was shattered. Its presidential candidate came fifth on 6.4% of the vote, a worst-ever score, and in parliamentary elections it lost 250 of its 280 MPs. According to polls, the French left, including the Green party (EELV), should attract nearly 30% of the vote – more than enough to reach the second round if it was cast for a single candidate. However, it looks likely to be divided between seven or eight. These include Mélenchon, the leader of La France Insoumise (Unbowed France), the only leftwing candidate forecast to reach double figures; the Socialist candidate, Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo; the Greens’ Yannick Jadot; and the Communist Fabien Roussel. Christiane Taubira, a former Socialist justice minister, won a “popular primary” intended to unify the left but since Mélenchon, Jadot and Hidalgo refused to recognise it, Taubira’s candidacy will most likely divide the progressive vote yet further. And what about the right? The conservative Les Républicains (LR) were also hit by the arrival of Macron and his La République En Marche (LaREM), failing in 2017 to make the second round for the first time since 1981. In a France that polls suggest has shifted rightwards, LR are still a potent force. They bounced back strongly in regional elections last year but squeezed on one side by Macron, whose centre-right economic policies appeal to moderate conservatives, and on the other by Le Pen and Zemmour, vying for its more traditionalist and sovereignist voters, the party has little room to manoeuvre. On the far right, the battle between the two rivals could be existential. Le Pen’s efforts to “detoxify” her 50-year-old nationalist party have left her exposed to Zemmour’s more virulent xenophobic rhetoric, leading to defections from the National Rally ranks. More departures – and particularly any formal declaration of support for the TV pundit by Le Pen’s popular, more socially conservative niece, Marion Maréchal – could badly damage her campaign and, some suggest, even herald the end of her party. Observers believe Zemmour’s longer-term aim is the demise of the National Rally and the foundation of a new national-sovereignist movement uniting the far right with the more traditionalist right who cannot bring themselves to vote for Le Pen. Who are the main candidates and what do they want? Emmanuel Macron France’s president, a former merchant banker and economy minister under his Socialist predecessor, François Hollande, is an economically liberal, pro-business reformist, but a progressive on most social issues. Despite his promise to be “neither right nor left”, in office he is widely perceived as having drifted rightwards. He has also suffered from a reputation for arrogance and aloofness that he has tried to temper. Marine Le Pen The leader of the National Rally wants to end immigration, slash crime, eradicate Islamism and save France from globalisation, but has rowed back on plans to pull it out of the EU. Her “economic nationalism” would favour French business, while “France-first” social policies in housing, health, education and employment would favour French people. There are signs that her drive to sanitise the party founded by her father, Jean-Marie, in 1972 has cost her some of its traditional support. Valérie Pécresse The president of the greater Paris Ile-de-France region, the candidate of the rightwing Les Républicains is a former budget minister and has described herself as “two-thirds Angela Merkel and one-third Margaret Thatcher”. Socially conservative (she was heavily involved in anti-gay marriage protests, although has since said she will not revisit the issue), she has tacked towards the hard right on immigration but remains relatively centrist by LR standards on the economy. Eric Zemmour A far-right TV polemicist who has convictions for inciting racial hatred and promotes the “great replacement” theory that Muslim immigrants will “replace” the populations of European countries, Zemmour has won a following for his violent diatribes against immigration. His book on the supposed “decline” of France has been a bestseller. Jean-Luc Mélenchon The outspoken leader of La France Insoumise party was a junior Socialist minister from 2000 to 2002 and has campaigned for a shorter working week, lower retirement age, higher minimum wage, benefits and top tax rate, and the end of the presidential regime of the Fifth Republic. Analysts believe he may struggle to match his 2017 campaign, when he polled almost 20%. Yannick Jadot The choice of Europe Ecologie Les Verts (EELV), France’s Green party, Jadot withdrew in 2017 to boost the flagging chances of the doomed Socialist candidate but is now aiming to transfer the success his party enjoyed in 2020’s local elections, when they picked up several big city halls, to the national level. He is campaigning for what he has called “concrete ecology in action”: green solutions for commuting, housing, food, rebuilding local economies. Anne Hidalgo The first female mayor of Paris has highlighted her working-class, Spanish-immigrant roots and promised to improve salaries, particularly for teachers. Although her green, car-free policies were popular enough to win her a second mayoral term, she may struggle to shed her image as “too Parisian” for the rest of France, and her campaign is suffering from deep divisions in the Socialist camp. Christiane Taubira The former Socialist justice minister is a talented orator of French Caribbean ancestry who pushed through France’s gay marriage law in the face of appalling racist insults. She has not so far unveiled a policy platform. Who will win? Polls show Macron winning the first round by a margin of about seven points over Le Pen, who is marginally ahead of Pécresse. Zemmour is three or four points behind, with the leftwing candidates headed by Mélenchon trailing. In the second round, Macron is predicted to beat Le Pen by about a dozen percentage points, and Pécresse by about half that margin. A lot, however, can still change. French presidential election campaigns have a history of throwing up unexpected events that have sometimes dramatically influenced results. What happens after the new president is elected? France holds legislative elections, also over two rounds, on 12 and 19 June – and without a majority in parliament a French president’s powers are limited. Even if Macron is favourite for the presidential poll, his LaREM party has failed to build grassroots support and polled disappointingly in regional, local and European elections. Many analysts foresee a splintered parliament possibly requiring complex negotiations and alliance-building to secure a majority.De La Soul played a gameshow on 3 Feet High and Rising, kids discussed love on The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill, Eminem faced his irate manager on The Marshall Mathers LP, Outkast parodied themselves at a record store on Aquemini, Biggie Smalls actually received fellatio on Ready to Die, and Eazy-E probably didn’t actually receive fellatio on Just Don’t Bite It. There was once a time where skits like these, particularly in the age of tapes and CDs, were a staple of hip-hop. Interspersed between songs, these comedy sketches or spoken-word interludes aimed to bring you deeper into the album, with records such as the Fugees’ The Score showing how poignant this could be (a child being shot at the end of Cowboys) or how puerile (the Chinese restaurant at the end of The Beast). Such interludes were not solely the preserve of rap, though: Meat Loaf’s You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth opened with an attempted seduction on that hot summer night, Destiny’s Child recited lines from the Bible on the outro track to Survivor, and Britney had an ill-fated exchange with an earnest astronaut on Oops! … I Did It Again. But as digital formats and curated playlists took over, many announced that the album was a dead format and that skits would die with them. Why would you stick a song on, say, a sexy playlist if it had a minute-long monologue from the artist’s grandma at the end? And if it was a separate track on the album, would you not just skip it? Indeed, in his 2015 article charting the history of the phenomenon in hip-hop, writer Jeff Weiss said: “In today’s streaming chaos, few things seem more anachronistic than including skits. That’s just one more way to annoy people unwilling to pay for Spotify Premium”, where you already suffer the interruption of advertising. But the death knell for skits hasn’t sounded – quite the opposite. In its various forms – sketches, spoken-word passages, vignettes, voicemails, voice notes – the skit has played a big role in the recent work of rappers such as Tyler, the Creator, Little Simz, Riz Ahmed, Knucks, Kojaque and Fly Anakin, and artists as varied as Adele, FKA twigs, the Weeknd, Lana Del Rey, Blood Orange, Solange, Frank Ocean, Jazmine Sullivan and Joy Crookes. At their best, these reinvigorate the album form as not just an arbitrary collection of recent songs, but a space for social gatherings and storytelling. The most cynical interpretation is that these extra tracks rack up more listens and, therefore, more money in a broken streaming system (Spotify counts anything over 30 seconds as a play). But many of these moments are part of longer tracks – they’re more likely to be a way of cohering and curating the album format still so beloved by artists, albeit less so by listeners in the age of the playlist. This impulse actually dates back to when producer Prince Paul thought sketches would help bring structure to De La Soul’s debut album; maybe some artists now do skits simply in acknowledgement of what has come before. Kendrick Lamar has long used them as a storytelling device, as on Good Kid, M.A.A.D City with his dad yelling about dominoes: intimacies from Kendrick’s personal life that also aligned him with classic hip-hop. Almost a decade later, the Irish rapper Kojaque used funny skits on debut album Town’s Dead to paint a picture of his own city, Dublin, repeatedly referencing the pizza chain Domino’s in what might have been a knowing nod to Lamar. The skit can amplify nostalgia: the Weeknd frames his new album Dawn FM as broadcasts from an old radio station, with Jim Carrey playing host alongside intermittent adverts that emphasise that this station is playing in purgatory. The skits create the dark, expansive universe of this album, but also pay homage to the past, with the old-school radio stylings and – a little jarring with the rest of the concept – Quincy Jones ruminating on how his childhood trauma affected his own parenting. Given how much the Jones-produced Michael Jackson has influenced Abel Tesfaye, his inclusion is a way for the Weeknd to pay respects while somewhat cheekily (but not unreasonably) inserting himself in that grand lineage, much like Lamar did on To Pimp a Butterfly, where he used an old interview recording to place himself in conversation with the late Tupac Shakur. But it’s not just about world-building or reverence for history. Writing for Pitchfork in 2017, Sheldon Pearce examined the use of answering machine messages in rap songs, noting the “intimacy to these private moments … an unprepared statement is often the most honest”. Pearce breaks down the reasons rappers include such recordings on their albums: narrative, myth building, family business, backstories, warning shots and remembrances. Voicemails became voice notes in the age of WhatsApp, and Adele uses them on new song My Little Love to cover much of Pearce’s list. The glib narrative around Adele’s divorce album 30 was that it would be good because she was heartbroken again – and so including conversations between the artist and her son on My Little Love made that heartbreak specific, its pain and horror reanimated – almost confrontationally so. “I feel like I don’t really know what I’m doing”, she says, her young son replying “Why?”; there is also a tearful voice note to a friend about her loneliness. Adele’s singing voice is otherworldly, but her speaking voice is famously earthy: in using the latter, she shortens the gap between her and us. Though it might feel like an intrusion to hear it – even exploitative of her son – Adele explained that: “I thought it might be a nice touch, seeing as everyone’s been at my door for the last 10 years, as a fan, to be like, ‘Would you like to come in?’” Other family members frequently crop up in pop: Drake, SZA and Joy Crookes all receive advice from theirs between songs. Once we wanted stars to be infallible and superhuman, but now, relatability sells, and these artists are letting us know they’re just as flawed and in need of guidance as we are. FKA twigs uses those relatable voice notes to slightly different ends on her new mixtape Caprisongs, where she explores her more fun, pop, club-going side, sounding freer and more accessible than she did amid the sculptural poise of previous album Magdalene. Part of this comes from feeling as if you’re being invited into twigs’ world – twigs as human, not just performer, with voice notes from her friends offering sweet (sometimes bordering on cloying) affirmations such as: “I wish you could see in you what I see in you, what everyone sees in you, because that’s the golden stuff right there,” twigs told BBC Radio 1’s Clara Amfo in a recent interview: “If people don’t have friends or company, then they can just borrow my friends – they can put on Caprisongs.” Rising artist Raveena even goes so far as to offer a guided meditation at the end of her new album. During two years where our worlds got smaller and we listened alone, and in a culture where identities are strongly forged through fan communities online, artists might populate their albums with these people to help you feel a part of their network – however synthetic that connection. Sometimes the skit takes on a more choric function. Moses Sumney has writers, poets and actors speak directly to the themes he explores more gently in his singing on Græ: multiplicities, relationships and loneliness are brought to life in fascinating murmured chants, almost amounting to a Greek chorus threading together Sumney’s album. Then there’s Janet Mock’s narration on Blood Orange’s Negro Swan, elucidating the themes – living loudly and in love with yourself and your chosen family as a Black or otherwise marginalised person – which might otherwise go unnoticed in the mixtape-y release. It is a natural progression from another powerful treatise on Blackness, A Seat at the Table: alongside Solange’s parents telling stories from their lives, rapper and entrepreneur Master P dotted vignettes that reinvigorated the theme of Black empowerment. There’s a nice collagist feel to these interjections – though some might argue the music should be enough to transmit the ideas on its own. One example of where the music should have done the talking is on Little Simz’s Sometimes I Might Be Introvert, where The Crown’s Emma Corrin channels their Princess Diana performance to portray Simz’s inner voice. She speaks to Simz’s neuroses as her career grows (“One foot out of line and you’ll be ridiculed”), but also offers up hackneyed phrases: “The top of the mountain is nothing without the climb.” Simz has said these interludes exist because she likes Corrin’s voice and the words are “things that everyone should hear”. But they are motorway-legal signposts of the album’s themes, and are ultimately heavy handed, didactic and diminish the way its mysteries might otherwise unfold. On a largely masterful release, these quickly become skippable after one or two plays. A better use is Jazmine Sullivan’s Heaux Tales – rightly nominated for three Grammys this year – where between the engaging R&amp;B jams, a series of women ponder sexuality and self-worth. These are not neat little bromides and positive affirmations – they are messy, funny, utterly vital stories, where Sullivan has a documentarian’s eye for kitchen-sink detail. Ari Lennox is hilarious as she laments her helplessness in the face of an unsuitable but sexually potent partner (“that dick spoke life into me!”), before appearing in sensual duet On It to explore those same tensions. On Donna’s Tale, Donna Anderson is frank about the poisoned economy that underpins so many relationships (“You have sex because you know your husband is gonna give you what the fuck you want the next day”). Unlike twigs’ community, which you never truly feel a part of, Sullivan makes you feel properly included in this circle of wronged, righteous, complicated women. In the same way that artists include guest verses from their peers, Heaux Tales weaves in these voices to strengthen the album’s sense of perspective. The album never died, but people’s consumption of the format has become more ephemeral – and so sketches, spoken word and voice notes are often effective at reversing that trend. Some of them will amuse you, or keep you company for a moment. But Sullivan shows how they can anchor songs into something more visceral, considered and long-lasting: the album as a gallery of ideas for how to live.When scientists found women in the remote Faroe Islands had unusually high concentrations of toxic industrial chemicals in their breast milk, it seemed a surprising discovery. The north Atlantic archipelago, which lies between Iceland and the northern tip of Scotland, is far from sources of industrial or chemical pollution. And the chemicals that the 2005 Stockholm University study measured, which included polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), had already been phased out in many countries. So how did this happen? The chemicals were coming from the ocean or, more specifically, from the pilot whales that make up an important part of the islanders’ diet. PCBs, part of a group of toxic chemicals called persistent organic pollutants (POPs), are able to travel huge distances around the planet through air and water, affecting communities far away from the source of contamination. They make their way into the sea, building up in the fatty tissue of marine animals. Once in the food chain, these chemicals can “biomagnify” as they pass from prey to hunter, reaching higher concentrations in top predators. That is why it can be riskier to regularly eat large marine animals such as tuna – or pilot whales, in the case of the Faroe Islanders – than, say, mackerel, anchovies or sardines. Inuit living in the Canadian Arctic have also been found to have higher POP levels in their blood than the general population of Canada, predominantly due to their diet of fish and marine mammals such as walrus and narwhal. What is happening in Canada and the Faroe Islands is one snapshot of the dangers of a group of chemicals that have, it turns out, an outsized impact on people, wildlife, food chains and entire ecosystems. In the 1920s, PCBs – a family of 209 synthetic industrial chemicals – were developed for use as cooling fluids and flame retardants in machinery, electrical goods, paints and building materials. Stable, non-flammable and heat resistant, the chemicals had multiple uses. But that stability, once such a positive attribute, meant they did not disappear or degrade even long after production had ceased. After peaking in the 1960s, use of PCBs began to decline from the 1970s as the health effects became more apparent and countries banned the chemicals. Scientists started to link PCBs to negative effects on the immune systems of animals and people, endocrine disruption, reduced fertility, neurodevelopmental problems and reduced IQ in children. They have also been classified as a probable carcinogen. Today, most PCBs are found in sealed landfill sites, old electrical equipment and prefabricated buildings made before the 1980s. Unless you live very close to an industrial or agricultural site, your most likely source of PCBs is food. A list of 12 POPs known as the “dirty dozen” – including PCBs and the synthetic insecticide DDT – were banned in 2004 by an international treaty, the Stockholm convention, and more chemicals have since been added. To date, 185 parties have signed the treaty, promising to implement control measures. But even with widespread bans, pollution continues to spread. Some chemicals face production restrictions, such as DDT, which cannot be manufactured or applied as an insecticide in agriculture in most countries but can still be used to control malaria. Others are being eliminated. The treaty calls for PCBs to be phased out in equipment by 2025 and all PCBs to be eliminated by 2028. But so far the treaty has not succeeded in turning off the tap for much of this toxic pollution. Only 17% of the total amount of PCBs has been eliminated worldwide, with 83% (14m tonnes) still to be dealt with, according to the UN Environment Programme. An estimated 1m tonnes of PCB-contaminated material are waiting to be destroyed in Europe alone. The most effective way to get rid of PCBs is by incineration at extremely high temperatures, an expensive and sometimes logistically impossible process. But unless existing stocks of chemicals are dealt with and disposed of appropriately, they will eventually end up in the environment. Already, the ocean acts as a PCB sink but so far, only a tiny proportion of the legacy contaminant has entered the marine environment. As buildings and materials are destroyed and dumped, more PCBs will continue to leach into waterways. The climate crisis may play an aggravating role, speeding up the movement of chemicals around the planet. As temperatures rise, POPs will evaporate even more easily into the atmosphere. In the future, this “grasshopper effect”, by which pollutants evaporate in warmer regions and travel in air currents to cooler places, could have an even greater impact on people, animals and places thousands of miles away from the source of pollution. And history may be repeating itself. Some of the most persistent synthetic chemicals available today, PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances), known as “forever chemicals”, could become the PCBs of the future. PFAS make products waterproof and stain-resistant, among other uses, but the chemicals’ strong carbon-fluorine bonds mean they do not biodegrade, accumulating in the soil and water and affecting human health. Polluting PFAS that escape into the ocean often come back to shore when released into the air from the sea-spray aerosols of crashing waves – this “boomerang effect” is further evidence that toxic chemicals do not get diluted by the sea. While legislation is slow, more stringent preventive measures are urgently needed to make sure the emerging pollutants in use today will not become the legacy contaminants of the future. Extracted from Anna Turns’ latest book, Go Toxic Free: Easy and Sustainable Ways to Reduce Chemical PollutionToday in a nutshell: Gold for Papadakis and Cizeron in the ice dancing and for Kaillie Humphries in the monobob, while Kamila Valieva is cleared to compete Next up: The finals of the women’s freestyle skiing aerials and the US women’s ice hockey semi-final. Tomorrow we get the women’s downhill and Valieva takes to the ice again Kamila Valieva of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) has been cleared to compete in the individual event tomorrow due to the “exceptional circumstances” of her case. The Court of Arbitration for Sport said that to ban Valieva while her doping case was ongoing “would cause her irreparable harm”. The three-person Cas panel also ruled that the World Anti-Doping Code was unclear when it came to suspended “protected persons” under 16 years of age and said that a 44-day delay in reporting Valieva’s positive test for the banned angina drug trimetazidine had affected her ability to mount a defence. Sean Ingle has more here. On the ice, there was a golden redemption for France’s Gabriella Papadakis and Guillaume Cizeron who won with a world record score of 226.98, putting behind them the wardrobe malfunction nightmare of 2018. The silver medal went to Victoria Sinitsina and Nikita Katsalapov of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC). The retiring duo of Madison Hubbell and Zachary Donohue from the US took bronze at their final Olympics. Kaillie Humphries of the US validated her reputation as one of the best pilots in the history of bobsleigh, surging to victory in the debut of women’s monobob and adding a third Olympic gold to her career haul with a strong chance for a fourth by week’s end. She finished with a four-run combined time of 4min, 19.27 sec to win by 1.54sec, the widest margin in any bobsleigh event in 42 years. Great Britain’s men’s curling team won their match against Switzerland 6-5 with the very last stone of the very last end. At the top of the standings Sweden lead on six matches unbeaten, Team GB have won five from their six, and Canada have won four. There’s another round of women’s matches later on Monday. Things you might have missed Canada’s Max Parrot stayed on course for his second gold medal after topping the Big Air qualifying standings. His compatriot and defending champion Sebastien Toutant failed to advance after a nasty crash. On Sunday, Erin Jackson ended the United States’ individual medal drought in speed skating, surging to a historic Olympic gold in the women’s 500m. The 29-year-old former inline skater is believed to be the first black woman to win gold in any individual event at the Winter Games. “Hopefully, this has an effect,” Jackson said. “Hopefully, we’ll see more minorities, especially in the USA, getting out and trying these winter sports. I just hope to be a good example.” Norwegian biathlete Ingrid Landmakr Tandrevold will be heading home instead of competing again in Beijing. Like many athletes in the event she collapsed at the finish line, but said: “I just think I pushed my limits in the altitude and in a tough race, but since I’ve had issues with my heart earlier in my career, we need to be careful and we need to check it out further. I’m not allowed to compete more in these Olympics so I will go home to Norway.” In the men’s team pursuit speed skating the semi-finals on Tuesday will be Norway v Netherlands and USA v ROC. Liu Shaoang of Hungary won the gold late on Sunday in the men’s 500m short track skating. Suzanne Schulting, Selma Poutsma, Xandra Velzeboer and Yara van Kerkhof gave the Netherlands gold in Sunday’s women’s 3,000m relay short track speed skating. You might also enjoy: Jackie Narracott’s wild ride from bad concussion to unlikely Olympic silver From dodging sheep to the Olympic slopes: GB’s Ryding sets sights on gold Calgary, Irving Jaffee and a time when the Winter Olympics was far from cold The briefing’s picture of the day China’s Eileen Gu comfortably qualified for the freestyle slopestyle final in third place behind Johanne Killi of Norway in second and Kelly Sildaru of Estonia who posted the best score of 86.15. She was the gold medalist in this discipline ahead of Gu at the 2020 Winter Youth Olympics. The British pair of Kirsty Muir and Katie Summerhayes safely progressed, but Marin Hamill, who crashed and fell after a jump, will return to the US for treatment. With rescheduling, the final runs for that will now be on Tuesday morning. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Monday 14 February 8pm Freestyle skiing – the second and final run of the women’s aerials 🥇 8.05pm Curling – the final session of the day includes Great Britain’s women v Canada 🥌 8.05pm and 9.40pm Bobsleigh – heats one and two in the 2-man competition 8.06pm Ski jumping – the final jump for the men’s team competition 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – Canada over-powered Switzerland 10-3 in the first women’s semi-final earlier today. Now the US will play Finland to see who joins them in the final 🏒 Tomorrow – Tuesday 15 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – more 12-round robin contests 🥌 9.30am-10.24am and 12.30pm-1.33pm and 7pm Freestyle skiing – the rescheduled three runs of the women’s slopestyle are first, then at lunchtime it is the rescheduled men’s slopestyle qualification and then in the evening it is qualification for the men’s aerials. Although frankly this programme seems to change from hour to hour so your guess is as good as mine 🥇 9.30am-10.24am and 1pm-1.45pm Snowboard – women do the big air final in the morning, the men do the big air final in the afternoon. That’s a lot of big air 🥇 11am Alpine skiing – it is the women’s downhill 🥇 2.30pm-4.47pm Speed skating – a brilliant day ahead at the National Speed Skating Oval as the men’s and women’s pursuit competitions both reach their finals 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – it is the play-off round for the men with four matches 🏒 4pm and 7pm Nordic combined – it is the individual Gundersen large hill/10km cross-country which deserves a gold medal for longest event title surely? They jump at 4pm, and then at 7pm the best ski jumpers desperately try to hold on to the slim time advantage they gained with their extra metres 🥇 5pm Biathlon – the men do their 4x7.5km relay 🥇 6pm Figures skating – the women’s single skating short program will be the next instalment of the Kamila Valieva story ⛸ 8.15pm and 9.50pm Bobsleigh – the final two heats for the men’s two-man teams 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 9 🥈 5 🥉 7 total: 21 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 14 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 7 🥈 6 🥉 2 total: 15 4 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 12 5 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 5 🥈 3 🥉 3 total: 11 6 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 4* 🥈 6 🥉 8 total: 18 7 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 4 🥈 6 🥉 4 total: 14 8 🇨🇳 China 🥇 4 🥈 3 🥉 2 total: 9 9 🇫🇷 France 🥇 3 🥈 6 🥉 2 total: 11 10 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 3 🥈 0 🥉 5 total: 8 Selected others 14 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 1 🥈 4 🥉 10 total: 15 16 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 20= 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 [*this total includes the team figure skating gold. IOC spokesperson Mark Adams said “That will probably not be sorted out during this Games and that is something regrettable, but we have to follow the process.”] The last word Only time will tell if she [Valieva] should be competing in these Games and whether or not all of her results will be disqualified. Unfortunately, either way, for the sixth consecutive Olympic Games, Russia has hijacked the competition and stolen the moment from clean athletes and the public. In addition to athletes and the public, this young athlete has been terribly let down by the Russians and the global anti-doping system that unfairly cast her into this chaos. – US anti-doping agency CEO Travis TygartAgainst our backdrop of revenge porn, dick pic-strewn online dating and embittered incel manifestos, the notion of courtly love couldn’t seem more remote. Cilla Black and Blind Date now seem like something from medieval times – so where does that leave an actual medieval sentimental convention? A goodly knight inspired to perform virtuous deeds and compose the sublimest verse in honour of an idealised lady-love – it’s enough to make a 21st-century onanist yawn and reach for their Fleshlight. But romance and chivalry aren’t quite dead yet. Cyrano de Bergerac is back in a new musical version this month, as Peter Dinklage lends his alexandrines to help a mate woo the beautiful Roxanne. Married off to no-nonsense bruiser Matt Damon in Ridley Scott’s 14th-century drama The Last Duel, Jodie Comer’s sequestered damsel becomes subject to the attentions of courtly smooth operator Adam Driver. And a silky-voiced consort, played by Alicia Vikander, gave Sir Dev of Patel’s mettle the stiffest of examinations in the penultimate trial of last year’s The Green Knight. All these films may seem like diverting excursions into cobblestoned fantasias, but modern social anxieties beat beneath their plate-iron breasts. Our online lives are just as caught up with appearances and reality as ringletted paramours and knights-errant once were in the “game” of courtly love (at least if you believe the literature). Chivalric romances were filled with a tension between idealised image and inner feeling. This gulf between what was socially valued and desired and how you approach that as an individual is strangely relevant to social media. Medieval lays (no sniggering) were as much about the act of self-presentation – how the lance gleamed, whether deeds were noble, the words well-spoken – as about the love object herself. Monty Python satirised the pretensions of courtly love brilliantly in the Castle Anthrax segment of their Holy Grail film. So when, in the new Cyrano, Peter Dinklage gives pretty-but-dumb musketeer Christian a silver-tongued upgrade to be the suave loverboy Roxane wants, there’s an analogy with the flattering personas and sassy internet-ese we adopt in our digital lives. “I will make you eloquent while you make me handsome,” says Cyrano – who effectively uses Christian as a kind of balcony-vaulting avatar. Or, in Gawain’s anxiety that in failing the lady’s test “he is no knight”, there is a hint of the ultimate online sin: that our real selves will be exposed and found wanting. Poring over our tweets, dallying over our Instagram filters, we’re still vying to be deemed worthy in the court of social media. Or perhaps exposing our real selves is actually what the updated version of the game demands. That’s the positive spin put on the online masquerade by Mamoru Hosoda’s new animation Belle – which draws on another quasi-courtly story, Beauty and the Beast, in which a savage warrior’s noble self is revealed by love. It’s a shame Joe Wright’s blandly tasteful new Cyrano didn’t opt for a contemporary setting – where it could have really played with the dramatic potential of smartphones and dating apps. Courtly love has arguably persisted most strongly in modern times in the romcom, with its yearned-for hotties, eager suitors and codified pageantry; as meet-cutes go, divorced maths teacher Owen Wilson getting hauled on stage to wed jilted megastar J-Lo in this month’s Marry Me is a pretty good one. Maybe the medieval convention keyed in to a timeless human truth that will never lose relevance: that desire operates first through idealised images. Jacques Audiard’s new anthology film Paris, 13th District touches on this with its plotline about a mature student being mistaken for a webcam girl, and its swirling sense that its four lovers are all navigating earthly illusions in search of The One. But it’s interesting to see courtly love return to cinema in unadulterated form at a time when other forms of medieval culture have been making a comeback. During a pandemic that naturally set us thinking back to past pestilences, trendologists noted the likes of #MedievalTikTok (videos often sending up incongruous modern-day formality against tapestry-style backdrops) and bardcore (lute and cornamuse-heavy pop covers). These atavistic throwbacks seemed almost comforting during the disorientating first months of isolation – cultural models harking back to other times marked by malady and social inequality. Ironically, courtly love was originally a kind of response to this rigid hierarchy: often addressed to a ruling lord’s lady, it was a safe outlet for courtiers to express erotic feelings and social-climbing aspirations without threatening the established order. Letting any old keyboard warrior mingle with the once-remote celebrity class, isn’t social media doing a similar job these days? Straining for the three-hanky tragic blow-out, down to packing Christian off to an even more stupid death than in the 1990 Gérard Depardieu version, Cyrano is a bit unimaginative in how it tackles the courtly love tradition. But The Last Duel and The Green Knight retailor it in startling ways that illuminate our times. In the Ridley Scott film, courtly love is revealed as a facade and a brutal form of social currency. Jacques le Gris (Driver) sweet-talking Marguerite de Carrouges (Comer) is the prelude to raping her; in her timeline, when husband Jean (Damon) defends her honour, it is patently more about maintaining his own social standing. It’s a cynical parable fit for own tooth’n’claw era of sexual politics, as #MeToo jousts the patriarchy online and further afield. Meanwhile, in The Green Knight, the issue of his performance in the trial with the lady and the whole courtly ideal turn out to be human vanity – amounting to no more than a glob of semen – when he finally meets his arboreal adversary. As dusk falls on the foliage of the Green Chapel, in his long wait for the Green Knight to stir, we’re meant to feel all the immensity of nature, which renders our daily affairs trivial. Again, we should take heed: the climate apocalypse is coming, and you’re worried about your follower count? As King Arthur wheezes into Gawain’s ear about this whole circus: “Remember: it’s only a game!” Belle is out now; Cyrano is out on 25 February; Paris, 13th District is out on 18 MarchA former team medic for Manchester City died falling 100 metres from a Lake District ridge where he proposed to his wife 27 years earlier. Dr Jamie Butler, from Altrincham in Greater Manchester, fell from the Striding Edge section of Helvellyn when hiking with his wife, Margaret, last year. They had returned to the mountain to find the exact spot where he had asked Margaret to marry him in 1994. An inquest heard the 54-year-old must have fallen from the mountain amid misty conditions and poor visibility on 2 November. When the couple reached Striding Edge, a rocky scramble before Helvellyn’s summit, Margaret was too tired to continue and so her husband carried on alone, according to a report from the Messenger newspaper in Trafford. In a statement read in the inquest, she described seeing her husband walk off into mist. After a while she shouted after him but received no response and called the police, “concerned something had happened to him”. Mountain rescuers were scrambled to search for the walker and found his body below the ridge. He was found with significant injuries, including a fractured skull, and was later pronounced dead. Butler was well known around the north-west for his work as a sports doctor. After qualifying as a doctor at the University of Liverpool in 1993 he worked at the English Institute of Sport (EIS) and Sale Sharks Rugby Club. He became a medic for Manchester City football club in 2007 and was promoted to senior medical officer in 2009. In 2011, he was cleared of wrongdoing after the defender Kolo Touré was given a six-month ban after testing positive for drugs, according to MailOnline. The inquest heard Butler was facing unspecified historical “allegations” and had been suspended from practice at the time of his death. His doctor said he had shown no intent to take his own life. The coroner, Kirsty Gomersal, accepted a postmortem finding that Butler died as a result of multiple injuries from the fall. Delivering her conclusion, she said: “In my judgment, a conclusion of accidental death is the most appropriate for me to reach. Although there had been allegations against him, he was determined to clear his name and his doctor was sure there was no suicidal intention.” Margaret Butler paid tribute to her husband. “Jamie was a loving husband with two twin boys who he adored,” she said. “He will be forever missed. He died doing what he loved.”Warnings from the US that Russian troops are poised to strike at Ukraine are growing more urgent and strident. There can be little doubt of the US’s conviction that Ukraine is at imminent risk, and the number of nations advising citizens to leave the country as soon as possible shows that the warnings are at last being considered credible. But the emphasis on near-inevitable war – and the naming of narrow timeframes when it is expected to happen – is also closing down options for the US and its allies, while opening them up for Russia. Moscow still has the initiative, and the risk is growing that its president, Vladimir Putin, is being set up to achieve a diplomatic victory through pulling the rug from under the western war scare. There’s been no shortage of speculation over how long Russia can keep its troops on the border without either launching an attack or withdrawing them. But back in November, when Putin first explained the purpose of Russia’s threatening force buildup, he also said it was important for those forces to keep the pressure on “for as long as possible”. Three months on, the question instead is how long the US and its closest allies can keep ratcheting up the warnings of imminent conflict. While previously it would have been hard to cast any retreat by Putin as anything but humiliating failure, it is now the US that stands to be embarrassed, and the credibility of its intelligence disclosures once again shattered, if Russia chooses an option other than invasion – or even simply continues to sit on the border as the dates named by the US come and go. The continuing diplomatic procession to Moscow, meanwhile, brings little obvious benefit. For the most part it repeats arguments Russia has already rejected, and hears complaints from Moscow that are already wearily familiar. There is no indication that insistent cajoling by western leaders and ministers has had any influence on Russia’s plans – even when the French president, Emmanuel Macron, apparently tried to negotiate with Russia by making sweeping promises on behalf of Ukraine and Nato. For now, Russia is continuing to reap benefits from its military deployments. It’s not just citizens and embassy staff that western countries are pulling out of Ukraine. Training missions by US, British and Canadian troops have also been withdrawn – with the specific aim of preventing them getting in the line of fire in the event of a Russian attack. This approach is the polar opposite of the way the west protects the Baltic states, where small contingents from multiple Nato member states are embedded in national militaries precisely to ensure that, in the event of Russian aggression, they are directly and immediately involved. That strategy has proved a striking success. Where in 2016 there was much public discussion of how the Baltic states were potential prime candidates for the next Russian intervention, some people now consider these three countries the safest they have been in centuries. It’s too late to take that approach with Ukraine. As the crisis unfolded, the US and UK almost immediately ruled out direct military support on the ground to Kyiv. Moscow will have been delighted, as once again the west helpfully took Russia’s greatest fears off the table. The extent of support to Ukraine is supposedly limited by the fact that it isn’t a member of Nato, but there’s no shortage of precedents for western powers offering protection from aggression beyond the borders of the alliance. There’s been startlingly little discussion of reducing Russia’s options by declaring no-fly zones and maritime exclusion zones over and around Ukraine, and being visibly ready to enforce them – presenting Russia with the risk of direct clashes with Nato nations if it supports an attack by use of air or sea power. Russia is demanding the withdrawal of Nato from eastern Europe precisely because it presents a deterrent and a constraining factor on its ambitions. Military experts talk of Moscow employing a “compellence strategy” to achieve this – a shorthand for Russia using the threat of force to extract sweeping concessions from the west like a street criminal. But the west is only a helpless victim of this mugging through its own choice. Five months ago, Chatham House published a survey of past successes and failures in dissuading Russia from aggression, titled What deters Russia. The case studies taken from incidents and confrontations over the decades show striking consistency: Russia achieves success when stronger adversaries back down in the face of threats, but retreats if those same adversaries demonstrate the will and determination to protect themselves, their allies or partners. Russia’s network of propagandists, mouthpieces and influencers has been insistently pushing the idea that confronting Moscow risks almost inevitable escalation to nuclear war. That’s obscured the fact that a clash with the US and its allies is the worst-case scenario for Russia, and the prospect is one of the few genuine deterrents for Putin. The possibility of western direct support for Ukraine carries a far more immediate, direct and palpable risk for Russia than repeated warnings of further sanctions. While warning of Russia’s plans to attack, the US and its allies should also be letting Putin believe they might just do something about it. Keir Giles works with the Russia and Eurasia programme of Chatham House. He is the author of Moscow Rules: What Drives Russia to Confront the WestAt least Lorenzo Insigne will not need to be taught another lesson by his children. He had barely made it back to his car after Napoli’s win over Torino in October when his sons, eight-year-old Carmine and six-year-old Christian, warned him that they would be getting the football out and showing him how to strike a penalty as soon as they got home. Maybe they had some good pointers. The tame effort saved by Vanja Milinkovic-Savic in that match was Insigne’s third missed spot-kick of the season. Since then, he has converted four out of four. After Inter’s Stefan De Vrij kicked the heel of Victor Osimhen on Saturday, Insigne swept a confident penalty past Samir Handanovic – striking the ball with too much force for the keeper to reach despite diving the right way. The goal took Lorenzo Insigne past Diego Maradona on Napoli’s all-time scoring list, a landmark that somehow felt less vivid than when he had drawn level three weeks before. Back then, after scoring against Salernitana, he had run to the TV cameras and tried to deliver a message to his club’s supporters. His words were hard to make out clearly, but various lip-readers had him telling the club’s fans “I will always be here.” Not in a literal sense, obviously. Insigne’s decision to sign for Toronto FC had already been made public. Insigne’s presumed intention was simply to remind his club’s supporters of his attachment to the team that he plays for and the city where he was born and raised. On the surface, Insigne’s story has parallels with that of Francesco Totti at Roma – a homegrown and lavishly talented forward who grew up to wear the captain’s armband, shattering records and each developing their own signature move. Where Totti had his ‘cucchiao’ chip, Insigne has ‘o tir a gir’, his trademark curling shot around the keeper after cutting in from the left flank. Yet the relationship between player and fanbase has always been different, with a certain coolness that did not exist for Totti in Rome. Insigne reflected on that reality in an interview with the magazine Rivista Undici, published at the end of last year. “Do you want to know what Naples has not understood about me?” he said. “I have a particular character. I know how to joke about with anyone, but at the start I keep my distance. For some fans that comes across as arrogance … It’s just a self-defence. Some people have not 100% understood me. Those who truly know me, know how I am made.” None of which is to suggest a lack of affection for his city. Insigne spoke in the same interview about anti-southern prejudice that exists in Italy and how much it hurts him to hear discriminatory chants from rival fans. His interviewer introduced further layers into the discourse, observing dualities within Neapolitan culture that would make it hard for any player to be loved as unanimously as Totti is by Roma supporters. A bigger discussion than we have room for here, but perhaps helpful in understanding why the response to Insigne’s departure has tended more towards resigned disappointment than soul-searching or profound regret. Fans are less interested in his future than their club’s present. The Ultras who waited outside the team’s hotel before the game against Inter had a singular message for Insigne and his vice-captain, Kalidou Koulibaly: “Listen, we need to win”. Napoli had been presented with a chance to go top of the table, the gap to league leaders Inter down to a single point after their defeat in the Milan derby. It was an opportunity that the Partenopei looked ready to seize when Insigne buried his penalty past Handanovic in the seventh minute. Through the first half, Napoli were dominant. Victor Osimhen, making only his second start since fracturing his cheekbone and eye socket in a game against Inter last November, seemed to be constantly in motion, not so much dragging Inter’s defenders out of position as never letting them find their shape to begin with. Piotr Zielinski chased Marcelo Brozovic into constant retreat and fired a left-footed effort against the post. But an equaliser at the start of the second half transformed the game. Edin Dzeko got his initial connection with Lautaro Martínez’s cross all wrong, heading the ball straight down into the floor. The bounce caught Gaetano Di Lorenzo off-guard, and the defender shinned it straight back to him. Dzeko did not need a third invitation, crashing his shot in off the bar. Napoli would have the best chances to win the game, Handanovic denying Osimhen and Eljif Elmas at his near post, but never recaptured their first-half verve. Inter were content to preserve the draw, though Dzeko remained a threat when Denzel Dumfries or Ivan Perisic found space down the flanks to counter. The game finished 1-1, and a day later Milan beat Sampdoria 1-0 to jump ahead of both teams into first place. Inter, with a game in hand, retain control of their own destiny, but they have taken just five points from their last four games. That is mostly a reflection of their taxing winter schedule – which included a visit to Atalanta as well as the fixtures against Milan and Napoli. But the form of Lautaro Martínez, with one goal in his last nine matches, is also becoming a concern. It was Napoli, though, who left with greater regrets on Saturday, having missed their chance to land a blow on a title rival. Opportunities to compete for the Scudetto do not come along so often in Naples, as Insigne well knows. Reflecting on the various managers he has worked under, he described the three years with Maurizio Sarri as pure joy but confessed that the regret of not winning a league title continued to linger. It was Koulibaly who spoke for the team at full-time, telling Dazn that: “Lorenzo is the symbol of Napoli and we must respect him. I want such good things for him. We still have a beautiful journey to go on together, chasing our dream.” Koulibaly’s presence offered a reason to believe. This was his first start since returning from the Africa Cup of Nations. At times he looked a little sluggish, but a brilliant recovering challenge on Dumfries reminded how decisive he can be. Napoli have enough talent to believe that they can compete for the Scudetto yet, as well as going toe to toe with Barcelona when the Europa League resumes on Thursday. Insigne, the first Italian ever to score at both the Camp Nou and the Santiago Bernabéu in the Champions League, can hardly be intimidated by the stage. Perhaps now would be a good time, though, for an extra session with Carmine and Christian. Napoli’s departing forward has scored four penalties since the dressing down that his sons gave him at the end of the Torino game. But he has only found the net once all season from open play.Marathon talks to revive the Iran nuclear deal have hit a new roadblock, with Iran accusing the US of refusing to make the necessary political decisions to entrench the agreement in international law or to broaden the scope of economic sanctions that would be lifted. The issue has dogged the talks in Vienna between the west, Russia, Iran and China – which have been under way since February – from the outset. There is no sign that the eighth round of negotiations, once intended to be the final round, has reached the breakthrough some had been expecting. Ali Shamkhani, the hardline secretary of Iran’s national security council, in a tweet issued in multiple languages, declared after speaking to his government’s negotiators that progress was becoming “more and more difficult”. Expressing his frustration at the delays, he said: “The Vienna negotiations had reached a point where the outcome could be described definitively without the need for guesswork. “A US political decision to accept the deal or refrain from accepting the requirements of a credible and lasting agreement based on the principles accepted in the nuclear agreement can replace speculation.” The US, he said, kept proposing new initiatives essentially designed to evade their commitments. The foreign ministry spokesperson, Saeed Khatibzadeh, at his weekly press conference tried to calm the atmosphere by saying he had spoken to Iran’s chief negotiator in Vienna, Ali Bagheri, and that he had been assured the position was “neither one of flowers and nightingales, nor one of rocks and thorns”. But, he added, the onus lay on the US to accept Iran’s terms. Asked what guarantees Iran was seeking, Khatibzadeh said: “The United States is not trustworthy and therefore objective guarantees must be obtained so that international law and relations are not again mocked by the US government.” He added that all sanctions should be lifted at the UN security council. “It does not matter what the title of the sanctions is since they were applied with a false label,” Khatibzadeh said. He stressed that any agreement on the release of political prisoners, including US dual-nationals held in Iranian jails, was discussed only in parallel with the nuclear talks. Prof Mohammad Marandi, an Iranian analyst in Vienna thought to be close to the government, also claimed the tensions centred on the range of sanctions that would be lifted as part of the deal. Iran is pushing for all sanctions to be lifted, but the US says some sanctions are linked to human rights and terrorists abuses, and are not linked to the nuclear deal. Mikhail Ulyanov, the Russian ambassador at the talks, adopted a less pessimistic tone. He said the discussions were at a final stage and that “significant progress” had been made. But he has tended to adopt a more positive outlook, adopting a near role of mediator between the US and Iran, one he has maintained despite tensions over Ukraine. Wang Qun, China’s ambassador to the UN in Vienna, also broke silence at the weekend to say the talks were at a concluding stage. The 20-page draft agreement with annexes is largely written, but the outstanding issues show an absolute determination by the Iranian regime to ensure that it appears to emerge from the talks victoriously, having withstood the might of US sanctions. Joe Biden, distracted by the Ukraine crisis, is already facing mounting political resistance from US Republican senators who insist that the president cannot evade Congress by refusing to put any new agreement to a vote. Democrats have said that if the deal was put to the Senate for approval, they did not think the necessary 60 senators would vote to reject it. The Senate is split 50:50, with vice-president Kamala Harris having the casting vote. But the Iranian army’s recent display of new long-range solid-fuel missiles with a range of 900 miles (1,450km) will hardly make it easier for the US administration to sell the deal. Iran has also claimed that the US negotiating team – with which it does not meet directly – is divided on how far to compromise. The agreement is designed to bring the US, and subsequently Iran, back into the original nuclear deal signed in 2015 from which the US withdrew in 2018. The talks have been held against a backdrop of repeated warnings from the west stretching back months that the talks can continue only for a few more weeks because Iran is coming ever closer to obtaining irreversibly the material and knowledge required to make a nuclear weapon.Two-thirds of UK asylum seekers arriving by small boat after crossing the Channel were suffering from hypothermia, according to Home Office data obtained by the Guardian, while hundreds had burns or suspected broken bones. Priti Patel, the home secretary, has repeatedly condemned the new arrivals, who crossed in record numbers last year, urging them to remain in other European countries. Those fleeing persecution say they have no other choice but to undertake the hours-long journeys in dinghies because there are no alternative “safe and legal routes”. Freedom of Information data for the period January to June 2021, when about 6,000 people crossed the Channel in small boats according to analysis by the Press Association, shows that 4,075 were suffering hypothermia , a dangerous drop in body temperature, when they reached the Kent coast. Some 354 people had petrol or saltwater burns sustained on the journey and 27 were taken to hospital with suspected broken bones shortly after arriving. The Home Office initially rejected the Guardian’s request under the Freedom of Information Act but later agreed to provide data answering some questions for a limited period of six months. Data for the whole of 2021 would likely show many more cases of poor health. In 2021, 28,381 people were recorded as arriving by small boat, up from 8,500 in 2020, 1,800 in 2019 and 300 in 2018. In January 2022, there were 1,341 arrivals, a sixfold increase on the same month last year. Last November at least 27 people drowned while trying to cross the Channel in a flimsy vessel; last week the French coastguard rescued 36 people. Independent inspectors raised concerns about the standard of reception facilities in Kent for small boat arrivals in a report in December, including fears for a girl with a fuel burn which was neglected for two days after arrival, leaving her scarred for life. Asylum seekers are currently processed at Western Jet Foil in Dover following the closure of the nearby Tug Haven facility. According to the Independent, the Immigration Service Union has raised concerns about facilities there, including narrow benches and concrete floors. A new facility for small boat arrivals is due to open this week at Manston, a former military base in Kent, which can process 300 people, the BBC said. Clare Moseley, the founder of Care4Calais, a charity that works with asylum seekers on both sides of the Channel, condemned the lack of safe and legal routes for people to claim asylum in the UK. “To find out that so many crossing in small boats are suffering hypothermia and nasty injuries when none of this is necessary is deeply upsetting. It’s time we offered refugees a safe way to make their asylum claims without risking their lives.” Lucy Moreton, of the Immigration Service Union, said the condition people arrived in after crossing the Channel in small boats was not only traumatic for those suffering hypothermia or other injuries but also for Border Force staff. “It absolutely adds to the pressure that staff are under,” she said. “When you have a child in your arms who is covered in fuel burns you take that vicarious trauma home with you. The pressure on staff is very difficult psychologically.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “People should seek asylum in the first safe country they reach and not risk their lives making these dangerous and unnecessary journeys. We have measures in place to ensure people arriving in the UK via small boats are treated appropriately, this includes onsite medical care and water. Anyone in need of urgent care is immediately transferred to a local hospital.”Love is not love, which alters when it alteration finds. It’s a beautiful sentiment around which to build a Shakespearean sonnet, but in real life not everyone adapts to the dramatic changes thrust upon them in a pandemic with the apparent grace of Kate Garraway. The TV presenter’s husband, Derek Draper, almost died of Covid; he is now back home after months in intensive care, but needs round-the-clock nursing. He can speak, but can’t hold what most people would regard as a conversation. It cannot be the life or the marriage either of them dreamed of in their early 50s. But as she said hopefully at the weekend, she thinks they have found “a new way to be in love”, a relationship of complete trust and reliance. “That’s a positive thing to come out of this, to have that certainty of each other. He and I are very close.” It’s easily overlooked among the more obviously dramatic ways in which Covid has changed our lives, yet when the history of this pandemic comes to be written, love will deserve its own chapter in the story. The last two years have obviously been tough on the single and the lonely, on those trapped in abusive or just downright miserable relationships, and above all on those bereaved by Covid. But they have not been without challenge, either, for plenty of couples who were rubbing along fine before, only to find that nothing exposes the hidden cracks in an outwardly happy life like a period of intense and unrelieved togetherness edged by fear. For every smug couple trilling that lockdown had brought them closer together, there was probably one either actively longing for their other half to go back to the office, or at the very least feeling the need to take the dog out for extremely long lockdown walks. (While a third of Britons felt their relationships had improved during the pandemic, according to a YouGov survey in the autumn of 2020, one in nine thought it had pushed them and their partner apart). As for predictions of a lockdown baby boom due to all the wild sex couples were bound to start having once they were trapped indoors – well, that gave way pretty quickly to elasticated waists, comfort eating and a birthrate that plummeted in 2020. Like pandas, it turns out humans don’t mate very well in captivity, and perhaps especially not if they already have manic toddlers bouncing off the walls with boredom. Nor is there anything enormously erotic about having a job hanging by a thread, or lying awake at night worrying about money. And then there’s the direct impact not of lockdown but of the virus itself, with all the grief, loss and fear it has brought first and foremost to the bereaved, but also to key workers who have spent their days steeped in death and have come home traumatised – either unable to talk about what they have seen, or unable to stop. Glib talk of “life-changing” injury or illness like Draper’s, meanwhile, obscures the often painful everyday reality of relationships transformed overnight, either by Covid complications or by long Covid; from partnerships of equals into carer and cared-for. Relief that the loved one survived all too often mingles with grief for a future now slipping out of sight and occasional fierce pangs of resentment, followed by guilt for not always managing to live up to the unswervingly loving ideal of Shakespeare’s “ever-fixed mark”. For the clinically vulnerable and those who love them, meanwhile, the government’s breezy insistence on lifting all restrictions at the end of the month spells not relief but fresh anxiety. What is the loving choice if you daren’t bring the virus back home, but have to go back to the office to make ends meet? And yet, at the not-quite-end of it all, here millions of us still are; still together, still faintly dazed by the whole experience, but perhaps with a new understanding forged in crisis of what long-term love is all about. It’s not all Valentine’s hearts and flowers, tables for two and tickets to Paris. It is absolutely about kindness, patience, tolerance and the ability to pull together as a team in times of unexpected trouble. For love is not always love that stays rigidly the same when circumstances around it change. Post-pandemic love is perhaps just as often the kind that good-naturedly adapts, and is flexible enough to withstand a shock. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistMeeting one’s heroes is, contrary to advice, always advisable – depending on how canny you are at picking heroes. So if as a teenager you lionised, say, the notoriously grumpy Van Morrison, then you’ll probably be disappointed. If, however, you’re the kind of person who never grew out of your love for Ivan Reitman comedies, from Animal House to Ghostbusters to Dave, you may have been mocked (by idiots) over the years for your taste, but, man, you are quids in when you meet your man. As the Guardian’s official 80s movies correspondent, I talked to Reitman multiple times over the years, beginning with a phone interview for the last film he directed, 2014’s Draft Day. When I contacted him again a few weeks later to ask if I could interview him for a book I was working on about 80s movies, he immediately agreed, and talked to me for over an hour, reminiscing about films people had been asking him to reminisce about for over 30 years. He never showed boredom or irritation. If I ever needed a quote, or just had a question, I could email him and he’d reply immediately. Does it really need saying that this kind of behaviour from a genuine Hollywood powerhouse is not exactly typical? I didn’t get to meet Reitman in person until October 2021 when he, amazingly, came to London mid-pandemic to help promote his son Jason’s contribution to the Ghostbusters canon – a testament, it quickly became clear, to his love for his son. We initially met in front of a hotel in Soho, where he and Jason gamely hammed it up in the Ghostbusters car, Ecto-1. It is rule number one of interviewing that you don’t ask for photos with the celebrity, and it is rule number two that, if you absolutely must, you certainly don’t do it before the interview. I smashed those rules to smithereens and asked the surprisingly shy and humble Reitman for a photo with him in front of Ecto-1, and after asking if I was sure I didn’t want one with Jason (nope, sorry), he agreed. How do you convey to someone how much their work meant to you as a child and therefore all your life? Poor Reitman had had nerds burbling to him about this for almost all of his adult life, and I’m afraid I added to the pile of nerds. As I babbled on about how I can recite whole scenes of Meatballs, of Twins, and most of all, Ghostbusters, Jason beamed proudly next to his father, but Reitman himself just seemed overcome. “Gosh, thank you,” he said to me as we walked to the hotel. “That’s so nice – thank you.” Genuine humility is in pretty short supply in most celebrity interviews – so is genuine emotion. But twice Reitman had to break off to cry (once going to the bathroom to pull himself together) as he talked about, first, how proud he was of Jason, and then as he talked about his mother’s time in Auschwitz. Reitman was born in Czechoslovakia in 1946, after his mother and father (who was in the resistance) finally reunited at the end of the war. They fled communist oppression and made it to Canada when Reitman was four, losing pretty much all of their money on the journey. He was happy to talk about Kindergarten Cop for weeks on end, but when it came to discussing his family – his parents, his children – his grief and pride and love were just too close to the surface. There’s nothing more Jewish than weeping with pride over one’s children, or being haunted by the Holocaust, and watching Reitman sit there reach for another tissue, this gentle, tender man felt, not like a director I had revered all my life (one who made Bill Murray a star and Arnold Schwarzenegger into a bona fide comedian), but like someone in my family. I wanted to hug him, but fortunately for him, social distancing rules kept me at a safe distance. What an impressive and brilliant man Reitman was. It’s yet another terrible loss from that generation of self-made Jewish immigrants who shaped American comedy, and a very sad loss of a genuinely lovely man.In the late 19th-century America, a somewhat bizarre form of abstinence emerged. The vice was not alcohol but anxiety. Citizens of New York began to attend regular “Don’t Worry Clubs” in which they encouraged each other to look on the bright side of life. Their founder, Theodore Seward, argued that Americans were “slaves to the worrying habit”, which was the “enemy which destroys happiness”. It needed to be “attacked” with “resolute and persevering effort”. By the early 20th century, the psychologist William James described how people had developed a kind of “religion of healthy-mindedness” with the aim of turning the mind away from all negative thoughts and feelings. Today, we seem to be living in a global Don’t Worry Club. Books, magazines, podcasts and TV shows frequently outline the dangers of stress. Many assume that anxious feelings are inherently and inevitably bad for us in the short and long term – and that they must be eliminated. Surprisingly enough, however, a growing body of research suggests that it is our beliefs about our feelings, as much as the feelings themselves, that determine their effects on the brain and body. Negative views of stress and anxiety often exacerbate our problems. And by learning to view these uncomfortable feelings more positively, we may even be able to use some forms of stress to our advantage. To understand how this may be so, let’s consider a concrete example. Imagine that you are facing a difficult exam or an interview that is going to determine your future career path. If you are like most people, your pulse will speed up, and your rate of breathing might increase too – and you may well assume that this stress response will damage your performance. How are you meant to concentrate, after all, if it feels as if your heart is about to break through your rib cage? Now consider an alternative possibility: the “physiological arousal” that you are experiencing is an evolved response that helps you to deal with new challenges. Heavier breathing, for example, fills your lungs with oxygen, and the racing pulse ensures that your blood can carry fuel to the brain – changes that should sharpen your thinking. Rather than attempting to suppress your feelings, you can go with the flow – knowing that they could give your performance a boost. Studies have now shown that simply presenting these facts to anxious people can help to shift their attitudes, so they no longer interpret these sensations as a sign of impending failure. And that, in turn, improves their performance on difficult challenges, such as maths tests – sometimes by a considerable margin. Apart from these cognitive changes, our attitudes to stress can also alter the way we perceive our environment, and what we learn from it. When faced with a potentially unpleasant task such as public speaking, for example, people who see stress as enhancing are more likely to focus on positive aspects of the scene before them (such as the smiling faces in a crowded room) rather than dwelling on potential signs of threat or hostility. They also become proactive – deliberately seeking feedback and searching for constructive ways to cope, rather than trying to hide from the problem at hand – and their thinking becomes more flexible and creative as a result. Our beliefs may even change our physiological responses to stressful situations. When people are taught that stress can enhance their performance and contribute to personal growth, they tend to show more muted fluctuations in the so-called “stress hormone” cortisol – just enough to keep them more alert, without putting them in a long-lasting state of panic. They also experience a sharper spike in beneficial “anabolic” hormones, such as DHEAS and testosterone, which can help repair the body’s tissues. (For people who see stress as dangerous or debilitating, there is barely any increase.) Overall, it seems that negative beliefs about anxiety and stress create a kind of vicious cycle that pushes us into ever more catastrophic ways of thinking. The result is that the body and brain start to react more and more as if they are in real physical danger and the only option is fight or flight. If we begin to see those feelings as a potential source of energy and motivation, however, we can break that cycle. There is even evidence that the way we feel about stress can influence our overall longevity. One US study tracked the health of more than 28,000 people over eight years, with questionnaires that measured people’s stress levels as well as their beliefs about the effects of that stress. Among people with high levels, those with the negative views were considerably more likely to die than those who believed that stress was harmless. Importantly, this was true even when the scientists controlled for a host of other lifestyle factors, such as income, education, physical activity and smoking. It’s important to be careful when interpreting correlational findings like this. But given the experimental work showing that worrying about stress results in a worse physiological response in the moment, it’s plausible that the effects could add up over time to influence long-term health. It’s not necessarily easy to pull off this shift in attitude, of course. Western culture generally teaches us to get stressed about stress – and the habit can become deeply ingrained. This is not about “toughing it out”, which, if you’re struggling to cope, can be a recipe for disaster. Nor is it about learning to simply put up with unacceptable workloads or damaging relationships. But as you encounter some of life’s smaller challenges, consider whether you might begin to view your anxiety a little more kindly, as a potential source of energy and resilience. To misquote Shakespeare’s Hamlet, stress may be neither good nor bad – but thinking makes it so. • David Robson’s The Expectation Effect: How Your Mindset Can Transform Your Life is published by Canongate (£18.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. Further reading The Upside of Stress: Why Stress Is Good for You (and How to Get Good at It) by Kelly McGonigal (Vermilion, £12.99) Chatter: The Voice in Our Head (and How to Harness It) by Ethan Kross (Vermilion, £9.99) Stress-proof: The Ultimate Guide to Living a Stress-Free Life by Mithu Storoni (Yellow Kite, £9.99)The Beijing Winter Games descended into acrimony and farce on Monday after the 15-year-old Russian skater Kamila Valieva was cleared to compete again despite a positive doping test hanging over her head. In a highly anticipated ruling, the court of arbitration for sport said there were “exceptional circumstances” surrounding Valieva’s case, and that banning her while it was ongoing “would cause her irreparable harm”. It means Valieva, who last week became the first woman to land a quad at the Olympics when she inspired the Russian Olympic Committee to victory in the team event, will now go for a second gold medal in the women’s single skating competition starting on Tuesday and finishing on Thursday. But Cas’s verdict was immediately condemned by several former athletes, with the 2018 Olympic team skating gold medallist Meagan Duhamel among the most vocal. “How is anyone going to take the women’s event seriously now?” she said. “We were just told illegal drugs and abuse are OK. If that is what this sport is about now, I want nothing to do with it. February 14 2022. The day the Olympic spirit died.” The decision was also criticised by the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee, whose skaters finished in silver behind the Russians in the team event. Its chief executive, Sarah Hirshland, described it as “another chapter in the systemic and pervasive disregard for clean sport by Russia”. She said: “Athletes have the right to know they are competing on a level playing field. Unfortunately, today that right is being denied.” The Canadian Olympic Committee also said it was “extremely disappointed” with the decision. “The COC is fully committed to clean sport and we firmly believe that no one involved in doping or other corrupt practices has a place in the Olympic movement,” its president, Tricia Smith, said. Valieva, who practised on Monday, has not commented on the decision. However her choreographer Alexey Zheleznyakov said he was delighted with the news. “The whole country does not sleep for a week! The whole world prays for a week,” he wrote on Instagram. “Everyone is happy today. Come on, our girl, fly, angel, fly!” Cas’s decision caps a remarkable week at these Winter Olympics which began last Monday when Valieva inspired the Russian Olympic Committee to victory in the team event. A day later, however, her world was turned upside down when the World Anti-Doping Agency-approved Stockholm laboratory reported that a urine sample taken from Valieva on Christmas Day contained the banned angina drug trimetazidine. That news led to the Russian Anti-Doping Agency provisionally suspending her, before reversing its decision a day later. That led the International Olympic Committee, Wada and the International Skating Union to take Valieva to Cas – which finally ruled against them on Monday afternoon. However, because Cas’s decision was limited to the sole question of whether Valieva should be allowed to compete again in Beijing – and not whether her urine sample contained a banned drug – there remains the strong possibility that she could still be banned in the coming months and also lose any medals she wins at these Games. The IOC has now confirmed it will not hold victory ceremonies for the team or individual figure skating events – a controversial decision that many here in Beijing believe unfairly punishes athletes from other teams. “In the interest of fairness, it would not be appropriate to hold the medal ceremony for the figure skating team event as it would include an athlete who on the one hand has a positive A-sample but whose violation of the anti-doping rules has not yet been established on the other hand,” it said. “Should Ms Valieva finish amongst the top three competitors in the women’s single skating competition, no flower ceremony and no medal ceremony will take place during the Olympic Winter Games Beijing 2022.” In a statement explaining its decision, Cas said the World Anti-Doping Code was unclear when it came to sanctions relating to suspended “protected persons” under 16 years of age. It also stressed that a 44-day delay in reporting Valieva’s positive test for TMZ, because of Covid issues in the Stockholm testing laboratory, had affected her ability to mount a defence. “The panel considered that preventing the athlete from competing at the Olympic Games would cause her irreparable harm in these circumstances,” Matthieu Reeb, secretary general for Cas, told the world’s press. Reeb also stressed the panel was concerned that if a permanent suspension had been imposed on the athlete and she was later cleared or given a very low sanction it would have caused “serious damage”. Cas added: “The panel considered fundamental principles of fairness, proportionality, irreparable harm and the relative balance of interests as between the applicants and the athlete, who did not test positive during the Olympic Games in Beijing and is still subject to a disciplinary procedure.” But in a statement, Wada suggested Cas had not correctly interpreted Wada’s Code as it applies to athletes under 16. “Wada is disappointed by today’s ruling,” it said. “While Wada has not received the reasoned award, it appears that the Cas panel decided not to apply the terms of the code, which does not allow for specific exceptions to be made in relation to mandatory provisional suspensions for ‘protected persons’, including minors.”United under pressure after City defeat Having begun to find a rhythm to their play with style and swagger, Manchester United’s capitulation against derby rivals Manchester City was surprising. With United five points ahead of their neighbours going into the game, victory would have hugely damaged any hopes City had of Champions League football and kept them with a foot firmly in the title race. Instead, United are off the pace at the top and have City firmly on their heels. Manager Marc Skinner pointed to the reason for the underwhelming performance: “I just think Man City have a lot of experienced players who have been around this league for a long time, [whereas] we’re embedding quite a lot of players.” He’s right: the experience of winning leagues and being able to get results in high-stakes games cannot be underestimated. United held out until Caroline Weir’s stunning chip in the 81st minute. Against Arsenal the preceding week it was a sublime pass from Vivianne Miedema for Stina Blackstenius to put in that denied them all three points. United need to see out games against the WSL’s traditional top-three but that will come with time, experience and the pain of these late concessions still stinging. Now their mettle will be tested in the race for top three. SW Match report: Manchester City 1 Manchester United 0 Neville steals the show It’s the Ashleigh Neville show and we’re all just here to appreciate the entertainment. The right-back was again at the heart of the Spurs attack in Sunday’s 2-0 win Birmingham, this time opening the scoring with her second goal in two games, nabbed when Emily Ramsey spilled Jessica Naz’s shot. Ria Percival got Tottenham’s second goal in the 85th minute but Neville remained the standout player, as she often is. The chart of her stats this year speak for itself: Neville is in the 90th percentile for expected goals for right-backs and has similar statistical excellence for her dribbling and ball-carrying. Her efforts on Sunday mean that Spurs are back in third place – above Manchester United and very much in European contention. MN Scott’s overhead-kick magic Ninth versus 10th in the league isn’t always the most exciting affair. But when it features an overhead overhead-kick assist from Jill Scott, what more can you really ask for? Everton v Aston Villa featured two teams who started dangerously close to the bottom of the league on 11 and 13 points respectively. A win either way would be pivotal and it was Villa who took the game by its lapels. They opened the scoring via Scott’s acrobatics and the finish by Emily Gielnik. Ramona Petzelbeger added to the tally, drifting in from the left to slide the ball into the far bottom corner. MN Green shines for Brighton Brighton have been desperate for goals, and they all seemed to have come raining down on Reading as they beat them 4-1. Kayleigh Green, who scored twice, brought much needed attacking spark to Hope Powell’s team – who before this result hadn’t won in 11 consecutive games in all competitions. Powell has tinkered with her forward options this season and usually prefers Danielle Carter as a lone striker. With Green promoted to the starting line-up, the Wales international certainly showed why she should keep her place. “Kayleigh was very good today, she didn’t want to come off as she was on a hat-trick,” said Powell. “I thought she was outstanding. She scored two goals and they were well deserved.” RO Bedford’s rejig pays off for Leicester Lydia Bedford has changed Leicester’s fortunes after switching to three at the back when taking over from Jonathan Morgan last December. It gave them their first 3-0 victory in the WSL against West Ham, as Natasha Flint and Ashleigh Plumptre put the team 2-0 up in under 10 minutes before Freya Gregory added the third in the second half. It’s been a revelation that has allowed the team to capitalise on their counter-attacking prowess. The formation means Leicester can play to their strengths with pacy forwards who can receive quick balls from midfield and mount attacks. It certainly was a day of lucky threes for Leicester. ROMy wife, Gurminder Sikand, who has died aged 61 of a cardiac arrest, was an artist whose work was characterised by images of strong women. This was true of her many self-portraits, her paintings influenced by Indian folk art, her watercolours of women hugging trees (inspired by the Chipko anti-deforestation movement), and latterly her drawings of muscular female figures whose physiques reflected Gurminder’s workouts at her city-centre gym in Nottingham. Born in Jamshedpur in India to Sohindar (nee Ohson) and Sarmukh Sikand, Gurminder spent her childhood in the hill-station of Kasauli in Himachal Pradesh. By 1970 the family had relocated to the UK, where her parents worked for the NHS. Following spells in north Wales and northern England, they finally settled in the Rhondda valley in south Wales. After attending Tonyrefail comprehensive school, Gurminder took a foundation course at Cardiff College of Art and Design in 1979-80 and then a fine art degree at the City of Birmingham Polytechnic (now Birmingham City University), where I was studying English. In 1983, when Gurminder graduated, we moved to Nottingham. Supported by East Midlands Arts, and given opportunities by several individuals and institutions, she began to display her paintings and to hold educational events across the Midlands. An early boost came in 1984 when the South African artist Gavin Jantjes selected one of Gurminder’s paintings, Festival of Fools, as the East Midlands Arts prize-winner. That year she co-founded the Nottingham Indian Artists’ Group with Said Adrus and Sardul Gill. Among the group’s many activities was an exhibition at the Commonwealth Institute in London in 1985, the year before we married. Further recognition came when the art curator Eddie Chambers included Gurminder’s work in the catalogue for Black Art: Plotting the Course (1988), which featured her painting on its cover. Besides her involvement in many group shows, including in New York, Gurminder had solo exhibitions in a number of English cities, notably at Derby Museum and Art Gallery, Midlands Arts Centre in Birmingham and Walsall Art Museum and Gallery. Gurminder exhibited sparingly after 2000, though her commitment to her practice remained absolute. The drawings in her final show, The Weaver of Songs, at the TG Gallery in Nottingham in 2021, each took three years to produce, their surfaces scratched away and pasted over in acts of erasure and remaking. She is survived by me and our son, Nathaniel, her brother, Kulvindar, and her sister, Gurbir.JD Sports and Footasylum have been fined almost £5m for sharing commercially sensitive information during an investigation by the UK competition watchdog, which accused them of deleting phone records, and found their chairmen to have held multiple clandestine meetings including one caught on video in a car park near Bury in Greater Manchester. JD Sports bought the trainer retailer for £90m in 2019 in a deal that was subsequently subjected to an in-depth investigation by the Competition and Markets Authority, during which time the companies were ordered to operate as separate businesses. In November, days after the CMA ordered the deal to be unwound over competition concerns, a covert video recording emerged of the JD Sports executive chairman, Peter Cowgill, and his counterpart at Footasylum, Barry Brown, holding a meeting in a car park during the investigation period. On Monday, the CMA published the findings of a new investigation, fining the companies a combined £4.7m for holding two meetings in which they “exchanged commercially sensitive information”. “There is a black hole when it comes to the meetings. Both CEOs cannot recall crucial details about these meetings,” said Kip Meek, the chair of the CMA inquiry group. “On top of this, neither CEO or JD Sports’ general counsel can provide any documentation around the meetings – no notes, no agendas, no emails and poor phone records, some of which were deleted before they could be given to the CMA.” The CMA said it used its information-gathering powers to try to develop a “clearer picture”, including submitting legally binding requests to the companies for information, to which they did not respond in full. It said information discussed included Footasylum’s issues with stock allocations from key brands, financial performance, the planned closure of six stores, contract negotiations with its transport and delivery provider and terms regarding the renewal of its head office space. “This fine should act as a warning,” Meek said. “If you break the rules there will be serious consequences.” The CMA said it had fined JD Sports £4.3m for failure to comply with its order to operate as a separate business during its investigation. Footasylum was fined £380,000. JD Sport said that at no point did it intend to break any rules and “always acted honestly and in good faith in its efforts to comply” with the CMA. However, it did accept that “inadvertently it was in the receipt of limited commercially sensitive information and that this was not reported to the CMA immediately”. The company hit out at the CMA saying that no phone records were deleted, although it admitted some records were “not available”. It said there was no ban on the two CEOs meeting as part of the CMA’s order. It added that there was no legal requirement for it to notify the CMA of the meetings, or to take notes. “A number of the conclusions which the CMA have drawn are either incorrect or have been presented in a misleading manner through the use of inflammatory language,” the company said in a statement. “Whilst JD accepts that some phone records were not available, it absolutely refutes any allegation that this was due to records being deliberately deleted. In this regard, JD can also confirm that it voluntarily submitted all of its relevant devices to a third party for expert forensic analysis. “Ultimately, JD does not believe that the description of events or the penalty that has been levied is a fair reflection of the group’s efforts to ensure compliance with the [CMA] order.”I have just returned from a trip to Mexico, where I was struck by the stocks I saw simmering on every stove – broths ladled over greens and flowers, or tender offcuts of meat, or in bases of dried shrimp and seafood. In all cases, these broths were seasoned with local herbs, dried chillies and spices. Countries with deep-rooted food cultures are often skilled at celebrating the goodness in a bowl of soup. Here is one inspired by holidays in Greece. Chickpea, chard and bread soup with saffron and garlic yoghurt This is similar to Greek avgolemono, which uses egg yolks to thicken and enrich the mix. Just don’t let it come to a boil after you’ve added the yoghurt/egg mix. Prep 10 min Cook 30 min Serves 4-6 50g butter 3 tbsp olive oil 3 large onions, peeled and finely sliced Salt and black pepper 300g swiss chard (or cavolo nero or spinach), washed, leaves and stems separated 3 large garlic cloves, peeled, 2 chopped, 1 crushed with salt 2 large pinches saffron 1 large (480g) jar cooked chickpeas or 2 x 400g tins, drained and rinsed 1.2 litres chicken or vegetable stock, or water 3 egg yolks, beaten 250g Greek yoghurt To finish A pinch of paprika 4-6 slices good bread A hard sheep’s cheese (optional) 1 lemon, cut into wedges Warm the butter and a tablespoon of the olive oil in a large pan over a medium heat, then add the onions, season generously and sweat for 12-14 minutes, until translucent and very soft. While the onion is cooking, cut the chard leaves into fine ribbons and the stalks into 2½cm pieces. Add the chopped garlic and saffron to the onions, fry, stirring, for a few minutes, then add the chickpeas and stock. Bring to a boil and simmer for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, whisk the egg yolks and crushed garlic in a small bowl, then stir in the yoghurt. Add the chard stems to the soup and simmer for a few minutes. Add a ladle of the hot broth to the yoghurt, whisk to combine, then slowly whisk back into the pan. Continue cooking over a low heat for five minutes, making sure the soup doesn’t actually simmer, or the yoghurt will split. Taste and check the seasoning – it will probably need a little more salt. Stir the chard leaves into the soup and leave them to wilt while you toast the bread. Drizzle the toasts with a little olive oil, then break them up and put into hot soup bowls. Ladle the soup into the bowls, sprinkle with a little paprika, a sprinkling of grated sheep’s cheese, if using, and an extra lick of olive oil. Serve at the table with lemon wedges. The simple flex … For a plant-based version, leave out the yolks and yoghurt and drizzle with an olive oil or even a pesto. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoBritain’s ownership of the Chagos archipelago has been formally challenged after the Mauritian ambassador to the UN, Jagdish Koonjul, raised his country’s flag above the atoll of Peros Banhos. In a ceremony on Monday at 10.30am local time, Mauritian officials sang their country’s national anthem and the red, blue, yellow and green standard was raised up the flagpole. Koonjul said: “We are performing the symbolic act of raising the flag as the British have done so many times to establish colonies. We, however, are reclaiming what has always been our own.” A pre-recorded message by the Mauritian prime minister, Pravind Jugnauth, was broadcast on a speaker to the Chagossians, Mauritian officials and media assembled on the beach. “This is the first time Mauritius has led an expedition to this part of its territory,” he said. “I feel sad that I have not been able to be part of this historic visit. “I’m delighted that our Chagossian brothers and sisters are able to travel to their birthplace without any foreign [ie British] escort. “The message I wish to give out to the world, as the state with sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago, is that we will ensure a wise stewardship of its territory – over its maritime security, conservation of the marine environment and human rights, notably the return of those of Chagossian origin.” A metal plaque secured beneath the flagpole said: “Visit of the Mauritius delegation to Peros Banhos archipelago, Republic of Mauritius, in the context of the scientific survey of Blenheim Reef.” In a phone call to the Guardian shortly after the flag was raised, the Mauritian prime minister said: “This is a very emotional moment for me and a very historic time for us because we are able to raise our flag on our own territory. “The international community and international institutions have already decided that this is our territory. What we are doing is legitimate.” Asked what would happen if UK officials later removed the Mauritian flag, Jugnauth said: “I don’t know what they are going to do. If they remove the flag, this will amount to a provocation on their part. The UK is not abiding by international law judgments.” After the ceremony, the crew of the cruise ship Bleu de Nîmes, chartered by Mauritius, arranged a barbecue on the beach. Wifi communications from the ship have been disrupted for the past 24 hours. Another vessel was seen nearby. It was not clear whether this was a UK-owned fisheries protection ship. The Mauritian government is making clear that the time has come for its legal victories in international courts and the UN to be translated into facts on the ground. A number of British Indian Ocean Territory signs were removed from the island in the process of the landing and the flag-raising. Most had warned – ineffectively, given the rubbish strewn around – that litter should not be left by visiting yacht crews. The debris that has accumulated on Peros Banhos, and the Salomon islands, where there are buoys for anchoring, suggests that the UK government’s authority in the archipelago is already being flouted and its professed environmental concerns for the islands have not been rigorously adopted. A Mauritian flag was also raised by three Mauritian officials on Salomon atoll during the landing on Sunday afternoon. A spokesperson for the UK foreign office said: “The UK has no doubt as to our sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean Territory, which we have held continuously since 1814. Mauritius has never held sovereignty over the territory and the UK does not recognise its claim. “We are honouring the assurances we gave to Mauritius that we would not interfere with this survey.” On Monday morning, shortly after dawn, one of the only permanent residents of Peros Banhos was sighted: a donkey trotting along the sand. A small herd has survived on the island since the British deported its entire human population in 1972.“I guess it really wasn’t a dream!” On Sunday morning, VfL Bochum’s Twitter account needed to verify the reality of what had been a wonderful, strange afternoon with a snap of the scoreboard at the 90-minute mark. Relegation favourites at the start of the campaign, surprisingly must-watch since, Thomas Reis’s team have been a tough nut to crack, especially at their atmospheric, chocolate box Ruhrstadion. Making life uncomfortable for visitors and becoming the first team to put four first-half goals past Bayern Munich since November 1975 is slightly different, however. The club’s managing director, Sebastian Schindzielorz, told Sky 90 the game might even surpass the fixture from September 1976, when Bochum had led 4-0 against the European champions and ended up losing 6-5. “Potentially it’s a new game of the century,” said Schindzielorz. “Now we can talk about a replacement for it. It’s a game that will go down in the history books of VfL Bochum.” Robert Lewandowski and Christopher Antwi-Adjei exchanged goals in the opening 15 minutes, a scenario Reis would have happily taken, but Bayern were finished off by an astonishing salvo of three goals in a six-minute spell just before half-time. Jürgen Locadia gave the home side the lead by smashing a penalty past stand-in goalkeeper Sven Ulreich, right-back Cristian Gamboa thrashed a magnificent drive into the top corner after nutmegging Kingsley Coman in the buildup to his first Bundesliga goal and then danger man Gerrit Holtmann curled a beauty around Ulreich from the edge of the penalty area. It was dizzying. The 8,500 home fans “freaked out long before the final whistle,” wrote WAZ’s Ralph Knight. “The first half was from another planet,” said Holtmann. Rejected by Werder Bremen as a youth player, able to dip a toe in the top flight with Mainz and Paderborn without really establishing himself, the 26-year-old is having a sensational season. This was the crowning glory, with Reis’s tactics built around Holtmann’s ability to carry the ball at pace and lead counterattacks. It went so well that his picture-book goal was even rattled in with his right foot, rather than his preferred left. Bochum’s bravery was something else. For what it’s worth, they were missing their own first-choice goalkeeper as Michael Esser stepped in for the excellent Manuel Riemann, who was laid low with Covid. Faced with Coman and Serge Gnabry, their full-backs, Gamboa and Danilo Soares, chose to fight fire with fire. Gamboa’s cheeky trick on the way to his goal was their attitude in microcosm. For Julian Nagelsmann, there was plenty of food for thought. He had wondered aloud whether Bayern were too open in last week’s thrilling win over Leipzig and those fears were realised, with the use of Thomas Müller in central midfield an attacking player too many. “They will not win the Champions League with this unconditional hooray football,” wrote Bild’s Matthias Brügelmann. Whereas Nagelsmann’s own capacity for self-reflection is in little doubt, there is increasing concern over whether he, like his predecessor, Hansi Flick, might begin to question recruitment. At the end of a week when it was announced Niklas Süle would be joining Borussia Dortmund next season – like David Alaba, Bayern decided to assent to his wage pretentions – it is clear the projected defensive rebuild hasn’t worked out, or not yet at least. The leaking of stories about Süle since the announcement to justify letting him walk (including claims about his attitude and his post-Christmas weight) do not reflect well and neither did the performance of Dayot Upamecano, who conceded the penalty by handling Holtmann’s cross and was substituted at half-time. This occasion, though, was more about celebration than analysis. Sebastian Fischer of Süddeutsche Zeitung hailed Bochum’s pre-interval flurry as “a reminder of football before the pandemic”, a return to joy. Reis may have spoken at full-time of refocussing minds to secure safety from relegation, the primary objective. But not yet, please. It’s only Monday. Talking points Dortmund recovered from last week’s beating by Leverkusen by winning 3-0 at Union, with the home side still looking a little lost up front after the abrupt exit of Max Kruse to Wolfsburg. A neatly taken first-half double by Marco Reus laid the foundations, with the first his 150th goal for the club. The captain was not in the mood to talk about the (notional) title race, even with BVB closing the gap on Bayern to six points. “Don’t ask the question any more, please,” he said to DAZN. Kruse continued his great (re) start at Wolfsburg, typically nerveless in notching the penalty he won to set Florian Kohfeldt’s team on the road to victory at Eintracht Frankfurt. “In tight situations, he has a nose for what’s coming next,” said Kohfeldt, while the striker spoke frankly of his departure from Union on Das Aktuelle Sportstudio on Saturday. “There was no bad blood,” he said of his relationship with the Union coach, Urs Fischer, “but we had a different view of things one way or another.” Propelled by Alessane Pléa, Borussia Mönchengladbach snared a vital win over Augsburg by the odd goal in five. It was tighter than it should have been, with Alfred Finnbogason’s well-taken late goal for the visitors fortunately too late to elicit real panic. The win – “an absolute liberation,” according to coach Adi Hütter – moved Gladbach four points ahead of the relegation play-off place. “We’re not where we want to be yet, but we withstood the pressure,” he said. After their eye-catching performance in defeat at Bayern last week, Leipzig shone again in beating Köln 3-1, a victory even more comprehensive than it sounds and garlanded with excellent long-range hits from Christopher Nkunku and Dani Olmo. It’s looking good, with the team back in the top four and a clear path to DFB Pokal glory with much of the competition fallen by the wayside and it has been noted locally how Domenico Tedesco has continued to be publicly demanding of his players, even after wins, in a way Jesse Marsch seemed not to be. The prospect of next season’s second tier turning into an Avengers Endgame-type affair looms larger after more defeats for Stuttgart – 4-2 at Leverkusen – and sinking-like-a-stone Hertha, who slid to defeat at rock-bottom Greuther Fürth. Stuttgart were gutsy in their trip north, spurred on by two goals from on-loan Portuguese teenager Tiago Tomas on his first start, but ultimately trimmed apart by Leverkusen’s superior quality (Florian Wirtz again scored and assisted), with sporting director Sven Mislintat telling Sky his side “now need to beat opponents on an equal footing” with VFB four points adrift of the play-off. Meanwhile Hertha went a goal down in Fürth to a strike from Branimir Hrgota after 26 seconds and it rarely got much better from there despite a flurry of chances. Hrgota, one of the season’s low-key stars, took his tally for the season to seven and the capital club, and their already embattled coach, Tayfun Korkut, were left to their soul searching. “We can’t do it without fighting for it,” midfielder Vladimir Darida said ominously.A deep split has emerged between the SNP and its coalition partners, the Scottish Greens, over Nicola Sturgeon’s decision to back the foundation of low-tax freeports in Scotland. The Scottish government signed a £52m deal with the UK government to approve two low-regulation freeports in Scotland just as Boris Johnson arrived on Monday at Rosyth in Fife, an industrial site expected to bid to host one. Ross Greer, the Scottish Greens’ finance spokesperson, said his party would have nothing to do with the schemes, in the first major split with the SNP since they struck a cooperation deal last August. That deal excluded freeports. Speaking on BBC Radio Scotland, Greer said claims from Scottish ministers that the two projects would prioritise green, low-carbon ambitions and promote the living wage were “greenwash”. “There’s nothing genuinely green about them,” he said. “What freeports are are a really effective way to give tax relief and to throw public money at multinational companies who are already doing their best to avoid tax. “The last time the UK had freeports, according to the UK government they only created a quarter of the jobs that were promised, and that was at huge public expense. Internationally, freeports are associated with crime, money laundering, smuggling, low wages.” The Scottish government’s decision to support the freeports, initially described as a “tarnished brand” by one SNP minister, Ivan McKee, is regarded as a significant coup within the UK government. Johnson visited Rosyth and Edinburgh on Monday morning before flying to north-west England as part of a tour to promote his widely criticised levelling up investment agenda. His visit was a rebuff to near-universal demands in January from Scottish Tory MSPs and the Scottish party leader, Douglas Ross, that Johnson resign over the Downing Street parties scandal. Johnson will not meet any Scottish colleagues during his visit. Whitehall officials said the freeports proposal had gathered such significant support from Scottish ports and business leaders that Sturgeon had been forced to reluctantly abandon her initial opposition to the schemes. Speaking at Rosyth, Johnson applauded her decision. “If you look at the attitude of the Scottish government, it has been fantastic,” he said. “I think they have really got the point and they can see the advantages of the freeports.” A number of port operators are expected to bid, including Cromarty, north of Inverness; Forth Ports, which is likely to include Grangemouth, Rosyth and Leith ports; a joint bid from Aberdeen, Aberdeen airport and Peterhead; Cairnryan, a ferry port that links Northern Ireland to Scotland; and Clydeport. The freeports model was also denounced by SNP members at a party conference, but Kate Forbes, the Scottish finance secretary, took a more pragmatic approach to the proposals and succeeded in doubling the UK government’s funding. Michael Gove, the UK’s levelling up minister, agreed to fund the startup costs for both projects, instead of one as the Treasury originally proposed. While that reducescosts for the Scottish government, it will still lose business rate revenues and land and building sales taxes at the sites. Forbes told the BBC her government had won other concessions, including an equal say with UK ministers on how the freeports are run. Scottish ministers would not approve bids that failed to put forward fair work and “robust” low-carbon schemes, she said. Forbes, who confirmed some bids would come from her constituency, declined to state that applicants would be legally forced to adopt them after winning a bid, but insisted the Scottish schemes would be fairer than England’s. “The bidder will not win without that robust decarbonisation plans. [We] will not support, for example, an economic initiative like this unless it helps shift the dial on net zero,” she said.The effort to launch an American “freedom convoy”, inspired by the Canadian truckers who have shut down parts of Ottawa for several weeks initially to protest vaccine mandates, is taking shape in a somewhat haphazard fashion. At least three national organizations, and a constellation of regional ones, say they will depart for Washington in early March. One proposed convoy aims to leave from Fresno in California on 2 March, taking the I-10 interstate straight to the capital, where it would arrive on 6 March. “What brings us here tonight is unity, solidarity and a mindset of America,” the group’s lead organizer, Kip Coltrin, said on a conference call last week. “Obviously we have a grievance to address with our politicians, our people in Washington.” Another organization, which calls itself the “People’s Convoy”, also plans to departin the first week of March from California. That effort is being backed by Freedom Fighter Nation, a far-right conspiracy group led by lawyer Leigh Dundas. A third group, “Convoy 4 Freedom”, is advertising its own convoy, although its size and organization appears modest in comparison with the others. The loose-knit nature of the impending protest makes it difficult to determine how many people could join, their goals and the potential for disruptions. In a Facebook video, Coltrin said he has been asked just how many participants he expects to join him on the trek to Washington. “My response was to begin laughing – respectfully, of course – chuckle and say, ‘I don’t know.’” But, he insisted: “It’s going to happen. There’s no maybes.” Around the world, convoys sympathetic to the Canadian truckers, who occupied the area in front of the parliament buildings and attracted thousands of additional protesters, have formed with varying degrees of success. The motivation of the US convoys appears as fragmented as its organization. Coltrin has said his group’s protest will be about everything from the cross-border vaccine mandates for truckers, to rising inflation, to their erroneous belief that electoral fraud cost Donald Trump his re-election. “Remember we are not only up against the government, but a $200tn big pharma industry and all its investors,” he said. Coltrin has repeatedly shared anti-vaccine misinformation on Facebook, including from the QAnon influencer Praying Medic. Coltrin said in another video: “Patriot Guard Riders, our veterans, come on guys. Three Percenters: come on, guys. Oath Keepers: come on guys.” The FBI has laid charges against a number of members of the Three Percenters and the Oath Keepers, including its leader, for their role in the January 6 insurrection. Several participants on the conference call said they were present at the Capitol that day. The “People’s Convoy” is led by Dundas, who on 6 January alleged that American officials were working with foreign governments to rig the US election against Trump, and that “we would be well within our rights to take them out back and shoot them or hang them”. Despite that, she was invited by Senator Ron Johnson to speak before the Senate last month to give “a second opinion” about Covid-19. Dozens of social media pages have popped up to advertise and organize the American convoys, especially on rightwing social media platforms such as Gettr and Gab. One Facebook group intended to organize logistics and support boasts nearly 25,000 members. On Friday, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said the Department of Homeland Security is actively monitoring the possibility of a Washington-bound convoy. “They’re taking all necessary steps to ensure that the convoy does not disrupt lawful trade and transportation or interfere with federal government and law enforcement operations,” Psaki said.Germany’s plans to introduce a general vaccination mandate this spring are faltering, as a growing number of politicians question if it will find a majority in parliament. The Bundestag was originally due to debate motions in favour and against mandatory vaccinations this week, after the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, indicated he considered such a step necessary to cope with a possible resurgence of the virus in the next few months. But the timetable that was meant to see a mandate passed in March has already begun to slip, as a Free Democratic party (FDP) politician said his third-way motion proposing mandatory vaccinations for those aged 50 and over would be submitted with a delay. The three motions may now not get their second and third reading until the end of March, when Germany’s high infection rates are forecast to be on a downward curve and the government is preparing to loosen restrictions on social gatherings and access to nonessential shops, according to reports in German media on Monday. National and state leaders are set to discuss the opening-up plan on Wednesday, as Germany’s disease control agency reported 76,465 new cases in the last 24 hours, the second consecutive day of declining incidence rates. As of Monday, almost 75% of Germany’s population had received at least two shots of vaccines, while 55% had also received a booster shot. A change of heart on behalf of the conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) looks set to further stymie any law making jabs mandatory in the immediate future. The party of former chancellor Angela Merkel, now in opposition, on Friday submitted its own proposal for a tiered “vaccination mechanism” that would make jabs mandatory only if required by the severity of further variants. “Plans for a vaccination mandate from age 18 or 50 are illusory solutions that won’t find a majority in the Bundestag,” said the CDU’s health spokesperson, Tino Sorge. The leader of the CDU’s sister party in Bavaria, Markus Söder of the Christian Social Union (CSU), meanwhile, announced last week he would not enforce compulsory vaccination against Covid-19 for nursing staff in institutions such as hospitals and care homes from mid-March, as originally planned, citing fears of staff shortages as unvaccinated care workers could leave Germany’s southernmost state. With political momentum behind a swift implementation fading and the cross-party consensus on a joint motion crumbling “the general vaccination mandate is dead, at least for the foreseeable future”, wrote the Taz newspaper. Questions about the effectiveness of mandatory vaccinations are also raised by the situation in Austria, where vaccinations have been mandatory since 5 February but are not yet enforced systematically. In the mandate’s first week, 101,499 doses of vaccine were administered in the Alpine state – almost half as many as the week before – a trend that could also be explained by holidays in the populous states of Vienna and Lower Austria. Austria’s chancellor, Karl Nehammer, said on Sunday that his government could scrap the law if its expert advisory committee decided the measure was no longer appropriate.Trials of a four-day working week are underway at a number of UK companies as part of a six-month pilot study at the universities of Cambridge and Oxford. The Welsh government has been also been urged by the country’s future generations commissioner, Sophie Howe, to launch similar trials in the public sector. We would like to hear from companies and workers who have been involved in trials of four-day working weeks. Have you enjoyed the experience? Has it affected your performance at work? If you haven’t been involved in any trials, we would still like to hear your views. What would you do with the extra day? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Senior figures in climate diplomacy, including the key architect of the Paris climate agreement, have urged the UK government to maintain its commitments to climate action, amid escalating attacks intended to generate a “culture war” on the net zero target. Laurence Tubiana, the French diplomat who crafted the 2015 Paris agreement, now chief executive of the European Climate Foundation, said: “We are not happy, and we are crossing our fingers [that the UK will reaffirm its net zero commitment]. It’s very important that the UK keeps this direction of travel.” She and other international observers are increasingly worried that the rows over net zero within the UK government, which have seen the Net Zero Scrutiny Group linking the cost-of-living crisis to the carbon reduction agenda, will undermine the progress made last year at the Cop26 UN climate talks. The UK will continue to lead the talks until Egypt takes over at the next summit, Cop27, this November. British leadership will be essential to the success of Cop27, as countries must use the next eight months to revise their national emissions-cutting plans, known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs), as they agreed to do at Glasgow. But British diplomats will be hamstrung if rows at home over net zero overshadow their efforts, and if support from key cabinet ministers – including the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who has barely mentioned Cop26 although it was the biggest diplomatic event on British soil since the second world war – continues to be lukewarm or nonexistent. Fatih Birol, the executive director of the International Energy Agency, praised the UK for the “really marvellous” achievements of Glasgow, and said it was “irresponsible” for some to claim that net zero was behind raising energy prices. “I hope the UK will continue with the leadership that we have seen at Glasgow, and go further to make sure that governments fulfil their pledges they have made before and during Glasgow. The UK is capable and responsible for making sure these are implemented.” Birol added: “The current high energy prices are nothing to do with net zero. This is not a clean energy crisis, or a renewable energy crisis. These claims are irresponsible and are being used to attack public support for the net zero transition.” Jennifer Morgan, the outgoing chief of Greenpeace International, told the Guardian shortly before her recent appointment as the German government’s climate envoy that any indication the attacks on net zero were persuading ministers to backpedal would be severely damaging. “It would clearly reduce the UK’s standing in the world, and as a partner for tackling the world’s biggest issue,” she said. “It would be a complete failure of leadership, and the world would judge [the UK government] harshly.” The British public was also being harmed, added Rachel Kyte, a former World Bank climate official, now dean of the Fletcher School at Tufts University and a climate adviser to the UN secretary-general. “There is something deeply disturbing about would-be political leaders jockeying for position by seizing on high energy prices, wilfully misdiagnosing the causes as shifting to renewable energy, and then suggesting as a remedy a harmful about-face by abandoning net zero goals. It is perverse and disingenuous, selling the British public out, and the opposite of the long view demanded of leaders today in combating climate change,” she said. Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House climate adviser, now with the Progressive Policy Institute, said that although political attention was focused on Biden’s stimulus, the UK government’s moves on net zero were also viewed with concern. “Boris Johnson’s dedication to net zero is seen in Washington as a linchpin for greater ambition by nations around the world, including at Cop27, so his recent troubles and backbencher bellyaches on climate are worrisome,” he warned. “Johnson should never allow the Tory right fringe to undermine his climate legacy.”Use of the controversial label “excited delirium” by first responders when subduing people exhibiting signs of severe agitation has emerged as a key issue in the federal trial of three former Minneapolis police officers involved in the death of George Floyd. Tou Thao, J Alexander Kueng and Thomas Lane are accused of depriving Floyd, a 46-year-old Black man, of his civil rights by failing to give him medical aid while he was handcuffed and lying facedown as their senior colleague Derek Chauvin proceeded to murder him on 25 May 2020. Jurors in the civil rights trial of the three more junior ex-officers have heard that Kueng knelt on Floyd’s back and Lane held down his legs, while Thao kept bystanders back. Kueng and Thao are additionally accused of failing to intervene to stop Chauvin, who was last year found guilty of Floyd’s murder and sentenced to 22 and a half years in prison. Chauvin admitted violating Floyd’s civil rights in his additional federal case last December following Floyd’s murder, which triggered protests worldwide and a re-examination of racism and policing. All were fired from their jobs and arrested days after Floyd’s killing in 2020. Thao, Kueng and Lane have pleaded not guilty in both their federal joint civil rights case and their state criminal case, which is due later this year and in which they are accused of aiding and abetting murder. In the current trial taking place in St Paul, the Minnesota state capital, one of the prosecution’s key arguments is that they were trained to provide medical aid in emergencies, and that Floyd’s situation had become so serious as police held him down that bystanders, even children with no medical training, knew something was wrong. Kelly McCarthy, chief of police in Mendota Heights police department and chair of Minnesota’s Police Officers Standards and Training board, testified last week that officers are specifically taught to reposition someone who is restrained face down, to ensure they can breathe. Asked why, she said: “There were enough in-custody deaths that we needed to have a learning objective on it.” A day earlier, the head of the Minneapolis police department’s homicide unit testified that the officers should have intervened to begin first aid or take action that even means moving another officer out of the way if necessary. Lt Richard Zimmerman, who also testified at Chauvin’s trial last year, said when the other officers saw Chauvin kneeling on Floyd’s neck “the officers should have intervened at that point and stopped it”. But defense arguments have repeatedly focused on the condition termed excited delirium, and the training of police to respond to it, suggesting the officers were following procedure about restraining someone they thought was experiencing such a health syndrome. The Minneapolis police department and the office of the city mayor, Jacob Frey, have said the city halted such training last year, after the American Medical Association (AMA) rejected the diagnosis of excited delirium. The AMA, called it a “manifestation of systemic racism” that had been misapplied to justify excessive police force or pharmacological interventions such as ketamine and “disproportionately cited in cases where Black men die in law enforcement custody”. But a Minneapolis police training video of the updated process, obtained through a public records request from the Minneapolis Star Tribune newspaper, showed officers still being trained using studies with “excited delirium” in the titles. The video included an emergency physician advising that the term had become “triggering” and suggesting that another term should be used, such as “severe agitation with delirium”. In either respect, the diagnosis is controversial. Federal prosecutors played a portion of Lane’s body-camera video showing the officers describing elements of their struggle to try to put Floyd in their squad car after they had arrived outside a corner store following a report that he had tried to use counterfeit money. “He kind of seemed like he was on something ... He was fighting the whole time,” Lane said. Lane’s attorney later focused on how his client is seen on video calling for an ambulance and expressing concern that Floyd might be experiencing “excited delirium”. “Should we roll him on the side?” Lane asked. “I just worry about the excited delirium or whatever.” An autopsy later revealed that Floyd had fentanyl, a powerful opioid sedative and painkiller, and methamphetamine, a stimulant, in his system but neither were listed as the cause of death. The issue came up in Derek Chauvin’s trial last year when jurors heard from defense attorneys arguing Chauvin acted reasonably and that officers are taught how to recognize signs of the physical and psychiatric state known as excited delirium from incoherence, extraordinary strength, sweat, or suffering from abnormal body temperature, or if a person appears to have suddenly snapped. Forensic expert Bill Smock testified that Floyd met none of the 10 criteria developed by the American College of Emergency Physicians. Prosecutors described the topic as a “story” created by Chauvin’s defense to shift blame for Floyd’s death after fatally depriving him of oxygen. In the current trial, the court heard testimony from Derek Smith, a paramedic dispatched to the scene. He acknowledged the dispute over the diagnosis, indicated that in his experience it is real, and said he suspected Floyd had the condition based on what officers told him. Controversy over the diagnosis is set to continue despite the change in name to “severe agitation with delirium”. And according to the Star Tribune, the Minneapolis police department instructed officers to ignore the findings from a watchdog investigation that found police inappropriately asking paramedics to sedate uncooperative people. Prosecutors have told the court that they will rest their case on Monday after three weeks of testimony.Our next guest is Andy McCarroll, a synthetic organic chemist working in medicine discovery, who sets as Eccles and Snape. Let’s meet the setter. Hello Eccles! When did you get the crossword bug? Only recently. I tried to write a crossword for my grandma when I was about 12; all I remember is working out that “frank denial” is an anagram of “rank and file”. Around 2000, a colleague at Sussex University printed off the quiptic every week; I joined in for a time, but that was it for many years. Later, I was the social secretary for West Bridgford hockey club and wrote picture quizzes to keep people in the bar before they hit the town on the last match before Christmas. They were full of terrible puns and people enjoyed them, so I recycled them for work Christmas dos . In 2014, I ran out of ideas. I noticed an amusing anagram of one of our informatics packages, and wrote a crossword to incorporate it. It was less popular than the picture quizzes but I really enjoyed setting it and started researching how to do it properly. Do you have a favourite of your own clues or puzzles? It’s rare that I come up with a cryptic definition that I’m confident stands alone, so I was pleased with: 1d He single-handedly fought to secure eternal youth (7,4) I was also pleased with … 18d Pressure on 10 Downing Street leads to Leadsom selling arms (7) … although I had a vague feeling that I’d nicked it – if I did, I couldn’t find where from. I do refer to a lot of living people in my clues, and one made it into a clue that’s a bit risque: 9d Very quietly cuts Lady Garden, perhaps, in shower (6) And sometimes the letters work out perfectly, as when I was delighted to realise that Chas’s partner ended in e: 24d Chas and Dave’s ultimate wind up (5) I’ll give the answers below. Alongside Baroness Garden of Frognal, your puzzles feature plenty of present-day names. That isn’t a deliberate ploy: I guess it’s just what I know about, and what I guess most other people would know about. I have just counted the times living people other than the Queen appear in my first 100 puzzles: it’s 144, although 16 are Donald Trump! All but 20 of them would be disqualified from the Times on that rule alone. Tell us about the Rookie Academy at Big Dave’s Telegraph solvers’ blog. Dave published a new crossword every Saturday. He was overrun with puzzles, many by novice setters and didn’t have time to edit them – so, in Rookie Corner, he publishes them as received and invites comments to help setters improve. Michael Callaghan (AKA Prolixic and Kairos) offered technical advice on the clues. The large amount of technical and other feedback made it an ideal place to submit my first puzzles. Over the years, many Rookies have gone on to set for national newspapers, often starting in the Independent. Mike Hutchinson, the Independent’s crossword editor, has done a fantastic job of finding and publishing new talent with puzzles that are second to none. Seconded. How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords? Peter Biddlecombe described a good solver as a person with “wide but shallow knowledge”. That is how I would describe myself, and I tend to assume the solver is similar. They might not be able to say what a particular book is about, but a character’s name or plot description might ring enough of a bell to give them confidence in an answer. “ Argument of rowing crew leader is baseless (5)”, changing EIGHT to FIGHT, was pretty strong stuff. How often are you tempted to use this kind of wordplay? If I see it, I’m happy to use it – sparingly. I was more concerned with the grammar: the “of” link word is incompatible with the “is”, though it can just about be justified if you consider them as separate sentences. I liked the “baseless” trick enough to overlook that, but normally try to get the grammar spot-on. Crosswords involve playing about with words, and messing about with the shape of the letters is part of that, so I see no problem if it is fairly indicated. Agreed. How did you choose your pseudonyms? Snape was how I was universally known during as an undergraduate: it was the name of my home village and I had some T-shirts showing a drawing of the village. Eccles was my mum’s birth name– I don’t think that that knowledge will give access to my bank accounts! – and was a thank you to her. Finally, how important is humour? For me, very important. I want the people who whiz through my puzzles to have enjoyment too, so I try to at least provide some whimsy. Many thanks to Eccles. The answers to the quoted clues are CAPTAIN HOOK, PISTOLS, PEPPER and TEASE and Eccles’ contribution to our retitled collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-22 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is below. • Find a collection of explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs at alanconnor.com. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian bookshop.After working as a bartender in Washington DC for many years, Ifeoma Ezumaki’s body reached its limit during the pandemic. For Ezumaki and millions of other restaurant employees, working during the pandemic – often, in the US, for a “sub-minimum” wage – became a source of immeasurable suffering. Tips went down because sales went down, while customer harassment and hostility went up. Ezumaki and her colleagues had to become public health marshals, in addition to cocktail servers; she was asked to enforce social distancing, mask wearing and even vaccination requirements. One evening, a customer at the bar asked her to pull down her mask so that he could see her face – a request that became so common from male customers during the pandemic that hospitality workers started referring to it as “maskual harassment”. When Ezumaki refused, he said: “Well, I guess you’re not going to eat tonight.” The comment exemplified the power that some male customers, managers and even colleagues feel they have over women’s bodies in the restaurant industry. While Ezumaki and her colleagues wished to protect their bodies and the bodies of their families by wearing a mask, many male customers made it clear that they believed they had the right to control female waiters’ bodies, particularly when the waiters were dependent on tips. Many have reported male customers asking them to take off their masks so that they can judge their looks – and tip on that basis. It is not just customers. My campaign group, One Fair Wage, and Survivors Know, an organisation for survivors of workplace sexual misconduct, collaborated on a report that said staff reports of managers requesting sexual favours at US branches of the golf-themed restaurant chain Topgolf had increased in the past two years. Due to the pandemic causing a reduction in tips, workers were more reliant on managers to give them the best shifts and tables, so rejecting such requests or advances could affect their pay. But the restaurant industry violated women’s bodies long before the pandemic. After the emancipation of enslaved people in the US, the restaurant lobby sought the right to hire newly freed Black people, mostly women, and pay them nothing at all, forcing them to live off customer tips. Restaurants are still able to pay tipped workers a federal minimum wage of just $2.13 (£1.57) an hour based on the legacy of slavery, forcing them to obtain tips to make up the rest of their wage. Studies have also found that hospitality workers suffer among the highest rates of sexual harassment of any industry because they must tolerate inappropriate customer behaviour in return for essential tips. That said, there is so much hope. Women are rising up like never before. Restaurant workers are refusing to allow their bodies to be objectified. In response, thousands of restaurants have had to raise wages to recruit staff. Employers are joining forces with those demanding one fair wage – a full minimum wage, with tips on top. The question now is whether policymakers will grant Ezumaki and her peers the bodily integrity they have always deserved. Saru Jayaraman is the president of One Fair Wage and the director of the Food Labor Research CenterOn the northern coast of the Russian Kola peninsula, bordering the infamously tempestuous Barents Sea, lie half-abandoned military bases, their mossy structures turning ghostly against the silver-grey winter sky. Looking more like a setting for a post-apocalyptic sci-fi film, the area hardly resembles an ideal place to put down roots. Nevertheless, Ilya Povolotsky’s otherworldly documentary shows a small, idiosyncratic community striving to lead meaningful lives in this inhospitable environment. While these unusual souls hail from different backgrounds, they all appear to be living outside the contemporary course of history. Former marine Bardak spends his autumnal years squatting in a rundown building even though his peers opted to move to the cities. Middle-aged Alexander operates a quasi-water bus service, a métier he hopes his teenage daughter Masha will inherit. Still, the young girl is more grounded on land: one particularly spirited sequence finds Masha sprinting with her friend around a shopping mall, where attractive window displays trump the solemn austerity of her father’s cabin. In contrast to those who are preoccupied with the past – including a ragtag team of amateur divers with a passion for recovering second world war boat wreckage – Dima is an adrenalin-seeking poacher working on the fringes of the law. Povolotsky planned to stage and shoot a sea chase, only for Dima to be pursued by real coast guards; this is where the line between documentary and fiction gets blurred, for dramatic effect. The threading together of the different stories is overly opaque at times, but Evgeny Rodin’s atmospheric cinematography is a marvel, imbuing a Tarkovsky-esque ethereality to a land that has fallen out of step with the modern world. • Froth is available on 18 February on True Stories.Leona Lewis, singer I was doing gigs and studio work, anything to get a record deal. At one point, I won a national karaoke competition held by Yates’s Wine Lodge. The prize was £10,000 and it was like a pub version of The X Factor. So when a chance at the real thing came along, I was ready to try that as well. I auditioned singing Eva Cassidy’s version of Somewhere Over the Rainbow. My cousin had just passed away, so I sang it in her memory and poured everything into it. Progressing through The X Factor put me in this weird bubble: hardly seeing family or friends and already being recognised in the street. I was 19, came from Hackney in east London, and winning the final seemed a pipe dream. When it happened it felt like an out-of-body experience. After winning, I had to sing for Clive Davis. I kept thinking: “This man launched Whitney Houston!” She was one of my all-time heroes. Simon Cowell mentored me, picking songs and arrangements. We had a few disputes but he shared my vision of who I wanted to be. When I did a showcase gig in LA, I was so nervous I was sick – then I had to go on stage and perform. I vaguely remember meeting songwriters and producers, but I know exactly how I felt when I heard a demo of Bleeding Love. I thought: “This song could have been written for me.” It had a Prince vibe and I just kept playing it over and over. Ryan Tedder, who wrote the song, is a great producer – as well as being the lead singer of OneRepublic. So whenever he said, “Why don’t you try this?”, he was able to actually sing what he meant. I could relate to the song because Ryan can write like a teenage girl. Just before Bleeding Love, I had had a really bad breakup. I thought of that while I was singing. The song came out a year after I won The X Factor. I was worried people might have forgotten me, but the show had such a high profile back then – and YouTube was blowing up, too. The song became so huge [topping the charts in 35 countries] I still can’t explain it. Bleeding Love just seemed to connect with people – and they wanted to hear it again and again. Ryan Tedder, songwriter and producer In my 20s, I wrote and produced for Jennifer Lopez. After that, the phone didn’t stop ringing. I actually wrote Bleeding Love for the American singer and actor Jesse McCartney. I’d done a couple of hits with him and he wanted to try something different. Whenever I don’t know what to write, I ask myself: “What would Prince do?” I was in my apartment and started playing organ chords. Even the song’s distorted drums are Prince-like. I soon had the verse, the melody and the opening lyrics: “Closed off from love, I didn’t need the pain / Once or twice was enough, and it was all in vain / Time starts to pass, before you know it you’re frozen.” I’d been thinking about When Doves Cry or Nothing Compares 2 U. I wanted to write a song that was about love but devastating, so thought about breakups that had crushed me in college. I finished the song with Jesse and we came up with the phrase Bleeding Love in the studio. I thought it was the best song I’d ever written, but I got a call from Jesse’s A&amp;R man telling me it wouldn’t make his album. “I don’t personally think the song is a hit,” he said. I was furious and thought: “Either he’s wrong or I need a new job.” Two months later, I was at Leona’s showcase at the Beverly Hilton alongside every writer and producer in the business. I was an up-and-coming nobody, but the moment I heard Leona’s voice, I thought Bleeding Love would be perfect for her. Simon Cowell and Clive Davis both loved the version I’d done with Jesse, so I re-did it with Leona and spent days crafting the strings. People told me that halving the tempo in the middle broke all the rules of songwriting. I sent the finished song to Simon and he said: “I guarantee I’m going to deliver you a UK No 1.” It reached No 1 in the same week OneRepublic did in the US with Apologize – which I’d also written. I’d done another song with Leona at the same time, called Take a Bow, which would have been a single if Rihanna hadn’t released a track with the same title. The only thing better than having a gigantic No 1 with a new artist would have been having two.The major buy now, pay later companies Clearpay, Klarna, Laybuy and Openpay have agreed to change “potentially unfair and unclear” terms and conditions after an intervention from the financial regulator. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) said it was able to use consumer law to enforce the changes. However, the regulator acknowledged that it was still lacking the powers to regulate the sector to the same standard as other consumer credit companies. The companies were made to change contract terms on cancellations and continuous payment authority to make them “fairer and easier to understand”, the FCA said. Clearpay, Laybuy and Openpay also agreed to refund some late payment fees they had wrongly charged after customers cancelled orders. The use of buy now, pay later (BNPL) has exploded in recent years, with an FCA review last year finding that the UK market had trebled in size in 2020 alone, even as other forms of short-term consumer credit such as payday lending fell back after being forced to improve their consumer protections. The market is worth an estimated £6.4bn a year in the UK, according to the consultancy firm Bain &amp; Company, and is used by about 10 million shoppers. The government is considering bringing in new rules for the sector but has yet to detail what action it will take. BNPL services are usually offered at the point of sale online, allowing shoppers to pay in instalments. Unlike payday lenders or credit cards, BNPL lenders typically do not charge interest on loans, meaning they avoid current regulations. Retailers instead pay the companies fees. The rapid growth – and the prospect of lending platforms spreading to retailers around the globe – has helped BNPL companies to huge valuations usually enjoyed by Silicon Valley tech companies rather than consumer credit firms. The Swedish company Klarna was valued at $45bn in a June investment round backed by SoftBank, the Japanese investment fund. Stella Creasy, the Labour MP for Walthamstow, criticised the FCA’s “whack-a-mole approach” to targeting BNPL companies. She told the Guardian they were the latest example of “legal loansharking”, in which consumers are encouraged to get into the habit of borrowing money they cannot afford to repay. That was a problem regardless of whether the consumer was charged interest, she said. “This is why we urgently need regulation and it needs to be regulation on a par with the regulation that every other consumer credit company has to abide by,” said Creasy, who played a prominent part in the stricter regulation of payday lenders such as the collapsed Wonga. “These companies and the government are promoting the idea that this is a different industry and needs slightly different regulation. “You can buy a pizza on buy now, pay later. How is that any different to borrowing on a credit card?” Klarna and Laybuy said they backed calls for the sector to be regulated directly by the FCA rather than more general consumer laws. Alex Marsh, the head of Klarna UK, argued that Klarna was “a fairer and more sustainable way for consumers to access credit” because it did not charge consumers fees or interest on the loans. He said the company had welcomed the FCA’s intervention, and that it always made clear it was offering a credit product. Gary Rohloff, who co-founded Laybuy in New Zealand before listing its shares in Australia, said the company was “absolutely committed” to “fair and transparent” terms. A Clearpay spokesperson said the FCA action affected a “very small group of customers who may have incorrectly been charged a late fee”, and added that it wanted to be “as transparent as possible”. An Openpay spokesperson said the company welcomed the guidance from the FCA, and backed “fair and proportionate regulation”. Sheldon Mills, the FCA’s executive director of consumers and competition, said: “Buy now, pay later has grown exponentially. We do not yet have powers to regulate these firms but we do have powers to review the terms and conditions of consumer contracts for fairness, and have acted proactively to ensure that the BNPL industry adopts high standards in their terms and conditions. He added that he hoped the rest of the industry would follow the four firms’ voluntary changes to conditions.Boris Johnson cut short his UK tour on Monday to return to London as western leaders voiced concerns a Russian invasion of Ukraine could happen imminently, and Liz Truss convened a Cobra meeting to discuss the UK’s consular response. The foreign secretary will consider whether to change advice to UK diplomats in the country, after it issued new guidance on Friday advising British citizens in Ukraine to leave immediately while commercial flights are still available. Number 10 said Johnson would receive an intelligence briefing on his return to London, having been due to visit Cumbria, and will convene another full Cobra meeting on Tuesday. Speaking on a visit to Scotland, Johnson said he would be making immense diplomatic efforts over the coming days including liaising with the US president, Joe Biden. He said that Ukraine’s future membership of Nato could not be “bargained away” as part of western leaders’ efforts. “I think it’s very important that we have a conversation, but what we can’t do is trade away the sovereign rights of the Ukrainians who aspire to Nato membership,” he said. “That’s something that was a massive gain for our world. If you remember what happened in 1990, you had a Europe whole and free, countries could decide their own futures. We can’t bargain that away. It’s for the Ukrainian people.” Parliament could be recalled if Russia invades Ukraine this week, Number 10 indicated. Asked if this was a possibility, the PM’s official spokesman said: “In that situation you would expect that the prime minister would want parliament to be updated and for it to have its say.” Johnson’s spokesman said there was no indication at the moment that diplomatic efforts would halt the invasion. “It’s certainly true that we have seen no sign so far that Russia will back down. There are more than 130,000 Russian troops on the border with Ukraine and we are gravely concerned. But we will continue to explore every possible avenue to talk Russia back from this path.” The UK ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, had said she will remain in Kyiv with a core team of diplomats. Many western nations have advised their citizens to evacuate. The US and Canadian embassies have told non-essential staff and family members to return home while others will work from the western Ukrainian city of Lviv. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, visited Kyiv on Monday and will travel to Moscow on Tuesday, warning that an attack by Russia would lead to “tough sanctions that we have carefully prepared and which we can immediately put into force”. Downing Street said British nationals should not expect a “military airlift” from Ukraine. “British nationals should leave Ukraine via commercial means and there are still flights available,” Johnson’s spokesman said.Spain’s far-right Vox party is pushing for a place in the new regional government of Castilla y León following a snap election that has proved a tactical misstep for the ruling conservative People’s party (PP). The PP called Sunday’s vote in the hope of securing an absolute majority after spending three years governing the region in partnership with the centre-right Citizens party. But the move backfired. Although the PP finished first, taking 31.4% of the vote and 31 seats in the 81-seat regional parliament, it did not attract enough support to govern alone. The Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE), came second with 30% of the vote and 28 seats, while Vox took third place with 17.6% and saw its seat count rise from one to 13. The far-right grouping’s strong showing casts it in the role of kingmaker for any future PP administration. In the past it has cut deals to help the PP into office in Madrid, Andalucía and Murcia, but this time it is demanding a place in a coalition government. “Vox has the right and the duty to form a government in Castilla y León,” Vox’s leader, Santiago Abascal, told a political rally on Sunday night. The PP’s regional leader, Alfonso Fernández Mañueco, said he would begin speaking to other parties about forming a new government in Castilla y León. “I will speak with everyone to form a government of everyone and for everyone,” he said. The national PP, however, appears less keen on a deal with Vox. “The coalition governments we’ve seen so far – including the national government [of the PSOE and Unidas Podemos] – haven’t been satisfactory,” said the party’s general secretary, Teodoro García Egea. An alliance with Vox would prove uncomfortable for the PP’s national leader, Pablo Casado. Despite rounding on Vox in October 2020 – when he accused the party of practising a politics based on “fear, anger, resentment and revenge” – Casado has dragged the PP further to the right to stop voters abandoning the party in favour of Vox. The results in Castilla y León will also give the PP pause for thought as it reflects on its strategy in both the looming regional election in Andalucía and next year’s general election.At least seven people, including two children, have died after an explosion sent fire raging through a building in southern France. One of the victims of the blaze that started in a three-story building in the coastal town of Saint-Laurent-de-la-Salanque, north-east of Perpignan, was reported to be a baby. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, who was on an official visit to police in Montpellier, 96 miles (155km) from the tragedy, was expected at the scene on Monday afternoon. He confirmed the provisional death toll of seven people including two children but added: “Unfortunately, the work of the firefighters and other services is not finished so this may not be definite.” The French prime minister, Jean Castex, sent his condolences to the victims’ families and friends and praised the work of the emergency services who he said were working “in difficult circumstances”. The explosion happened around 1.30am local time and was believed to have occurred on the ground floor, which housed a grocery store and a fast-food take-away. Flames quickly engulfed the building and two neighbouring properties. Firefighters have searched two of the buildings but said the third remained too dangerous to enter. Jean-David Cavaillé, the Perpignan public prosecutor, said the emergency services were still searching for a family thought to be in the building but who may have been absent. The search was being hampered because temperatures in the buildings remained high and several floors had collapsed, he said, adding that the death toll may rise further. Cavaillé said an investigation into the cause of the explosion had been opened but it was too early to establish whether it was accidental or criminal. One man who jumped from the second floor to escape the flames was said to be in a critical condition in hospital. Three other people were also injured. Just under 100 firefighters were called to the scene in the early hours of Monday. A resident of a neighbouring building who was woken by the explosion said it was “a horror scene … it was extraordinarily violent”.Threats to an American agricultural inspector in the Mexican state of Michoacán caused the US to suspend imports of avocados from its neighbor, officials said, disrupting a $2.4bn industry during one of its busiest times of the year. Mexico’s department of agriculture said in a statement that the inspector received a threatening message on his cellphone, prompting the ban on avocado exports to the US “until further notice”. The US agricultural department (USDA) has not confirmed the move, but warned after an incident in 2019, in which a team of US inspectors was reportedly robbed by a gang at gunpoint, that further threats would prompt an immediate cessation of “program activities”. Michoacán is the only state in Mexico with a license to export avocados to the US, and the Mexican growers and packers association says its members are a frequent target of violence and threats from organized crime groups seeking protection money. In 2020, the most recent year for which figures are available, Mexico exported almost 965 metric tons (2.1bn pounds) of avocados to the US, a 7% increase on the previous year as demand for guacamole and other avocado products increased. Mexico announced the USDA’s decision the night before the Super Bowl in Los Angeles, traditionally one of the biggest days of avocado consumption of the year, although produce used this year was exported several weeks before the game. The inspector who was threatened was part of a team working for the USDA’s animal and plant health inspection services department, according to the Associated Press. The US lifted a three-year ban on Mexican avocados in 1997 after an inspection deal was struck to try to prevent weevils, scabs and other pests from entering orchards.This May, the Queen will celebrate 70 years in office, her platinum jubilee. She is already the longest-serving British ruler and, by then, will be second only to Louis XIV among European monarchs. Such longevity in office is phenomenal and will merit national congratulation and celebration. The Queen has performed her duty of symbolising the British nation over an extraordinary era, from the end of empire, through joining and leaving the European Union, to a global technological revolution. She has known 14 prime ministers, from Winston Churchill to Boris Johnson. Though her “rule” is powerless and largely ritualised, she has performed with energy and dignity. She has steered her office away from controversy, and retained a sincere public affection. Given her bizarre occupation, she has been well-cast. Today, age and the pandemic have forced the Queen to withdraw from ever more royal duties and public engagements, most conspicuously the recent Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. She has indicated that she will join in this summer’s jubilee celebrations and will be applauded for doing so. But there already appears a sort of finality to that event, coming as it does with her now being 95 years old. The Prince of Wales is taking on ever more of the burdens of office. The Queen may be fit, but she is clearly delicate. Any reasonable person would recommend retirement from active work for a woman of her age. Yet none in royal circles dares breathe the word abdication – a concept toxic to the royal family since Edward VIII’s enforced departure in 1936. It is accepted that serious incapacity might require the Prince of Wales to be made “regent”, though the confusions of regency under George III make it hardly appealing. Besides, if the prince is going to act as king for the remainder of his mother’s life, there seems little point in not crowning him. The Queen has attributed her intention to continue in office throughout her life to the significance of her coronation “anointment”. According to the royal expert Hugo Vickers, this results from her alleged pact with God: “If you are an anointed queen you do not abdicate.” A poll at the time of the Queen’s coronation in 1953 reported that “three out of 10 people believed she could claim direct descent from God”. There is no constitutional basis for this. Popes are likewise supposed not to abdicate, but Benedict XVI retired in 2013. The monarchs of the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain and Japan, among others, have all given way to younger successors in the past decade. Monarchy is not a human attribute but a constitutional function, in which one person performs the rites of statehood emphatically detached from political partisanship. It is an arbitrary convenience. That this person should be chosen by birth and religion is inherently absurd, but that is a relic of history and one that has served surviving monarchies well. It suggests a people secure enough in their democracy – and impotent enough in their monarchy – to have escaped the turmoil of republican revolution. The world’s most stable and progressive countries – such as Sweden, Norway, Denmark and the Netherlands – have hereditary monarchies. They are not stable because they are monarchies; they are monarchies because they are stable. Nor can the folksy language of deference and hierarchy be said seriously to stifle Britain. Tourists love it. Nonetheless, the prospect now is of a prolonged period in which the person embodying the British state cannot fulfil the functions of office, while the country waits in possibly prolonged suspense. In Queen Victoria’s old age this meant constant rumour, uncertainty, feuding courtiers and an ill-planned ceremonial. It was a period of intense gloom. The death of a monarch in office also has to embrace the contortion of national grief overlaid with subsequent joyous coronation. Monarchy’s most articulate analyst, Vernon Bogdanor, has argued that its “mystique and magic”, even if shorn of power, can rely for its legitimacy only on public opinion. It has no accountability to parliament or election, but depends instead on “the practical employment of its symbolic influence”. This means the personality of the monarch and their ability to conduct the necessary rituals to public satisfaction. The Queen and Prince Philip decided in the 1960s not to seek the anonymous security of the so-called “cycling monarchies” of Scandinavia. They focused a spotlight on the heredity principle in refashioning the crown as a family, satirised as “the firm”. Their extended offspring became the world’s most celebrated royals, their every move predictably recorded by an ever more fascinated media. This was and remains high risk. As was found during the divorce and death of Diana, Princess of Wales, it left the royal family vulnerable to mass public opinion. This is currently in decline. While a steady two-thirds of the British public still favour monarchy, that is by no means everyone. The longstanding Ipsos Mori survey shows its popularity sliding in just a decade from near 80% in 2012 to 60% at present. Hence the palace’s hypersensitivity to the media glare that has visited the allegations against Prince Andrew and the high-profile departure of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex from the family. The crown has rescued itself from such controversies in the past, but it has done so largely through the personality of the Queen in drawing on deep reserves of personal affection. After her death, this will be extremely hard for the Prince of Wales to regenerate. The moment of transition to any new monarch, not least after 70 years, must be one of intense delicacy. Nothing could therefore more aid Prince Charles in his succession than for it to be a planned transfer on the retirement of his mother and her blessing on his coronation. She has broken nearly all records for time in office. She has prepared the way for the Duchess of Cornwall to become queen. Charles has reportedly committed himself to Buckingham Palace. A retirement in good health, like that of Beatrix of the Netherlands in 2013, a retreat to Windsor and Charles’s coronation would be a dignified and happy occasion. It would celebrate British monarchy not as a ritual of death and rebirth, but as a simple facet of the constitution. It would also relieve Charles of a deluge of comparison, especially if he decides on changes in royal custom and practice, as well he should. Whatever is wrong with British politics just now, the monarchy cannot be blamed. At least Britain is avoiding the US’s current agonies of state. But monarchy’s stability depends on public favour. That favour can never be taken for granted. The Queen’s early retirement should be seen not as an “abdication”, but as prudent, considerate common sense. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistAn opera score retrieved from a San Francisco basement has had its world premiere in a German theatre, exuberantly brought to life by more than 150 musicians and performers nearly 80 years after its composer was murdered by the Nazis. Grete Minde, a late-romantic opera of 1920s jazz-inspired melodies and large orchestral sounds, was the work of Eugen Engel, a Berlin-based Jewish textile tradesman in his day job, who gave his handwritten sheet music to his daughter for safekeeping when she escaped to the United States in 1941. He waited in vain for permission to follow her but was killed in Sobibor extermination camp on 26 March 1943, at the age of 67, after his arrest in Amsterdam. “We kept his papers in a trunk for years but it was too painful for my mother to take them out, so we never really engaged with them, though I always knew there was an opera score there,” said Jan Agee, Engel’s granddaughter. She didn’t realise their significance until after her mother Eva’s death in 2006, when she was contacted by the Jewish Museum Berlin looking for documents for its archives. Agee travelled with her brother and daughter from California to eastern Germany and the Theater Magdeburg for the first live performance of Grete Minde, a rousing spectacle that veers between comedy and tragedy and has left critics full of praise. “It has everything you may wish from an opera, involving the entire ensemble, a heart-stopping storyline touching on the dream of a better, fairer life versus the dogma and bigotry of bourgeois society, accompanied with gorgeous sounds and catchy rhythms,” wrote Die Zeit’s music critic Hannah Schmidt. Talking backstage after the performance, which received standing ovations, Megan Agee, Engel’s great-granddaughter said: “It is quite overwhelming to have these written words and notes which have been dormant for so long brought to life. It’s like Eugen Engel planted a seed back then but until it was performed we did not know exactly what that was. We are amazed and grateful for the abundance of what has emerged.” Her uncle Claude Lowen, Engel’s 84-year-old grandson, said: “These musicians today are giving voice to my grandfather as well as to all the many other musicians who were murdered, many cut off before they were able to show their full potential.” The opera has further performances in Magdeburg in February and March and the family said they were hopeful it would be performed elsewhere around the world, with several concert venues having already reached out to the German theatre. Jan Agee, 74, said her mother never got over the feeling she had “left her father behind”. She said: “She had an upright piano waiting for him for when he would finally arrive in the United States. But he never did, and it was her greatest wish to have his music performed. My biggest regret is that she is no longer here to experience this.” Anna Skryleva, a Russian conductor who became the general music director of Theater Magdeburg in 2019, first became interested in Engel at a performance of some of his works at the unveiling of a brass plaque engraved with brief details about his life and death. The stolperstein, or “stumbling stone”, is set in the pavement of Charlottenstrasse 74, his Berlin address, which was destroyed in a bombing raid. She took a copy of the piano arrangement of the opera home and played it. “I was immediately captured,” she said. “It is replete with interesting harmonious expressions and stylistic phrases. I was struck by its touches of Wagner, Strauss and Korngold, by the confidence of a layperson to write such an ambitious work.” The musicians – a large ensemble including an organ, two harps, strings and brass, a female choir and solo singers – were enthusiastic supporters of the project, Skryleva said. “We are all at great pains to do Engel justice, seeing him as representative of the many composers we never got to know.” Little is known of Engel’s life or how he taught himself to compose. His wider body of work includes chamber music, lieder and quartets. Working on the opera was a sideline as he earned money as a buyer of fabric for women’s coats on behalf of a large Berlin department store. He was friends with leading musicians in Berlin including the composer Engelbert Humperdinck and the conductors Bruno Walter and Leo Blech, as recorded in extensive letters between them found in the trunk. Engel would trawl music shops with his daughter and regularly took scores with him to study line by line during opera concerts. The dozens of letters on thin paper that he sent to his daughter after she went to the USremain among the family’s most precious possessions. “He typed them; then, when he was forbidden from buying typewriter ribbon, he continued them by hand,” Agee said. In the last one, via the Red Cross, dated 20 March 1943, he wrote: “My dear children, I am healthy and well and think of you often.” Skryleva and Ulrike Schröder, Theater Magdeburg’s chief dramatic adviser, oversaw the painstaking transcription by external experts of more than 40 individual voice and instrument parts, making use of the shutdown during the pandemic to do so. The entire production cost more than €110,000 to stage. “We believe he spent almost 20 years composing the opera, working on it in his spare time,” said Schröder, who has attempted to piece together as much of Engel’s life as possible. “The libretto was written in 1914 and this might have been the starting point.” By the time he’d finished the opera in 1933, the Nazis were in power, but he kept trying to get it on stage even as his life was in danger. “Even if he hadn’t been Jewish it would have been hard for him to get it on the stage as a non-professional, but the rise of Hitler made it absolutely impossible,” Schröder said. Engel was one of about 13 siblings, most of whom are thought to have been murdered by the Nazi regime. But Schröder said she would be cautious about reading too much into Engel’s choice of source material – Grete Minde, by the writer Theodor Fontane, which is based on the true 16th-century story of a young woman who is deprived of her rightful inheritance by officials in her home town and takes her revenge by setting fire to it and burning to death herself and her child. Nevertheless, she said, a modern audience watching as the town goes up in flames would not be able to avoid drawing parallels between the fate of Grete Minde, who is treated as an outsider, and the decimation of the Jews.Petrol prices have surged to a record high and are expected to climb further in coming weeks, adding to the burden on UK households’ already squeezed budgets. The AA said petrol surpassed 148p a litre on Sunday, rising above the previous record high of 147.72p on 21 November last year. Diesel prices have also risen, with the average price for a litre at 151.57p, compared with 151.10p on 20 November 2021. The increases have been driven by growing demand after the reopening of global economies and mounting tensions between Russia and Ukraine. A barrel of Brent crude, a global benchmark for oil, traded above $96 a barrel on Monday, its highest in seven years. “The cost of living crisis has been ratcheted up yet another notch, tightening the vice on family spending when it faces other pressures from impending domestic energy cost and tax increases,” said Luke Bosdet, the AA’s fuel price spokesperson. A poll conducted by the AA on 15,335 of its members found 43% of motorists were cutting back on car use, other consumer spending or both. This figure rose to 59% among younger drivers and 53% for lower-income motorists. Inflation is running at an almost 30-year high of 5.4%, and official figures on Wednesday are expected to show more pain for households and heap pressure on the Bank of England to increase interest rates again. An RAC’s fuel spokesperson, Simon Williams, said: “Petrol has unfortunately hit a frightening new high of 148.02p which takes filling a 55-litre family car to an eye-watering £81.41. With the oil price teetering on the brink of $100 a barrel and retailers keen to pass on the increase in wholesale fuel quickly, new records could now be set on a daily basis in the coming weeks. “The oil price is rising due to tensions between Russia – the world’s third-biggest oil producer – and Ukraine, along with oil production remaining out of kilter with demand as the world emerges from the pandemic. As a result drivers in the UK could be in for an even worse ride as pump prices look certain to go up even more. “On a positive note, retailer margins – which were the reason drivers paid overly high prices in December and January – have now returned to more normal levels of around 7p a litre. The RAC appealed to retailers, including the big supermarket chains, to “play fair with drivers” and reduce the amount of profit that they make per litre. Adam French, a consumer rights expert at Which?, said: “These record high fuel prices will be worrying for many households across the country. “We’d advise motorists looking to get the best prices to fill up their tank at the supermarket where possible and avoid expensive premium unleaded. Driving smoothly, changing gears early to avoid revving the engine and sticking to a lower speed will also help to keep your fuel consumption low.”Though the exact centenary does not fall until October, the BBC is spreading celebrations of its anniversary throughout the year and across its networks. The BBC orchestras, some of which are as old as the corporation itself, got their contribution in early, with a weekend of concerts from each of the seven current ensembles, all broadcast live on Radio 3 from their home halls. The importance of these orchestras in serious music-making in the UK across the past 100 years can’t be overstated. While their independent counterparts around the country have always had to keep one eye on the box office, mindful of the need to attract audiences and to tailor their concerts accordingly, the BBC bands have always had a freer hand, and have consistently been able to tackle more ambitious repertoire – works that were more demanding of resources and rehearsal time, or were unlikely to attract large audiences. And though their programmes nowadays may be less adventurous than they were, say, in the 1960s and 70s, when William Glock was the controller of music, the BBC remains the most important champion of large-scale new works in the UK, responsible for more premieres each year than all the country’s other orchestras put together. But though this collection of anniversary concerts had been coordinated to some extent – each programme included at least one work composed or first performed around the time of the BBC’s foundation, and one more or less new piece – it never seemed to generate the sense of pioneering ambition it perhaps ought to have conveyed. Not many of the rather motley collection of works felt truly celebratory or adventurous, and disappointingly few received performances that were truly memorable either. The subfusc tone was set on the opening evening, in the BBC Symphony Orchestra’s concert conducted in the Barbican by Semyon Bychkov, which ended with the most lugubrious performance of Ravel’s orchestration of Mussorgsky’s Pictures at an Exhibition (first performed in 1922), one could imagine. Before it, the pianist Kirill Gerstein had been the nimble soloist in Strauss’s Burleske, while the concert had begun with the UK premiere of Bryce Dessner’s Mari, which Bychkov had first performed last year with the Czech Philharmonic, and which like several of the new works in the series was composed during lockdown, and intended as a “reflection on the pastoral”, though it begins with rather threatening Sibelius-like brass, before quoting Dvořák and Mahler. The BBC National Orchestra of Wales’s concert from Hoddinott Hall, Cardiff the following lunchtime opened with the UK premiere of another lockdown piece, Sebastian Hilli’s Miracle, another rather indulgent, stylistically diverse piece of orchestral rhetoric. Conductor Ryan Bancroft followed it with Copland’s Appalachian Spring (the suite only, alas), Grace Williams’s Elegy for strings, and the suite from Stravinsky’s ballet Pulcinella, diverse 20th-century repertoire that seems to bring the best out of him, and from his orchestra too. Later that day, after the BBC Concert Orchestra had joined the party from the Colosseum, Watford with a programme that began and ended with Eric Coates, and also including film music by Anne Dudley, and a short piece, Brink, by the winner of the BBC’s Young Composer Competition, Xia Leon Sloane, the focus switched to Manchester. In the Bridgewater Hall the BBC Philharmonic and its chief conductor Omer Meir Wellber offered another rather arbitrary programme. But this one was redeemed by the sheer panache of the performances, from Hindemith’s brittle, manic Kammermusik I to Tippett’s sumptuous Ritual Dances from his opera The Midsummer Marriage, via the baroque potpourri of Aziza Sadikova’s BBC commission, Marionettes, and a dashing account of Schumann’s Piano Concerto, with Giulia Contaldo as the last-minute replacement soloist. The Ulster Orchestra’s Sunday-morning contribution from the Ulster Hall under Andrew Gourlay was entirely home grown, pairing Michael McHale’s heroic performance of Hamilton Harty’s overblown Piano Concerto – the only piano concerto I know that includes a tam-tam in its orchestration! - with Conor Mitchell’s rather John Adams-like Democracy Dances. Later in London’s Milton Court, the BBC Singers built their programme around Vaughan Williams and Howard Goodall, interleaving movements from Vaughan Williams’ Mass in G minor with a variety of short choral settings in the first half, and devoting the second to the European premiere of Goodall’s rather beautiful and touching Unconditional Love, a cantata setting poems written during lockdown. That left the BBC Scottish Symphony to end the weekend, with a programme from City Halls, Glasgow, which was also the orchestra’s first appearance with Ryan Wigglesworth since he was announced as its next chief conductor from September. Here finally was a programme with a real shape and sense of purpose, with three works from the early 1920s – Kurt Weill’s rarely heard suite Quodlibet, Strauss’s Hymne an die Liebe, with Katherine Broderick as the radiant, soaring soloist, and Berg’s Three Fragments from Wozzeck – and Wigglesworth himself supplying the new work in the form of his epigrammatic Five Waltzes for viola and orchestra, played by Scott Dickinson. Even with highlights such as this, though, there was something a little random about the weekend, rather less of a celebration and statement of intent than it could have been. • All concerts available on BBC Sounds until 12 MarchColeen Rooney has suffered a serious setback in her legal battle with Rebekah Vardy, after a high court judge refused to grant permission to add Vardy’s former agent to the legal proceedings. Rooney’s lawyers had attempted to bring Caroline Watt into the “Wagatha Christie” case, alleging she misused Rooney’s private information and worked in cahoots with Vardy to leak stories to the Sun. However, Mrs Justice Steyn refused the request to add Watt on the basis that the application had been made too late and would delay the main libel trial by up to a year, which would be unfair on Vardy. This means the full trial – due to take place in May – is now likely to hinge on whether Rooney can prove it was Vardy who personally leaked stories to the Sun, as opposed to another individual acting on her behalf. The judge did agree to let Rooney’s lawyers search WhatsApp messages between Vardy and Watt and to make a request to Instagram for relevant data. However, the judge refused Rooney’s request for details of any payments and messages from Sun journalists to Vardy and Watt. The judge’s 25,000-word ruling followed two days of hearings at the high court last week, where some of the UK’s most expensive lawyers battled over which WhatsApp messages should be admissible evidence, who exactly called whom a “nasty bitch”, and how a mobile phone containing potential evidence was accidentally dropped into the North Sea. The case is due to go to a full trial in May. Despite repeated pleas by judges for both women to settle the case, neither side has been willing to back down. The total costs have run into millions of pounds – dwarfing any likely financial damages that may be awarded at the end of the case. The complete collapse in the relationship between the two women began at the end of 2019, when Rooney ran a sting operation to identify who had been leaking stories from her private Instagram to journalists at the Sun newspaper. This led Rooney, the wife of the Derby County manager Wayne Rooney, to make the now-infamous accusation: “It’s……… Rebekah Vardy’s account”. Vardy, the wife of the Leicester City footballer Jamie Vardy, strongly denied she was the individual leaking stories to the Sun and responded by suing Rooney for libel over the accusation. More than two years later, the case continues to wind its way through the court system, with ever more excruciating details being revealed to the public. An earlier ruling in the case found that the meaning of Rooney’s post was that Vardy was herself personally leaking stories to the Sun. As a result, any libel trial could hinge on proving who – if anyone – was using Vardy’s Instagram account to obtain and leak information to the Sun. Rooney’s representatives told the court that if Vardy won her claim on the basis that she was not the specific individual who leaked the information to the Sun, then Rooney would be left without “vindication”. Last week’s hearings turned the spotlight on Watt, Vardy’s long-term agent, with the court hearing the pair discussed Rooney and whether to leak material to the media. It was told the duo described Rooney as a “cunt” in private WhatsApp messages, had an ongoing financial relationship with the Sun, and discussed providing stories to the newspaper’s journalists. The court heard Vardy and Watt had discussed a post on Rooney’s private Instagram when her car had been damaged in January 2019. Vardy told Watt she “would love to leak those stories”. The case has been plagued with issues around lost evidence. Shortly after Rooney’s lawyers asked to search Watt’s mobile phone for potential information, the agent accidentally dropped the device into the North Sea from the side of a boat when it was hit by a wave. Although the rest of her iPhone’s contents were backed up on iCloud, the WhatsApp messages were not. Data from Vardy’s WhatsApp messages to Watt was also accidentally deleted during the process of uploading it to her solicitors. Vardy’s own digital forensics expert described what occurred as “somewhat surprising” but said it was the possible result of “an unusual combination of actions or events”. The laptop used by Vardy during the crucial period also “no longer functions”, while messages between Rebekah Vardy and the Sun journalist Andy Halls also appear to have been deleted.After a relatively light year at the Super Bowl for Hollywood, thanks to Covid, of course, the studios and streamers were back to business at the weekend, securing $7m spots for their shiniest of wares. Here’s a rundown of what you might have missed: Doctor Strange and the Multiverse of Madness The phenomenal success of the most recent Spider-Man instalment (about to take over Avatar’s mammoth box office) and the film’s many, many cameos have upped the ante for the next Marvel adventure, something the new tease of Sam Raimi’s Doctor Strange 2 is certainly aware of. While we knew from the last trailer that Elizabeth Olsen’s tortured Wanda would be a major part, the new ad has confirmed a rumour that Patrick Stewart would be starring as well. It was a mere voice tease (and not enough to 100% confirm that he’ll be playing X-Men’s Professor Xavier although it seems very very likely) but just that alone managed to briefly break the internet. We’ll find out how their worlds collide in May. The Lord of the Rings: the Rings of Power The Super Bowl also offered up a new look at Amazon’s ambitious new Lord of the Rings series, which has cost a reported $465m to make. It certainly looks epic in scale, but the niggling question remains: do we really need this? Peter Jackson’s original series remains virtually perfect and still all-too-recent and nothing yet, not even this handsome trailer, has shown us that Middle-earth needs revisiting. The Lost City A quick look at Sandra Bullock and Channing Tatum’s The Lost City, a knowing spin on Romancing the Stone, doesn’t really offer us that much we haven’t already seen in the initial trailers. The story of a romance novelist who finds herself in a real adventure has plenty going for it – Bullock returning to physical comedy, Daniel Radcliffe as a bad guy, a role for the extremely funny Patti Harrison, a piss-taking cameo from Brad Pitt – but three trailers have now shown essentially the same moments on a loop (someone over at Paramount is very proud of the line “What is this, Taken? Am I took-en?”) so let’s hope there’s more to be found when it hits cinemas next month. Nope Probably the most anticipated trailer of the evening (that actually dropped in the morning) was for the film that had been most shrouded in secrecy up until now – Jordan Peele’s latest “social thriller” Nope, out this summer. The rather divisive title is not really explained in the first tease, but it’s quite likely meant to mean Not Of Planet Earth. Maybe. Because the Oscar-winning film-maker has turned his sights up to the sky, after going underground with Us, for a film that’s about something evil sucking people up from above (comparisons to 2004’s The Forgotten are already clogging up Twitter). Daniel Kaluuya, Keke Palmer, Steven Yeun and some very scared horses star. Jurassic World: Dominion After the success of last month’s Scream, the legacy sequel – AKA the one that brings back the old to mingle with the new – continues with force this year with our first real look at the inevitable greatest hits sequel Jurassic World: Dominion. The last film brought back BD Wong and a cameo-ing Jeff Goldblum to join Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard but this time they return with both Sam Neill and Laura Dern, an exciting prospect for hardcore fans. The trailer has some promising moments but there’s an awful lot here to be juggled – despite the familiar faces, it’ll be the lesser-known DeWanda Wise who leads – so whether all balls can be kept up in the air remains to be seen. Sonic the Hedgehog 2 Despite all of the pre-release fun-poking (fans ripped the character design in the trailer so much that Paramount tweaked it for the actual movie), 2020’s Sonic the Hedgehog became one of the year’s biggest, and sadly only, hits with $319m worldwide. The inevitable sequel is being rushed out this April and a headache-inducing Super Bowl spot, introducing new villain Knuckles voices by Idris Elba, does little to explain the appeal to OG game fans who wisely skipped the last film. Moon Knight It’s looking like a rather dark year for Marvel, after the night’s horror-tinged Doctor Strange 2 tease and now this, a second look at their new Disney+ series, Moon Knight, recently described as “brutal” by Marvel boss Kevin Feige. Oscar Isaac’s British accent remains … a decision, but there’s plenty to get excited about here, including a grizzled Ethan Hawke and some stunning on-location imagery.Hundreds of yellow-headed blackbirds have been filmed appearing to fall from the sky, some of them dying, in mysterious circumstances in the northern Mexican city of Cuauhtémoc. The cause of death remains unclear but experts said it was most likely the flock was “flushed” from above by a predatory bird swooping down to make a catch. The footage from a security camera shows a flock of migratory birds descending on to houses like a cloud of black smoke. Most birds manage to fly off but subsequent footage shows carcasses of the distinctive black and yellow birds scattered on streets of the city. The incident happened on the morning on 7 February, according to local reports. The birds tend to breed farther north, in the US and Canada, and migrate south for winter in Mexico. According to the local paper El Heraldo de Chihuahua, which first reported the story, a veterinarian suggested blame for the incident could lie with high levels of pollution, driven by the use of wood-burning heaters, agrochemicals, and cold weather in the area. Another suggestion was that the birds were electrocuted while resting on power lines. There was speculation on social media that it could have been caused by 5G technology. But Dr Richard Broughton, an ecologist with the UK Centre for Ecology &amp; Hydrology, said that although he could not see a raptor in the footage, he was 99% sure it was caused by a predatory bird. A predator could have made the birds swirl tightly and driven them towards the ground, with higher birds forcing lower ones to crash into the buildings or the ground. “This looks like a raptor like a peregrine or hawk has been chasing a flock, like they do with murmurating starlings, and they have crashed as the flock was forced low,” he said. “You can see that they act like a wave at the beginning, as if they are being flushed from above.” Dr Alexander Lees, a senior lecturer in conservation biology at Manchester Metropolitan University, agreed. “For my part and from one video and no toxicology, I’d still say the most probable cause is the flock murmurating to avoid a predatory raptor and hitting the ground,” he said. “There always seems to be a kneejerk response to blame environmental pollutants, but collisions with infrastructure are very common. In a tightly packed flock, the birds are following the movements of the bird in front rather than actually interpreting their wider surroundings, so it isn’t unexpected that such events happen occasionally.” The deaths of 225 starlings in Anglesey in December 2019 were later discovered to have been caused by them diving into the tarmac, possibly after being chased by a predatory bird and failing to pull up in time.And with that, I’ll say goodbye. Thanks for your company - what a brilliant night in Beijing. Let’s do it all again tomorrow. Bye! Ice Hockey: And back to Wukesong to finish the night, where Team USA have popped in a third goal - that’s cream on the cake. They’re 3-0 with just one minute to go, certain to face Canada in an All American women’s gold medal match on Thursday. Finland will play off for the bronze medal against Switzerland on Wednesday. Curling: The coach has his say: Sweden land on a play of removing the Swiss guard first, opening up the house, then finishing with a draw shot. Part one goes to plan. Over to Alina Pätz - this is sudden death now, she has to move the Swedish stone with this her finish attempt. And does! Right. It all comes down to this: the Swiss have the shot but the dancefloor is open. But instead of the gentle draw Hasselborg opts to knock out the shot and it works! Sweden win 6-5 in the extra end, taking their record to 4-2. As for the Swiss, that’s their first loss of the competition, now 5-1. Brilliant curling. That could well end up a preview a major medal match later this week. Curling: We pick up the extra end between Sweden and the Swiss with four stones to go, Sweden with the hammer. They currently have the decisive shot in position, sitting on the button with skip Anna Hasselborg piling the pressure back on to Alina Pätz, who takes a time out to weigh up her options. She gets under the guard but isn’t able to curl it beyond the yellow - time for Sweden’s time out. Ice Hockey: A second goal for the USA! From the stick of veteran forward Hilary Knight, another member of that gold medal team in Pyeongchang. The assist goes to Savannah Harmon. So, they lead Finland 2-0 with 12 minutes to go in this semi final - the winner here goes on to play Canada in the gold medal final on Thursday. Bobsleigh: Let me shock you: Germany finish the first half of the men’s two-man comp with pairs in first, second and fourth. An ROC combination breaks them up in third with the Swiss and Austrians in equal fifth. We’ll watch their medal runs closely tomorrow. Curling: In the other matches, Denmark finished their thrashing of ROC, winners 10-5 - the same in margin Korea’s victory over Japan. But close one is Sweden v Switzerland - we join with one each to play; the latter have the hammer, down 4-5 but with a shot on the button. Sweden first... bang! Out goes the Swiss shot, replaced by their own - indeed, they have three points surrounding those Olympic rings. “Curling perfection!” says the commentator - I like her style. This has to be perfect as well from Alina Pätz... and is! To an extra end they go! And the hammer goes back to the Swedes. Curling: As you would expect from watching this contest, Canada’s Jen Jones has to knock out the GB shot with her penultimate stone and it was never in doubt. Class. Over to Muirhead, two to go - can they engineer something very special? Not strong enough there - contact is made but the shots are still Canada’s. They take a time out before their final stone of regulation, just to be sure - they erect a guard. “You tell me how on Earth Eve Muirhead gets three there?” asks Steve Cram somewhat rhetorically, drumming up what a Hail Mary might look like but it’s not to be - Canada take the shot and the victory, by a margin of 7-3. Both teams are now 3-3 after six matches. Ice Hockey: Cayla Barnes’ clinical finish - the USA taking full advantage of the power play when Finland were penalised for a trip - remains the only goal in their semi-final with one period to play. Curling: Korea finish the job against Japan, winning 10-5 to keep their destiny in their own hands for the later stages of the round robin. And Sweden go up 5-4 over the Swiss with one end to play, but the latter have the hammer - extra time surely beckons there. Curling: Three stones to go, ninth end. GB have both shot and a guard but the hammer is Canada’s. Jen Jones hasn’t quite nailed her penultimate shot though, placing it alongside another stone at the top of the house. Here’s Muirhead’s opening for a steal - the most important moment of the night for her so far. From left to right she goes, around Canada’s pair, and on the button. Well, that’s two shots as it stands. “The chances of Jen making two mistakes in a row are slim,” says Steve Cram. She can’t let GB steal two here - damage control? Left to right her direction too... and it’s absolutely perfect. Clinical. The GB stone is knocked away, the Canadians claim the point - they lead 6-3 with one end to go. GB have the hammer for it but they need three shots to finish for this to go to an extra end. Ice Hockey: With seven minutes to go in the second period of the women’s second semi-final, the USA remain 1-0 up over Finland. Curling: Around the rinks we go once more, eight ends down. (1) Switzerland 4 v (4) Sweden 4 (3) Great Britain 3 v (8) Canada 5 (2) Japan 5 v (6) Korea 8 (9) Denmark 7 v (10) ROC 4 Bobsleigh: The BBC are sticking with the early stages of this event on their main channel - is this a Cool Runnings thing? Or because GB have a team in? Halfway through the second run, with the main men (including the three German pairs) still to come, Swiss pilot Michael Vogt has a provisional lead over the Austria’s Benjamin Maier. Curling: Three shots to come in this seventh end and it’s four Canadian stones in the house. Super stuff from their skip Jen Jones to dislodge the only troublesome GB stone to this point. “Eve is going to have to get this absolutely perfect,” says Steve Cram on commentary. It works - just. GB have shot but they’re not quite on the button. Back to Jones - can she drive the red stone away again? There’s no guard in her way; a free hit - and she’s bang on. “She hasn’t made a mistake this whole match,” says Cram. So, the best Muirhead can hope for is one point with the final stone and gets the job done. They have inched the gap back to two points with two ends to go; Canada lead 5-3 and they take the hammer for the ninth. Ice Hockey: Team USA with the first goal of the semi-final! Early in the second period, Cayla Baynes - a veteran of the team that won gold at Pyeongchang - with the finish, via Hannah Brandt’s assist. Curling: We’re reaching now-or-never for Team GB against Canada, down 5-2 with three ends to go. On the plus side, they have the hammer in this the eighth and again in the tenth to finish. Eve Muirhead’s team had a 3-2 record coming into this match against Canada, who are 2-3. Each foursome play each other - nine games in all. So, if GB don’t get up here, they’ll probably need to win each of their remaining three fixtures to advance to the medal rounds. Before we go back to the curling, the Daily Briefing is in! There’s no better one-stop-shop on these Winter Games than Martin Belam’s daily email. Sign up here to get it sent directly to your inbox. Once again, the biggest story from Beijing was off the ice. Specifically, the ongoing saga with Kamila Valieva. Sean Ingle is here with the latest, after the 15-year-old figure skater was cleared by the court of arbitration for sport to compete in the solo event. Curling: Updated scores from the Water Cube. Team GB remain in strife, unable to take full advantage of the hammer in the sixth end. (1) Switzerland 2 v (4) Sweden 3 (3) Great Britain 2 v (8) Canada 4 (2) Japan 4 v (6) Korea 7 (9) Denmark 4 v (10) ROC 4 Ice Hockey: No goals in the first period of the women’s semi-final between the USA and Finland at Wukesong Sports Centre. The pictures are in. The best of day ten - enjoy some special work from the outstanding photographers covering the Games in Beijing. Ice Hockey: We’re about halfway through the opening period in the second semi-final of the women’s tournament, Team USA taking on Finland - no score as yet. The winner here earns the right to play the brilliant Canadian outfit for gold - they thrashed the Swiss 10-3 in the first semi earlier today. When these teams met last week in the group, the Americans won 5-2. In their quarter finals, the USA knocked off the Czechs 4-1 and Finland hammered Japan 7-1. Curling: We’re into the eighth session of the the women’s round-robin tournament. Here are the progress scores and, in brackets, where the teams sat on the table coming into these clashes. (1) Switzerland 2 v (4) Sweden 2 (3) Great Britain 1 v (8) Canada 4 (2) Japan 4 v (6) Korea 5 (9) Denmark 3 v (10) ROC 3 All matches are halfway through with five ends complete. Of most interest so far, Team GB have plenty to do from there under the leadership of Eve Muirhead - they can’t drop this match. Bobsleigh: The BBC also stuck with the bobsleigh - the first of four runs, 24 hours away from the medals being decided - rather than taking the ski jumping final on the main channel. And on the red button, it’s the curling - again, well ahead of medal time. Anyway, that first run is complete with results just as I summarised half an hour ago with the Germans in first, second and fourth. The Team GB pair, piloted by Brad Hall, sit in 11th position - 0.67 off the pace. That’s the final medal event of day ten. Austria, with their fifth victory of these Winter Games, jump into fifth spot with 15 medals. Norway’s nine gold medals - seven in the cross-country skiiing and biathlon events - keep them at the top of the pops with nine. Ski jumping: Slovenia stay well clear of Norway with a 127m jump from Peter Prevc. So, it’s all down to Austria, Manual Fettner - the man who won silver on Saturday - with the final jump of the night. He’s up, he’s flying... it’s 128m. It’s going to be so close - we await the marks. It’s enough! 119 points earn Austria gold by eight points. GOLD - Austria 942.7 (Kraft/Huber/Hörl/Fettner) SILVER - Slovenia 934.3 BRONZE - Germany 922.9 Norway miss out on a medal by 0.8 points. Ski jumping: The big four to come, here we go. For Germany, it’s Karl Geiger - the bronze medallist in the solo event on the weekend. Is is over 130m? Not quite, 128m. They’re relying on the style points to bridge the three-point gap to Norway. Over to Lindvik, the champion on Saturday... and he’s short! How short? Glum faces in the Norwegian camp... 126m. Is that enough for them to stay ahead of Germany in bronze? It comes down to style marks again... Germany keep their noses ahead by 0.8 of a point! 922.9 to 922.1. Just Slovenia and Austria to jump for gold. A thrilling finish this event. Ski jumping: Quick aside - why are style points even a thing in ski jumping? I’m not the first to make this observation, but surely it should be about getting as far as you can, however you can? I’ll stop now. Ski jumping: A big third round! Austraia, Slovenia and Norway are on the podium for now with one jump to go - with the wind dropping, the major players were really able to turn the heat up. The top four are in contention for medals, they are: 1. Austria 823.7 2. Slovenia 818.4 3. Norway 806.5 4. Germany 803.9 Norway have the singles champion, Marius Lindvik, to come. The last jumps are in reverse order of their current position. Bobsleigh: 20 of the 30 pairs have completed their first run in the two-man event with the German teams sitting first, second and fourth. They hurtle down twice today and finish the job tomorrow. Ski jumping: We are halfway through the final and Slovenia are back into top spot, overtaking Austria with Cene Prevc collecting 126 of the best with his jump. Norway remain in the bronze position but they’re 22 away from second; the Germans have jumped from six into fourth but they’re 35 points off the lead. Then well out of the medals for now: Japan and Poland, 50 points adrift, ROC 90 away from Slovenia, and Switzerland, easily out of contention. The Eurosport commentator remains scathing about the officiating, specifically the barriers they have been released from at the top. Ski jumping: A lot of wind; the conditions aren’t great for going huge in the first jumps of the final. Austria and Poland are over 119 but most of the rest of the field are closer to 100. Austria (578.1) lead Slovenia (575.1) and Norway (565) as they begin the second of four legs. The TV commentator is very critical of the barrier they are taking off from, saying they should be given more room to build up speed because of the wind. Indeed, he’s unhappy full stop. Ski jumping: To the final of the men’s team event! 11 became eight in the first round of the final with the Czech Republic, the USA and China eliminated. At the other end of the table, the qualifiers are: 1. Slovenia 2. Austria 3. Norway (defending champions) 4. Germany 5. Japan 6. Poland 7. Not Russia 8. Switzerland The scores from the first round all count, added to the second jumps for a grand total. Just 8 metres separate the top four so far. Go! Bobsleigh: The BBC screened the first heat of the two-man event live instead of the freestyle aerials final. Anyway, the it’s four runs for the men - two tonight then two tomorrow. Keep your eyes on the Canadians, the Latvians and, of course, the Germans. Can they continue their extraordinary run at the sliding centre? Sure enough, their two pairs are first and second to set the standard early on. Freestyle aerials: Ashley Caldwell (USA) is the fourth jumper in a row to go opt for the back full-full-full but she ends up as Peel did on her back! That’s gold for China with with Mengtao Xu the only athlete to stick the landing on the big jump when it mattered most! Gold for China! At age 31, she’s finally at Olympic champion. And what a response, roaring into the Beijing night sky. Love to see it. Caldwell finishes fourth. Hanna Huskova, what a mighty jump to lead the final, earns silver after gold in 2018 and Team USA’s Megan Nick will collect the bronze for her clean back full-double-full. Freestyle aerials: Mengtao Xu! It’s the same jump as Peel and Fanyu but that is the way to land it! Quite outstanding. Surely she moves to the top with a 4.293 hit so sweetly? She does! Just! 108.61! The Chinese jumper is into first position with only Ashley Caldwell to come. The American held her nerve in the final of the teams event and will need to do so again here. Brilliant drama. Freestyle aerials: Kong Fanyu (CHN) with the same jump as Peel, the back full-full-full... and the result is the same! In her case, a faceplant at the end. 59.67, it isn’t to be for the local athlete. Huskova, the defending champ, will definitely win a medal. Over to Mengtao and Caldwell to work detmine the colour it will be. Freestyle aerials: Launching into a 4.293 degree triple, Laura Peel’s taking a huge risk with this. And she’s up high, so very high... too high in the end, the Australian unable to stick it at the business end. 78.56 is the score - deep disappointment, but she gave herself every chance to take gold if that went right. Credit for that. Freestyle aerials: Nick Megan’s degree of difficulty is 3.525, not up with Huskova on that measure, but she’s got it right! 93.76. Will that be enough for a medal? The pressure is now on Laura Peel - the most important moment of the Australia’s career is coming up now. Freestyle aerials: Hanna Huskova won’t be giving up her title without a fight! The Belerusian lays down an absolute beauty to start this super final, her back lay-full-full is stuck to perfection. And it’s 107.95! That’s the best jump of the competition so far... have that! I said I’d be a little bit parochial. Forgive me. To fire up for the aerials final, coming in just a moment, let’s take a look at Alisa Camplin’s stunning victory at Salt Lake City in 2002. Freestyle aerials: They’ve given Akmarzhan Kalmurzayeva (KAZ) another attempt after failing to reach the jump earlier in the round. And it’s a fine jump too, albeit with a lower degree of difficulty, collecting 71.23. Right, so we have our six finalists confirmed: 1. Ashley Caldwell (USA) 2. Xu Mengtao (CHN) 3. Kong Fanyu (CHN) 4. Laura Peel (AUS) 5. Megan Nick (USA) 6. Hanna Huskova (BLR) Only one jump each in the super final - high stakes stuff! Freestyle aerials: The wind has dropped off as Laura Peel (AUS) waits to go. Down with a back full-tuck-full, difficulty right on 4.0... up there, looking good... down! But trails with a hand! The landing is worth 30 per cent. This is touch and go stuff for the world champion, requiring 92 to make it. “You have to reward the bravery,” says the commentator on telly... and they have! 100.02. She’s through! Freestyle aerials: Ashley Caldwell (USA) doesn’t need to jump - she’s already through to the final with her first jump. But she does and improves her position with a 105.6 - the best score of the day with a back lay-full-full. Bang. She’s the in-form jumper in this comp. Freestyle aerials: The first of the Australians, Danielle Scott... and it’s gone horribly wrong. She lost it well before the landing. A high degree of difficulty with a triple attempt at 3.975 but surely she’s out? She is - the score 64.79. But credit for having a big crack. Freestyle aerials: Five jumpers to go. Marion Thenhault (CAN) the first. The 21-year-old didn’t trouble the scorers with a fall at the point of landing the first around but she holds it with style this time! It’s a double not a triple though, so unlikely to reach 100... 91.29! Into sixth! In short, she needs the Australianas to mess it up again. Freestyle aerials: Whoa! Akmarzhan Kalmurzayeva (KAZ) doesn’t make it to the jump, catching the edge of the runway! Is that for her or does she get another crack? Anyway, over to Hanna Huskova (BLR), the 29-year-old Olympic champ in 2018, and she gets it down with a 3.71 difficulty! Into the 100s? No! For the second time tonight she’s not been fancied by the judges, finishing with a 92. Freestyle aerials: Clean from American Kaila Kuhn but it won’t be enough to progress. Her teammate Megan Nick lands a 3.525 as well but only registers a 90, which means her 95 from the first attempt has to stay in the top six between now and then. In her favour is the conditions, which continue to get worse. The pressure is on. Freestyle aerials: Fanyu Kong (CHN) hit her first jump, a 102.71 placing her in third, but she’s botched this back lay-full-full. A nervous wait ahead to determine whether that initial attempt keeps her above the fold. A reminder that the top six scores make it. Freestyle aerials: On we go - can one of the lower seeds do something special to push into the top six? Not in the first couple - neither Anastasiya Andriyanava (BLR) nor Eseniia Pantioukhova are getting to the medal round. Conditions are tough: cold and windy. Ice Hockey: One for later tonight, a couple of hours from now in the women’s competition it’s Team USA against Finland for the right to play Canada in Thursday’s Gold Medal Match. Earlier today, the top seeed thumped Switzerland 10-3 in the first semi at Wukesong. Ski jumping: A quick look at the men’s team competition while we wait for the next jumps in the freestyle aerials. A great start from the USA with Decker Dean up top with a 129. Eight of the twelve teams will make it through to the medal jumps later tonight in Beijing with the cumulative score from all four athletes taken for the final tally. Freestyle aerials: All Australian eyes on Laura Peel, who led the qualifying round. But the world champion has overcooked her back full-tuck-full! With a high degree of difficulty she’s a chance to still stay in the top six... nope, ninth. She’ll jump last in round two, so she’ll know precisely what is required in 20 minutes from now. Freestyle aerials: Ashley Caldwell, who was the catalyst for Team USA’s stirring come-from-behind victory in the team’s event, goes relatively safe with a 4.028 but makes absolutely no mistake. She’s the third jumper over 100 and into the lead with 103.92. Freestyle aerials: Xu Mengtao with the most ambitious jump we’ve seen so far and she’s right on the money! And with 103.89 she’s into the lead, overtaking Fanyu Kong. That will be enough to see her through to the medal final. Caldwell (USA) and Peel (AUS) to come. Freestyle aerials: Danielle Scott is hits the deck! The Australian, who the was in fourth position through qualifying, got wonderful air on her back lack-tuck-full but didn’t stick it at the landing. The veteran from Sydney, competing in her third Winter Olympics, will need to get it right the second time around to reach the final six. Freestyle aerials: Hanna Huskova (BLR), the gold medallist in 2018, lands a back lay-tuck-full - or so it appears. The expectation on commentary was that she’d be a chance to nick top spot but the judges aren’t as keen, scoring 89.41. She’s in third position. A reminder of how this works. All twelve athletes jump twice in this first final. The six best jumps (not a cumulative tally) will qualify for the major medal final of six, which begins at the top of the hour. Freestyle aerials: Fanyu Kong (CHN) makes her back lay-full-full to start the first final, drawing on all her experience from Pyeongchang to bank a very handy 102.71. After six jumpers with their first of two attempts - they are going in reverse order from how they qualified this morning - she’s in the lead ahead of Team USA’s Megan Nick. Thank you, Niall. A warm-and-cuddly Valentine’s Day welcome to you all for the night session on this second Monday in Beijing – which also happens to be my baby girl’s second birthday. I’ve had her skating around the kitchen over the weekend; you’ll see her in the short track speed skating in 2038. Maybe that will be with the Australian flag on her uniform - I’m going to be a bit parochial over the next two hours despite the fact that I’m coming to you from 10,000 miles away in London. That’s because the pet event for Australian Winter Olympians is about to begin: the women’s freestyle aerial final. And just as it was in 2002 when Alisa Camplin took the chocolates, then in Salt Lake City and eight years later when Lydia Lassila did the same, it’s an Aussie, Laura Peel, favoured to take home gold at Genting Snow Park here. She shot the lights out in qualifying round with a 104.54 – one of just two jumpers to crack the ton as the field was reduced to 12. Peel was the world champion in 2021 so she knows how to get it done on the big stage. With her in wearing green and gold in the final is Danielle Scott, fourth in qualifying at this her third Winter Games. They’ll have to get past the experienced Ashley Caldwell from Team USA who was outstanding in their team victory on Thursday – she’s one of three Americans in this penultimate round before the final jumps in an hour from now. Kong Fanyu from China was bronze in 2018 and has snuck into the dozen, outshone by her countrywoman Xu Mengtao who did everything right in the team event for silver. Hanna Huskova was the Olympic champion in Pyeongchang and has also snuck through, one of a pair of Belarusians. And Marion Thénault is one to watch as well, the Canadian putting in a fine performances when Canada’s mixed team won bronze last week. I’ll also have a close eye on the Ski Jumping where the men’s team final is taking place at the same time with 11 groups of four ready to roll at Big Air Shougang Hill. Germany are the defending Olympic and world champions with Austria, Poland and Slovenia all expected to be in the mix at the business end of the competiton. Drop me a line throughout the day, or send me a tweet. I’ll be handing over to my esteemed colleague Adam Collins shortly – he’ll guide you through the rest of the day’s live sport. Meanwhile, this is a nice read from Simon Burnton on the Winter Olympics’ historical battles with the weather: Here’s what’s still to come on day 10 (all times GMT). The action resumes in 10 minutes time, so get ready ... 11am Women’s aerials final 🥇 11am Men’s team ski jumping (large hill) first round 12.05pm Two-man bobsleigh – run one 12.05pm Curling: women’s round-robin games including GB v Canada 12.06pm Men’s team ski jumping (large hill) final 🥇 1.10pm Women’s ice hockey semi-final: USA v Finland 1.40pm Two-man bobsleigh – run two Following the news that she can compete in the women’s individual events, Kamila Valieva has been training with other ROC skaters at the Capital Indoor Stadium – watched by her entourage, including controversial coach Eteri Tutberidze ... ... while in Moscow, electronic billboards in support of the Russian teenager bear the message “Kamila, we are with you”. More on Jamie Anderson, the US snowboarder who won slopestyle golds in 2014 and 2018, and a Big Air silver in Pyeongchang but has had a disappointing Games in 2022. Anderson has said she feels “tapped out” and “excited to go home” after finishing ninth in slopestyle, and failing to qualify for the Big Air final. “We’ve been here for so long and I feel like our whole crew is just over it,” Anderson said of life in the Beijing bubble. “Just barely hanging on by a fricking strand of hair. Just like, tired of the food, homesick, tired of the pressure.” The 31-year-old says she’s not ready to retire, but she’s not sure what’s next for her in terms of competitive snowboarding. Last week, she posted on Instagram that she “straight up couldn’t handle the pressure” and her “mental health and clarity just hasn’t been on par.” Before we look ahead to the rest of the day 10 action, here’s a rundown of what you might have missed beyond the medals in ice dance and monobob: The women’s slopestyle qualifying runs took place, with China’s Eileen Gu going through in third place behind Estonia’s Kelly Sildaru and Norway’s Johanne Killi. Team GB duo Kirsty Muir (sixth) and Katie Summerhayes (10th) also made the cut for Tuesday’s final. The finals are also set for the men’s and women’s Big Air snowboard finals. Canada’s Max Parrot led the way in the men’s event, while New Zealand’s slopestyle gold medallist Zoi Sadowski-Synnott topped the women’s qualifiers. Double Olympic champion Jamie Anderson failed to qualify, though, and her US teammate Julia Marino withdrew after a fall in practice. Team GB’s Katie Ormerod also missed out on the final, finishing 25th. The women’s ice hockey is at the semi-final stage, but Canada are still banging in the goals – their 10-3 win over Switzerland took their Games tally past 50, a new record. The USA and Finland meet in the second semi-final later today. The IOC has just announced that the team figure skating medal ceremony, on hold for the last week, will not take place in Beijing at all following Kamila Valieva’s positive drugs test. Valieva has been cleared to compete in the individual competition by Cas due to “exceptional circumstances”, but if she wins a medal, there will be no ceremony. The IOC adds that it will “organise dignified medal ceremonies once the case of Ms Valieva has been concluded.” Here’s Bryan Armen Graham on the battle for gold in the women’s monobob – a new sliding event at these Games, won by a familiar face: “Athlete of the Games so far?” asks Kurt Perleberg. Putting aside the obvious answer, we’ve seen moments of brilliance from Nathan Chen, Nils van der Poel and Eileen Gu, but my personal shout would be Suzanne Schulting. The Dutch short track skater has won two golds and a silver in Beijing, and set a new world record too. The Netherlands’ relay gold and their emotional celebrations – after teammate Lara van Ruijven died in 2020 – were a Games highlight too. There’s a break in the action in Beijing for the next 90 minutes – so plenty of time to catch up on a busy day of skating, sliding and skiing so far. Let’s start with ice dancing, and tales of Valentine’s Day romance and redemption from Martin Belam: Curling: Denmark have beaten Norway 6-5 amid extra-end drama to earn their first win of the group stage. Here are the latest men’s standings: 1. Sweden (6-0) 2. Great Britain (5-1) 3. Canada (4-2) =4. USA, Switzerland, ROC (3-3) =7. Norway, China (2-4) =9. Italy, Denmark (1-5) The top four advance to the semi-finals, so Team GB are well placed – but their last three games are against Sweden, Canada and ROC. Monday’s biggest story from Beijing is undoubtedly the news that Kamila Valieva will be able to compete in the women’s individual figure skating event. The World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada) have issued a statement responding to the court of arbitration for sport’s decision, saying it is “disappointed by today’s ruling.” “It appears that the Cas panel decided not to apply the terms of the Code, which does not allow for specific exceptions to be made in relation to mandatory provisional suspensions for ‘protected persons’, including minors.” Wada also appears to lay some of the blame for the delay in Valieva’s positive test being confirmed with Rusada, the Russian anti-doping agency: “According to information received by Wada, the sample in this case was not flagged by Rusada as being a priority sample when it was received by the anti-doping laboratory in Stockholm”. Sweden have beaten ROC 7-5, while Denmark and Norway are locked in an extra end after drawing 5-5. And if you think I’m slightly overdoing it on the curling, it’s the only live event happening at the moment – but we’ll have a run-down of all the day 10 action so far, and what’s coming up, very soon. Curling: Bruce Mouat’s crew have a stone almost on the button, while Switzerland have largely left their efforts short, keeping the target area clear. One stone each left to go ... With their last attempt, the Swiss team nestle a stone in front and give Mouat something to think about. He clears both stones with his final effort, and Team GB pick up the point they need to win! GB 6-5 Switzerland. So, the only live sport currently going on is curling, and Switzerland have struck back against Team GB in the ninth end. With the final stone, they try a complicated cannon shot for three points, but end up taking two. It’s 5-5 going into the 10th and final end, where Britain have the hammer – the final stone. Elsewhere, Canada have beaten Italy 7-3, Sweden lead ROC 6-5 and Denmark lead Norway 5-4. Here are the 12 aerials finalists, who will return to compete for gold at 11am (GMT) – in two and a half hours. The last name on the list, Anastasiya Andryianava of Belarus, did not take a second jump, so it remains to be seen if she will be able to take part. Laura Peel (Aus) Ashley Caldwell (USA) Xu Mengtao (China) Danielle Scott (Aus) Marion Thenault (Canada) Hanna Huskova (Belarus) Akmarzhan Kalmurzayeva (Kaz) Megan Nick (USA) Kaila Kuhn (USA) Kong Fanyu (China) Eseniia Pantiukhova (ROC) Anastasiya Andryianava (Blr) In the second qualifying round for the women’s aerials final, Kazakhstan’s Akmarzhan Kalmurzayeva scored 98.68, a huge improvement on her first run score of 70.86. Australia’s Gabi Ash improved too, but her second score of 80.04 isn’t quite enough as he finishes 14th. Hello everyone, Niall McVeigh here picking up the baton from Geoff. Let’s get a curling update: Team GB lead Switzerland 5-3 heading into the ninth end. Victory would improve Britain’s record to five wins and one loss overall, with tough games against ROC, Canada and leaders Sweden to come. The other latest scores are Canada 4-3 Italy, ROC 5-6 Sweden and Denmark 4-4 Norway. And that’s it for me today. Thanks for your company, Niall McVeigh will be with you next. Here’s the latest piece from our reporters at the scene. Snowboarding: The two Finns, Jarvilehto and Rene Rinnekangas, have the last two jumps and both stumble on the landing, missing a chance to sneak into the 12, and Darcy Sharpe holds on. The final standings are in. Max Parrot (Canada) Otsuka Takeru (Japan) Redmond Gerard (USA) Kunitake Hiroaki (Japan) Su Yiming (China) Marcus Kleveland (Norway) Sven Thorgren (Sweden) Mark McMorris (Canada) Mons Roisland (Norway) Chris Corning (USA) Niek van der Velden (Netherlands) Darcy Sharpe (Canada) Snowboarding: The last few riders going huge on their tricks, trying to get into that top 12, so there are a lot of crashes happening on landing. Six spots are locked up. Curling: Low-scoring match, 3-3 between GB and Switzerland in the seventh end of the men’s round robin. Aerials: Ashley Caldwell, of the USA, goes for a monster trick as the final jump, a back/full-full-full, with a DOD of 4.293. Three backflips, three twists. Perfect in the air, raises one ski on landing which costs her points, but she scores 101.31 and goes to second place. So the direct qualifiers are: Laura Peel (Aus) Ashley Caldwell (USA) Xu Mengtao (China) Danielle Scott (Aus) Marion Thenault (Canada) Hanna Huskova (Belarus) Aerials: Gabi Ash, the third and final Australian, goes for a more straightforward back/full-full, done nicely in the air with a bit too much compression on landing. Keeps her balance and doesn’t put a hand down. Her 77.17 puts her in 13th. The top six scores go to the final, and the rest compete in a second qualification round. Aerials: Another great jump in qualifying for Australia! Laura Peel goes top of the pops with a back/full-tuck-full, degree of difficulty 3.975, and that DOD boosts her score all the way up to 104.54. Australian skiers first and third with six to go. Snowboarding: Mons Roisland lands a good third jump to take himself into the top 12. Now it’s whether he can hold on there. Aerials: Danielle Scott is up, the Australian attempting a back double full full, degree of difficulty 3.525, and she lands it perfectly! Goes all the way up to second place behind Xu with a 96.23. There are 10 competitors to come. Snowboarding: Otsuka Takeru nails an 1800! Slight handtouch on landing but he still gets the second-biggest score of the day, 91.50, and shoots up to second place. Curling: GB leading 3-2 now in the sixth end. Snowboarding: Max Parrot crashes his third run, but is still first on the basis of his first two scores. Redmond Gerard stays second but bumps up his score by three points. Snowboarding: USA’s Chris Corning lands an 81.75 to get into seventh spot, for now. Aerials: The women’s qualifiers have started, Xu Mengtao of China top so far with a 101.10. Snowboarding: Finland’s Kalle Jarvilehto finishes off the second round with an 85.75, making up for a bad first score of 22.75. He’s 17th now but can challenge for the top 12. Snowboarding: Mark McMorris had a great first jump, but the Canadian scores 65.75 after a hand-touch deduction on his second. Still has him in sixth place leading into the third round. Snowboarding: Scores of 80 and over for Emiliano Lauzi of Italy, Niklas Mattson of Sweden, and Mons Roisland of Norway get them in the top four behind Parrot. Five riders to come in round two. Snowboarding: No good for Matthew Cox on his second run, goes well in the air but slips on the landing to score a 19. Snowboarding: Darcy Sharpe was under pressure, after the Canadian bombed on his first run. Switch backside triple 1620 lands him a 77.50 and keeps him in the game if he can score a good third run. Curling: In the fourth end, and it’s slow scoring between GB and Switzerland. 1-1. Snowboarding: Su Yiming goes for a more modest 1440 on his second jump, but drags his hand on landing to score 62.75. That’s probably still enough to get him through in the top 12, and he has another jump to come. He’s currently third, with Redmond and Canada’s Max Parrot ahead. Ice hockey: The Canada-Switzerland game ends up at 10-3. The Canadians go into the gold medal match with plenty of goals behind them. Strap in - here is that update on the Valieva story, after the Court for Arbitration for Sport decision today. Curling: Great Britain has just started a match against Switzerland in the men’s round robin. More on that as scores advance. Snowboarding: The first round is done, and the top three stay as they were: China, Norway, Japan. Staale Sandbech is 12th with 69.50, so that’s the benchmark for anyone below him wanting to get into qualifying contention. Redmond Gerard is the only USA rider in the top 12. Matthew Cox is in 21st spot, the Australian. Second round will start immediately. Ice hockey: This match has indeed settled down. Canada have scored one more to go up 9-3, but that’s all so far in the third period. Snowboarding: Nobody has displaced the top three yet with six jumps to come in the first round. Snowboarding: Matthew Cox for Australia in his first Olympics pulls off a clean run, less intense than some others, slight stutter on the landing probably costs him but he places 11th with 56.25. Su is still top after 16 jumps. Snowboarding: Su Yiming, the 17-year-old Chinese prodigy, goes top after nine jumps with a 92.50. He nails an 1800 spin and lands it clean as a fresh shirt. Markus Kleveland is second at the moment, and Kunitake Hiroake third, for Norway and Japan. Snowboarding: The men’s big air qualifiers have begun, the first run of three for these boarders. Their best two scores decide who goes through to the final. The first 12 of 29 will do so. Ice hockey: End of the second period now, still 8-3. Perhaps the storm has passed. Ice hockey: An absolute torrent of goals here, Poulin scoring again to make it 8-3 to Canada. It’s only the second period. Ice hockey: Stalder scores again! The Canadians get Laura Stacey sent off for two minutes, and Switzerland take advantage, Stalder firing through the five hole to make it 7-3. Ice hockey: Ok, scrap that. Canada score two more in 11 seconds of game time, and now go up 7-2. Marie-Philip Poulin followed by Emily Clark. Here come the Swiss! What did I tell you? Lara Stalder scored the first and now sets up the second across the net, and Alina Muller flicks it home. It’s 5-2 to Canada in the semi-final. We’re expecting an outcome in the Kalina Valieva doping case in just under an hour from now at 2pm Beijing time, which would be 5pm AEDT and 6am UK time. The IOC will have a press conference then. Sean Ingle is on the spot for us to report. Ice hockey: By the way, it’s not even the end of the first period. Canada scored three goals in 53 seconds at one point. Hello all, thanks Beau for the last few hours. You’ll be pleased to know that the Swiss have clawed a goal back on the Canadians in the hockey. That 5-1 could become 5-6 in the blink of an eye. So what’s next? Glad you asked ... In 30 minutes: Men’s snowboard big air qualification In one hour: More curling, with Team GB’s men up against Switzerland. In two hours: Women’s aerials qualification In five hours: Men’s team ski jumping. Not all at the same time. In six hours: Women’s aerials final In seven hours: Another round of curling, with Canada’s women taking on Team GB. Also the first two heats of two-man bobsled. In eight hours: The other women’s hockey semifinal -- USA vs. Finland. My MVPs of the day so far are Kaillie Humphries and the organist at the hockey venue. Great mix of tunes. With that, The Guardian’s epicenter of Olympic coverage shifts from the East Coast of the USA to an undisclosed location in Australia, where the redoubtable Geoff Lemon will guide you through the next few hours. I’ll be back with you in 20 hours. Phew! Are we caught up? Let’s see ... the only sport in action right now is women’s hockey, with Canada facing Switzerland in the semifinals. Quick check: It’s 5-0 Canada. In the first period. Not a lot of parity here. Good quip from Elana Meyers Taylor on NBC, saying her silver was surely the first medal ever won on behalf of the isolation hotel. She somehow maintained her sense of humor and made videos from her room while she waited to have the necessary positive tests. Not that it was easy. Oh wait -- Switzerland just scored. Don’t call it a comeback. It’s fine to feel some sympathy for the USA’s Madison Chock and Evan Bates, but there’s no arguing with the top three here. Madison Hubbell and Zachary Donohue were dazzling. Then the ROC’s Victoria Sinitsina and Nikita Katsalapov were equally spectacular. And there’s simply no way to describe France’s Gabriella Papadakis and Guillaume Cizeron. NBC’s Johnny Weir probably came closest when he said he has shared the ice with the duo, and it makes him feel like he’s a shop full of things he can’t afford. So it’s France, ROC and the USA, to the surprise of absolutely no one. Freestyle slopestyle: The second qualifying run is over, and the most significant shakeup was that the two skiers who had the epic duel in the big air final, Eileen Gu and Tess Ledeux, secured spots in the top 12 and qualified. Like Ledeux, Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud was outside the top 12 after her first run but came through in the clutch to qualify. Gu was in the top 12 after the first run but would have been bumped out if she hadn’t improved in the second. Two Team GB skiers, Kirsty Muir and Katie Summerhayes, also qualified. The USA’s Maggie Voisin is in the final, hoping to end her run of back luck in the Olympics. She couldn’t compete in 2014 after being injured in a training run. She finished fourth in 2018. She was fourth again in qualifying here, but that’s certainly enough. Marin Hamill has also qualified, but her injury would have to be a lot less serious than it looked for her to compete. The accident left coaches and teammates in tears. We’re lucky more people weren’t injured, frankly. Many skiers had a difficult time coping with this course. The fluidity of the snowboard competition just wasn’t there. Ice dancing: Hubbell and Donohue are retiring from competition after this, and that was a breathtaking exit full of the athleticism and grace you want to see in this event. Donohue makes lifts look easy. Hubbell hangs on to Donohue’s neck during a spin in which Donohue takes the “look Ma, no hands” approach. “One last turn,” says Hubbell as she steps off the ice. It’s emotional, it’s brilliant. It’s a one-point deduction because Donohue held on to his lift just a little too long, but it’s still good for first place. Hubbell and Donohue will get a medal. Next up: The ROC’s reigning world champions and then the overwhelming favorites from France. Freestyle slopestyle: Hamill’s accident is surely a difficult incident to follow for the remaining skiers trying to qualify for the final. Canada’s Olivia Asselin crashes and slowly skis down to the finish looking a little despondent, though her first-run score might hold up to qualify. She’s currently 10th. New Zealand’s Margaux Hackett has a clean run going until she overrotates a jump and crashes hard. She trudges up the hill to collect a piece of equipment that was dislodged. Ice dancing: The USA will get a medal. Chock and Bates easily sail past the rest of the field with a personal best of 130.63 in the free dance. Their friends and teammates Madison Hubbell and Zachary Donohue will need to be near their own personal best to top that. Freestyle slopestyle: The USA’s Marin Hamill has clinched a spot in the final, but her participation seems to be in doubt now. She crashed on her second run, and nearly a dozen people have surrounded her on the snow. Horrible sight. Ice dancing: Italy’s Charlene Guignard and Marco Fabbri have moved up from seventh to at least fifth, displacing the ROC’s Alexandra Stepanova and Ivan Bukin. The top four are going now (well, not at the same time, which would be entertaining but frightening), starting with the USA’s Madison Chock and Evan Bates. Snowboard big air: Oh, so close! Belgium’s Evy Poppe goes for a double forward somersault in the air and gets about 1 3/4 of the way around. So the USA’s Hailey Langland hangs on in 12th. Canada will have two representatives, Laurie Blouin and Jasmine Baird. New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski Synnott set herself up as a favorite to do the slopestyle-big air double, posting the only score over 90 in this qualifying event. Australia’s Tess Coady has qualified, as has defending champion Anna Gasser of Austria. Freestyle slopestyle: Team GB’s Katie Summerhayes’s second run isn’t quite as good as her first, and she’ll have a nervous wait, currently sitting in ninth. Australia’s Abi Harrigan is on deck. Snowboard big air: Team GB’s Katie Ormerod can’t land cleanly. She’s out. Langland is still in. Can Courtney Rummel bump out her US teammate? She looks OK in the air but lands awkwardly, remaining upright but with some difficulty. Her score of 38.75 seems quite harsh, but no reasonable judging would’ve put her in the top 12, anyway. Langland is looking safer. Snowboard big air: Australia’s Tess Coady has qualified for the final, currently holding seventh place with five riders left. The bubble’s occupant at the moment is the USA’s Hailey Langland, but the remaining riders -- including Team GB’s Katie Ormerod and the USA’s Courtney Rummel -- have some distance to make up. Kaillie Humphries simply dominated this competition in its Olympic debut, posting the best time in each of the first three heats and the third-best when she held a massive lead in the fourth. She has now won gold medals for two different countries. Elana Meyers Taylor takes silver with the fastest time in the fourth heat. Meanwhile, the US women close out an 8-6 win over South Korea in curling. Monobob: Canada’s Christine de Bruin immediately hands back the slim advantage she had over Meyers Taylor through three runs. She drives well the rest of the way but can’t make up the difference. Here comes Kaillie Humphries for what should be a victory lap. Meyers Taylor is set for the 1-2 US sweep, with de Bruin in bronze. Monobob: The USA’s Elana Meyers Taylor has three Olympic medals and two world championships in the traditional two-woman race. She comes into the last run with a significant lead of Nolte, and she puts a stamp on things by going faster than Nolte in the fourth run as well. Two to go ... will Meyers Taylor move up to silver? Monobob: Walker’s hopes are probably dashed here. Germany’s Laura Nolte stays barely ahead of Walker at each checkpoint and ends up slightly slower in the fourth run but 0.13 seconds ahead in the four-run total. Three to go. Monobob: Could Bree Walker sneak on to the podium? Maybe. Her fourth run is clean, and it’s faster than Elana Meyers Taylor went in her last two runs. Four to go ... Snowboard big air: Time for Tess Coady of Australia, and her trick is so smooth and effortless that it almost seems that she didn’t do anything. Her scores coming into this final run were 74.00 and 54.75, so her goal was to improve on the latter. She does. It’s 62.25, and she’s up into sixth, where she can probably plan for tomorrow. Immediately after that, fellow Australian Bree Walker hits the monobob course .. Snowboard big air: China’s Rong Ge lands an underflip, then flips again in the finish area, failing to stop before hitting the foam padding. She goes over the barrier, gets up and looks around in confusion, as if the landscape has suddenly changed. She gets a 65.75. Pancochova is bumped out. You’d think the air guitar would beat the barrier jump, but it seems things like that are not judged in big air. Pancochova’s good cheer should be an asset in her political activities: Snowboard big air: Looks like our favorite air guitarist, the Czech Republic’s Sarka Pancochova, will the one who officially bumps Jamie Anderson off the bubble. She lets loose a nice howl, tells us all she loves us (in English) and follows up with something in another language. We love you too, Sarka, even if you just knocked a legend out of what’s probably her last Olympic competition. Pancochova moves into 12th. Anderson’s 13th and won’s make the final. Curling: I THINK THE US WOMEN ARE WINNING. Freestyle slopestyle: Gu’s rival from the big air event, Tess Ledeux, also is virtually assured of a place in the final after a clean run that nets her a ... 68.13? That’s all? She’s puzzled. She probably had a case for winning the big air ahead of Gu, and now she has a tough wait to see if she’ll make another final. Snowboard big air: The Japanese 1-2-3 in qualification is finally broken up, as New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski Synnott gets the first score in the 90s with a beautiful 1080. The next rider almost breaks 90. It’s an 89.75 for the legend, Jamie Anderson. She’s in 11th for the moment despite two falls, but it would be a stunner if no one else can push her out of the top 12. Eileen Gu faces a pressure-packed run in freestyle slopestyle. The US-born and based skier who has become a marquee athlete in China had a lackluster first run. Her second run starts tentatively, as she does not seem all that comfortable on the rails. But she makes all the jumps looks easy, landing a couple of them heading backwards. Surely that’s enough to get her to the final. It’s a 79.38. She contently eats a sandwich in the finish area and gives a thumbs-up. See you tomorrow. Now THIS is how you do big air ... Why Lucile Lefevre went for comedy over cab 900s is a good question, but bless her for it. Here’s where we stand going into one of the busiest hours of Olympic action of this fortnight-plus ... SNOWBOARDING: Japanese riders are 1-2-3 in big air qualifying, with slopestyle winner Zoi Sadowski Synnott fourth. Australian Tess Coady and American Hailey Langland are in the top 10 but might need to improve on their final jumps to reach the 12-person final. Top two of the three runs will count. FREESTYLE SKIING: Still only two people in the slopestyle who’ve broken 80 -- Johanne Killi (NOR) and Kelly Sildaru (EST). They’re likely set for the final, as are Maggie Voisin (USA) and Kirsty Muir (GBR), each of whom broke 70. Next up: Marin Hamill (USA) and Katie Summerhayes (GBR). Slopestyle champion Eileen Gu (CHN) is near the bubble; silver medalist Tess Ledeux (FRA) fell early in her first run. Top run counts. ICE DANCING: Last two groups are due up next. Other events might be done before the contenders/leaders go. MONOBOB: The final run is underway, going in reverse order of current standings. That means we’ll see Australia’s Bree Walker (fifth) near the end. Barring catastrophe, the USA’s Kaillie Humphries will take gold. Will Elana Meyers Taylor join her on the podium? CURLING: The US women stole three against South Korea, which came back to score two with hammer to cut the deficit to 5-4. Japan is having an easy time with China, while Canada is controlling the game against the ROC. The Super Bowl is barreling to a thrilling conclusion. Go ahead and watch -- I’ll be over here breaking down the scenarios for a lot of action coming up in the next hour. I mean a LOT. Finally got an update on the USA’s Julia Marino, the slopestyle silver medal who withdrew from the big air event: Fellow American Caroline Claire fell in the freestyle big air event a few days ago, which may explain why she’s not in the slopestyle today. Finish your event early, go to the Super Bowl. Makes sense. Jamie Anderson’s Olympic career may have just come to an end. She skids in the finish area on her second big air effort, and that’ll make it impossible for her to advance to the final. She took silver in this event four years ago along with her second straight slopestyle gold, but it won’t happen this time. Meanwhile, in freestyle skiing, the competitors are skiing as if slopestyle has just been invented. The USA’s Darian Stevens fell off one of the rails at the start of the course, stood up and looked back at the feature as if it had somehow come to life and tripped her. She’s hardly the only person having trouble. Through 11 skiers, only two have scores above 58.00. First run of the snowboard big air qualifier is complete. Top three are Zoi Sadowski Synnott (NZL), Kokomo Murase (JPN) and Reira Iwabuchi (JPN), followed by Tess Coady (AUS). Defending champion Anna Gasser also is in very good shape. The three Canadians are in the top 10. The only American in qualifying position is Hailey Langland in 11th. I was told incorrectly by a major organization that shall remain nameless that they only used the best run in the scoring. It’s actually best two out of three, and those two have to be different spins (frontside, backside, switch something, etc.). And now Norway’s Johanne Killi has taken the freestyle slopestyle qualification lead. Seems unfair for Norway to be good at everything like that. The USA’s Caroline Claire did not start. The women’s snowboarders have finished their slopestyle competition and moved to big air. The women’s freestyle skiers are doing the opposite, and we’re now seeing a slopestyle competition in which the riders are having serious problems putting together a successful run. The latest to stumble is France’s Tess Ledeux, who may have deserved to win the big air event ahead of China’s Eileen Gu. Gu went first and has the early lead with an indifferent score of 57.28. Scratch that -- Estonia’s Kelly Sildaru, who won this event in the 2020 Youth Olympic Games, has landed an 80.96. “I don’t know if waves get you big scores,” says our big air commentator as France’s Lucile Lefevre attempts no rotations but waves to the crowd and/or cameras while airborne. She also has a lot of messages written on the underside of her snowboard. “Please give me more points” was apparently not one of those messages. Snowboarders are generally a cheerful, music-loving bunch, and they’re showing it here. Canadian Laurie Blouin showed her phone to the camera at the finish line in an attempt to show what music she’d selected. The Czech Republic’s Sarka Pancochova played some air guitar on her snowboard, shrugging off any disappointment over only getting a 20.75. A bit of news: The USA’s Julia Marino, the silver medalist in slopestyle, is now listed as “DNS” (did not start). No explanation as yet. The slopestyle bronze medalist, Australia’s Tess Coady, had a solid first effort with a 74.00 off an underflip. She might need to beat that to qualify. The USA’s Elana Meyers Taylor has passed Germany’s Laura Nolte to move into third place in the third heat of the Olympics’ first monobob competition. The gold medal is almost certainly in the hands of Kaillie Humphries, who won two gold medals for Canada but switched to the USA. Australia’s Bree Walker has moved from seventh to fifth. The standings heading to the final run in a little over an hour: 1. Humphries (USA) 2. Christine de Bruin (CAN), +1.55sec 3. Meyers Taylor (USA) +1.73 4. Nolte (GER), +2.05 5. Walker (AUS), +2.28 Want to know more about the monobob, gender equity and global representation? Of course you do. The two most recent snowboard slopestyle gold medalists have gone early in the big air event, and it’s the same story as it was in slopestyle this time around -- New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski Synnott lands an impressive trick, and the USA’s Jamie Anderson does not. Sadowski Synnott is the early leader, ahead of Japan’s Reira Iwabuchi and Miyabi Onitsuka. The ramp has an additional platform built up top to add some length and allow the riders to get a bit more speed. The ROC’s Ekaterina Kosova checks it out and lands a beautiful 0. No, that’s not her score, but in an event that deals with 720s, 900s and 1080s, I’m not sure how else to refer to something with no rotations. Over to women’s snowboard big air qualifying at the venue I’m calling the Power Station. A lot of the favorites go early. Best effort out of three counts. Best two scores out of three count, as long as they’re different spins. Field of 30 will be cut to 12 for tomorrow’s final. The Ukrainian ice dancers’ music selection is a piece from Moulin Rouge that interpolates a guy grunting out the lyrics to Lady Gaga’s Bad Romance. A bunch of their elements have the dreaded yellow box for “under review,” and they’re visibly disappointed afterward despite warming up nicely as the routine went on. The last minute was fun to watch. And in between routines, the PA plays Kryptonite, by one-hit wonder 3 Doors Down. We’re a few minutes away from the start of the free dance, the second and final segment of ice dancing. The favorites and leaders are in the fourth group, so we’ll only be checking on this sporadically while we watch skiers and snowboarders do their flippy/spinny things. The first dancers are Oleksandra Nazarova and Maksym Nikitin from Ukraine. You have to admire the Ukrainian athletes here. We tend to ask athletes about “distractions” when the “distractions” are utterly trivial. No one would blame Ukrainian athletes if their minds were elsewhere. The first five duos are warming up to a mashup of Madonna and Michael Jackson. When we get rolling, it’ll be a lot of movie soundtracks and some Chopin. I’d like to see someone try a routine to a Dream Theater song in 13/8 time, but my vigil will continue. Speaking of the Hamilton family, we’ll begin with a quick look at women’s curling, where Matt’s sister Becca is playing on Tabitha Peterson’s team as they face South Korea in a crucial game. Current standings (each team plays nine games, top four go to playoffs): Switzerland (Silvana Tirinzoni) 5-0 Japan (Satsuki Fujisawa) 3-1 Team GB (Eve Muirhead) 3-2 Sweden (Anna Hasselborg) 3-2 USA (Tabitha Peterson) 3-2 South Korea (Kim Eun-jung) 2-2 China (Han Yu) 2-3 Canada (Jennifer Jones) 1-3 Denmark (Madeleine Dupont) 1-4 ROC (Alina Kovaleva) 0-4 So, yeah, this is a big one. No one expects Jones to stay out of the running for long. The US women have never medaled. They took fourth in 2002. It appears that we will indeed have the women’s freestyle slopestyle qualification shortly. It was postponed yesterday because it snowed. At the Winter Olympics. How dare Mother Nature do that to us. Did you think you’d go through a full Winter Olympics without a Formula One (1) tie-in? That would’ve been a reasonable thought, actually, but it’s not happening: And the responses: Thankfully, we’ve had no judging controversies at these Olympics to compare with what happened in F1 last year. A little later in this 16-hour span: Hello world, it’s Beau Dure, and I still have chills from watching Erin Jackson and her family celebrate after she became the first Black woman to win an individual Winter Olympic gold medal (as far as we know). So I figure you’re all watching the Super Bowl and reading this coverage of the Olympics. Or you don’t care about the Super Bowl and reading along with me anyway. Or you forgot the Super Bowl was happening today, and you need to hop over to see Hunter Felt’s coverage to catch up. Or you’re a digital archeologist tracing the collapse of civilization in the future. Hopefully at least a few years from now. In any case, glad you could be here. We have ice dancing, freestyle skiing and the first-ever monobob medal. And curling. Did I mention the perfect draw I threw on Wednesday? Because I did, you know. Coming up today Times are all in local Beijing time. For Melbourne it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – would you be surprised to learn that there is curling all day long? 🥌 9.15am Ice dancing – have they put the most romantic couples’ dancing on Valentine’s Day on purpose? Your guess is as good as mine. Twenty couples will free dance for the medals 🥇 10am-11.01am and 7pm-8pm Freestyle skiing – weather permitting, the morning is the rescheduled women’s freeski slopestyle qualification, the evening is the women’s aerials final 🥇 9.30am and 11am and 8.05pm and 9.40pm Bobsleigh – the first two sessions are the conclusion of the women’s monobob, the final two are heats one and two of the men’s 2-man contest 🥇 9.30am-11am and 1.30pm-3pm Snowboard – big air qualification day, the women go in the morning, the men in the afternoon 12.10pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – it is semi-finals day for the women, Canada v Switzerland and Finland v US 🏒 6pm-8.06pm Ski jumping – the men are doing their team competition 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal tableFlowers, chocolates, poetic ditties. When it comes to romantic gestures, there are no shortage of options to embrace. But perhaps nothing says “I love you” quite like embroidering a bedsheet with a message in human hair. Set to feature in an exhibition this autumn at the Museum of London Docklands, the unusual, if macabre, token of affection is a 300-year-old memento of a story replete with romance, tragedy and insurrection. The sheet was taken from the Tower of London, where it had been used on the bed of James Radclyffe, the third Earl of Derwentwater, who was awaiting execution for his involvement in the first Jacobite rebellion in 1715, an attempt to put the “Old Pretender” – James, son of James II and VII of England and Scotland – on the throne. Despite raising troops, Radclyffe and the other Jacobite rebels were defeated at the Battle of Preston. While efforts were made to secure a pardon for Radclyffe, the aristocrat – a grandson of Charles II by the monarch’s mistress Moll Davis – was beheaded for treason on 24 February 1716, aged 26. Radclyffe was later featured in numerous novels and ballads, from Sir Walter Scott’s Rob Roy to Lord Derwentwater’s Farewell. But his story was also immortalised in his laundry. In a gesture of remembrance, Radclyffe’s young widow, Anna Maria Radclyffe, embroidered the bottom of the linen sheet in cross-stitch with the words: “The sheet OFF MY dear dear Lord’s Bed in the wretched Tower of London February 1716 x Ann C of Darwent=Waters”. “The interesting thing is that it doesn’t look as if [the sheet] was used for very long. So it’s likely that it was only used for the four months that he was in [the Tower], awaiting execution,” said Beverley Cook, curator of social history at the Museum of London. Cook added that Radclyffe’s wife was allowed to stay with him during that time. “It would be lovely to think that they were lying together beneath this sheet,” said Cook. “Obviously, we can’t prove that, but it’s likely that she conceived their daughter at that time.” Cook said the message was thought to have been embroidered by Anna Maria after she fled to Brussels to raise her children as Catholics. She died of smallpox in 1723. While the handiwork may seem romantic, it is also somewhat macabre: instead of using linen thread – as was used, possibly by nuns, to embroider hearts and flowers on the sheet – the message was stitched with human hair. But quite whose hair remains something of a mystery. When the sheet was presented to the museum in 1934 it came with the message that the hair was Anna Maria’s. However, there is another possibility. Cook noted after his death, Radclyffe’s heart was given to an Augustinian convent in Paris, but his body – with his head sewn back on – was given to his wife. “That would have given her the opportunity of removing some of his hair. And we do know that, obviously, taking locks of hair was quite a common thing for people to do,” said Cook, adding that Anna Maria is known to have kept some of Radclyffe’s hair in a locket. Another possibility, said Cook, was that the hair was from both husband and wife, noting that it appeared to have two different colours. But Cook said the bedsheet was more than a symbol of love. “It is also a sort of relic to Catholic martyrdom,” she said. Among other items in the Executions exhibition is clothing said to have been worn by Charles I when he was beheaded, as well as love tokens – discs resembling flattened coins that were inscribed in their cells by those condemned to death or transportation. One token, dated 1826 and given by the 20-year-old thief George Wright to Ann Lee, bears, like the Radclyffe bedsheet, a poignant message of heartache: “In my dismal cell I lie / In sorrow grief and woe, / For my time it seems so long, / My doom I wish to know.”The Royal Statistical Society published the results of an interesting survey of MPs last week, having asked 101 of the people who make our laws a fairly basic question about probability: if you toss the same coin twice, what are the chances that it will be heads both times? Forty-eight per cent of them got it wrong. To be fair to our current crop of MPs, that was an improvement on the result when the society conducted a similar survey a decade ago and 40% got it right. The performance of Labour MPs has definitely improved, from 23% getting it right 10 years ago to 53% – 1% in front of the Tories – this time around. But even so, the results reflect quite poorly on the basic numeracy of our elected representatives. It would be interesting to see the results if 101 racing punters were asked to calculate the return on a £10 win double on two even-money shots, which is a different way of phrasing exactly the same question. This is, of course, pure speculation, but my money would be on rather more than 52% of the punters knowing that the double is 3-1 against, and that they would be looking at £40 back. But it is the MPs, a fair chunk of whom apparently lack even the faintest grasp of chance and probability, who will soon be considering, amending and ultimately approving a new Gambling Act, which will determine how and even, in some scenarios, whether the rest of us can continue to bet on racing and other sports as we choose. If 48% of MPs do not understand that getting two heads is a 25% chance, how can they be expected to recognise the important differences between various forms of gambling and the vital distinction between betting and gaming? And how can they even begin to consider the possible consequences, unintended or otherwise, of lumping it all together and treating it all as “just gambling”? As Stian Westlake, the RSS’s chief executive, pointed out when the results of the survey were published, “statistical skills are vital for good decision-making and effective scrutiny. While we’re pleased to see that it looks like MPs’ knowledge in this area has improved, the survey results highlight that more needs to be done to ensure our elected representatives have the statistical skills needed for the job.” A grasp of probability and chance is one of those essential statistical skills Westlake mentions and if parliament is any reflection of the country as a whole it is an issue for a significant proportion of the general population. It is also a skill punters tend to acquire over time, often without even realising. This is not to suggest all MPs should be enthusiastic gamblers to improve the decision-making process or that Cheltenham should market a day out at the Festival next month as an educational experience (though you can learn much about your fellow humans on a trip to the West Country, on the bus back to the station after racing in particular). But gamblers often seemed to be ignored, or dismissed as an irrelevance, in debates around the forthcoming legislation, which could have huge implications for racing’s revenue stream from betting. It seems likely many punters have a stronger grasp of chance than the MPs, which hardly increases confidence that the next Gambling Act will be any less of a poorly thought-out mess than the last one.Activists fronting a new campaign masterminded by Roger Hallam, the strategist behind Extinction Rebellion and Insulate Britain, have said they are now preparing to move beyond protest and “into civil resistance”. Two young supporters of Just Stop Oil went to Downing Street on Monday morning, where they delivered an ultimatum to ministers calling for an immediate end to new fossil fuel investments. “If you do not provide such assurance by 14 March 2022 it will be our duty to intervene – to prevent the ultimate crime against our country, humanity and life on earth,” said the letter, read out at the gates and delivered by hand. The Guardian understands that the intention is to take direct action against Britain’s oil infrastructure – from petrol stations to fuel depots and refineries. In a brief speech to reporters, Louis McKechnie, 21, who was recently released from jail for taking part in court injunction-breaking road blockades with Insulate Britain, said: “We know what needs to be done, it’s simple, just stop oil. Right now they are doing the opposite.” For weeks Hallam and other supporters of the campaign, seen as a successor to Insulate Britain, have been touring universities calling on students to sign up. Unlike Insulate Britain, which was predominantly composed of older activists, including several over 70, Just Stop Oil is intended as a youth-led campaign. Hallam told students at Glasgow University last month they “had to become revolutionaries” to avert climate disaster. The Guardian understands that hundreds of activists have signed up and said they were willing to be arrested as part of the campaign. Jess Causby, 25, a supporter of the campaign, said it would involve an escalation of tactics compared with recent environmental protests. “Just Stop Oil has seen that if we want to really protect ourselves and everything around us then we need to move beyond this protest stuff which people have been doing with Extinction Rebellion and Insulate Britain, and then we need to move forward into civil resistance,” Causby said. “What that actually means is stopping pointing out what the government should or shouldn’t be doing [and instead] actively stopping government doing what they shouldn’t be.” Causby said the campaign had taken inspiration from fuel protests 22 years ago, when hauliers used lorries to blockade oil refineries and fuel depots. She said: “We have been demanding [action on climate change] for years now and we’re continuously disappointed with their empty promises and lack of action. So now we’re taking it into our own hands and we’re going to stop them because we have no choice.” Activists from the campaign were giving about 20 to 30 talks a week, Causby said. The Guardian has contacted the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy for comment.Bel-Air is a reboot with its own remarkable origin story. In 2019, the independent film-maker Morgan Cooper had the audacity to make a trailer for an imaginary new version of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, reshaping the 1990s sitcom as a tough, Ryan Coogler-style drama. Cooper might have dreamed that the clip would go viral and that the show would actually be made, with him still on board directing episode one. That’s happened, but this is a fairytale with a sad ending. The new Bel-Air (Peacock/Sky/NOW) is confused and joyless, a remake without a reason to exist. Another kid called Will Smith moves hastily to LA to live with his rich aunt, uncle and cousins after an incident on a west Philadelphia basketball court. That run-in with the neighbourhood bad guys is much graver than the one the previous incarnation of Will experienced – involving guns and the threat of jail time – and when Will gets to Bel-Air, everyone there is a serious operator, too. Uncle Phil is now a focused, muscly lawyer with ambitions to be elected district attorney, and own a colossal mansion rather than just a nice house. Aunt Viv is an artist and elegant socialite. Cousin Hilary is an Instagram influencer, because apparently there’s a law now that says someone in every new show has to be, while her brother Carlton has undergone the most profound change: instead of the preppy buffoon of old, he’s a pseudo-Shakespearean vortex of toxic pride and fractured self-image who is to be Will’s nemesis. Since Bel-Air has chosen to retain the premise, character names and some of the title of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, it invites comparisons. Such comparisons are not to its benefit. One of the countless magical properties of the sitcom format is that it has a particular ability to create moving dramatic moments, because viewers are wrongfooted when the clown mask suddenly drops: the Fresh Prince episode where Will and Carlton find themselves the victims of racist policing, for instance, or the one where Will’s neglectful father reappears and then abandons his son again, have extra power because they sneak up in the cloak of a gag-filled comedy. With an hour an episode and no jokes to make, Bel-Air has all the time in the world to fashion drama about race, class and coming-of-age, but it ends up being less layered and guileful than its source material. The limited characterisation that doesn’t necessarily matter in a comedy, but does in a straight drama, is no more detailed than in the original Fresh Prince. Take Will himself, whose insistence on maintaining his Philly smarts was fuel for a thousand funny comebacks when he was a sitcom protagonist: as played by the restless Jabari Banks, the new Will’s refusal to adapt to his surroundings – a cliched fantasy of walk-in closets, Lexuses and neon-lit pool parties – turns him into an annoying caricature of stubborn teen ingratitude, ranged against Uncle Phil (Adrian Holmes) as a stiff scold who constantly goes on about how Will’s behaviour will affect “my campaign”. The drama’s grandest aim is to take the idea of a privileged family looking after their disadvantaged relative, and use it to examine the guilt of the black upper-middle class. But because the scripts can never resist going down the easiest route, the show’s handling of racial politics seems rudimentary – particularly when held next to recent series that have covered similar ground, such as Dear White People, She’s Gotta Have It or Black-ish. A scene where Will is angered by a white student saying the N-word, and another where Hilary is offered a magazine job on the condition that she tone down her blackness, are both undermined by how starkly they’re set up and how readily the correct answer is arrived at. Of course these are still live issues and any reminder of them is valuable, but where the aforementioned recent shows felt as if they were pushing the discourse forwards and creating challenging drama into the bargain, Bel-Air does neither. Perhaps it wants to hit a younger demographic, as shown by the way episode two trots out the familiar plots of a standard high-school drama. But that’s unlikely to work either: trivial storylines such as Will trying out for the basketball team jar with the show’s monotonous intensity, which demands that everything everyone says is a self-aggrandising speech or a vicious telling-off. Coco Jones as the funny, energised Hilary offers some respite, but not much. Once upon a time, Will from west Philly was miles from home, but the show he was in knew exactly what it was and where it was going. Bel-Air finds that a difficult trick to replicate.The cost of travelling on London’s tube and bus network will rise by almost 5% from next month, the biggest increase in more than a decade, as the body responsible for running the capital’s transport network struggles to plug a funding shortfall. The average 4.8% rise, which matches the rate of inflation, means that most fares will increase by between 10p and 20p. However, some bus fares will rise by 6.5%. It is the second year running that fares have increased, a situation the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, blamed on the row over the level of government funding for Transport for London (TfL), with the proportionate increase in tube prices the biggest since 2010, and the largest since 2009 on the bus network. “Since TfL’s finances were decimated by the pandemic, the government has set strict conditions as part of the emergency funding deals to keep essential transport services running in London,” Khan said. “We have been forced into this position by the government and the way it continues to refuse to properly fund TfL.” Khan, who had kept a partial fare freeze across the TfL network from his election as London mayor in 2016 until 2020, said he had done “everything in my power to keep fares as affordable as possible”. Emma Gibson, the chief executive of the passenger watchdog London TravelWatch, said: “Many key workers and those on low incomes rely solely on the bus, as they can’t afford the tube or train, and they will be hit hardest by this rise.” TfL, which Khan chairs, faces a deadline this Friday to hammer out a long-term funding arrangement with the government. TfL’s finances have been hit heavily by the pandemic as commuters and holidaymakers stopped travelling. The situation has been exacerbated by the government’s plans to force the organisation to make efficiency savings to ultimately reach “financial sustainability”. Before the pandemic, about 70% of TfL’s income came directly from fares, with grant income worth £700m a year from central government phased out between 2015 and 2019. The RMT union said this month that tube workers are to go on strike on 1 and 3 March over fears for jobs, pensions and working conditions. The Department for Transport said it had provided £4.5bn in emergency funding to TfL to help weather the pandemic, as well as pledging £1bn annually for capital investment annually until at least 2024-25, “all at a time of significant pressure on the national finances”. “We’re aware that TfL are still feeling the after-effects of the pandemic but it is the mayor’s responsibility to accelerate overdue reforms that will ensure TfL becomes financially sustainable,” said a spokesperson for the department.The prime minister’s pledge to scrap legally enforced isolation for people in England with Covid-19 flies in the face of basic infectious disease management, which tells us to avoid infecting other people when you are infectious. It is a basic public health protection, like others we have in daily life: speed limits on roads, the banning of smoking indoors, and laws against drink driving. These limit our freedoms to a certain extent, but we have accepted that “infringement” in order to have a safer and healthier society. I agree that we need to get back to “normality” but it’s a question of timing, and now isn’t the right time. Governments across the world are facing the same difficult questions with Covid-19. While vaccines and therapeutics have largely defanged Covid-19, the disease can still have a nasty bite, especially for those who are unvaccinated or vulnerable or elderly. Even for those with three vaccines who manage the disease at home, Omicron can leave people with fatigue, struggling with their normal activities and needing weeks to recover. At the same time, suppression has become increasingly difficult and elimination almost impossible, given Omicron’s infectiousness: South Korea has abandoned its test-and-trace system due to the difficulty of tracking chains of infection that were moving faster than their world-leading tracing systems could run. Asking people to continue to limit their social mixing, work from home and avoid activities they might enjoy such as singing in church or going to the pub once a week is increasingly difficult for governments. Humans are social – interacting and being in close physical contact is part of a meaningful life for many people. Governments are also dealing with the longer-term buildup of harms that come with extensive restrictions, such as rising unemployment, mental health issues (in younger people particularly), increased educational inequalities and the desertion of city centres. We all want our pre-Covid-19 lives back: the question is what the cost of this is. That’s the debate we should be having as a society, without avoiding the difficult realities of the situation. The UK has faced an average of 200 deaths a day now for weeks, while the US is heading towards the million death mark. The media no longer report these deaths widely, as they did at the start of the pandemic: there seems to be a certain acceptance of this as the cost of somewhat normal life to continue. The morality of that is questionable. It is similar to how other diseases such as measles, malaria and childhood pneumonia have been approached. In 2018, measles killed more than 140,000 people worldwide, largely children under five. These deaths could have been prevented through vaccination. In 2018, malaria killed more than 411,000 people, most of them babies and toddlers. These deaths could have been largely prevented through antimalarial treatment. In 2018, more than 800,000 children, largely under five, died of pneumonia, making it the biggest infectious killer. These could have been largely prevented through provision of oxygen and antibiotics. We know how to prevent the bulk of child deaths across the world, we just don’t have the political will or investment to make it happen. The difference in attention to Covid-19 deaths is that this is killing people in rich countries, not just in poor ones. And again we know how to prevent the bulk of Covid-19 deaths using vaccinations and boosters, rolling out new antiviral therapies and continuing to ensure that testing is available to enable those who are infectious to isolate and avoid infecting those who could be at risk of serious disease. Isolation could possibly be removed at some point in the future, starting with children, but instead of moving cautiously with an uncertain future, the prime minister is accelerating in the “race to get back to normal”, as if countries are in a competition to who can leave the Covid-19 pandemic behind first. It’s easy to forget that we are still learning and making policy in real time with considerable uncertainty over the coming months. There are three major unknowns that worry scientists as we look ahead into the future. The first is about waning immunity and how long protection from vaccines or infection will last, especially for those more susceptible to severe illness from Covid-19. Again this is science in real time: we will know about waning immunity when patients start appearing in hospitals and we can collect enough data from enough people on their vaccination date and status and health outcomes. Learning from other countries is vital here. Next is the question of long-term impacts of the virus on the body: a new study from the US shows that even a mild bout of Covid-19 increased the risk of heart failure by 72% and of stroke by 52% for at least a year after diagnosis. We still don’t fully understand what the impacts of getting Covid-19 are on the heart, lungs, blood vessels or brain, once or repeatedly. This means that resigning people to get Covid-19 several times could possibly have major consequences in the years to come. The third is about what new variants might emerge and how that might affect the next phase of the pandemic. New variants may not necessarily be milder: there is a certain unpredictability about what might come next. Managing Covid-19 is not an easy feat, and it is fantastic that restrictions have largely been released for us to continue with normal life. Children particularly should be able to mix with their friends and enjoy as much normality as possible. But releasing isolation right now, given the uncertainty ahead and the death toll, is irresponsible. If we’ve learned anything from the past two months, slow and steady is the best way to stay ahead of Covid-19. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of EdinburghAs the confetti fell at SoFi Stadium, Odell Beckham stood alone amid the revelry, eyes welling, hands on his head in disbelief. No sooner than the dazed receiver appeared on the stadium’s massive video screen did the Los Angeles Rams partisans, in slight majority among the 70,048 attendees, loose a deafening roar. To find their common emotional trigger, one needn’t have looked further than the message writ large on Beckham’s matching hat and T-shirt: Super Bowl Champions. Nothing gets LA in a froth like a big sparkly prize. On Sunday the Rams’ 23-20 dismissal of the upstart Cincinnati Bengals was recognized with a Lombardi trophy, the second Super Bowl crown in the franchise’s 86-year history. It was a capstone achievement that was realised in Los Angeles, on the Rams’ home turf, with more A-listers in attendance than at most recent award shows. There was the Rock, Cardi B, Bennifer – and those sightings all came before the Grammy-grade halftime show. So it was fitting that it was the Rams’ stars who delivered the Hollywood ending that was every bit as sappy as the one in American Underdog – an actual film about the Rams that was released this year. Even game MVP Cooper Kupp’s acceptance speech was note-perfect. “I just feel so undeserving,” he said in an emotional postgame news conference while thanking his high school sweetheart Anna Croskrey for the years of support and sacrifice that helped him to this career pinnacle – the greatest season by a receiver since the immortal Jerry Rice. Beckham set the tone during the game; facing third and three from the Bengals’ 17-yard line, he quickly manoeuvred from the inside of the Rams spread formation and caught a fade pass over Cincinnati’s Mike Hilton in the right corner of the endzone to stake Los Angeles to a 7-0 lead. He celebrated in the endzone with a moonwalk. Another third-down reception in the second quarter for 35 yards set up an 11-yard Kupp TD catch that extended the Rams’ lead to 13-3. Beckham was a a bargain bin signee added to the Rams roster at midseason, and he appeared well on his way to an MVP night. But then late in the second quarter, while reaching for a shallow pass, he fell to the ground clutching his left knee and had to be helped off the field, never to return to action. And without their X-factor or much of a run game to keep Cincinnati’s ferocious defensive front honest, LA struggled to move the chains, and Matthew Stafford got desperate. Facing third and 14 from the Cincinnati 43 yard line, Stafford forced an end-zone to Van Jefferson that was intercepted by Jessie Bates III. Thanks to the blunders, the Bengals rallied to a 20-13 third-quarter lead. On the Rams’ first possession of the third quarter Stafford bounced a ball off Ben Skowronek that was picked off by Chidobe Awuzie. The next time the Rams had the ball Stafford went out for a pass, echoing the Bengals’ “Chilli Special” scoring play earlier in the game, but couldn’t gather the throw from Kupp. It was enough to make you wonder: Is this what the Rams traded away Jared Goff and all those draft picks for – to take the ball out of Stafford’s hands? With the whiff of defeat in the air as thick as the stench of marijuana in the SoFi’s upper bowl, Aaron Donald seized control. After the second Stafford interception, the Rams’ all-world defensive stalwart dropped Joe Burrow twice; the second sack helped hold the Bengals to a field goal. It wasn’t until late in the fourth quarter that the Rams offence shook off the loss of Beckham and started forcing the ball to Kupp – the Rams’ true No1 receiver. With time ticking away and Stafford struggling to connect with Van Jefferson (who may have been distracted by his wife going into labour during the game), Kupp carried a fourth-down handoff seven yards and caught four balls for 39 more yards, not least a one-yard back-shoulder touchdown against the Bengals’ Eli Apple to nudge the Rams back in front for good. When Cincinnati seemed as if they’d drive for the win with 1:25 left, Donald hurried Burrow into a fourth-down incompletion that gave the Rams the ball back with 43 seconds left. After a Stafford kneel down, the most exclusive party in sports was on. Altogether, the Rams sacked the Bengals QB a Super Bowl record seven times. “Our best players stepped up in the most crucial and critical moments,” said LA’s Sean McVay, validating his status as the NFL’s ‘It’ coach. “When you look at the way the second half started, a lot of teams would’ve folded.” Of course this being an LA story – a 20-year reunion, of sorts – there’s no telling how long this happy ending will last. After all, this vibrant, thrumming moment of SoFi Stadium bliss wouldn’t have been possible without the Rams mortgaging their future to redeem their Super Bowl defeat against New England just three years ago. The tags were barely off the Rams’ Super Bowl gear before speculation raged about whether Donald, Miller and Beckham will return for the title defence. Even the 36-year-old McVay, who displaced Mike Tomlin as the youngest Super Bowl-winning coach, has been frank about not wanting to be in this business in his 60s. This championship seems less like one for the ages than yet another piece of Tinseltown ephemera, something to savour in the moment – like, well, the Lakers’ 2020 NBA title run. But not all the Rams’ stars are flashy blow-ins, brought in through costly expenditures. “I promised my daughter this when she was five-years-old,” said the 30-year-old Donald, like Kupp a homegrown cornerstone acquired through the draft. “She got to play in confetti? I’m going to enjoy this with my teammates, my family. I’m just going to enjoy this for today, a couple days.” It’s quite conceivable that in a year’s time few in his ever-changing city will remember who won Super Bowl LVI. But for one night at least it was a blockbuster entirely of the Rams’ making, one that wouldn’t have been possible had their brightest stars not aligned.Russia’s ambassador to the EU has said Moscow would be within its rights to launch a “counterattack” if it felt it needed to protect Russian citizens living in eastern Ukraine. The comments in an interview with the Guardian will do little to calm fears of a major Russian assault on Ukraine, given one of the key scenarios suggested by western intelligence was Russia launching a “false-flag” operation to provide a pretext for invasion. “We will not invade Ukraine unless we are provoked to do that,” said Vladimir Chizhov, who has represented Russia in Brussels since 2005. “If the Ukrainians launch an attack against Russia, you shouldn’t be surprised if we counterattack. Or, if they start blatantly killing Russian citizens anywhere – Donbas or wherever.” Donbas is the region of eastern Ukraine where the Kremlin has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014. It has also, in recent years, handed out hundreds of thousands of Russian passports to residents of two so-called “people’s republics”, which are no longer controlled by Kyiv. More than 14,000 people have been killed in the conflict since 2014. Russia has always denied being a party to the conflict despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Chizhov described claims Russian troops were already in the Donbas region as a “lie” but warned that a sudden escalation of the conflict there, or a Ukrainian “provocation”, could precipitate action by the Kremlin. “What I mean by provocation is that they may stage an incident against the self-proclaimed Donbas republics, provoking them, and then hitting them with all their might, thus provoking Russia to react in order to avoid humanitarian catastrophe on its borders.” The US government has claimed to have evidence that Moscow is planning just the kind of provocation Chizhov said Kyiv could launch. US officials went public last month with claims they had evidence of a plan to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack. With an estimated 145,000 Russian troops on the border with Ukraine, intelligence officials in the US said over the weekend that Russia had accelerated plans for an invasion and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday. Chizhov dismissed western fears of an imminent conflict, saying the numbers of Russian troops on Ukraine’s border were only equivalent to those of the Zapad 21, a large-scale military exercise conducted last September. “And nobody said a word [then],” he said. Military analysts describe the scale and composition of the buildup as unprecedented. At a meeting with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, on Monday, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, appeared to leave room for further negotiations. “You have said, and other Russian representatives have said, that we warn against endless conversations on issues that need to be resolved today. Still, as the foreign minister, I should say that there is always a chance,” the told the Russian president. “It seems to me that our possibilities are far from being exhausted. They certainly should not continue indefinitely. But at this stage I would suggest that they continue and be intensified,” he added. Chizhov said he believed the diplomatic blitz of recent weeks could still end in a solution that worked for all sides. The Kremlin is seeking to block Ukraine from future membership of Nato, a demand rejected by the west, as well as to begin a discussion on a new security architecture for Europe. Chizhov said the west had a “selective type of memory” about previous commitments on Nato enlargement. He added that Lavrov had written to EU and Nato countries on 1 February citing the OSCE summit in Istanbul in November 1999 where it was agreed that all were obliged “not to strengthen its security at the expense of the security of other states”. The EU’s foreign affairs chief, Josep Borrell, has responded in a letter seen by the Guardian, in which he said: “We in the European Union are prepared to continue dialogue with Russia on ways to strengthen the security of all.” Chizhov said he was not able to make Borrell’s letter public but that his general assessment was that it was “unsatisfactory”. He added that it was also surprising, given that Borrell had not been a recipient of Lavrov’s communication. “We wanted to sound out each and every country,” Chizhov said. “Well, they were too timid to reply in their national capacity”.Name: Weird accents. Age: As old as acting. Appearance: On a screen near you. Can you give me an example? For one, there’s Lily James’s stab at sounding like Pamela Anderson in the new Hulu/Disney+ series Pam &amp; Tommy. What’s weird about it? Does it not sound like Pamela Anderson? It sounds more like Pamela Anderson than Pamela Anderson does – it’s actually kind of intense. I’ll take your word for it. It’s over the top, but it works. Then there’s Julia Garner’s impersonation of the real-life con artist Anna Delvey in Inventing Anna. I don’t even know what she’s supposed to sound like. It’s a strange blend of Russian, German, British, American and inauthentic. Perhaps it’s authentically inauthentic – she’s playing an impostor, after all. That may well be the idea, but the result is jarring and, when it comes to the reviews, polarising. And this is a trend, you say? It appears to be. Who else is boldly attempting accents, for better or worse? A scouse Martin Freeman in The Responder; everybody in House of Gucci. I saw that – it was like the longest Dolmio advert ever. The variable-strength Italian accents on show divided opinion, with most people on your side. Can’t they just find actors who already possess the accents required? If you’re an actor, you’re meant to be able to act. So why can’t they do the accents? Lots of them can. The bar, once very low, is now set pretty high. Not like when Dick Van Dyke played a cockney in Mary Poppins. No. But then Lin-Manuel Miranda arguably fared worse in the 2018 sequel Mary Poppins Returns. Why did they pick him? Was there some kind of shortage of English actors in 2018? They somehow managed to cast one in every other part. Perhaps they just ran out. Shouldn’t these highly paid actors be trying a little bit harder? They try really hard. The days of winging it and hoping for the best – Mel Gibson in Braveheart, say, or Kevin Costner as Robin Hood – are over. So it’s not a lack of discipline? Garner, who spent a month speaking only in a Missouri accent for her role as Ruth Langmore in Ozark, did similar in-depth preparation for Inventing Anna, even visiting Delvey in prison. Lady Gaga spent nine months speaking with a northern Italian accent before House of Gucci. Does it really matter if the accent is a bit ropey in the end? Only if people notice, but it’s bad when they do. Do say: “Whatsa matter you? Why you lookah so sad?” Don’t say: “Maybe just do the accent with your eyes.” • This article was amended on 14 February 2022. An earlier version said Pam &amp; Tommy is broadcast on Netflix; in fact, it is shown on Hulu in the US and Disney+ in the UK.There’s an intriguing touch of Michael Haneke about this refrigerated drama from Ronny Trocker, which begins with a family walking in on burglars at their holiday home. Nothing is stolen, no one is injured; no harm done. But the intrusion disrupts their comfortable lives in ways that are hard to explain: it yanks away the blanket of privilege that keeps them warm and at ease in the world. Human Factors is a film that gets by on intelligent performances and an unnerving, tense mood. Sabine Timoteo is brilliant as Nina, the owner of an advertising agency in Germany with her husband, Jan (Mark Waschke). They have their offices in a converted warehouse, staffed by ambitious-looking millennials. Nina is the creative brains, while workaholic Jan deals with the clients. On the sly, he has agreed to run the election campaign of a controversial populist political party, which looks set to run on an anti-immigration agenda. Nina is enraged by his dishonesty and betrayal: they’ve always vowed not to touch politics. It is Nina who is the main witness to the break-in. The couple have come away for the weekend with their two kids: sulky teenager Emma (Jule Hermann) and younger child Max (Wanja Valentin Kube). As they arrive, a door bangs upstairs and masked men thunder down the stairs into the garden. Could the incident have been staged by activists, some kind of protest against their new client? The film replays the moment of the intrusion from the perspective of each member of the family, jumping backwards and forwards in time, and the camera sticking with the character whose point of view we’re following. So it becomes like a puzzle to solve, though as time went on I wondered about the solution and if perhaps, after all, this is a film slightly lacking in ideas. The suggestion that it’s convenient to blame our problems on outsiders – personally and nationally – is interesting but doesn’t really go anywhere. • Human Factors is available on 17 February on Mubi.Antarctica’s two native flowering plants are spreading rapidly as temperatures warm, according to the first study to show changes in fragile polar ecosystems have accelerated in the past decade. The increase in plants since 2009 has been greater than the previous 50 years combined, coinciding with rapidly rising air temperatures and a reduction in the number of fur seals, according to researchers working on Signy Island in the South Orkney Islands. Populations of Antarctic hairgrass (Deschampsia antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis) have been studied by scientists on the island since 1960. Research found hairgrass spread five times faster between 2009 and 2018 than between 1960 and 2009. For pearlwort, the increase was almost ten times more, according to the paper. In the past decade, summer warming has increased from +0.02C to +0.27C each year, despite strong cooling recorded in 2012. “Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems respond quickly to these climatic inputs,” said lead researcher Prof Nicoletta Cannone, from the University of Insubria in Como, Italy. “I was expecting an increase of these plants but not of this magnitude, we are receiving multiple evidences that a major change is occurring in Antarctica.” The primary driver of change is warming summer air, according to the study, which provides one of the longest records of changes in vegetation in Antarctica. A secondary reason is there are fewer fur seals on the island, which trample on the plants. It is not known why the number of seals has declined but it is likely to be related to changes in food availability and sea conditions. Analysis shows that fur seals influenced changes from 1960 to 2009, while the main driver between 2009 and 2018 was temperature increase. Warming trends are expected to continue, with more ice-free areas created over the coming decades, and scientists say the findings from Signy Island are representative of processes happening in the region more generally. “Our findings support the hypothesis that future warming will trigger significant changes in these fragile Antarctic ecosystems,” researchers wrote in the paper, published in Current Biology. The spread of these species will cause changes in soil acidity, the bacteria and fungi in the soil, and in how organic matter decomposes. Changes in soil chemistry, as well as degradation of permafrost, will cause a cascade of changes, with “consequences on all components of terrestrial ecosystems”, said Cannone. The plants are adapted to a very short growing season and are able to photosynthesise in snowy conditions with air temperatures below 0C. Despite being able to reproduce quickly and in harsh climatic conditions, they are not good at competing with other non-native plants. Although warming may benefit some native species in isolation, it greatly increases the risk of the establishment of non-native species that could outcompete native species and trigger irreversible wildlife loss, researchers warn. In 2018, for example, an invasive grass species called Poa annua – which is often used on golf courses – colonised Signy Island. Cannone said: “The ingression of alien species can induce a dramatic loss of the native biodiversity of Antarctica which required million of years of evolution and survival. Moreover, the vegetation change will imply a domino effect on the whole biota of the terrestrial ecosystems.” During the mid-Pliocene, the Antarctic experienced warming events that allowed the spontaneous migration of species from South America to Antarctica, and the other way around. Current levels of warming could have already triggered such migrations of mosses, lichens, vascular plants and invertebrates, facilitated by human activity – namely increasing levels of tourism – in the Antarctic, scientists warn. Dr Kevin Newsham, a terrestrial ecologist at British Antarctic Survey, who was not involved in the study, said: “The study shows that further increases in populations of these plant species can be expected as Antarctica warms in future decades, leading to a greening of the region, but that there may also be increased risks to ecosystems associated with the establishment of alien plant species.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresAn experienced British diplomat whose body was found almost four months after vanishing from his Hampshire home had been under “extreme stress” working on the sensitive Harry Dunn case and the Covid crisis, an inquest heard. Richard Morris, the former ambassador to Nepal, worked 15-hour shifts six or seven days a week for the Foreign Office and began to suffer from night sweats, worrying that he was going to make a mistake that could land him in prison, the hearing was told. The father-of-three, who had a distinguished 30-year career, felt he could not take more time off, and instead needed to “man up”, the inquest in Winchester heard. Morris, 52, led a team involved in the case of Harry Dunn, the teenage motorcyclist killed in a crash outside the military base RAF Croughton in Northamptonshire. Anne Sacoolas, the American citizen accused of causing Dunn’s death, flew home after the crash, triggering tension between the UK and the US. Morris was then drafted on to a government Covid team. On the morning of 6 May 2020, after making his wife a cup of tea at their country home in the village of Bentley, the diplomat went for a run, leaving behind his mobile phone. When he did not return, a search was launched, but his body was not found until 31 August in woodland at the beauty spot Alice Holt Forest, 2.5 miles from his home. Det Insp Matthew Gillooly, of Hampshire constabulary, who led the search, admitted that an error had been made. On the second day, police searched the area where Morris’ body was later found and officers were just 100 metres from the spot. But they only searched two-thirds of the assigned sector, and so missed Morris. Police did not treat his death as suspicious. Morris, the ambassador to Nepal between 2015 and 2019, was due to take the position of British high commissioner to Fiji in July 2020. He was excited about the role but could not prepare for it because he was pulled into the Dunn and Covid taskforces. His wife, Alison Morris, told the inquest that her husband struggled to adjust to working in London after his return from Nepal. “The job was busy, it was full on,” she said. In January 2020, after a stressful festive period, Morris complained that he had not had time off over Christmas and was not feeling well. His wife said he was told: “There’s a lot of it going around.” She added: “I think it felt to him he was being told to man up and be more resilient. I think that resilience is a core Foreign Office value. Later on he said: ‘If I’m not resilient, they will not send me to Fiji.’” He was assigned to the Covid taskforce in February 2020 and found himself working weekends and 15-hour days. His wife said that from February, he “essentially had no days’ leave”. She continued: “The responsibility of [Covid-19] weighed heavily on Richard and more than once I had to tell Richard he didn’t cause Covid. I can’t remember exactly when the night sweats started, but they were frequent.” In late March, Morris became troubled over public travel guidance he had written. Alison Morris said: “He was extremely stressed and thought this might amount to misconduct in a public office. “The hours got longer and when working from home he didn’t have time to eat with us. He could not sit still and would not watch anything apart from Antiques Roadshow.” The inquest continues.I remember the first time a friend told me that she had been choked without her consent during sex. I was in my early 20s, and it hadn’t been the first time for her – she had also been slapped and had her hair pulled, all by men she had met online – but I was shocked and concerned. “It’s as though he was trying to do what he has seen in porn,” she said. As our 20s progressed, my single friends came to feel that a transactional dating environment only exacerbated the problem: the men they met would watch porn, then “order” a woman on Tinder to act out what they had seen. It felt, by all accounts, mechanistic, depressing and disempowering. I write this in the midst of what is being called a backlash against sex-positive feminism. For more than a decade, millennial women have been looking back at the 90s and early 00s in which we came of age and reflecting on the all-pervasive sexist lad, porn and raunch culture, and the toxicity of the tabloids and women’s magazines. As a result, fourth-wave feminists are ambivalent about pornography and its effects, and this scepticism has coexisted quite peacefully with a desire not to shame women while deconstructing the issues we all face. I say this because Generation Z’s discovery that porn can be damaging is making headlines: some even speak of this as though it is a backlash against millennials, despite it being no real departure from the beliefs of my generation. It’s more a rite of passage that most of us raised in the internet age have been through. Billie Eilish’s comments about porn and its damaging effects are true and righteous, but they are not new. They are the logical culmination of this feminist wave, which you could argue has been embroiled in a long, slow rebound from the postfeminism of the 1990s espoused by Generation X. Much is made of the tension between older, third-wave feminists and millennial feminists (while I realise that it isn’t always useful to divide women into generations, when it comes to waves of feminism it can be elucidating), but this always lets the 1990s postfeminists off the hook. Something I share in common with my (boomer-aged) mother is that both of us wonder what on earth these women were on. These were the women who said that feminism was over, who collaborated with the lads to bring about the heavily sexualised, objectifying, porn-influenced era we grew up in. They were the “cool girl” feminists, always one of the boys, who dismissed any attempt to critique the culture they had formed a part in creating. When we came of age and began to pull apart this hellscape, which included the women’s magazines they wrote for, they slapped us back down to protect their own interests. They could not tolerate us criticising their role in the problem. If I sound angry, I do not mean to. But having sat on the frontlines of feminist discussion before retreating due to exhaustion, exasperation and boredom, I do feel it’s important that my generation’s role in the movement is not erased. Sex-positive feminism was never about giving men a free pass to choke women in bed without their consent. It was about affording women who were sexually active, including sex workers, the respect that they had previously been denied. Look at the body of literature that is being produced by millennial women such as Sally Rooney, Megan Nolan and Raven Leilani, who are all examining rough sex, power dynamics and coercive control. Indeed, such topics are so prevalent – with good reason – that they risk becoming repetitive, but you can hardly argue that we haven’t been trying to get to the bottom of why women are being so regularly subjugated and objectified. Of course, there were Gen X feminists who critiqued porn culture at the time – Ariel Levy and Natasha Walter, for example – and women writers who were adults during that era of feminism who are sceptical of its legacy. In Katherine Angel’s brilliant Tomorrow Sex Will Be Good Again, she writes of the role that postfeminist thinking has played in so-called “consent culture”, how it demands confidence and empowerment where they may be uncertainty and ambivalence and, ironically enough, is contributing to the fact that so many women are experiencing bad sex. “Postfeminism insisted on sexual assertiveness and sex-positivity – on a gleeful pleasure taken in seeing oneself as a subject of desire,” she writes. “A woman who failed to declare her desire noisily and defiantly was falling short of her personhood. She was harking back to a fusty, frigid, feminism …” Angel frames bad sex as an important political and social issue, and, while I’m keen to stress that men can (naturally) play a significant role in bad sex, the failure of 1990s feminism should also not be forgotten. Women of my generation feel enormous solidarity with women in their late teens and 20s now, because we have been through it ourselves (though admittedly without the new horrors offered by Instagram and influencer culture). They might be surprised, given the tone of some of the media coverage (including the claims that we view them as “puriteens”), to realise that, in examining the long-term impacts of porn, they have our support. Now all we have to do work out is how to make women’s sex lives better, together. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnistThe immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has been urged to heed Australia’s “moral obligation” to Afghan nationals fleeing the Taliban by ensuring resettlement places are on top of the existing humanitarian intake. A delegation of faith groups, veterans’ advocates and members of the Afghan diaspora met with Hawke in Canberra on Monday to implore him to ramp up assistance after 20 years of Australian military involvement in Afghanistan. It is understood Hawke did not rule out the option of offering additional places for Afghan nationals. In addition to the request to increase the overall humanitarian intake, the group also argued it was “cruel” for the government to leave Afghan nationals in limbo on temporary protection visas because they had previously arrived in Australia by boat. Hawke announced last month the government would provide “at least 15,000 places for Afghan nationals, through our humanitarian and family visa program over four years”. That “multi-year” figure included 10,000 places for Afghan nationals within Australia’s existing humanitarian program and at least 5,000 visas within the family stream. But the Rev Tim Costello, one of nine members in Monday’s delegation and the executive director of Micah Australia, said the announcement was “mean and tricky” because it did not result in any additional places. Costello said that could be fixed if the government followed the example set by the Abbott government in 2015 when its offer to take 12,000 refugees from the conflict in Syria and Iraq was in addition to the pre-existing humanitarian intake. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The substance of the complaint is that failing to increase the overall global intake means Afghan nationals may, in effect, take the places of individuals from other countries who are also in need of protection. Australia has set an overall limit of 13,750 humanitarian visas for the current financial year. “We can actually open up our hearts and do what Tony Abbott did when he took 12,000 additional Syrians and Iraqis,” Costello said on Monday. “We know that government backbenchers, even some government cabinet ministers, really believe there should be additional places, that this matter isn’t over, and it can be fixed. It should be fixed.” Mariam Veiszadeh, a spokesperson for the Afghanistan-Australian Advocacy Network, said Afghanistan was in “a state of anarchy” and urged Hawke to act. “With the stroke of a pen, it’s that simple – he’s able to save people’s lives,” she said. Veiszadeh said she was hearing from her extended family and other contacts in Afghanistan that the situation “really varies”, but some people with young children were avoiding leaving their homes “out of fear that they could be abducted”. “The way that it’s been put to me is life is not worth living when you don’t know what tomorrow holds, you don’t know what the future of your children holds,” she said. “I get inundated with messages from different people across Afghanistan, who are facing dire situations, and it absolutely breaks my heart.” Afghanistan was a human tragedy, Veiszadeh said, citing Unicef’s estimate that about 1 million children under five were likely to die before the end of 2022. “We have a moral obligation,” Veiszadeh said. “I’ve gotten to the point where I can’t answer phone calls any more when I know they’re coming from Afghanistan, because frankly, I find it really triggering and I don’t know what to say to people.” Veiszadeh said “any bit of hope that we give [people who call seeking help], any glimmer of hope” meant “they’re willing to risk their lives of themselves and their children” to flee the country. As of last month, the Department of Home Affairs had received more than 32,500 applications for the humanitarian program from Afghan nationals on behalf of more than 145,000 individuals. Glen Kolomeitz, a director at GAP Veteran &amp; Legal Services, said he regularly received calls from Australian veterans of the Afghanistan war asking why Australia was not doing more to help the Afghan people. “I’ve had veterans say to me, we’ve got a spare room, we’ve got a holiday house, we’ve got a caravan – send me some Afghan families and they can live with us,” he said. Kolomeitz said the issue was having an effect on the mental health of veterans, who believed it was “painfully obvious that promises weren’t kept”. “We were there for 20 years in that country, 20 years, we cut and run essentially, we left with the rest of the coalition forces, we’ve left that country in a state which we’re seeing now, in a crisis state,” he said. “We owe moral obligation, not just to Afghans who worked for Australian agencies, but to the Afghan people more broadly.” The Australian Christian Lobby’s Wendy Francis said the delegation was also pressing for Afghan nationals who have been in limbo on temporary protection visas for years to be given a pathway to permanent residency. “We’ve got people who are on temporary protection visas, who cannot go back to Afghanistan, we know that,” she said. “It’s cruel actually to keep them still on temporary protection visas as well.” Comment has been sought from Hawke. The delegation also met with Labor shadow minister Andrew Giles, Coalition backbenchers Damian Drum and Russell Broadbent, and independent Rebekha Sharkie.Economists love people getting busy – and not just at work. Population growth is one of the three keystones of economic growth. According to some, demography is (economic) destiny. Women are doing more than their fair share of nurturing a growing a population. In 2020-21 women accounted for nearly 90% of primary parental leave. Yet 91% of organisations do not discriminate between men and women taking parental leave. Source You’d think the economy would give them recognition for this service. Alas, that’s not the case. Motherhood means, for most, a hit to pay and progression. Australian women with one child earn 5% less than those with no child. If you have two or more children, the wage penalty rises to 9%. In the US and UK the numbers vary but the story is the same. This persists in retirement. At last count, the median Australian 65- to 74-year-old-woman had a superannuation balance of $200,000 – 20% less than men of the same age. The gap is likely to be larger for mothers, who have the double whammy of no superannuation contributions while on maternity leave and smaller contributions (blame that wage penalty) on their return. The injury isn’t just financial. About 15% of mothers report experiencing discrimination in relation to performance assessments and career advancement while on or requesting parental leave. On the flipside, men seem to get moderate pay bumps along with fist bumps when they become parents. Estimates range between no impact on their pay and a 2% increase. So, let’s get this straight. Women are 2.5 times more likely to take parental leave than men. Yet there’s a wage premium for being a dad and a wage penalty for being a mum. It doesn’t seem to stack up. Why aren’t new dads more likely to take time off? Some of the reasons are pragmatic. Breastfeeding is difficult (though not impossible) for men. Mums need time to recover from childbirth. It follows that women need to take leave after giving birth. If there’s a choice between maternity and paternity leave for a newborn, maternity leave is prioritised. Others reasons are societal. Mothers are often expected to take time off. Whether a woman is taking too much leave or not enough seems to be a popular water cooler conversation. Fathers – not so much. Patriarchal views still argue that men should be breadwinners, not caregivers. The same views argue that men who spend time with their families are less committed to their work. What really gets me, though, are the financial reasons. Birth mothers of newborn children in Australia are entitled by law to up to 18 weeks of paid leave. Birth fathers? Just two weeks of paid leave. Here we have a law which explicitly discriminates against men on the basis of biological sex. In doing so, the law entrenches old social gender roles and expectations. It also has negative impacts across the board. Paternity leave brings a range of benefits – and not just to dads. Kids report feeling closer to fathers who took paternity leave – even years later. Where couples are married, dad taking paternity leave means a lower probability of divorce. There’s a more equal sharing of household tasks, even years after paternity leave has ended. Yes, providing paid paternity leave would involve some cost to taxpayers. But it would also provide an economic boost. It could be the thing which encourages our next baby boom – and our ticket out of a recession. Normally, an increased fertility rate is economic short-term pain (lower participation rates) for long-term gain (bigger population). Equal paid parental leave could provide the latter while mitigating the former. Perhaps counterintuitively, having paid paternity leave could actually increase the number of hours couples are willing to work while they have young children. Paid paternity leave encourages mothers to go back to work earlier. What’s more, couples who share household tasks more evenly are willing to spend more time on paid work. It also incentivises people to become parents. At a time when population growth seems as elusive as economic growth, this is a pretty good deal. Globally, each woman is having fewer children than ever in recorded history. By 2100, the global population will have plateaued, or even begun to decline. Good for the environment, but not great for economic growth (if GDP was all we cared about). I’m far from the first person to advocate for this. The Workplace Gender Equality Agency has long argued for universal, gender-neutral paid parental leave. More than half of Australia’s largest employers already offer gender-neutral paid parental leave on top of government entitlements. Other countries provide equal paid parental leave for fathers. It’s good for women and men both. With the economic sweetener thrown in, it seems like a no-brainer. • Jessica Mizrahi is an economic consultant and commentatorNew Zealand and Australia have announced they will relax the border rules for vaccinated travellers from later this month to the relief of many who have been separated from family and friends for years. Vaccinated citizens and visa holders travelling to New Zealand from Australia will be able to fly there from 27 February and do 10 days of home quarantine, and those who are in other parts of the world can return on 13 March (and then do 10 days of home quarantine). Meanwhile, Australia will open to all fully vaccinated visa holders, including tourists, on 21 February, with no quarantine required. Four people who have been affected by the countries’ strict border restrictions discuss how it will feel to be reunited with partners, family and friends. ‘My grandmother keeps telling me she’s going to die before she gets to see me’ The opening of Australia’s borders means that Samantha Law, a 30-year-old Australian national living in Kyrgyzstan, will be able to see her family and friends for the first time in two-and-a-half years. “It’s been pretty difficult. I haven’t lived in Australia for a few years now, but you always know that whenever you need to go back, you can,” she says. “I have an elderly grandmother who’s getting frailer and keeps telling me that she’s definitely going to die before she gets to see me again, which is not very nice to hear.” Law, who works in global health international development and has lived in Kyrgyzstan for two years, says she’ll be “trying not to think too much” about all that she’s missed when she returns to New South Wales in March. “It’s going to be a tearful few weeks in March. A number of really good friends have gotten married … [and] also had children. One friend has even had two children,” she says, adding that her younger brother is also now in a “very serious” relationship with a woman she hasn’t met. After seeing her family, the first thing Law plans to do when she’s back in Australia is swim in the ocean. “Kyrgyzstan is the country furthest from the ocean of any country in the world, and … I grew up on the coast of NSW. So once I see my brother and my parents, then it’ll be a swim in the ocean for sure.” ‘It’s been a real challenge’ Francesca Scott, a 30-year-old NHS healthcare assistant in North Tyneside, met her fiancee online at the beginning of the pandemic. As the world locked down in 2020, Scott and New Zealand national Tony Smith, a 37-year-old logistic manager working in Auckland, began video calling every day but weren’t able to meet until months later. Smith went over to England in December 2020 and stayed until March 2021, during which time the couple got engaged. “It was just after he left that I found out I was pregnant,” the 30-year-old says. “It was obviously very difficult because we’d spent all that time in each other’s pockets and then he was gone. At that point we weren’t sure when he was going to be able to come back because the borders are still closed and obviously it costs a lot of money.” The easing of New Zealand’s border rules means Smith’s family will finally be able to meet their daughter-in-law and grandchildren – Scott gave birth to twins last November. Smith has applied for a UK visa and the couple plan to get married in May. “It’s [been] a real test of a relationship, but I feel like we’re almost there. It’s not for the faint-hearted. It’ll be really special the day that he lands back in England and we can be together again.” ‘It’s such a relief’ “I didn’t know at the time that I would be unable to return for more than a year,” says Australian author Alicia Wanstall-Burke, who lives in north-west England and is travelling back to Queensland, Australia in March for a month. Thirty-five-year-old Wanstall-Burke arrived in the UK in January 2021 when she came over to marry her fiance, now husband, Graham. She was hoping to return to see her nine-year-old son during his school holidays in September, and again this January, but due to Covid restrictions she was unable to meet the conditions to travel and couldn’t afford to quarantine. “It’s breaking my heart not seeing him,” she says. “We would normally say how many days it would be till we next see each other but we couldn’t do that because he’d get sad when I wouldn’t come home.” She decided to book her flights before Queensland officially announced the changes. She says it was a “huge risk but it’s such a relief”. “The trauma and anxiety of the pandemic still lingers though,” she adds. “I watch the news waiting for the border to slam shut, or for some sort of insurmountable restrictions to be put in place, reducing flights or complicating pre-travel preparations. I’m over planning everything and I’ve got my rapid antigen test already packed.” ‘The feeling of being cut off from family is hard to describe’ Jon Albrecht in Cornwall hasn’t seen his parents, brother and sister in Nelson, New Zealand since February 2019. “The feeling of being cut off from family is hard to describe,” says the 47-year-old. Albrecht, who works as a rigger, first came to the UK from New Zealand in 1979 as a child with his family. Since then most of them have moved back to New Zealand. “It’s been exhausting,” he says. “I’m really conscious that I’m not the only one in this situation but I think for many people, the whole pandemic has been very difficult.” He hopes to return to New Zealand at some point this year but doesn’t know yet when. “It means I can visit my brother and my elderly parents who are no longer in the best of health. And I want to embrace my sister who I miss greatly. “It’s hard to put it into words but it feels like the end of something. I guess it just feels like going home.”Despite growing up under the tyranny of “no hat, no play”, it wasn’t until my late 20s that I started wearing a hat every time I was in the sun (motivated mostly by the threat of accelerated ageing). To make it fun, I started collecting hats from iconic Australian destinations (Bondi Icebergs, Cottesloe beach, Noosa Heads etc). These hats may be the only thing in my wardrobe that are treated appallingly. They are stained by chlorine, sunscreen and salt. They get left at the bottom of beach bags and backpacks, squished between water bottles, books and towels. Hats should be treated with more care than this, not least because we wear them when braving the elements. But more care does not necessarily mean frequent care, says Hamish McLeod, the store and sales manager for Strand Hatters in Sydney. For fabric and felt hats, a dry clean or hand wash once every six months or so should be enough, unless there are visible dirt, sweat or makeup stains inside it. For those, McLeod says to “use a wet cloth and gently dab the affected areas. But do not wipe”. From there, care instructions vary depending on the kind of hat. Wool hats and caps From fedoras to ascot caps, McLeod says that “wool is a tough one as it quite easily collects different fibres such as hair and dust”. He recommends purchasing a hat brush and brushing your hat after each use, to “take away any dust or any sort of marks that may discolour your hat”. Alternatively, errant fibres can be removed with double-sided sticky tape or a lint roller. If your hat is out of shape, he suggests steaming it with the boiling water from an iron or a kettle to loosen the fibres and remove wrinkles and creases. Sun hats, Panamas and boaters Straw is a particularly delicate fibre, so hats made from it need to be handled with extra care. McLeod says one of the worst things you can do to shaped straw hats, such as a Panama or fedora, is taking them off by grabbing them at the front of the crown. The pressure this places on the pointy ends of the crown can cause the straw to break. Instead, you should always take your hat on and off by the brim. Straw also dries out when it is worn in the sun. McLeod suggests using steam to restore a straw hat’s moisture and prevent future breakages. Cloth caps and bucket hats Most caps and bucket hats are made of cotton, but pay attention to the care instructions on your particular hat, as things like embroidery can impact how they should be washed. McLeod suggests hand-washing caps and bucket hats using a bucket of warm water and a small amount of washing powder. “After using your hands to remove any stains or marks, allow it to soak for 10 to 15 minutes before hanging it up to dry.” If the visor of your cap is out of shape, use steam to soften it before bending it back into shape. Storing hats at home and on the road They may sound old-fashioned, but hat boxes do serve a purpose. They stop your hat collecting dust when you’re not wearing it; alternatively, keeping hats under a plastic cover will do the same job. Wide-brimmed hats should be stored upside-down or on a hat stand to avoid ruining their shape. Outside the home, travelling with hats can be a bit awkward. If you are travelling on an aeroplane, McLeod recommends placing the hat in the bottom of your luggage and building around it. “Fill the inside of the hat with smaller items and stabilise the outside [crown and brim] of the hat with larger items to ensure it cannot be damaged throughout transit.” If you are travelling by train or car, he suggests purchasing a Klipsta hat clip. He says this “accessory allows you to attach your hat to the side or back of your bag or even to the back of your car seat without the hat being affected by its surroundings”. Matching your hat to the weather We may be more likely to reach for a straw hat when the sun is out, but McLeod says they don’t always provide the best protection. Since they are made by weaving long strands of straw, “there is always a chance of having small gaps between each weave, ultimately allowing UV rays to hit your skin”. Alternatively, wool hats have UPF50+, but wool can be too hot to wear in the sun for long periods. If you decide to take a wool hat to the beach, McLeod says you’ll need to be careful of salt marks, as they can react with the dyes and cause discolouration. “If you do get your wool or fur felt hat wet, we advise that you use a cloth or towel with some clean water on it and give it a wipe down to remove any salt crystals.” On the other hand, as long as they are properly cared for afterwards, wool hats can handle the rain really well. “When you take it off, make sure you allow it to dry without damaging the shape,” McLeod says.” He suggests the best way to do this is by placing the hat upside-down on its crown.A social media platform for sex workers with close to half a million users globally has shut down over legal concerns regarding online safety laws and the Australian government’s social media defamation legislation. Switter, which runs on Twitter-replica Mastodon, was set up by an Australian collective of sex workers and technologists, Assembly Four, in 2018 in response to the anti-sex trafficking legislation known as Sesta/Fosta in the United States leading to a number of sites like Backpage shutting down, or platforms banning sex work content. Switter works as a safe space by, and for, sex workers, with little concern that their content or accounts will be censored. On the site, sex workers can find each other, share safety information, find clients and find out legal information or service availability. “There is no fear that we’re going to need to censor ourselves,” Brisbane-based sex worker Sienna Charles told Guardian Australia. “There is no fear that we’re going to be outed.” However, the managers of the site announced on Monday night that they had decided to shut down immediately, telling its more than 420,000 users the raft of “online safety” and defamation laws in the US, UK and Australia made it difficult to keep the platform running. “The recent anti-sex work and anti-LGBTQIA+ legislative changes not only in Australia, but in the UK, US and other jurisdictions have made it impossible for us to appropriately and ethically maintain compliance over 420,690+ users,” the letter states. The UK is working on bringing in an online safety bill this year similar to that passed in Australia last year. One of the concerns that has led to Switter shutting down is that the Online Safety Act regulates adult content online based on definitions of acceptable content which pre-date the internet. Fetish content, for example, must be removed if a complaint is received. Lobby group Digi had raised questions about this before the legislation passed to no avail. Assembly Four said it showed how difficult it was for smaller social media platforms to navigate the new laws. “If big tech with millions of dollars in funding and access to the best talent are confused by these regulations, how did we or any small business stand a chance?” “Due to the constant sexualisation and fetishisation of the LGBTQIA+ existence, the tools that are purported to protect children and young people online are causing more harm through the normalisation of surveillance and censorship.” Another concern leading to the shut down is the prospect of the government’s so-called social media anti-trolling legislation. The legislation, which will make platforms liable for defamation if they do not help to unmask an account making defamatory comments, would place a platform like Switter in the position of potentially having sex workers or their clients’ anonymity removed in a time when they can still face discrimination from banks, housing and other institutions for the work. “If this law passes … then it means that they could be compelled to give up their users’ information and that’s not something [Switter is] prepared to do, or take liability, which is also not something they’re prepared to do, because that’s very expensive,” Charles said. As the Victorian parliament voted last week to decriminalise sex work, online sex workers were finding that laws ostensibly about improving safety online were making it less safe for them to work and communicate, said Jules Kim, the CEO of Scarlet Alliance. “We’re celebrating decriminalisation in Victoria, and on the other hand we’re seeing our presence in the digital spaces shrinking,” she said. “I think that that is a real, major threat to sex workers and our ability to operate and operate independently.” Charles said there were other private forums and groups that sex workers could turn to, but it wasn’t the same level of openness and communication as Switter had, and there was the constant concern that at any point they could be banned from a platform like Twitter or Reddit without notice. “What ends up happening as a result of things like this is that we have to hop platforms a lot and build up our following again,” she said. “And if you’re even a little bit too spicy online, on Twitter, I’ve had my account deleted before, and to build on 22,000-odd [followers] – and now I’m back at 6,000 – I’m really sad about it. “It impacts your income, having to do that kind of thing again and again and again. And removing Switter just means that now we don’t have a safe place.”Governments can’t help themselves when it comes to feeding the media chooks around budget time. With a federal election looming, expect a smörgåsbord. Over the weekend, the Murdoch tabloids delivered front-page froth with news the Morrison government was giving “serious consideration” to halving the beer excise, potentially saving 30-50 cents. Literally, hold my beer. On Monday, a kind of reverse sweetener appeared in the Nine papers, with “increasing concerns within the government” about the potential end of an offset worth as much as $1,080 a year for taxpayers lest its extension stoke inflation. The latter, about the low and middle income tax offset – dubbed “lamington” for its acronym, LMITO – deserves a closer look. What is the lamington? Apart from being a New Zealand dessert purloined by Australians, the lamington, in a fiscal sense, is a temporary tax cut for those earning less than $126,000 a year. Those eligible receive it when they file taxes. As the Grattan Institute noted a year ago, the lamington was meant to be temporary and replaced this year by the so-called stage 2 tax cuts. Richard Denniss, the chief economist at the Australia Institute, says the offset costs the budget about $7bn a year. That sounds like a lot, but it goes to many workers. It compares with the $16bn a year that will mostly go to high-income earners in permanent legislated stage 3 tax cuts from 2024, rising to $30bn by 2030. Another serving of lamingtons? A hint at why the lamington will almost certainly be extended for another year is that it was doubled in the 2019-20 budget from $530 to $1,080. That was the “back in black” budget wheeled out by a desperate Morrison government declaring it had a secured a surplus just prior to winning re-election in May 2019. “We are baking into our system lower taxes,” the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, told ABC RN Breakfast on Monday, adding piously he was “not going to preempt” what his budget would include or exclude next month. Denniss is highly sceptical Frydenberg has any intention to dump the offset, noting how grim post-budget headlines would look if they took money from the many while locking in largesse for the wealthy starting at $9,000 a year in stage 3 tax cuts. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “How do you get big positive news out of this pre-election budget for leaving things the same?” he says. “Presumably you tell everyone they’re about to lose it – and then go and rescue it.” “The idea that Scott Morrison is going to choose fiscal conservatism over a populist cash splash when they’re this far behind in the polls seems quite unlikely.” What about the inflationary effects? A purported reason for not renewing the lamington is that the inflationary hawks at the Reserve Bank are circling. Having that (up to) $1,080 offset for another year would only stoke more spending when consumer prices are starting to heat up, adding to the risk official interest rates will soon rise. Yes, the low and middle earners are more likely to spend that money, but a lot of it would probably go on mortgage repayments rather than goods and services. And if the government was really worried about extra spending, why not avoid dipping into that $16bn honeypot of yet-to-be-announced pre-election splurges? In any case, the RBA governor, Philip Lowe, insists at every turn he’s in no hurry to lift interest rates. Last week, he said he was prepared to watch inflation for “a couple” of quarterly consumer price index “prints”, which takes you out to August at least before the rates button gets pushed. Another serving of lamingtons, in other words, won’t make a difference. Other views Frydenberg, though, wasn’t only talking lamingtons today. He also wanted to highlight analysis “based on unpublished Australian Tax Office data” (reprinted in the Nine papers and repeated on Radio National) that show 5.2m women have enjoyed average tax cuts of $3,130 since the 2018-19 budget. Indeed women under 24 are paying 20% less tax, he says. Cassandra Goldie, the chief executive of the Australian Council of Social Service, said the three-stage tax cuts had been regressive and “claims that young people and women – who mostly have lower incomes – are the main beneficiaries don’t withstand scrutiny”. “The stage 3 tax cuts, which give an extra $180 a week to those with the highest incomes, are especially damaging and inequitable,” Goldie said. These cost $16bn a year, with two-thirds going to men, as they make up that share of the 10-15% of income earners above $120,000 a year. “People on low and modest incomes (and most women) would be better off with an improved income support safety net, lower childcare costs and overdue investment in other essential services,” she said. Labor’s shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, took up the theme of the lamington being on the hitlist. “[W]orking families – millions of them – face a tax hike on the first of July, a few weeks after the next election,” he said, adding that “if Australians want cost-of-living relief, they need Labor’s plans for childcare, and cheaper and cleaner energy, and our plans to get wages growing again.” Adam Bandt, the Greens leader, said a permanent wage rise would be better than a temporary tax cut. “While the Greens haven’t stood in the way of support for low-income earners, people would be better off if we lifted wages, taxed the billionaires, made dental part of Medicare and abolished ‘voluntary’ school fees instead,” he said.One of the RAF’s most senior commanders has been suspended from duty after allegations that he exposed himself to neighbours. Air Marshal Andrew Turner is reported to have apologised to neighbours after they said they saw him nude in a paddock at his home in Oxfordshire. An RAF spokesperson said: “We are aware of a matter involving a RAF officer, which has been subject to a police investigation. The officer has been suspended from duty without prejudice.” Simon Herbert, who lives near Turner, is reported to have said he was concerned for his neighbour’s wellbeing after seeing him outside his house. He contacted Thames Valley police, who started an investigation. The Daily Mail reported that Herbert’s partner and teenage daughter had been left “really upset” after the alleged incident. A detective sergeant is reported to have told Herbert in correspondence: “Mr Turner has accepted the community resolution and the conditions we discussed. Therefore, please expect a written letter of apology to be forthcoming.” However, the family are said to be dissatisfied with the letter, signed with a monogram rather than the air marshal’s name, which they regard as failing to admit the seriousness of his alleged behaviour. A police spokesperson said they were unable to confirm any details. A solicitor for Turner told the Daily Mail the claims were inaccurate and “vexatious”. He said the case had not been prosecuted despite the claims being “the subject of a lengthy police investigation and review by CPS”. Herbert is reported to have said in a witness statement that he was working on a fence when his partner phoned and told him to look into their neighbour’s paddock. He alleged: “I was about 30 metres from Andrew at this point and only had him in my view for a second or so, long enough to realise it was Andrew and he was naked.” He said he was left “wondering if there were any children in the area who may come across Andrew naked”. Herbert added: “Andrew was still in the same corner of his paddock and as I approached I could see his face as he turned towards me and had a look of shock or surprise. I could see that Andrew was fully naked, not even wearing shoes.” The air marshal, whose title is deputy commander capability, has responsibility for key areas of RAF strategy covering human resources, equipment, digital, training and infrastructure. He has served as a helicopter pilot on operational tours in Northern Ireland, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Bosnia and Afghanistan, and commanded the special forces aviation wing. He received an OBE in 2003 and a CBE in 2010. Other roles have included head of RAF public relations in the Ministry of Defence and assistant chief of the defence staff (operations). He was promoted to his current role in 2019 and is also a diversity and inclusion champion.With its beer garden overlooking the ruins of the Roman city of Verulamium, the historic Ye Olde Fighting Cocks pub in St Albans has been pushed to the brink by Covid-19. Two years of on-off lockdown closures, as well as the wider challenges brought on by the pandemic, have taken its toll on a pub that once held a Guinness World Record for the oldest in England. It was announced this month that the pub, which has foundations dating back to 793 and hosted Oliver Cromwell for dinner in the 1600s, had served its last pint. But now its landlord, Christo Tofalli, believes the Ye Olde Fighting Cocks could be given a reprieve, urging regulars and its global fanbase to “watch this space”. “It’s a very fluid situation at the moment, there have been lots of phone calls over the past few weeks with people interested in buying the pub,” he told the Guardian. “The pub was a good business before Covid and we are really working hard to find a prospective buyer. We want to get it done as quickly as possible.” Tofalli said he had been touched by the messages he had received since it was announced the pub was facing closure because of the pandemic. He said: “When I bought it 10 years years ago, it had been derelict for nine months, so to go from that to being one of the best pubs in the country, if not the world, has been an amazing achievement. “We know how special this place is. We connect with our customers and it’s not just the locals, it’s people from all around the world who have been in touch with me. “The messages start expressing great sorrow about the prospect of closure but it’s not long before people start reminiscing and talking about their memories of the place.” He said Ye Olde Fighting Cocks has been operating, in some shape or form, for more than 1,200 years, and he has been told “the past 10 have been the best it has ever seen”. On the pub’s future, he added: “Watch this space. We want to put this to bed in the best possible way and hopefully there will be some news very soon.” The pub’s Facebook page was inundated with support from well-wishers when it was confirmed the company, called Ye Olde Fighting Cocks (YOFC) Ltd, had gone into administration. It is being marketed by the auctioneers JPS Chartered Surveyors, with the deadline for expressions of interest set for Monday. A description reads: “A unique opportunity has arisen to purchase the business and assets of Ye Olde Fighting Cocks, a true piece of English history. Reputedly England’s oldest pub, established in the 8th Century and moved to its current site, a grade II listed building overlooking the picturesque River Ver, in the 1500s.”When the hot young comics from Saturday Night Live spilled over into cinema in the late 1970s, they needed film-makers who could marshal their unruly talents. That task fell to John Landis, Harold Ramis and especially to Ivan Reitman, who has died aged 75. Having produced the off-Broadway National Lampoon show, featuring some of the future SNL stars (John Belushi, Bill Murray, Gilda Radner), Reitman was well placed to launch them on the big screen. He developed and produced Landis’s raucous hit National Lampoon’s Animal House (1978), in which Belushi played the wildest member of a 1960s college fraternity. He also directed Ghostbusters (1984), which combined the tomfoolery of old Abbott and Costello movies with the sort of hip, scornful attitude personified by Murray. Reitman had previously directed the actor in Meatballs (1979), set at a teenagers’ summer camp, and the army comedy Stripes (1981), in which the bumbling US military end up invading Czechoslovakia (the director’s birthplace). High-brow these films were not – one scene in Stripes took place at a topless mud-wrestling contest – but they captured a new generation of comic talents whose carefree irreverence was distinct from the countercultural provocation of Lenny Bruce or the jangling intensity of Richard Pryor. Nowhere was this more evident than in Meatballs, where Murray, as one of the camp’s counsellors, leads his young wards, who are facing a sporting defeat, in chanting, “It just doesn’t matter!” The genius of Ghostbusters lay in combining this comedy movement with cutting-edge special effects and family-friendly entertainment. Ramis and Dan Aykroyd began writing the film in 1981 as a vehicle for Belushi. When he died of a drug overdose the following year, Ramis and Aykroyd took the script to Reitman, who pointed out the budgetary obstacles in their universe-hopping, time-travelling adventure, and encouraged them to relocate it to present-day New York instead. Murray filled Belushi’s role as the most sardonic of a quartet of parapsychologists turned ghost hunters, and the film earned almost $300m worldwide, spawning an animated television series as well as a sequel and several spin-off movies. Reitman directed Ghostbusters II (1989) and produced the others, including the recent Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021), which was directed by his son, Jason. He was born in Komárno, in what is now Slovakia: his father, Ladislav, owned a vinegar factory and had been part of the Czechoslovak resistance during the second world war; his mother, Klara, had survived Auschwitz. To escape the postwar communist regime, they fled to Vienna in the hold of a barge when Ivan was four, eventually reaching relatives in Toronto. Ladislav started his own dry-cleaning business in the city. Ivan was educated at McMaster University, in Hamilton, Ontario, where he made his first short films and met many of the future stars of Canadian comedy, including Rick Moranis, who later starred in Ghostbusters. He directed the comedy Foxy Lady (1971) and the horror spoof Cannibal Girls (1973). He also co-founded the Toronto Film Co-op with the director David Cronenberg, and was among the producers of Cronenberg’s early horror films, Shivers (1975) and Rabid (1977). His first encounter with Murray during the National Lampoon stage rehearsals in 1975 was an awkward one, as he told the Guardian last year: “I made the mistake of thinking I could be creatively helpful and had the temerity to say: ‘Hey, why don’t you …’ And Bill immediately came over and put his arm around me, took me over to where the coats were hanging, grabbed my scarf, wrapped it dangerously tightly around my neck and said: ‘Hey man, thank you for dropping in.’ He ushered me out of the room without any force, but he had force within him.” Reitman learned how to harness and shape improvisatory performances on film. “There’s a moment when the actors can say anything they want,” he said in 1993, “and then, part of the fun for me as a director is to take that raw work and just structure it and rework it and make it conform to the character work and to the plot, which is evolving as well. It’s a way of being a co-writer of a movie as it’s being shot. But it doesn’t allow for the same kind of focused direction and polished style that leads to much recognition for the creator of the film.” The suspicion that he had not been given his proper due was one with which he wrestled throughout his life. “With comedy, people tend to think that you just get some funny guys in a room, turn the camera on and ‘Boom!’ whereas I like to think I had something to do with it,” he said in 2001. “It’s more than just organisation, you know. It’s a perspective and a tone that I applied judiciously.” Later movies, such as the humdrum caper Legal Eagles (1986), starring Robert Redford, rarely met the same standards of quality control. One exception was the witty and likable Dave (1993), with Kevin Kline as both the US president and the everyman lookalike who replaces him in the White House when he falls ill. Sigourney Weaver (who had starred in the first two Ghostbusters films), Frank Langella and Ben Kingsley rounded out Reitman’s most illustrious cast. The director could also be credited, or perhaps blamed, with helping to reinvent the action hero Arnold Schwarzenegger as a comedy star. (The actor had approached him and said: “You’re that Ghostbusters guy. I could be a Ghostbuster.”) Their first two collaborations – Twins (1988), in which Schwarzenegger and the physically dissimilar Danny DeVito played long-lost siblings, and Kindergarten Cop (1990) – were popular. Junior (1994), in which Schwarzenegger fell pregnant, was not. “Young men were pissed off that I had taken this macho icon and turned him on his head,” the director said. “I had crossed the line.” Fathers’ Day (1997), with Robin Williams and Billy Crystal, and the science-fiction comedy Evolution (2001) also failed to recapture his earlier magic. His last directing credit was on Draft Day (2014), a sports drama starring Kevin Costner. He is survived by his wife, the actor and director Geneviève Robert, and by their children, Jason, Catherine and Caroline. • Ivan Reitman, film director and producer, born 27 October 1946; died 12 February 2022Florence residents are being asked to pay the utility bills of elderly people living alone and struggling to make ends meet as the city’s leaders seek to shield the most vulnerable from soaring energy costs. The “adopt a bill” initiative begins in the next few days and comes as the social implications of a more than 50% hike in gas and electricity bills in Italy this winter start to manifest. “The social impact is very strong as we’re facing huge increases in bills,” Dario Nardella, the mayor of Florence, told the Guardian. “We’ve received many calls and letters from people who are in great difficulty.” About 27.6% of Florence’s population is over the age of 65, a number that has increased in recent years, with between 30,000 and 33,000 of pensioners living alone. “And many are living below the poverty line, trying to survive off €9,000 (£7,500) a year,” added Nardella. “We have a list of all the people who are enrolled with the social services, and we can’t succeed in helping them all, as much as we will try to, as the council has also been hit by the high energy costs.” Sara Funaro, Florence’s welfare councillor, said the council had 4,000 to 6,000 older people on its social services records, although she estimated the number of those in economic strife could now be higher. “People who might have usually been able to manage, or who had some support, maybe from family, can’t do it any more,” she said. “From their pension they have to pay for rent, food and now these very high bills. We need to give them some serenity.” The donations will be collected online by the Montedomini Foundation, which for decades has assisted elderly people in Florence, and citizens can give as much as they can afford. Since news of the initiative was published by La Repubblica on Sunday, Montedomini has received dozens of messages from individuals and companies wanting to donate. “It’s very impressive,” said Nardella. “The Florentines, when it comes to solidarity, are very responsive.” Florence was among the major Italian cities that last week switched off the lights at famous monuments in a symbolic protest against high electricity costs, which are leaving many of them struggling to pay the bills for town halls and public buildings. ANCI, the association of Italian municipalities, estimates that bills will increase by at least €550m for local councils, out of a total annual electricity expenditure of €1.6bn-€1.8bn. Nardella said Florence had set aside €7.5m from its 2022 budget for the additional energy costs. The Italian government has endeavoured to ease the burden of gas and electricity bills on families and businesses by so far enacting €5.5bn worth of support measures. The prime minister, Mario Draghi, said last week that the government was preparing a further “far-reaching intervention”.Here’s a roundup of the key developments from the day: Boris Johnson has said the situation in Ukraine is “very, very dangerous” and urged Vladimir Putin to step back from “the edge of a precipice”. The prime minister said the evidence was “pretty clear” that Russia was planning an invasion. Russia’s ambassador to the EU has said Moscow would be within its rights to launch a “counterattack” if it felt it needed to protect Russian citizens living in eastern Ukraine. The comments in an interview with the Guardian will do little to calm fears of a major Russian assault on Ukraine, given one of the key scenarios suggested by western intelligence was Russia launching a “false-flag” operation to provide a pretext for invasion. A Russian attack on Ukraine could arrive with “no notice”, the armed forces minister has warned. Bombs could hit Ukraine within minutes of Vladimir Putin giving the order, James Heappey said during an interview on Sky News. Boris Johnson will travel to Europe later this week as part of intensive diplomatic efforts to bring the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, “back from the brink” of war in Ukraine. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, and foreign secretary, Liz Truss, are also due to take part in meetings with international counterparts to discuss the crisis, although there were acknowledgements in Whitehall the diplomacy may prove futile if the Kremlin is set on war. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a joint press conference following their talks in Kyiv earlier today. They stressed the seriousness of the situation as diplomatic talks continue to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Boris Johnson cut short his UK tour on Monday to return to London as western leaders voiced concerns a Russian invasion of Ukraine could happen imminently, and Liz Truss convened a Cobra meeting to discuss the UK’s consular response. Vladimir Putin could launch an invasion of Ukraine “almost immediately”, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has warned after chairing a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee. Truss repeated a call for Britons to leave Ukraine because of the threat of war. Families bereaved by Covid want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group fears the current arrangement, where Johnson has a final say over inquiry topics, could allow him to water down examination of his own conduct and that of senior officials. UK ministers and the Scottish government have reached a deal over proposed freeports in Scotland, after months of disagreement over what No 10 has billed as one of the main economic benefits of Brexit. The Scottish government had resisted the idea of freeports – specific areas that offer tax breaks and other incentives to investors – which are intended to revitalise deprived areas but have been accused of encouraging tax avoidance and lower regulation. Keir Starmer has confirmed he received death threats following Boris Johnson’s false claim that he failed to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile. The Labour leader said the prime minister’s slur had “fed into” a “rightwing conspiracy theory”, and this had caused “difficulty”. Thanks so much for joining me today and for all your tweets, emails and comments below the line. Sorry I couldn’t reply to everyone. We’re closing this blog but I’ll be back again tomorrow and we have some other liveblogs which are still live. You can follow our liveblog focused on the Ukraine crisis here: We also have a global coronavirus blog still live here: Russia’s ambassador to the EU has said Moscow would be within its rights to launch a “counterattack” if it felt it needed to protect Russian citizens living in eastern Ukraine. The comments in an interview with the Guardian will do little to calm fears of a major Russian assault on Ukraine, given one of the key scenarios suggested by western intelligence was Russia launching a “false-flag” operation to provide a pretext for invasion. Vladimir Chizhov, who has represented Russia in Brussels since 2005, said: We will not invade Ukraine unless we are provoked to do that. If the Ukrainians launch an attack against Russia, you shouldn’t be surprised if we counterattack. Or, if they start blatantly killing Russian citizens anywhere – Donbas or wherever. Donbas is the region of eastern Ukraine where the Kremlin has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014. It has also, in recent years, handed out hundreds of thousands of Russian passports to residents of two so-called “people’s republics”, which are no longer controlled by Kyiv. More than 14,000 people have been killed in the conflict since 2014. Russia has always denied being a party to the conflict despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Chizhov described claims Russian troops were already in the Donbas region as a “lie” but warned that a sudden escalation of the conflict there, or a Ukrainian “provocation”, could precipitate action by the Kremlin. What I mean by provocation is that they may stage an incident against the self-proclaimed Donbas republics, provoking them, and then hitting them with all their might, thus provoking Russia to react in order to avoid humanitarian catastrophe on its borders. The US government has claimed to have evidence that Moscow is planning just the kind of provocation Chizhov said Kyiv could launch. US officials went public last month with claims they had evidence of a plan to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack. With an estimated 145,000 Russian troops on the border with Ukraine, intelligence officials in the US said over the weekend that Russia had accelerated plans for an invasion and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday. Read more from my colleagues Daniel Boffey in Brussels and Shaun Walker in Kyiv here: Senior figures in climate diplomacy, including the key architect of the Paris climate agreement, have urged the UK government to maintain its commitments to climate action, amid escalating attacks intended to generate a “culture war” on the net zero target. Laurence Tubiana, the French diplomat who crafted the 2015 Paris agreement, now chief executive of the European Climate Foundation, said: “We are not happy, and we are crossing our fingers [that the UK will reaffirm its net zero commitment]. It’s very important that the UK keeps this direction of travel.” She and other international observers are increasingly worried that the rows over net zero within the UK government, which have seen the Net Zero Scrutiny Group linking the cost-of-living crisis to the carbon reduction agenda, will undermine the progress made last year at the Cop26 UN climate talks. The UK will continue to lead the talks until Egypt takes over at the next summit, Cop27, this November. British leadership will be essential to the success of Cop27, as countries must use the next eight months to revise their national emissions-cutting plans, known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs), as they agreed to do at Glasgow. But British diplomats will be hamstrung if rows at home over net zero overshadow their efforts, and if support from key cabinet ministers – including the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who has barely mentioned Cop26 although it was the biggest diplomatic event on British soil since the second world war – continues to be lukewarm or nonexistent. Read more here: Boris Johnson cut short his UK tour on Monday to return to London as western leaders voiced concerns a Russian invasion of Ukraine could happen imminently, and Liz Truss convened a Cobra meeting to discuss the UK’s consular response. The foreign secretary will consider whether to change advice to UK diplomats in the country, after the Foreign Office issued new guidance on Friday advising British citizens in Ukraine to leave immediately while commercial flights are still available. No 10 said Johnson would receive an intelligence briefing on his return to London, having been due to visit Cumbria, and will convene another full Cobra meeting on Tuesday. Speaking on a visit to Scotland, Johnson said he would be making immense diplomatic efforts over the coming days including liaising with the US president, Joe Biden. He said that Ukraine’s future membership of Nato could not be “bargained away” as part of western leaders’ efforts. “I think it’s very important that we have a conversation, but what we can’t do is trade away the sovereign rights of the Ukrainians who aspire to Nato membership,” he said. Read the full story: Liz Truss has defended her decision to travel to Moscow to meet her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. The meeting concluded with a testy press conference and claims that the UK foreign secretary had confused two areas of Russia with parts of Ukraine. Truss told reporters: “I went to Russia to deliver a very clear message, which is that it’s Russia who is the aggressor, they have 100,000 troops on the Ukrainian border and if they stage an incursion into Ukraine, that would have a damaging effect on the Russian people and the Russian government. “Of course, the Russians didn’t like what I had to say but I say it nevertheless. “And I want them to desist and I want them to be aware that there will be severe costs of an invasion.” Liz Truss has claimed Germany had been “clear” that the Nord Stream 2 pipeline would not go ahead if Russia invaded Ukraine. The US president, Joe Biden, has said the Russia-Germany pipeline, which has been built but is not yet operating, would be stopped if there was an invasion but the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has been less explicit about the situation. Truss said: The Germans, and indeed the Americans, have been very clear that Nord Stream 2 would not go ahead in the event of a Russian incursion on Ukraine. The prime minister is right, we do need to reduce dependence on Russian gas in Europe and find alternative sources. Russian oligarchs would be targeted with “severe” sanctions if Russia invaded Ukraine, she said. The foreign secretary said she still hoped for a diplomatic solution, telling reporters: “That is why the prime minister and I are travelling around Europe this week, that is why we are working to persuade the Russians to remove their troops from the border, because a war would be disastrous.” But she added: We are very clear that Russia is the aggressor in this situation. They have 100,000 troops lined up on the Ukrainian borders. They need to de-escalate because it will be a cost to Russia if they invade Ukraine, both in terms of the cost of a long-running war, but also the sanctions that we would impose, which would be severe, and would target oligarchs and it would target companies across Russia. Vladimir Putin could launch an invasion of Ukraine “almost immediately”, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has warned after chairing a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee. Truss repeated a call for Britons to leave Ukraine because of the threat of war, PA Media reported. We are fully aware that there could be a Russian invasion almost immediately. That is why British citizens do need to leave Ukraine but we are also pursuing the path of diplomacy and de-escalation. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a joint press conference following their talks in Kyiv earlier today. They stressed the seriousness of the situation as diplomatic talks continue to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. The German chancellor said Germany stands closely by Ukraine’s side and is impressed with the country’s democratic movement. Scholz says “no other country has supported Ukraine as much financially as Germany”, and has just announced that €150m will be paid out to Ukraine with immediate effect, with a new credit of another €150m. He says Germany has been training Ukrainian soldiers and treating injured civilians, and that “the sovereignty and territorial independence of Ukraine are non-negotiable”. Scholz has promised to emphasise the consequences of an invasion when he is in Moscow tomorrow: If Russia again violates the territorial integrity of Ukraine, we will know what to do … There’s one central challenge: to de-escalate the situation and for troops to draw back. Zelenskiy, meanwhile, said they had spoken about sanctions and the importance of preventative measures and added that “Ukraine’s security is the security of all of Europe”. Here’s Boris Johnson’s response when asked about the death threats Keir Starmer has been getting after the prime minister falsely accused him of failing to prosecute Savile while he was director of public prosecutions. He doesn’t seem to be taking the issue too seriously. My colleague Dan Sabbagh, the Guardian’s defence and security editor, has tweeted some key questions on the Ukraine/Russia crisis. The prime minister condemns death threats received by Keir Starmer over the Jimmy Savile row, Downing Street has said. Starmer said on Monday that Boris Johnson’s claims he failed to prosecute Savile while he was director of public prosecutions had “fed into” a “rightwing conspiracy theory”, and this had caused “difficulty”. The Labour leader confirmed he received death threats in the wake of the jibe. Asked if Johnson condemned the threats, the prime minister’s official spokesman said: “Yes.” He added: “Any sort of death threats to politicians are never acceptable.” Downing Street said Boris Johnson has no role in the appointment of the next Metropolitan police commissioner. The prime minister’s official spokesman said: As (you’ll) be aware, he doesn’t have a role in this appointment. The commissioner is appointed by Her Majesty on recommendation by the home secretary, who has a statutory duty to give regard to the views of the mayor of London. Pressed on whether there was any situation in which the prime minister might offer “advice or counsel” on the matter, the spokesman said: He doesn’t have a role in the appointment, you would expect the prime minister to be notified of the home secretary’s decision but beyond that he doesn’t have a role. Downing Street said British nationals should not expect a “military airlift” from Ukraine. The PM’s official spokesman said: British nationals should leave the Ukraine via commercial means and there are still flights available. They should not expect a military airlift from the country. Downing Street said there has been “no sign” Russia will “back down” amid the crisis on the Ukrainian border. The PM’s official spokesman said: It’s certainly true that we have seen no sign so far that Russia will back down. There are more than 130,000 Russian troops on the border with the Ukraine and we are gravely concerned. But we will continue to explore every possible avenue to talk Russia back from this path. Parliament could be recalled if Russia invades Ukraine this week, the spokesman said. Asked if this was a possibility, the PM’s official spokesman said: While I wouldn’t get into a hypothetical, obviously we would discuss that with the Speaker – and in that situation you would expect that the prime minister would want parliament to be updated and for it to have its say. He said such discussions with the speaker had not yet taken place. Downing Street said the prime minister’s responses to his police questionnaire would not be made public. On whether Boris Johnson had returned his questionnaire yet, the PM’s official spokesman said: As we said on Friday, we will respond as required. As you know, I think the Met made clear that that was in seven days, so we will comply with that requirement. Asked if the responses would be made public, the spokesman said: “No.” On today’s Cobra meeting, a No 10 spokesman said: This afternoon the foreign secretary will chair a (Cobra) meeting to discuss the consular response to the crisis in Ukraine following Friday’s update to travel advice. The prime minister will receive a security briefing from his intelligence chiefs today. Tomorrow the prime minister will chair a full meeting of (Cobra) to discuss the UK’s response to the current situation. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, will chair a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee on Monday to discuss the consular response to the Ukraine crisis, it has been announced. The prime minister will cut short a trip to Cumbria in light of the situation in Ukraine, it has just been announced. Boris Johnson will not stay overnight in the region, instead returning to Downing Street, No 10 said. Downing Street said it did not order the defence secretary to cancel his holiday. It was reported over the weekend that the “worsening situation” in Ukraine caused Ben Wallace, who has warned an attack is “highly likely”, to leave a family holiday in Europe early on Sunday, having set off a day earlier. Asked if No 10 ordered him to cancel his holiday, the PM’s official spokesman said: “No.” Pressed on why Wallace deemed it OK to take the trip in the first place, the PM’s spokesman said: I think this is a fast-moving situation. I think he’s obviously kept that position under review and made the decision to cut short that holiday, which I understand had been long-planned. On the foreign secretary’s trip to Moscow last week, Downing Street said “no one was under any illusions about what can be achieved in a single meeting”. The PM’s official spokesman said It’s an important opportunity to present our understanding of the situation and to hear directly from the Russians on their position as well. We will continue always to explore all opportunities to take a diplomatic path and we stand ready to have further discussions with our Russian counterparts at all levels in the interest of de-escalating this crisis. I think no one was under any illusions about what can be achieved in a single meeting. But it’s crucial that we take all these opportunities and continue to put forward this message about how further aggression will be responded to, so Russia can be in no doubt about our position and [the] position of our Nato allies. Asked if he would would be travelling to Moscow to negotiate with Vladimir Putin, Boris Johnson said: I’m going to be doing everything I can to help the diplomatic process. I’ll be talking to various leaders, including Joe Biden, very soon. He also said that Ukraine’s future membership of Nato could not be “bargained away” as he stressed the importance of continuing talks. Johnson told reporters: I think it’s very important that we have a conversation, but what we can’t do is trade away the sovereign rights of the Ukrainians who aspire to Nato membership. That’s something that was a massive gain for our world. If you remember what happened in 1990, you had a Europe whole and free, countries could decide their own futures. We can’t bargain that away. It’s for the Ukrainian people. Boris Johnson said Vladimir Putin needed to understand the economic and political consequences if he launched an invasion of Ukraine. He said Europe needed to cuts its reliance on Russian hydrocarbons – including the Nord Stream pipelines. Speaking to reporters in Scotland, the prime minister said the world needed “to learn the lesson of 2014”, when not enough was done to move away from Russian gas and oil after the Russian activity in eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea. What I think all European countries need to do now is get Nord Stream out of the bloodstream. Yank out that that hypodermic drip feed of Russian hydrocarbons that is keeping so many European economies going. We need to find alternative sources of energy ... and get ready to impose some very, very severe economic consequences on Russia. Boris Johnson has said the situation in Ukraine is “very, very dangerous” and urged Vladimir Putin to step back from “the edge of a precipice”. The prime minister said the evidence was “pretty clear” that Russia was planning an invasion. There were troops massing on the Ukrainian border and “all sorts of other signs that show that there are serious preparations” going on, he added. On a visit to Scotland, Johnson said: This is a very, very dangerous, difficult situation, we are on the edge of a precipice but there is still time for president [Vladimir] Putin to step back. He called for more dialogue and urged Russia to avoid a “disastrous” invasion. Keir Starmer has confirmed he received death threats following Boris Johnson’s false claim that he failed to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile. The Labour leader said the prime minister’s slur had “fed into” a “rightwing conspiracy theory”, and this had caused “difficulty”. But he said he would rather not talk about the matter because he did not want his young children to hear “too much” of what may be said about him. It comes after police launched an investigation into online death threats against the Labour leader in the wake of the PM’s jibe in the House of Commons. Asked if he had received such threats after Johnson’s comments, Starmer said: “Yes. I do not like talking about this because I have got young children.” He told BBC Radio Newcastle: It’s very important for me to say that what the prime minister said was wrong, it was very wrong. He knew exactly what he was doing. There has been a rightwing conspiracy theory for some time that’s a complete fabrication. He fed into that, and that has caused difficulty, but my preference, if I may, is not to talk about that because, as I say, I have got young children and I don’t particularly want them to hear too much of what may or may not be said about me. Parliament being recalled may offer an “opportunity” for parliamentarians to show the UK’s resolve in opposing Russia, a minister has said. When asked if he could guarantee whether or not parliament would be recalled this week, the armed forces minister James Heappey told BBC Breakfast: Well, I mean, that is a matter for the speaker, the prime minister and the leaders of the opposition parties. I’ve got to be honest on that, I think that you know, if you consider what the UK is doing in all of this, parliament being recalled may offer an opportunity for parliamentarians to show the UK’s resolve in opposing what might happen or to give it support to the diplomatic efforts. We want to be clear that if Russia were to cross the border into Ukraine, we’re not then entering a period of kind of febrile, tactical responses to Russian activity. We’re entering into a period of sustained, strategic competition with Russia, in which we need to make sure that Putin’s wider aims beyond any territorial aim he may have in Ukraine, but his wider aims about Russia’s role in the world, his wider aims around constraining Nato, that he fails to achieve those and that Nato shows its resolve within its own borders. The president of Estonia, Alar Karis, has agreed that “probably at the moment” it would be unwise or inflammatory to place Nato troops in Ukraine, but added that Estonia had given the country some military support. Karis said the situation between Russia and Ukraine was “extremely serious and tensions are very high”, adding that an invasion of Ukraine could have an impact on Europe, too. “We have given some missiles to Ukraine and so have some other countries, so this is some kind of military help we are doing at the moment,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He said a Nato-enforced no-fly zone over Ukraine could be helpful, too, adding: Any means of what we are doing now might be helpful, as well as more and more diplomats and politicians from different countries going to Ukraine in political support. So this is also important, not only military support. Asked if he thinks that is inflammatory, he said: I think, from a Russian perspective, everything is inflammatory. They look (at things) in a different way, as we’ve heard from previous discussions. Logic doesn’t work and doesn’t apply when Russia is concerned. He added that if Ukraine wants to join Nato, the organisation has an “open door policy” and it is up to the nation and Nato to decide if a country should be admitted as a member. Boris Johnson will not meet the leader of the Scottish Conservatives as he travels north to promote his levelling-up agenda. The prime minister is in Scotland on Monday, to announce an agreement with the Scottish government on the plan to create new green freeports. But with Douglas Ross, the leader of the Scottish Tories, among those in the party who have called for Johnson to quit after lockdown parties in Downing Street, there will be no meeting between him and Johnson. The SNP Westminster leader, Ian Blackford, said the visit north should be Johnson’s “farewell tour”. Blackford told Sky News: This is prime minister who is not going to meet his own Scottish Conservative leader, even the Scottish Conservatives want Boris Johnson to go. I hope this is his farewell tour, he is a man who is deeply unpopular up here. More than 75% of Scots think he should resign and I think people right up and down these islands recognise that this is a prime minister who no longer has moral authority. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has called for tougher sanctions for Russia over the Ukraine crisis. Speaking in Sunderland, he said: I would like to see tougher sanctions. I’d like that threat to be very real because let’s see this for what it is. It’s Russian aggression. So, I would say to the government go further on sanctions. I will say this: Russia wants to see our allies divided, it wants to see division in the United Kingdom, and we are not going to divide and, therefore, we support the government in what it’s doing. We support our allies and the sovereignty of Ukraine but, yes, those sanctions should go further. Boris Johnson will travel to Europe later this week as part of intensive diplomatic efforts to bring the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, “back from the brink” of war in Ukraine. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, and foreign secretary, Liz Truss, are also due to take part in meetings with international counterparts to discuss the crisis, although there were acknowledgements in Whitehall the diplomacy may prove futile if the Kremlin is set on war, PA news reports. The diplomatic activity came as the UK stepped up warnings for Britons to evacuate from Ukraine, with a defence minister suggesting missiles would start raining down on the country within minutes of Putin deciding to launch an invasion. Downing Street conceded Moscow could be planning to invade “at any moment” but that the prime minister would hold talks with world leaders before a trip to Europe during this week’s “window of opportunity” for de-escalation. Johnson, who is receiving daily intelligence briefings from security chiefs, was understood to be working with allies to provide further defensive and economic support to Kyiv, with an announcement touted for the coming days. A Downing Street spokesman said: The prime minister will continue to work tirelessly alongside our allies to get Russia to step back from the brink. The Conservative chairman of the defence select committee has claimed “we have no leverage” over Russia and “there is no co-ordination between what the west is actually doing”. Speaking on LBC, Tobias Ellwood said: Putin is aligning Russia towards China. So, any sanctions that we threaten absolutely plays into his own strategy. That’s my point. We don’t have a strategy and the final one has to do with dialogue. You know, Putin naturally craves the international spotlight and we’re actually running around him and he’s enjoying this. We have no leverage, we have no collective effort. There’s no co-ordination between what the west is actually doing. There’s the last point that we hide behind the fact that Ukraine is not a member of Nato. Well, Libya wasn’t a member of Nato and we stepped in there to avoid a bloodbath in Benghazi. Bosnia wasn’t a member of Nato. Kosovo is not a member of Nato. This idea that there’s no treaty for us to lean on, surely we have a commitment to freedom to supporting European democracy. The MP and former soldier added: “This is exactly the language of somebody who wants just to appease your actual aggressor. We’ve got this completely wrong.” UK ministers and the Scottish government have reached a deal over proposed freeports in Scotland, after months of disagreement over what No 10 has billed as one of the main economic benefits of Brexit. The Scottish government had resisted the idea of freeports – specific areas that offer tax breaks and other incentives to investors – which are intended to revitalise deprived areas but have been accused of encouraging tax avoidance and lower regulation. Scottish ministers instead proposed the idea of green ports, based around low-emission industries and fair work practices. The deal appears to follow this model, but with the compromise name of “green freeports”. The plan proposed two green freeports, which can be rail or air hubs as well as seaports. They can apply alongside other local businesses, as well as the council and other public bodies. A bidding process for the two locations will run from this spring until summer, with the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, which is leading the process, saying it hopes the sites will be running by spring next year. Read more here: Europe is closer to war than at any point over the past 70 years, a UK government minister has warned, as Russian troops amass on the borders of Ukraine and western leaders warn that an invasion could take place early this week. The armed forces minister James Heappey told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he feared “we are closer than we’ve been on this continent” to war “for 70 years”. He said: There’s 130,000 Russian troops around the borders of Ukraine, thousands more on amphibious shipping in the Black Sea and the Azov Sea. All of the combat enablers are in place and my fear is that if all of this was just about a show to win leverage in diplomacy that doesn’t require the logistics, the fuel, the medical supplies, the bridging assets, the unglamorous stuff that actually makes an invasion force credible, but doesn’t attract headlines. Yet all of that is now in place too. Western leaders are mounting a final effort to negotiate diplomatic solutions after US intelligence said an attack could be imminent. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv for talks with Ukrainian officials and Boris Johnson said he would hold further talks with world leaders to bring Russia “back from the brink” of war. His office did not say which world leaders Johnson was hoping to talk to or where he planned to travel, but it is understood he is keen to engage with Nordic and Baltic countries. The Foreign Office has asked British citizens to leave the country while roads are still open and commercial airlines are still flying. Heappey said there was “real urgency” to ongoing negotiations. Read the full story here: James Heappey has said the UK government does not believe that suggestions of Ukraine giving up its goal of Nato membership is now official policy. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK Vadym Prystaiko told BBC Radio 5 that the country would, due to threats and blackmail, consider “serious concessions” to avoid war with Russia. The armed forces minister disagreed that he believed that was now official policy and told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: I think what the British government has a position on is Ukraine sovereignty and, therefore, their right to choose which alliances they want to be part of. Now, if Ukraine makes a sovereign decision that it doesn’t want to be a part of Nato, we respect that, there are plenty of other countries in Europe who have also made that judgment and with whom we have good relations. Similarly, as the course of the diplomatic negotiations has gone on, we’ve been clear that we wouldn’t support any effort that rule out the Ukrainian membership of Nato. This is their sovereign right and that’s what we respect. Asked if it would be helpful for them not to make that commitment, Heappey added: “It would be a judgment entirely for them and we would support them either way.” Families bereaved by Covid want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group fears the current arrangement, where Johnson has a final say over inquiry topics, could allow him to water down examination of how his own conduct and that of senior officials may have undermined public trust in infection control measures that the bereaved say cost lives. The group, which represents more than 6,000 families, is calling on the prime minister to commit to accepting terms of reference presented by the chair to the inquiry, Lady Hallett, after a public consultation. Under the Inquiries Act it is for the minister in formal charge to set the terms of reference, in this case the prime minister. “It’s becoming increasingly clear that it’s not good enough for him to just take the chair’s recommendations for the terms of reference as advice and he needs to commit to implementing them in full,” said Hannah Brady, a member of the bereaved group. “The fact his office is under police investigation for breaching the rules shows he is compromised and cannot be allowed to have a final say on what the inquiry looks into.” More than 159,000 people in the UK have died within 28 days of a positive Covid test and more than 180,000 had Covid on their death certificates. The call for control over the inquiry’s terms of reference to be handed to Hallett was backed by the Labour party. “This inquiry is one of the most important in living history yet it is being supervised by a government paralysed by total chaos,” said Fleur Anderson, the shadow paymaster general. “If the prime minister had any respect for the bereaved families he would accept and implement the chair’s recommendations in full, not half-heartedly or under advisement. We cannot allow an administration currently under police investigation to mark its own homework on how it handled the pandemic.” Read the full story here: A Russian attack on Ukraine could arrive with “no notice”, the armed forces minister has warned. Bombs could hit Ukraine within minutes of Vladimir Putin giving the order, James Heappey said during an interview on Sky News. He said: My fear is it is very imminent, that’s not to say it’s definitely going to happen. This is a warning because minutes after Putin gives the order, missiles and bombs could be landing on Ukrainian cities. On Friday, all Britons were told to leave Ukraine immediately. Heappey explains why the advice changed so abruptly: We’ve seen now that there’s 130,000 combat troops around Ukraine’s land borders. There’s thousands more on amphibious shipping in the Black Sea. Russia has concentrated artillery missile systems and combat air in the area. And, perhaps more ominously, although it grabs less headlines, all of the combat enablers, the logistics, the fuel, the medical supplies, the bridging assets, are all also now in place. So, the reason that the travel advice changed on Friday and the urgency of the messaging since is that the attack could effectively now happen with no notice. Welcome to today’s Politics Liveblog. I’m Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking the lead today. You can contact me on Twitter (@Nicola_Slawson) or via email (nicola.slawson@nicolaslawson.co.uk) if you have any questions or think I’m missing something. You can also check out our global coronavirus blog here:The Crown Prosecution Service has launched a high court challenge to the decision by a judge last year to let the Euston tunnellers walk free after their trial. The highly unusual move, which seeks a judicial review of the decision to dismiss charges against six HS2 protesters who spent a month in tunnel in front of Euston train station, has led to claims by environmental activists that the CPS is interfering with the right to protest non-violently about the climate emergency. Charges of aggravated trespass were dismissed last October by district judge Susan Williams. Now the CPS has started judicial review proceedings against the decision. The case was heard at Highbury Corner magistrates court in north London. A spokesperson for HS2 Rebellion expressed alarm at the CPS’s decision. They said: “In the wake of the government’s policing bill, the decision to review the Euston tunnel case is another ominous attack on our right to protest. This protest was peaceful and proportionate and raised awareness of the unjustifiable cost of HS2 to the environment and to taxpayers.” At the time of the dismissal of charges last year an HS2 spokesperson said they were “bitterly disappointed” with the outcome of the case. The protesters dug a 100ft tunnel network secretly over a period of months and stored up enough food and water supplies to last throughout the subterranean protest. During the tunnel occupation they spent much of their time digging and shoring up the structure they had created. Williams dismissed the charges against the protesters on the basis that HS2 was not carrying out any construction work on the site at the time the charges were levelled against them. Instead, their aim was to clear the site of protesters and then begin the construction work. She said in court: “There is no evidence of any constructor or construction taking place on the land at that time.” The subterranean environmental protest is thought to be one of the longest in UK protest history. The court heard that the disruption to HS2’s work at the Euston site cost about £3.5m. There were nine activists involved in the tunnel protest, ranging in age from 16 to 48. Two aged under-18 were not charged and a third activist was unwell and unable to attend the court hearing. The environmental activists staged their protest because they believe that the HS2 project is causing environmental damage, including to 108 ancient woodlands. HS2 disputes this and says that according to its assessments, 43 of the country’s 52,000 ancient woodlands will be affected by HS2’s route between London and Crewe, with 80% of the total area of these remaining untouched, meaning just 0.005% of ancient woodland will be lost, a fraction of losses from comparable road projects. While the protesters celebrated “a victory for the right to protest” following last October’s court case they are now facing a new threat from the decision by the Crown Prosecution Service to get their acquittal judicially reviewed. Simon Natas of ITN Solicitors who acted for the Euston tunnel protesters at their trial, said: “My clients were engaged in peaceful, environmental protest. Our view is that they were acquitted entirely properly and that the reasoning of the district judge in the case was unimpeachable. We are surprised that the CPS is challenging that decision and I fully expect that their application will be contested.” A CPS spokesperson said: “We have applied for permission to seek a judicial review into the decision to dismiss charges against six HS2 protesters in October. Our written application will be considered by a judge. If it is granted a full hearing will take place before the high court.” Labour peer Shami Chakrabarti, previously director of Liberty, said: “A wise CPS would be slow to use public funds to judicially review inconvenient court decisions, not least when the policing of protest has become so politicised and judicial review put beyond the reach of ordinary citizens. “Court decisions, like protests, can be annoying to those in authority, but the ‘one law for them’ approach is exploding public trust in criminal justice. Prosecutors are supposed to be servants of the public and our courts. Maybe they should prioritise bringing sex offenders to justice and winning back the confidence of women and girls?”The US sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson has questioned why the Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva has been allowed to compete at the Olympics while she was banned for a similar offence. On Monday, the court of arbitration for sport (Cas) ruled 15-year-old Valieva could continue to compete at the Winter Olympics in Beijing despite registering a positive doping test in December. Richardson missed last summer’s Olympics after testing positive for cannabis. Few people regard the drug as performance-enhancing and Richardson said she had smoked to relieve the pain she felt over the recent death of her mother. “Can we get a solid answer on the difference of her situation and mine?” Richardson tweeted on Monday. “My mother died and I can’t run and was also favored to place top 3. The only difference I see is I’m a black young lady.” Richardson’s ban was for 30 days, which meant she missed the Olympic 100m in Tokyo, where she was expected to contend for a medal. Richardson was not the only athlete to greet Cas’s decision with dismay. “How is anyone going to take the women’s event seriously now?” said figure skater Meagan Duhamel, who won team gold for Canada in 2018. “We were just told illegal drugs and abuse are OK. If that is what this sport is about now, I want nothing to do with it. February 14 2022. The day the Olympic spirit died.” In its ruling, Cas said banning Valieva “would cause her irreparable harm”. Last Monday, she produced a brilliant performance to lead the Russian Olympic Committee to team gold in the figure skating. A day later, however, the World Anti-Doping Agency-approved Stockholm laboratory reported that a urine sample taken from Valieva in December contained the banned angina drug trimetazidine. Cas’s ruling was solely on whether the teenager can compete again in Beijing and she could still be banned from competition over the failed test in the coming weeks. She may also be stripped of any medals she wins at these Games.American fans of campy pop music, outrageous outfits and petty geopolitics were able to rejoice on Monday, with the news that the US will soon launch its own Eurovision-style music competition. The extravaganza, prosaically titled American Song Contest, will see musicians from all 50 states, five US territories and Washington DC compete against each other, in a format borrowed from its long-running European cousin. Beyond the musical offerings, the show presents the mouth-watering prospect of seeing how politically and culturally opposed states rate the musical output of their rivals, a key component of the Eurovision Song Contest’s enduring popularity. Texas and New York represent an early example of how traditionally conservative and liberal Americans could voice their mutual dislike of one another, in a scenario familiar to anyone who has seen countries such as Russia shun western European songs – however pleasant their melodies – over the years. It also represents a chance for states to show their admiration for one another. In Europe the Scandinavian countries tend to award each other high points, while other, more complicated, allegiances exist within countries of the former Soviet Union. In times of geopolitical strife, countries perceived as bad actors have struggled, including the UK following the 2003 invasion of Iraq. In the US the anti-mask and vaccine-skeptic crusade led by Ron DeSantis, Florida’s self-advancing governor, could turn people against singers from the Sunshine state. The Eurovision Song Contest has gained millions of fans over the decades, some of whom engage with the contest ironically, since it first launched in 1956. The contest consists of two lesser-watched semi-finals before an all-night final, but the American version, hosted by Snoop Dogg and Kelly Clarkson, will stretch over eight weeks after it begins in March. In the European competition a country’s votes are decided partly by a jury of music industry heads and partly a public vote. NBC, the network which will host American Song Contest, is yet to reveal its exact format. Eurovision has sometimes served as a place for progressive statements. In 1998 Dana International, a transgender singer from Israel, won the contest, and in 2019 two gay men were featured on the broadcast’s kiss cam, delighting supporters of LGBTQ equality. But the contest has also served as an expression of displeasure. In 2016 Ukraine won with a song about Joseph Stalin’s deportation of Crimean Tartars. Russia, which had invaded and annexed Crimea, in Ukraine, two years earlier, was furious. Away from politics, American Song Contest could see a clash of musical styles. The country music popular in parts of the south, defined by its songs about beer and pickup trucks and sometimes traditional roles for women, might be pleasing to Tennessean ears, but it is a genre that fares less well further north. Recent polls, elections and political fights have highlighted the state of America’s yawning societal divides, raising the potential that warring factions could detract from the actual singing and dancing on screen. But the show’s creators insist that music could help America heal in troubled times. “When America is more factionalised than ever and we are dealing with so many issues that divide us, the one [thing] that truly unites us is our culture,” Ben Silverman, the show’s executive producer told the NME. He added, perhaps optimistically: “[American Song Contest] can unite it by celebrating its diversity, its distinctions and in pulling everyone around its love of music and its love of song.”Why are there tensions? American officials have warned of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days, after Russia forward-deployed hundreds of tanks, self-propelled artillery and even short-range ballistic missiles from as far away as Siberia to within striking range. Moscow’s rhetoric has also grown more belligerent. Vladimir Putin has demanded legal guarantees that Ukraine will never join Nato or host its missile strike systems, concessions he is unlikely to receive. A flurry of diplomatic activity has done little to ease tensions. Putin is also short on time. His troops cannot remain out of garrison indefinitely. By late winter he will probably have to launch an attack or draw down his forces, in what would look like a retreat. In the meantime the UK, US and others have to told their citizens to leave. What do we know about the deployments? As of 13 February, 93 battalion tactical groups, the smallest operational unit in Moscow’s army, of around 800-1,000 troops, were estimated by military intelligence group Rochan Consulting to be in place near the borders of Ukraine in both Russia and latterly Belarus. The UK estimates the figure is higher, at 100, with 14 more due to arrive. Many of the heavy weapons stationed near Ukraine arrived in spring 2021, when Russia put an estimated 110,000 troops with tanks and other heavy weaponry near the border. Some, but not all, of Russia’s troops to base in May after Putin secured a summit with Joe Biden. But Russian troops have been coming from the east for weeks. On 11 February, the head of the Norwegian intelligence service said they numbered 150,000. There are also separatist forces in the breakaway areas of Donetsk and Luhansk. Their numbers are estimated at 32,000, some are likely to be unacknowledged Russian forces. Half of Russia’s airforce is also now deployed near Ukraine, according to Western estimates, while more than 30 Russian warships started training exercises in the Black Sea on Sunday. This assessment shows some of the main deployments as of late 2021: In early February, there was some evidence that forces previously massed several hundred miles from the border were moving closer to Ukraine. There were signs that the seven BTGs stations in Yelnya, near Smolensk, were moving on to near Klintsy, about 100km from the border. Over the new year Russia began to move tanks, artillery, air-defence systems and fighter jets to Belarus for joint “Allied Resolve” exercises that started on 10 February and are due to run until 20 February. That deployment has grown and is currently estimated at about 25 BTGs or possibly higher. Nato has warned that Russian forces in Belarus could reach 30,000, including Speznaz special operations forces, SU-35 fighter jets, S-400 air defence systems and Iskander missiles, which can carry nuclear weapons, and have a range of 500km. One of the largest forces to remain near Ukraine since May 2021 comes from the 41st Combined Arms Army, which is headquartered in Novosibirsk almost 2,000 miles away. Stationed at the Pogonovo training area south of Voronezh since spring, some of the 41st CAA forces have moved to Yelnya, a town in the Smolensk region closer to Belarus. The equipment includes motorised infantry, main battle tanks, rocket artillery and Iskander short-range ballistic missiles comprising an estimated six or seven BTGs, according to an estimate by the independent defence analyst Konrad Muzyka. Satellite images taken from above Pogonovo depict the arrival of more equipment between November 2021 and January 2022. Other recent movements show motor rifle brigades from the 49th Combined Arms Army moving towards Crimea. Artillery and air-defence assets from the 58th Combined Arms Army have also been spotted in satellite photographs taken from above Novoozerne in western Crimea. The US estimates 10,000 troops moved into Crimea in late January and early February. There are also units permanently deployed near Ukraine from the 8th and 20th Combined Arms Armies. What form could a Russian attack take? An invasion would take place on multiple axes, with Russian forces expected to try and encircle Ukraine’s military in the east of the country, but Western intelligence agencies believe that the most likely goal of a Russian offensive would be to surround Kyiv and force regime change. They concluded that as of 11 February Putin had put in place enough troops to attempt an invasion. The US, the UK and some independent western experts highlight the importance of Belarus in an offensive on Kyiv. The country, now closely aligned to Moscow, is considered the simplest invasion route to Ukraine’s capital as it would allow Russian forces to cross the large Dniepr river in friendly territory and attack from the west. This runs counter to the thinking in Ukraine as of late January that a focused attack in the east was the most likely scenario. On 21 January Ukrainian military intelligence said that since the beginning of the month Moscow had supplied separatists in eastern Ukraine with additional tanks, self-propelled artillery, mortars and more than 7,000 tons of fuel. A map released by Ukrainian military intelligence in November showed a worst-case scenario: Russian forces crossing the Ukrainian border from the east and attacking from annexed Crimea, as well as launching an amphibious assault on Odessa with support from Russian soldiers in Transnistria and troops sent in from Belarus. The potential economic consequences of any new fighting would be enormous as the US and its allies are promising “significant and severe” economic and technological sanctions in the event of an attack, while Russia could cut off gas supplies to Europe. Russia could still seek concessions from the west in negotiations while maintaining its troops along the border for a credible threat of escalation. Putin has said he believes high tensions are useful for Russia. Nevertheless, some analysts say that without a clear diplomatic victory, any drawdown could look like a defeat. When might an attack happen? February has long been seen as the most likely month for a potential offensive. Russian soldiers are participating in military exercises in Belarus which are due to finish on 20 February and Vladimir Putin has returned from a trip to Beijing for the Winter Olympics opening ceremony. How did we get here? In 2014 Putin sent troops to annex Crimea, a mainly Russian-speaking region of Ukraine. Russia also incited a separatist uprising in Ukraine’s south-east, clandestinely sending soldiers and weapons to provoke a conflict that grew into a full-blown war. A 2015 peace deal established a line of demarcation and called on both sides to make concessions. Since then low-level fighting has continued along the front, and both sides have accused the other of violating the agreement, which observers say is close to collapse. Russia no longer wants to maintain the status quo and is looking for another way to assert control over Ukraine. What is the role of Nord Stream 2? The completion of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea gives both sides an economic weapon. The pipeline would allow Russia to send gas to Europe without going through Ukraine, meaning Moscow could pile pressure on Kyiv without the risk that Kyiv would cut the gas supply route in retaliation. Ukraine has lobbied furiously against the project, saying it undermines its national security. However, the pipeline, which has become a pet project of Putin’s, has not yet come online, and western governments have indicated that in the case of invasion, that may never happen.She’s Lady Macbeth, scheming, manipulative, a forward planner; but she’s also feckless, work-shy, addicted to holidays, with a brain that can’t plot the optics from one Instagram post to another. Thus is Carrie Johnson characterised in the new biography from Michael Ashcroft, the Tory peer who makes these unflattering, scattershot pen portraits his contribution to the literary canon. His biographies rarely make a huge addition to the public understanding of a person; the modus operandi appears to be to find anyone, genuinely anyone, right down to someone who met them once at university and doesn’t remember them (so the reader can infer, Ashcroft will typically suggest, that they weren’t very memorable), prepared to make a bitchy remark, and then note it down. Inevitably, the character that then emerges is a little contradictory. To this, the author brings his own baggage: that title of the biography in full – First Lady: Intrigue at the Court of Carrie and Boris Johnson. What’s he trying to say? Is she Eleanor Roosevelt (ultimate first lady, never knowingly thwarted?), or Cherie Blair (often accused of trying out the role, assailed by pratfalls as she learned the hard way what the British political scene expects of a spouse?). Is she Anne Boleyn (controlling the court with vixen spite and the king with unexpected sexual manoeuvres she learned in France?), or Kate Middleton (bland on the surface, but underneath … well, she’s female, right? So probably underneath is something worse). In this medley of puppeteer-wife stereotypes, you can’t really pick out a tune. That’s medleys for you: they were designed for people who prefer not to follow things through. But the endless stories in the book: Carrie, who allegedly demanded an iPad from work even though it was incompatible with the system; who never turned up; whose friendships ran hot but didn’t last; whose ex-boyfriends can recall seemingly word for word the times she lashed out unreasonably … Even if the evidence isn’t all consistent, it nevertheless builds a picture of a wrong ’un, and upon this hangs the faith of the few remaining defenders of Boris Johnson. He wasn’t destined to become this kind of prime minister. He’s just a fool for love. On this, it’s maybe safer to remain agnostic. We could run counterfactuals for ever and we’d still be in the same situation; maybe if you were trying to write a period drama, it would help to know which character flaws were hitched to which relationship. If you’re wishing for a more effective government, it really doesn’t matter who is worse between Boris and Carrie Johnson, nor which of them wears the trousers. However, there are those who would defend not Boris Johnson but his party and their project, and they’re going for the classic left-right switcheroo, a cheap three-cups magic trick in which the people who thought they were on the side of the angels find themselves suddenly – who could possibly have foreseen? – the true villains. First, they find a diversity angle: in Carrie’s case, that she is female. Nobody would be saying these things about her if she wasn’t. Ergo, the substance and tone of the attack are misogynistic. Anyone who denies that is failing to take misogyny seriously (and now, of all times, ladies and gentlemen! Just when worldwide misogyny has never been more serious!). Anyone who continues to attack her is, themselves, a hater of women. The aim is to discombobulate feminists so much that we don’t know which way is up – if we can’t decide whether Carrie is good or bad, if we’re in thrall to sexist narratives that belong in a different century, then how can we possibly say what we think of her husband, what we think of the entire predicament? And there’s more: we disagree with Priti Patel because we’re racist, we fault Cressida Dick because we’re sexist and homophobic, the only person we’re allowed to criticise on this ship of fools is Michael Fabricant, and even then it is illiberal to mention his hair. The truly irking thing is that nobody, literally nobody, buys any of this: the people crying sexism don’t really believe it’s that, and wouldn’t care if it was. The people who abhor sexism know it isn’t that. It’s not even a discursive manoeuvre, it’s more like throwing a tarantula into a Scrabble bag, so that no one wants to put their hand in, and the game simply dissolves, its players move on. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistA retired Florida police captain went on trial for murder on Monday, eight years after he shot dead a moviegoer who threw a bag of popcorn at him in a dispute over text messages. Curtis Reeves, now 79, killed Chad Oulson, 43, at a movie theater in the Tampa suburb of Wesley Chapel shortly after the confrontation over the younger man’s use of his cellphone while previews were playing. Reeves initially attempted to use Florida’s controversial stand-your-ground law to insist he acted in self-defense, but a judge ruled in 2017 that the doctrine did not apply. Subsequent legal arguments and the Covid-19 pandemic further delayed the case. “The eight-year delay is, in my opinion, embarrassing and only benefited Curtis Reeves as it allowed him to contribute to be at home with his loved ones and spend time with his family,” TJ Grimaldi, attorney for Oulson’s wife, Nicole, said in a statement. “All [this] while Ms Oulson was stuck waiting for delay after delay to be resolved.” Opening statements in the second-degree murder trial were presented on Monday morning before a jury of six. Prosecutors are attempting to paint Reeves as an overzealous character who had prior disagreements with other patrons over their cellphone use in the auditorium. Lawyers for Reeves, meanwhile, will argue that their client felt threatened by Oulson, who they say was angry and obstructive, and threw what Reeves believed was a cellphone at his head. Witnesses have previously said that the pair argued over the texting, and Reeves attempted to find a manager. “He came back very irritated. Somebody throws popcorn, I don’t know who threw the popcorn. And then bang, he was shot,” Charles Cummings, an eyewitness, said at the time. Oulson was taken to hospital in Tampa, where he was pronounced dead. His wife, who was wounded in the hand by the shot that killed her husband, was released after treatment. In an appearance on ABC’s Good Morning America in 2014, shortly after the shooting, Nicole Oulson said her husband was checking for messages from their babysitter before the movie started, and planned to put the phone away when Reeves confronted them. “It was a couple of words. No threats. No harm. No nothing,” she said. Grimaldi told CNN on Monday that Nicole Oulson would tell her story to the jury. “While going through a trial forces her to relive this situation, that she would rather forget, she can’t wait for the day that justice is served – Curtis Reeves is found guilty and spends the rest of his natural life in prison paying for his crimes,” he said. During jury selection last week, Reeves entered the courtroom walking slowly with a cane. In opening arguments on Monday, according to reporters at the Pasco county courthouse, prosecutor Scott Rosenwasser asked the jury to compare the defendant’s insistence that he suffered from arthritis in his back to witness statements and videos from the auditorium that show him moving freely, and lunging at Oulson with his gun. Attorneys for Reeves, a former captain with the Tampa police department, described by neighbors as “a good guy”, failed to persuade Judge Susan Barthle five years ago to dismiss the charge. The circumstances of the case, she said, were not “those envisioned by the legislature when the stand-your-ground law was enacted”. George Zimmerman, a white neighborhood watchman who was acquitted of murdering Trayvon Martin in 2012 in another Florida case with many similarities, did not rely on the stand-your-ground law, but successfully argued he was forced to fire the fatal shot in self-defense.TRIP! AH! There may still somehow be more than three months to go until the end of the Premier League season, but this felt like a big weekend for the relegation battle (or lack thereof). Frank Lampard got one over on old adversaries Leeds with his new club, Frank Lampard’s Everton, while the scrappy, last-on-Match-of-the-Day stalemate between Brentford and Crystal Palace allowed pundits to quickly mutter that both sides will be fine before Gary Lineker wrapped up. For the current bottom three, results were not so encouraging. Norwich started well enough before their game with Manchester City turned into a long, gruelling chapter of Raheem Sterling’s Soccer Skills. Despite 82 years of management experience between them, neither Roy Hodgson nor Claudio Ranieri can get Watford to defend properly. Burnley, with one win in 21, still have those games in hand. Above them, in 17th place and rising, are Newcastle United. After one league victory all season, Eddie Howe’s team have now won three in a row, restoring a feelgood factor not seen at St James’ Park since about 2005. Newcastle made four January signings, but it is the first recruit that has stood out the most – far from simply whipping the ball in the direction of Chris Wood, Kieran Trippier has brought necessary set-piece skills and helped tighten the defence. The only player to score against Newcastle in those three wins was Jamaal Lascelles, replaced by Dan Burn against Aston Villa, with Trippier taking the captain’s armband as the Saudi-backed revolution began in earnest. This being Newcastle, however, no sooner had Trippier’s deflected free-kick winner moved them four points clear of the drop zone than their new leader was limping off the field. The club confirmed on Monday that K-Trips has broken a bone in his foot, and faces several weeks out. Given his immediate impact on Tyneside, this could become the most closely-monitored metatarsal since David Beckham. Oh, Newcastle! Just when they thought they were out, and all that. On the other hand, an upcoming fixture list of West Ham (A), Brentford (A), Brighton (H), Chelsea (A) and Palace (H) offers chances for hard-earned points (the best of all points). Howe has also had the common sense to improve the players he already had, adding purpose to Alain Saint-Maximin’s freestyle shapes and even retrieving Jonjo Shelvey from his cryogenic chamber. We can’t believe we’re saying this, but maybe Newcastle ... will be fine? QUOTE OF THE DAY It’s been a while since I wrote a rhyme, I’m not sure this one will stand the test of time. But there are certain words, which I’d like to say, About the love of my life, around me every day. You’re always there in my time of need, Since the first day, when you planted the seed. That smile said it all, that’s why you’re my girl, The look with those eyes sent my head in a whirl. I love you more than ever, that’s for sure, We’re a perfect match; I know there’s no cure. I’m so in love with you, at times I could cry, I find myself looking at you, and boy, do I sigh. You’re so lucky today if you find the right wife, We’re a match made in heaven, it’s lasting for life. Two wonderful children: our Amy and Will, [If] my father could see them, he’d [be called] Grandpa Bill. I know he’d be proud of what we’ve been through, Almost joined at the hip since, stuck with glue. I never want you to be bored when I say: ‘I love you’ The simple fact is, I just do! Neil Warnock takes a breather from touchline ranting to deliver a touching Valentine’s Day tribute to his beloved wife, Sharon. RECOMMENDED LISTENING No Barry? No problem! Football Weekly cracks on regardless. Listen to Monday’s edition here. FIVER LETTERS “A rival rocker recently described the Rolling Stones as a mediocre pub band with a great front man. Man Utd are a mediocre football team with a great keeper” – Williams. “I am constantly amazed by how often we are told in various football reports and commentaries that Ralf Rangnick is 63. Is there any significance attached to this?” – Carol Stewart. “Perhaps somebody should explain to Ian Copestake, who won prizeless letter of the day for not knowing that The Fiver was available in South Korea, what the initials www stand for?” – Brian Ross. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Williams. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Ralf Rangnick has enlisted sports psychologist Sascha Lense to try and rebuild Manchester United’s confidence, with the Reds suffering a serious case of the yips recently, blowing narrow leads in each of their last three games. “They are human beings, not robots,” parped Ralf. On the blue side of Manchester, Pep Guardiola wants Raheem Sterling to sign a new deal. “The club decides,” sniffed Pep. “I give my opinion but of course the club takes the decision all the time.” Uefa are the finally the nice guys: free tickets for all! Christian Eriksen marked his 30th birthday by playing 60 minutes in a friendly against Southend for new club Brentford, registering an assist. Course he did. STILL WANT MORE? It’s total romance in Fiver Towers, and we’re ‘celebrating’ Wetters Day by doing Big Website’s Valentine’s Day quiz. Ten (count them!) Premier League talking points for your reading pleasure. Aaaaaaaand, here’s some more on the WSL action, courtesy of Suzy Wrack, Maryam Naz and Renuka Odedra. Bochum beat Bayern 4-2 on Saturday, don’t you know. Here’s our man, Andy Brassell, to explain how, and why it might be regarded as the new “game of the century”. Nicky Bandini on the adorable Lorenzo Insigne, the Serie A title race and the returning Kalidou Koulibaly. Paul Doyle on Kurt Zouma’s West Ham absence and a wobbly afternoon in Leicester for defenders. Eric Devin on the latest in Ligue Urrrrrrnnnnnnnnnnn, with Lyon and Marseille continuing their quest for Big Cup qualification. The most prominent gay manager in English men’s football, Leatherhead’s Luke Tuffs, talks to Paul MacInnes about dressing-room banter and the people at the top of the game. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! M&amp;S DINE IN FOR TWO FOR ONE IT IS, THENPolice in Kentucky have detained a person suspected of a Monday morning “assassination attempt” on a Democratic party candidate for Louisville city mayor. The Louisville Metro police chief Erika Shields said at a lunchtime press conference that the unidentified shooter entered Craig Greenberg’s fourth-floor suite in a downtown office building at about 10.15am and fired multiple shots. Neither Greenberg, who is running for his party’s nomination for city mayor in the upcoming Democratic primary, nor any of his staff were struck, Shields said, although Greenberg’s clothing was nicked by a round. Greenberg tweeted that he and his campaign team were safe and uninjured, and that he planned to give an update later. Television footage showed Greenberg and several colleagues being led from the building by a heavily armed Swat team. The person in custody was detained near the building after officers matched their appearance to descriptions by witnesses, according to Shields. “We have no known motive at this time. We also have no reason to believe that this individual was acting anything but alone,” Shields said. “Until we can determine what the motivating factors were, we are going to keep an open mind and proceed with an abundance of caution and concern for many of our community members. Mr Greenberg is Jewish, so there’s that. We don’t know if it’s tied to the candidate’s politics or if we are dealing with someone who has mental issues or is venomous.” She added that investigators would piece details of the incident together before deciding on charges. David James, a Louisville council member, told WLKY News that he believed it was “an assassination attempt on Greenberg and his staff”, who are working to secure the Democratic nomination to succeed the party’s long-serving mayor, Greg Fischer, in November’s election. Greenberg is among the frontrunners in the 17 May primary, according to HuffPost, and would be “an overwhelming favorite” if he won the nomination. Several Louisville council members are supporting his candidacy, while others have refused to endorse him.Naomi Campbell has described becoming a mother at the age of 50 as “the best thing I’ve ever done”. In a photoshoot for the March issue cover of British Vogue, the supermodel will appear photographed with her daughter. Campbell has never revealed her daughter’s name, but she confirmed to the magazine that she was not adopted. Campbell, 51, has previously kept any news related to her child private, surprising fans when she announced her arrival on Instagram in May last year. She posted a picture cradling her newborn daughter’s feet with the caption: “A beautiful little blessing has chosen me to be her mother. So honoured to have this gentle soul in my life there are no words to describe the lifelong bond that I now share with you my angel. There is no greater love.” Very few people even knew she was planning parenthood, Campbell told Vogue. “I can count on one hand the number of people who knew that I was having her. But she is the biggest blessing I could ever imagine. It’s the best thing I’ve ever done.” Exact details around the arrival of her daughter are unknown. When asked if she would elaborate, she said simply: “She wasn’t adopted – she’s my child.” The only time Campbell has previously spoken about her daughter was in September last year, when she described her as “a dream child”. She told BBC HardTalk: “She’s wonderful. She’s very independent already, very smart, alert, sleeps 12 hours. She’s a good girl.”The decision to allow the Russian prodigy Kamila Valieva to take part in the women’s figure skating competition less than two months after testing positive for a banned heart medication has cast a shadow over the glamour event of the Winter Olympics that will persist for years to come, further tainting the reputation of a Beijing Games already beset by controversy. Armed with a quiver of point-gobbling quadruple jumps, the 15-year-old Valieva set the world record for combined total score in her first outing as a senior in October and has improved from there, skating with a deeper maturity and sophistication in each competition through to the team event last week in Beijing, where she became the first woman to land a four-revolution jump on Olympic ice. But the entirety of her sensational debut campaign was thrown into question on Friday after it was revealed she tested positive for a prohibited substance known to increase endurance and stamina. The ruling handed down on Monday by the court of arbitration for sport (Cas), allowing Valieva to compete while appealing against the positive result, represents a mockery of the Olympic movement. The likelihood that Valieva will fly home with not one but two gold medals despite testing positive for an illegal substance is a devastating optical blow for a sport that, practically, has only just emerged from the judging scandal at the 2002 Olympics that left its integrity in tatters. At times such as these – and Monday will surely go down as one of figure skating’s darkest days – the instinct to assign blame kicks in. But the widespread anger toward the Cas decision is misguided. The panel of three judges were not charged with examining whether or not Valieva doped, rather the procedural matter of whether the Russian teenager should be suspended until it is determined whether she did. The search for culpability that follows in the coming months along with the investigation into the merits of the case – one that could still end with Valieva stripped of her medals – will extend to the skater’s entourage and whether anyone in it encouraged the use of a banned substance. Top of that list is Eteri Tutberidze, the enigmatic, polarising coach whose methods have forged skaters that have dominated the international scene for eight years while drawing criticism for their short, injury-prone careers. On Saturday she admitted the situation was “very controversial and difficult” but added: “I want to say that I am absolutely sure that Kamila is innocent and clean.” Another is Filipp Shvetsky, the doctor at rinkside for Valieva’s senior international debut in October who was reportedly banned from working with Russia’s rowing team following a 2007 doping inquest. Shvetsky claims he was made a scapegoat. Other members of her coaching team on the ground in Beijing are Sergei Dudakov and Daniil Gleikhengauz, both of whom hail from the Sambo-70 club in Moscow where Tutberidze is head coach. None of Valieva’s support personnel have been formally accused of any wrongdoing. The maelstrom has already generated backlash in Russia, where the hashtag #позорТутберидзе, or #shameonTutberidze was trending on Twitter as news of Valieva’s positive drug test spread on Friday. Since then Valieva, who has appeared distraught in training sessions in the days since the news broke, has been seized on as a reminder of how vulnerable young athletes remain. Adam Rippon – the 2018 Olympic bronze medallist and coach of the American skater Mariah Bell, who will compete against Valieva this week – said: “The adults around her have completely failed her. They’ve put her in this awful situation and should be punished.” As far as the stain on the women’s competition, which begins on Tuesday with the short programme and concludes with Thursday’s free skate, the blame falls on the collective failure of the alphabet soup of organisations in the Olympic orbit – none more than the International Olympic Committee – to hold the line on Russia’s serial malfeasance over the years. What has passed for discipline has plainly failed to create an adequate deterrent for the glory of gold over the welfare of athletes. When a judging scandal rocked the pairs figure skating competition at the 2002 Olympics, ultimately leading to a complete overhaul of the scoring system, the Russian team who benefited were awarded duplicate golds rather than downgraded to silver and no extensive investigation was ever conducted. The years-long doping program that included the sabotaging of drug tests during the 2014 Sochi Olympics was answered with a banning of the Russian flag rather than the state behind it, with more than 300 athletes from Russia invited to compete at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games under the Russian Olympic Committee designation. Now a young athlete is cleared to compete after testing positive for a banned substance, handing another victory to Russia’s state-sponsored doping system if Valieva’s positive test is confirmed. The obvious way forward is to raise the age minimum, which feels like a foregone conclusion if it is found that bad actors were able to exploit the idea of a “protected person” as a loophole to circumvent the rules. But that won’t save this year’s competition, the one time every four years when the general public leans forward and pays attention. The IOC responded with surprising force on Monday evening, saying there would be no medal ceremony for last week’s team competition and no medal ceremony for the women’s event this week if Valieva finishes on the podium, stating it would not be appropriate to include an athlete with a positive A-sample but whose violation of anti-doping rules has not been established. It also requested the ISU allow the 25th-place finisher in the short programme on Tuesday, who otherwise would have missed the cut, to take part in the free skate on Thursday. Yet all of it feels too little too late. After years of acquiescence and appeasement, the chickens have come home to roost under the brightest lights. And clean sport is left holding the bag once again.Almost a year ago, Russia began moving forces from Siberia and other regions to the border with Ukraine. With more than half of its land forces now poised for an attack, whether or not there will be a war with Ukraine hinges on the decision of Vladimir Putin, whose options range from a large-scale assault to a decision to hold his troops back or ultimately send them home. At stake is a potentially devastating conflict, sanctions and economic hardship, and a verdict on the legacy of Putin, who has broadcast his decision to engage in brinksmanship with the west, saying that the tensions have a “definite effect” and should be maintained “as long as possible”. Putin has been clear about what he wants: to reverse Nato expansion in Europe and a pledge that Ukraine will never join the alliance. But the main question remains how far he is willing to go to achieve that goal. And if he does de-escalate, does he have anything concrete to show for the last year? In an unusual bit of play-acting on Monday, Putin invited his foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, to the Kremlin for carefully scripted discussions on how it was all going. “Sergei Viktorovich, what do you think? In your opinion, is there a chance to reach an agreement with our partners on the key questions causing our concerns?” Putin asked in a televised discussion that set the stage for the Kremlin’s next steps. “We have said more than once that we warn against endless conversations on issues that need to be resolved today,” said Lavrov, repeating a warning that Russia would not be filibustered. “But still, probably as the foreign minister, I should say that there is always a chance.” He told Putin to continue holding talks with the west. Shoigu, likewise, told Putin that a number of military drills were “ending”, signalling that Russia could pull back some of its heavy weaponry soon. “Summary of Putin’s meeting with Shoigu: exercises are ending, everyone is going home, Russia will not have a new war with Ukraine,” one Kremlin pool reporter wrote after the meeting. The reality on the ground is not so encouraging. Open source data has continued to show aircraft and helicopters deploying near the border and tanks and artillery leaving staging areas for positions where they would be poised for an attack. And much of the weaponry that the Kremlin has put at Ukraine’s borders is not officially involved in any exercises. Still, the televised meetings with his top officials were a rare nod towards de-escalation for Putin, who has explained little to the public about this crisis and appears to be isolated even from his own ministers in his decision-making. At the Kremlin, Lavrov and Shoigu were both forced to sit at the end of a long conference table, part of the draconian anti-Covid measures that the Kremlin has employed in recent months (including when Emmanuel Macron visited for talks last week). The indication was that these were formal meetings with Lavrov and Shoigu meant for television cameras rather than real consultations. The timing coincides with what western officials have warned is a crucial week on the Ukrainian border, with Russia ready to begin offensive operations “at any time”. US media have reported that Joe Biden told Nato allies that Russia could launch an attack beginning on Wednesday, although he claimed Putin had not given the order yet. (Russian media have ridiculed those claims, as well as US allegations that the Kremlin had plans to install an occupation government and film a propaganda video of a “false-flag” attack as a casus belli.) If Russia is preparing for a large war, it does not appear to have prepared its own public for it either. Updates on Ukraine often run in the middle of news broadcasts, and most media have not run the kind of hysterical, jingoistic programming that dominated the airwaves in 2014. There are some exceptions. Margarita Simonyan, the hawkish head of RT, has regularly advocated for intervention and incorporation of the Russian-controlled separatist areas. “Russia cannot not stop this war,” she said during a nationally broadcast television programme. “What are we waiting for? When there are concentration camps? When they start gassing their own population?” The mood in Kyiv has also been one of calm and lack of panic. But western allies led by the United States have withdrawn their diplomatic staff, urged their citizens to leave, and some airlines have said they will stop flying over the country because of the potential dangers. Kyiv has been forced to launch a $600m (£444m) insurance fund to ensure that air travel to the country continues. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and other Ukrainian officials have warned that a key goal of the Russian buildup is to foment internal tensions, put pressure on the economy, and convince Ukraine of its precarious situation as Moscow seeks to reverse its drift to the west. The Russian business daily Kommersant said on Monday that the last three months of “diplomatic and security pressure” had brought some rewards: increased pressure on Ukraine from the west over the Minsk accords, a recognition of Russia’s willingness to fight any future Nato expansion, and a queue of top western politicians to meet and speak with Putin. But the pressure “has had a multitude of negative effects”, the newspaper added, noting that while the pluses existed “only on paper”, the negative effects had already become a reality. Those have included a revitalisation of Nato, with deployments of US and other troops to eastern Europe, as well as direct deliveries of lethal arms to Ukraine, such as the thousands of anti-tank missiles delivered by the UK. Responding to a question from the Guardian, the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said that Shoigu had complained specifically about those deliveries last week when the pair met. “No matter how many weapons we have delivered, they are dwarfed by the scale of the forces on the other side of the border,” Wallace said he replied. They would only play a role, he added, “if you were defending yourself from an invasion”.The FIA has chosen not to disclose the findings of its inquiry into the controversial climax of the Formula One world championship-deciding Abu Dhabi Grand Prix last season. The sport’s governing body presented its report to the teams on Monday but in the forthcoming days will reveal only its plans of proposed changes. The development will not be welcomed by those who felt the sport’s integrity was put at risk by events at last season’s finale. The FIA was expected to share the findings publicly but instead issued a short statement. “The FIA president [Mohammed Ahmed bin Sulayem] led detailed discussions of the 2021 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix,” it read. “Feedback from the commission on matters raised will be incorporated into the president’s analysis and he will publicly present news of structural changes and action plan in the coming days.” Max Verstappen won in Abu Dhabi after the race director, Michael Masi, improvised the rules in order to ensure the race did not finish behind a safety car, specifically in the way backmarkers could unlap themselves and in how long the safety car had to remain on track after they had begun to do so. Masi’s actions faced greater scrutiny after he appeared to react to pressure from radio communications with Verstappen’s Red Bull team. It allowed Verstappen, on new tyres, to attack and pass Lewis Hamilton on the final lap to secure his first title. After protests from Lewis Hamilton’s Mercedes team were dismissed by FIA stewards, the organisation came under fire for “marking its own homework”. Similar accusations are likely to be raised if only proposed changes are announced and details of the investigation are not presented. After the equally controversial decision to count two laps behind the safety car at last year’s washed out Belgian Grand Prix as a race and award half points, the FIA has proposed rule changes on races shortened because of bad weather. Two laps without the safety car, or virtual safety car, will be required in future to count as a race and a percentage scale applied for points according to how much of the race has been completed. The commission also approved three sprint race events this year at Imola, Austria and Brazil.People with children and renters are more likely to have seen their spending on utility bills increase while working from home during the coronavirus pandemic, official figures suggest. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said almost half of people who worked from home had spent less than they would have normally, with reduced costs for travel and food offset by an increase in spending on gas, electricity and internet access. However, it said the change in spending patterns was more pronounced for some people in the survey of more than 3,000 adults in Great Britain undertaken by government statisticians last month. As many as 92% of people working from home who live in rented accommodation reported increased spending on utilities, compared with 86% for home workers who were paying a mortgage and 77% for those who owned their homes outright. It also found people working from home with children were more likely to report increased spending on food, utilities and internet access compared with home workers without children. Concerns are mounting over rising energy prices amid Britain’s cost of living crisis, with households expected to see a 54% increase in average gas and electricity bills from April. The government has announced plans to cushion the blow from rising prices, though charities have warned that millions of families will still be pushed into fuel poverty. The ONS said overall rates of home working rose during December and January as more people stayed indoors due to the Omicron variant. However, rates remained significantly lower than earlier in the pandemic. From 29% in September – the lowest since the pandemic began – the proportion of working adults who said they had worked from home at least once in the previous seven days rose to 36% in January. Home working rates peaked at 49% in early June 2020. Despite higher utility costs, almost half (46%) of people said they had spent less money as a result of working from home in January – a proportion similar to the ONS survey in November (49%). Half said they had spent less on fuel and parking for commuting, while 40% said they had spent less on public transport. The ONS said the percentage of people working from home correlated with the stringency of Covid-19 restrictions and consumer spending, suggesting a link between working from home and reduced spending in shops, pubs and restaurants. Sarah Coles, a senior personal finance analyst at the investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown, said people working from home “could be in for a nasty shock” when they go back to the office because of rising petrol and diesel prices and living costs. “There are always some exceptions to the rule, but on average working from home is cheaper,” she said.Pep Guardiola says harmony at Manchester City is exceptional but insisted he will not be the manager for as long as Sir Alex Ferguson was in charge of Manchester United. Guardiola is in his sixth year at City, a tenure that has so far been supremely successful. While his opening season was trophyless, the 50-year-old has since led City to three Premier League titles, the FA Cup, four successive League Cups and last season’s Champions League final. City’s first domestic crown was claimed with a record 100 points and, if Guardiola’s side defend the title this year – they lead Liverpool, who have played a game less, by nine points – he will join Ferguson as the only manager in the Premier League era to do so twice. Yet Guardiola is clear he will not emulate the Scot, who led United for 26 and a half years. “I’m not going to be Sir Alex Ferguson, don’t worry,” he said. “The harmony [though] in this team right now is exceptional, thanks to the captains – it’s exceptional because of them.” While Fernandinho is the official captain, Rúben Dias and Kevin De Bruyne are also part of a strong leadership group. Guardiola believes the team spirit is the strongest since he took over in the summer of 2016. “We know each other well [now],” he said. “My harmony with, and respect for, them is much better, after six seasons. “We know each other perfectly and we accept the good things and the bad things. And we want to fight and be part of it [the team]. “The harmony is important because in our last 20 games, we have won 18, drawn one and lost one to Leipzig when we didn’t play for anything. I know all the guys [players], and sometimes they are disappointed when they don’t play. But our harmony comes because at this club, the players know the physios, the sports scientists, everyone is just there to help them, so they cannot complain.” City will be without Jack Grealish, Cole Palmer and Gabriel Jesus for the Champions League last-16 first leg at Sporting Lisbon on Tuesday because of injury but Guardiola remains confident after an unbeaten run that dates back to the game against Leipzig on 7 December in a dead rubber. “That is the most important thing,” Guardiola said. “To win or lose is random, you never know what will happen in the future. But the period we are together we try to beat our opponents with big smiles and good moods because, when you have bad faces, it’s impossible. When that happens, the rest is not important – we can’t control the results. Nobody knows what will happen, not even myself, the manager.”If our school days are the happiest of our lives, I’m worried for the Euphoria teens. In the season two opener, the kids of East Highland saw a drug dealer being murdered with a hammer by another drug dealer named “Ashtray” (because he ate discarded cigarettes as a child). One girl celebrates New Year’s Eve by hiding under a urine-soaked towel in a bath, and the school’s toxic jock is beaten up so brutally his face has to be stitched back together. As Rue – Euphoria’s enigmatic lynchpin played by Emmy-winner Zendaya – says in the closing seconds: “Damn.” We had been warned. Before this adolescent journey through drugs, sex and social media resumed, Zendaya told her followers on social media that the second season may be even more “triggering and difficult to watch” than the first. She wasn’t wrong. There’s a torturous drug relapse that ends in a bathtime morphine session, a manipulative love triangle and a battle for an underage sex tape that leads to a game of Russian roulette. Euphoria often feels less high school, more horror film. That teenage life can be hell is not new territory for television. Skins, the Bristol-set series that recently turned 15, was partial to killing off its characters. Buffy was slaying vampires with stakes while attending class in the late 90s. In recent years, though, teen drama has darkened. Riverdale – based on a comic book series about the happy lives of suburban teenagers – revolves around serial killers and drug rings. In 13 Reasons Why, a teenage girl listed all the reasons why she killed herself. Perhaps the best example of how times have changed for on-screen teens is last year’s reboot of the soapy noughties classic Gossip Girl. When the super-rich kids of Constance Billard resumed class, there was a new accessory among the Balenciaga trainers and Jacquemus handbags: abject misery. Out was unthinking privilege, in was self-seriousness. The new queen bee Julien is a tortured influencer. Max Wolfe, the reboot’s answer to the original’s antihero Chuck Bass, is stuck in a bleak three-way relationship with two best friends who care more about their sex lives than Max’s actual feelings. They discussed the ethics of property development, brand endorsements and Broadway plays. They did not have fun. It’s not hard to see why these shows have become so serious. When Gossip Girl first hit our screens in 2007, it was glitzy fluff. Fifteen years later, times are darker to the extent that it would be almost impossible not to engage with more serious issues. Especially as, in the intervening years, the technology that made the original concept so fun – an all-knowing, gossip-starved blogger! – has become something uglier. The teens are snapped in real time cheating on each other; they’re constantly worrying about how they are perceived online. The Gossip Girl reboot isn’t always an elegant reflection of modern teen anxieties, but it is a symptom of them. It’s also worth remembering that, extreme as the plotlines of shows like Euphoria may be at times, reality underlies them. In the US, the opioid crisis was declared a public health emergency in 2017. Showrunner Sam Levinson struggled with drug addiction as a teenager, eventually checking himself into rehab at 19. Though Rue’s addiction is increasingly difficult to watch, it is addressed with patience, rather than solved neatly by a season finale. Plotlines based around social media-induced anxiety are also simply depicting the reality of life for many teens. One of the best scenes in Euphoria’s second season is when body-conscious teen Kat, who had apparently overcome her self-confidence issues last season, breaks down again. In her messy bedroom, she is assaulted by imaginary body positivity influencers. “Kat, you’re one of the bravest, most beautiful human beings I’ve ever seen,” a perfectly preened, bikini-clad blonde tells her. Another screams at her to embrace her “inner fucking warrior”. It is a delicious take-down of anodyne influencer culture: the notion that people will simply feel beautiful by being told they are beautiful by beautiful people. When one model assures her that she has mental issues too, Kat laughs in her face: “I wish my mental problems made me look like you.” Teen dramas have always thrived on controversy. The original Gossip Girl ran an ad campaign proclaiming the show “every parent’s nightmare”. This season, Euphoria has doubled its viewing figures and secured a third run, no doubt aided by the trending topics and memes it inspires with every shocking turn. Every generation, it seems, likes to think of itself as the most scandalous. But in the current landscape of regularly scheduled anxiety and overdoses, it’s hard to imagine just how much bleaker these shows can get. While there will always be fresh miseries at hand – a pandemic is right there for the taking – it might benefit some of them to take a lighter approach. Being a teenager can be a world-consuming cycle of hell but, with a little perspective, it can also be pretty funny.People seem to be getting excited, again, about nuclear fusion (The power of stars to meet our energy needs? This is something to be excited about, 13 February). Given that for the past 60 years, fusion has always been 20 years in the future, is this an experiment to prove that time doesn’t exist in modern physics? Dr Paul Dorfman University of Sussex • Re levelling up, we don’t expect much from Michael Gove’s department, but some new, thick cushions for the wooden riser seats in Huddersfield Town Hall would be much appreciated. Lynn Brooks Huddersfield, West Yorkshire • Regarding counting mice instead of sheep to get to sleep (Letters, 13 February), a good friend of mine, a widow, counts all the other widows she knows. She is in her 80s and has Alzheimer’s disease. Joyce Blackledge Formby, Merseyside • Having mislaid my atlas, can I be reassured that San Serriffe (Letters, 13 February) is not in danger of being claimed by Mauritius, following in the footsteps of Chagos? Roger Bing Seaford, East Sussex • Is this another form of net zero (Death and decimation: Whitby devastated by declining marine life, 10 February)? Alan Rigby Taunton, Somerset • Perhaps it’s carrying current anti-Russian sentiment a step too far to miss out Shostakovich as a composer of “real music” for films (Editorial, 13 February). Dr Bryan Sowerby Coventry • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your article makes sobering reading (Library use plummeted in 2021, but e-visits showed 18% rise during lockdown, 10 February). However, it doesn’t tell the whole story. Here at the Leeds Library, an independent library with more than 1,000 members, we took the view that if members could not come to the library then the library had to go to its members. So while we saw a steep decline in visits and physical borrowings, this was partly offset by the establishment of postal and delivery services for members that were greatly welcomed and well used. As a result, the ebook library, which we set up rapidly after lockdown, proved less popular than we had expected, though other digital services we provided were much appreciated. And as the lockdown has lifted, members have returned to the library not just to borrow books but also to meet friends, attend events and make the most of the friendly and welcoming space we provide. Martin Staniforth Chair, the Leeds Library • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Many disabled people will be asking the same question as Hannah Devlin (Covid rules are to be axed in England, but is pandemic’s end really in sight?, 9 February), and feel concerned about the relaxing of rules. A common theme in disabled people’s experiences of the pandemic has been a sense of profound inequality. Disabled people have faced a higher clinical risk, bigger threats to job security and more barriers to living well from Covid-19. And the feeling among many disabled people that their needs are being ignored has only been accentuated by a perceived desire by the government to return to the “old normal” while the virus still poses a serious threat to lives and livelihoods. We all want to put the pandemic behind us, but the fact remains that social distancing measures are being scrapped while rates are high and policymakers are shying away from making decisions on mandatory vaccinations. We need the government to consider our roadmap out of restrictions carefully, so that everyone remains safe and treated equitably. Gemma Hope Director of policy, Leonard Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The failure to deal with the misogyny, racism and other prejudicial views of the Metropolitan police is rightly a cause of major concern and must be addressed by the new commissioner (‘She just did not get it’: how Cressida Dick’s support as Met chief unravelled, 11 February). But perhaps more importantly, much greater attention must be paid by the Met – and the media – to the finding in the 2021 independent review of Daniel Morgan’s murder that the Met is “institutionally corrupt”. Not being trusted by different demographic groups in the population is one thing, but institutional corruption means that it can be trusted by no one. Toby Williamson London • In the search for a new Met commissioner (Priti Patel’s search for new Met police chief could include overseas candidates, 13 February), surely the time has come for the role to be stripped of leading on counter-terrorism and royal protection. This should ensure that the focus is on reforming and running the Met. Simon Maddison Hitchin, Hertfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I hold no brief for Vladimir Putin, and I am not a member of the Stop the War coalition, but Keir Starmer’s attack on it and his eulogy for Nato is a travesty of history (Under my leadership, Labour’s commitment to Nato is unshakable, 10 February). When the UN was founded in 1945, the imperialist concept of spheres of influence should have become obsolete. But instead of developing common security policies, Nato was established – allegedly – as a defence against a threat from the Soviet Union to attack western Europe. In fact there was, and is, no evidence that there was a plan to overrun the west. When the Soviet Union collapsed and the Warsaw Pact was disbanded, Nato’s alleged raison d’etre disappeared and it too should have been closed down. The standoff with Ukraine must not lead to war. But an arms buildup on both sides makes war more likely. Only discussion and diplomacy can avoid this catastrophe. Constructive dialogue should be brokered by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, which operates with a fraction of the budget of Nato, yet gets no publicity for its successes. Increased support for the OSCE would make a much greater contribution to peace in Ukraine and the rest of Europe than flooding the region with more arms. Frank Jackson Former co-chair, World Disarmament Campaign • As a member of the Labour party and a supporter of Stop the War, I am appalled that Keir Starmer falls back on the old trope about those who oppose war giving succour to our enemies. Does he understand what being opposed to war means? Expressing his faith in the anachronistic Nato militates against the kind of internationalism that is central to the Labour party and socialist philosophy. Starmer is the one giving succour to aggressive militarism. Of course, I am opposed to the kleptocratic regime in Russia and its militarism, but I do not think we should oppose this with a show of military strength from the west. Richard Ashwell Wolverhampton • Lindsey German’s timely piece encapsulates Keir Starmer’s changed position on Nato (Keir Starmer’s cynical embrace of Nato is a sad sight indeed, 11 February). With the Falklands war, Margaret Thatcher rescued her dire economic policies from likely electoral defeat. Tony Blair survived the calamitous and ongoing war on “weapons of mass destruction” to win another general election. However, David Cameron’s urge to take us back to war in Syria misfired, despite his parliamentary majority. It may be that 12 years of cuts to essential services and the weariness of an ongoing pandemic will not make war an inevitable vote winner. Dr Alan Lafferty London • Lindsey German emphasises Nato’s real recent misdeeds, but doesn’t consider the present context and situation. There is no mention of Russia’s seizures of Georgian and Ukrainian territories, nor its support for the armed conflict in the Donbas region and the shooting down of a civil airliner. If there is a “march towards war over Ukraine”, it’s been provoked by the massing of Russian forces on Ukraine’s borders, a real encircling of a sovereign nation, not the encircling of Russia claimed by geographically challenged opponents of Nato. German’s reference to Nato as “expansionist” is similarly partial. The nations that joined Nato in the past 20 years had direct experience of Russian rule and subjugation, which they do not want to see repeated. Ignoring this is the real insult. Blaine Stothard London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thousands of UK university staff have gone on strike in a new wave of industrial action over pensions, pay and working conditions, claiming they have overwhelming support from students. The University and College Union, which represents university workers, said huge numbers of UCU members had joined picket lines on Monday, where they were supported with musical accompaniment, DIY banners and chants. By contrast, university employers said there were low levels of industrial action by what it called a minority of UCU members that apparently had little impact on students, in the latest stage of a long-running and increasingly acrimonious dispute. The strike is the first of 10 days of action spread over three weeks. This week it involves 44 universities, including Cambridge, Leeds and Edinburgh, and focuses on pension cuts. Next week strike action will involve 68 universities when 50,000 staff are expected to walk out over pensions, pay and working conditions, affecting about a million students. The UCU general secretary, Jo Grady, who joined the picket line at the University of Strathclyde, said staff were taking action to prevent a 35% cut to their guaranteed retirement income. “The response from students has been overwhelming and I want to thank every single one of them for standing with us,” she said. “These strikes over pension cuts were totally avoidable, but university employers have so far failed to accept compromise proposals put forward by UCU, which would have protected pensions and avoided disruptive industrial action. “Vice-chancellors should not doubt the resolve of our members who are determined to stick this out and win what they deserve.” The pensions dispute is focused on the management and financing of the Universities Superannuation Scheme (USS), the UK’s biggest private pension scheme, which provides pensions to the UK’s older universities as well as for research institutes and academic thinktanks. The two sides are also battling over issues such as the insecure fixed-term contracts used to employ an increasing number of teaching staff. On pay, the union is demanding a £2,500 pay increase for all staff, as well as action to tackle unmanageable workloads and equality pay gaps. There was anger among university staff last week when it emerged that the Universities and Colleges Employers Association (UCEA) recommended that universities should dock 100% of pay for staff who work to rule as part of the forthcoming industrial action. Raj Jethwa, the UCEA chief executive, said: “We are disappointed that UCU is encouraging its members to target students who have endured so many recent disruptions. “While these early reports are of low levels of industrial action and disruption to teaching it does, of course, take time for these large organisations to find out exactly how many scheduled classes have not taken place on a given day.” The strike is the latest in a long-running dispute. In late 2019, UCU staff at 60 universities initially went on strike, which grew to 74 institutions in a second wave of strikes that began in February 2020, when the dispute was overtaken by the Covid-19 outbreak, until it resumed with three days of strikes last December.Belgian police have stopped drivers taking part in France’s so-called freedom convoy from entering Brussels, where they planned to hold a demonstration on Monday. Hundreds of protesters had headed north from Paris region on Sunday but Brussels authorities said the convoy would not be allowed to enter the city. Police set up barriers and enforced checks around the European quarter, home to the EU headquarters and other buildings including the European parliament. The protest against Covid restrictions and high energy prices shifted its focus to the symbolic heart of the EU after police prevented most of the estimated 3,000 vehicles from entering Paris at the weekend. About 100 managed to get past the police and converged on the Champs Élysées, where they were eventually dispersed with teargas on Saturday evening. Belgian police said they had deployed forces along several motorways and stopped vehicles with French registration plates heading for the capital. The mayor of Brussels, Philippe Close, said police were directing vehicles to a parking and rest area just outside the city, capable of accepting up to 10,000 vehicles, and warned demonstrators this was the only place they would be allowed to converge. He said protesters could be allowed to enter Brussels on foot, but they would not be allowed to “take the capital hostage”. Officials banned any demonstrations in the city on Monday. On Sunday night French police said there were about 1,300 vehicles converging on the northern city of Lille, not far from the Belgian border. The French convoy, inspired by the movement that has paralysed Ottawa in Canada, has brought together people opposed to the vaccine pass, gilets jaunes (yellow vests), and anti-government protesters angered at energy price rises. Jean-Pierre Schmit, 58, an unemployed man from Toulouse, told Agence France-Presse: “We’re going to Brussels to try to block it to fight against this policy of permanent control.” Sandrine, 45, from Lyon, said: “We’re aiming to get to all the European institutions one by one. We don’t know where this is leading, but we’re on our way and we will make ourselves heard.” The convoy was reported to be aiming for Strasbourg, where the European parliament also sits, after Brussels. Jean-Christophe Couvy, the secretary general of the SGP police union, said the convoy appeared to have a number of targets. “There’s Brussels and the European parliament in Strasbourg. We have officers on standby and for the moment we’re being vigilant. We’re closely following the journey of this freedom convoy,” he told FranceInfo. Officials said only about 10% of the convoy that had converged on Paris at the weekend had left for Brussels. It is not clear what protesters are now planning, but one told Belgian television: “There’s no hurry. We’ll get there in the end.”Though the Cuban-American artist Carmen Herrera, who has died aged 106, spent 70 years refining her painting style into a severe yet seductive form of geometric abstraction, her pioneering work remained largely unrecognised by the art world until she was in her early 90s. From thereon, however, it received popular acclaim, with myriad museum exhibitions dedicated to the artist’s paintings and occasional forays into sculpture. Her work, she said in 2005, has been a “lifelong process of purification, a process of taking away what isn’t essential”. The artist was an early adopter of an aesthetic that has an affinity to American colour field painting, op art and Latin American neo-concretism. A typical Herrera painting does no more than balance two planes of contrasting colour across a large canvas. Each work in the Blanco y Verde series (1959-71), for example, is painted uniformly white in acrylic, bar the imposition of one or several green triangles, each with slight variations in acuteness, which stretch the width or length of the composition. The artist rejected painting as intuitive practice. Her paintings were carefully planned through scale drawings on tracing paper, complete with annotated measurements, which would later be replicated in acrylic on canvas. Her later work became sharper, more angular. Curves were banished. “I never met a straight line I did not like,” she noted in 2010. Herrera also made human-scale wood sculptures. Stylistically echoing the acrylic works, these tended to balance multiple parts, painted a flat primary colour monochrome, into simple geometric arrangements. Untitled (1971), now part of the collection at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, consists of a rectangular block of wood, over a metre in height and width, yet just eight centimetres deep, on top of which is balanced a smaller rectangular wood block, similar in depth, and likewise painted royal blue. In later years she moved into public works, which she titled Estructuras Monumentales, her abstract compositions rendered in monochromatically painted aluminium. Despite a lifetime’s dedicated practice, Herrera was 89 when her big break came. In 2004, a fellow artist, Tony Bechara, ran into the New York dealer Frederico Sève at a dinner. Sève mentioned that one of the exhibitors had withdrawn from what was supposed to be a three-woman show he was curating of Latin American geometric abstraction. Bechara recommended Herrera as a replacement. Sève sold several of Herrera’s works off the back of the show, with the prominent New York collector and philanthropist Agnes Gund buying several and donating one to the Museum of Modern Art. That work, a large hypnotic black and white striped painting from 1952, was put on display in the 2007 survey exhibition New Perspectives in Latin American Art. In 2009 Herrera had a solo show at the Ikon gallery in Birmingham, piquing the interest of the gallerist Nicholas Logsdail. His gallery, Lisson, showed Herrera’s work for the first time in London in 2012, and inaugurated a New York space with an exhibition by the artist in 2016, the same year the Whitney Museum staged a retrospective. Born in Havana, Herrera was the second child of Carmela Nieto y Font and Antonio Herrera y López de la Torre. Her father was the founding editor of El Mundo, a progressive newspaper, her mother a journalist. Herrera was raised alongside her mother’s five children from a previous marriage. Antonio and Carmela were outspoken in their politics, Herrera’s mother ingraining a feminist attitude into her and her two half-sisters from a young age. As the Cuban general Gerardo Machado, elected president in 1925, grew increasingly despotic in his second term of office, Herrera’s parents largely evaded persecution. However many of her relatives, including two of her half-brothers, were harassed and imprisoned. In 1929, at the age of 14, Herrera left Cuba for finishing school in Paris, the first of several trips over her life to the French capital. Returning to Havana in 1931 she took a sculpture course at the Lyceum, a women’s college, building on the private tutelage she had received when aged eight from the painter Federico Edelmann y Pinto. Those early exercises in sketching classical sculpture served her well.The first work she exhibited, Cristo, in 1937, consisted of a tearful mahogany-carved Christ set on a mount bearing a swastika. It was part of a group exhibition in a public park – the art was hung from trees; Herrera was “the spirit” behind the show according to one critic. The same year she met Jesse Loewenthal, an English teacher visiting from the US, and their courtship continued after Loewenthal returned home. In 1938 she enrolled on an architecture course at the Universidad de La Habana. “Modern architecture was interesting to me. I loved spaces, shapes, and lines,” she said in an interview with Artnet in 2016. However, she was forced to abandon her studies after a year due to the volatile political situation. “There were always revolutions going on, and fighting in the streets. The university was closed most of the time, so it affected my studies,” she said in a Guardian interview in 2016. Fulgencio Batista came to power for the first time in 1940 (having served four years democratically he would return in 1952 to establish a US-backed dictatorship), establishing a semblance of stability, but by then Herrera had left Havana to be reunited with Loewenthal in New York. They married in 1939. In the US Herrera took an apprenticeship with the Austrian-born painter Samuel Brecher. Despite her teacher’s adherence to realism, Herrera made tentative steps towards abstraction. Two surviving early portraits, one of a male figure, another a female, make use of blocks of colour delineating parts of the bodies and background. From 1943 to 1947 she studied at the Art Students League in New York, but was increasingly dissatisfied with the traditional approach of her teachers. She later noted that her friendship with the abstract artist Barnett Newman and his wife, Annalee, proved the greater education. “He had such incredible insight into the artist,” she said. “And that was the best university you could have.” In 1948 Herrera and Loewenthal moved to Paris. Living on the Left Bank in Montparnasse, she made contact with Sonia Delaunay, Jean Arp and other prominent figures of the Salon des Réalités Nouvelles. It was under their influence that Herrera dropped the lingering remnants of figuration. “It was a struggle,” she noted in a 2010 interview with the Guardian of this development in her art. “An interesting struggle.” In 1950 she had her first solo show, back at the Lyceum in Havana, where she showed a series of large, angry, gestural paintings, works which she described as a reaction against her home city. The artist noted that the reception from the local audience was largely negative. Green Garden (1950), made back in Paris, was the last of Herrera’s work that had any subject other than the formal devices of geometry and colour. Framed against a brown background were curving organic forms in a variety of green tones. The canvas was stretched around a circular frame, the first of many irregular shaped paintings. Iberic, painted a year later, took similar form, but this time, bar unity in the autumnal, burnished red, orange and black interlocking shapes, it bore not the slightest allusion to figuration. The couple returned to New York in 1954. Herrera then stayed in the US, despite the lack of attention afforded her work. Two years later she had a solo exhibition and work included in two group shows, both of which focused on Cuban art, something that irritated her. “I don’t believe the ‘Cuban painter’ exists,” she later stated. “The artist is universal.” Between 1958 and 1962 she did not exhibit at all and she and her husband struggled financially. Fidel Castro assumed power in 1959 and rent payments from a family property in Havana failed to get through. Herrera made efforts to bring some of her family’s more valuable belongings to New York and put them up for sale. A year later her brother Antonio was given a 22-year prison sentence for “anti-revolutionary activity”. For the next four decades she fell into a cycle of occasional small solo exhibitions and only slightly more frequent participation in groups shows. In the late 1960s she was awarded two fellowships from the Cintas Foundation and in 1977 a grant by the Creative Artists Public Service, but Herrera and Loewenthal sought out a cheap neighbourhood so they could live solely on his teaching salary. From 1988 to 2005 she managed only a single solo show, at El Museo del Barrio, New York, an exhibition of her black and white paintings from the 1950s. She blamed her lack of success unequivocally on sexism. She recalled being explicitly told that while she was a great painter, a gallerist could not give her a show because of her gender. “Everything was controlled by men,” she noted. “Not just art.” Now Herrera’s work is held in the collections of the Smithsonian and the Hirshhorn museums in Washington; the Pérez Art Museum, Miami; Tate Modern in London; and the Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Havana; as well as MoMa, the Whitney and the Walker. In 2019 her public sculpture was shown in City Hall Park in New York, moving to Buffalo Bayou Park in Houston in 2020 to coincide with a retrospective at the city’s Museum of Fine Arts. In 2019 she was made an honorary Royal Academician, the French government awarding her the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres the following year. “I was left alone to refine and distil my art for decades,” she said of her late-starting career. “I have no regrets.” Loewenthal died in 2000. • Carmen Herrera, artist, born 31 May 1915; died 12 February 2022Plans to offer Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 have been delayed by the government because the jabs have not been deemed urgent. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) decided more than a week ago to expand the vaccination programme to all that age group and handed its advice to ministers. However, the government has not publicly declared whether it will go ahead with the offer and is still “reviewing” the evidence for another week. The delay represents a break with its previous moves to accept JCVI advice straight away. The decision is now expected to be announced on 21 February, when a long-term strategy for “living with Covid” is to be outlined by Boris Johnson. It is understood any vaccination programme for five- to 11-year-olds would not start until Easter (mid-April) at the earliest. JCVI members told the Guardian they were in the dark as to reasons for the delay. But the holdup appears, at least in part, to be down to the JCVI advice that the jabs are non-urgent. A government spokesperson said: “We have received advice from the JCVI as part of the wider work on the living with Covid strategy so we will set out more details in due course. You can expect more detail next week.” The decision to offer the jab to clinically vulnerable children in the five-to-11 age group was made in December. Prof Christina Pagel, director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit and a member of the Independent Sage group of experts, criticised the approach. “I definitely welcome the news that parents are given the choice whether to vaccinate their primary school-age children with a vaccine that has proven both very safe and very effective. Unfortunately it is coming too late to prevent the maybe half a million or more infections in five- to 11-year-olds this year so far, and the lack of transparency around JCVI decision-making and government intervention remains worrying,” she said. “Waiting until after the end of term seems perverse, when rates in that age group are the highest in all age groups. This delay in announcing is just causing additional stress and confusion for the many families that have been waiting to vaccinate their children with no clarity.” Dr Simon Williams, a behavioural scientist at the University of Swansea, also expressed concern. “The fact that the JCVI have now apparently recommended the offer, and the UK government have delayed action on this, despite the fact that a majority of parents report wanting it for their children, and the fact that Covid is ripping through the primary school population, beggars belief,” he said. Dr Nathalie MacDermott, of King’s College London, a clinical doctor sub-specialising in paediatric infectious diseases in the NHS, also raised questions about transparency. “It is unusual that the government have chosen not to announce the decision made by the JCVI in relation to the immunisation of five- to 11-year-olds against Covid-19, particularly as they have not given a clear reason for this,” she said. “If they are doing this because they are seeking information or evidence from other sectors then this is perhaps understandable, but then this reason should be clearly stated … To simply delay … without giving a reason, when it is public knowledge a decision has been made, raises concerns, not least since recent comments and decisions relating to public health no longer seem to be ‘following the science’.” Mike Short, Unison’s head of education, said: “Offering the vaccine to younger children is crucial if many more hours of learning are not to be lost. Ministers should stop dithering and announce jab plans for all primary pupils to reassure parents and school staff. “Covid is running rife in schools. The half-term holidays should help infection rates, but the prime minister’s decision to jettison sensible isolation rules next week could make everything significantly worse.” Prof Penny Ward, visiting professor in pharmaceutical medicine at King’s College London, said: “Additional issues which come into play include how to schedule these vaccinations in the context not only of Covid vaccination delivery but also delivering other childhood vaccines, which are equally important in this age group, in the context of a service which is overstretched.”Time to wrap up.. here are today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW People with children and renters are more likely to have seen their spending on utility bills increase while working from home during the coronavirus pandemic, official figures released this morning suggest. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said almost half of people who worked from home had spent less than they would have normally, with reduced costs for travel and food offset by an increase in spending on gas, electricity and internet access. However, it said the change in spending patterns was more pronounced for some people in the survey of more than 3,000 adults in Great Britain undertaken by government statisticians last month. As many as 92% of people working from home who live in rented accommodation reported increased spending on utilities, compared with 86% for home workers who were paying a mortgage and 77% for those who owned their homes outright. Here’s an ONS twitter thread with the key points too: A former postal worker fought back tears as he recounted how he faced financial ruin and battled suicidal thoughts as a result of errors in the Post Office’s IT system, which showed that money was going missing from one of the branches he ran. Baljit Sethi was overcome by emotion on several occasions as he gave evidence to an independent inquiry looking into how hundreds of Post Office workers were wrongfully accused of theft, fraud and false accounting as a result of computer errors. The 69-year-old and his wife, Anjana, who have three children, successfully ran a Post Office branch near Romford in Essex for several decades, and took on another branch near Brentwood in 2001. A year later, the Horizon computer system showed a £17,000 hole in the Brentwood branch’s account, which the Sethis were asked to cover out of their own pocket. “I was so down and out, at one stage I was thinking of contemplating suicide. But then I thought no, this is the easy way out. What about my family, my children?” Sethi’s contract with the Post Office was terminated. He said he informed the company there was a problem. “I knew there was something wrong with the system, but no one wanted to know.” Sethi was the first witness to give evidence to the Post Office Horizon IT inquiry on the human impact of the failings of the company’s software. The inquiry is part of an investigation into one of the biggest miscarriages of justice in British legal history. Here’s the full story: European stock markets also closed solidly in the red. Germany’s DAX fell 2%, as did Italy’s FTSE Mib, while France’s CAC lost 2.3% and Spain’s IBEX lost 2.5%. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, sums up the day: “Very few stocks trading on the FTSE 100 today managed to make it into positive territory. Concerns that tensions in the Ukraine are close to turning into conflict unsettled markets right across Europe as investors considered the potential implications. No one would be surprised to find travel stocks amongst the hardest hit and Wizz Air, Carnival, IAG and TUI all sustained losses. Today has been one of those days when fear tumbles into volatility helped by some investors rushing to take profits just in case today’s fall is just the first step down but ready to back buy bargains if the price is right tomorrow. The mid-cap FTSE 250 index has closed 1.95% lower, which knocks around £7.75bn off the index. Budget airline Wizz Air lost 6.3%, and cruise operator Carnival fell 4.8%, while cyber-defence firm Darktrace was the top faller (-10.6%). Michael Hewson of CMC Markets explains: Whichever way the chips fall, airlines have come under the most pressure with British Airways owner IAG leading the [FTSE 100] fallers, although Wizz Air has also seen steep falls giving its broader exposure to Eastern Europe. After a rough day, the FTSE 100 stock index has closed down 129 points or 1.69% at 7532 points. That knocks around £34bn off the value of the blue-chip index, as Ukraine tensions hit stocks. Airline group IAG, which owns British Airways, fell 5.6%, while financial stocks such as Barclays (-5.1%), Lloyds (-4.2%) and NatWest (-4.1%) were also in the top fallers. US government bond yields have also risen, as traders anticipate a series of American interest rate rises through this year. In the bond markets, the yield (or interest rate) on UK two-year government debt has risen to its highest level since 2011. Yields rise when bond price fall. The yield on two-year gilts rose as high as 1.5% today, nudging above over the five-year gilt yield (1.49%). Typically, a longer-dated bond ought to trade at a higher yield (to reflect the greater risk of holding it), so when that flips, it can be a signal of an economic downturn. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets explains: Banks have taken a bit of a kicking, after decent gains year to date, largely down to an inversion of the yield curve, as 5-year gilt yields fall below 2-year gilt yields, although we have been here before in the second half of 2019, and the beginning of 2020. Typically, a yield curve inversion is a forerunner, or warning of a possible recession, and while higher yields are widely seen as a good thing, if there is little difference between short- and long-term rates then banks’ ability to make a decent return is hindered. Barclays, NatWest and Lloyds Banking Group are all lower. Stocks are turning south in London in late trading. With an hour to go, the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares is down 2.1%, off 161 points at around 7500 points. Financial stocks are weaker, with Barclays down 5.7% and Lloyds and NatWest losing around 5%. Travel stocks are still sliding too, with British Airways parent company IAG losing 6.4%. The FTSE 250 index of medium-sized companies is down around 2.3% - with cybersecurity firm Darktrace off 9.4%, and budget airline Wizz dropping almost 8%. Energy stocks are lower in New York, with the oil price having dropped back from its earlier seven-year highs. The Dow Jones industrial average is dropping lower, now down 0.65% in choppy trading. Oil producer Chevron has dropped 1.3%, while the Dow fallers are led by pharmacy group Walgreens Boots Alliance (-2.8%), conglomerate 3M (-2%) and IBM (-1.6%). Here’s our news story on the surge in petrol prices, which are expected to climb further in coming weeks, adding to the burden on UK households’ already squeezed budgets. The New York stock market has opened cautiously, as concerns over the Ukraine crisis and likely US interest rate rises weigh on investors’ minds. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US companies has dropped by 0.45%, or 156 points, to 34,581 points, adding to Friday night’s losses. The broader S&amp;P 500 index is flat, while the tech-focused Nasdaq is up 0.5%. Fiona Cincotta, Senior Financial Markets Analyst at City Index, says a signal from Vladimir Putin that talks with NATO &amp; the US will continue has helped stabilise markets. Traders will continue to monitor the situation closely. Wars are bad news for financial markets and risk assets. The markets hate uncertainty, so the stabilizing of the situation is bringing some relief. However given that Russia is a major oil &amp; grain supplier and is a key producer of palladium, used in catalytic converters fears of price rises are very real. Global finance ministers have warned Russia that there will be severe sections should they invade. However, it’s worth keeping in mind that Europe is heavily dependent on Russia for energy supply, so sanctions could be met with Russia restricting energy supply to Europe which could not only slow growth but also send energy prices surging higher. One of America’s senior central bankers has called for a rapid rise in interest rates, sticking to a position that spooked Wall Street last week. St. Louis Federal Reserve President James Bullard has told CNBC that the Fed needs to react to accelerating inflation, after it hit a 40-year high of 7.5% in January. Bullard told CNBC’s “Squawk Box” show that Fed’s credibility was ‘on the line’: “I do think we need to front-load more of our planned removal of accommodation than we would have previously. We’ve been surprised to the upside on inflation. This is a lot of inflation in the US economy... 7.5% on the headline CPI. “Our credibility is on the line here and we do have to react to the data. However, I do think we can do it in a way that’s organized and not disruptive to markets.” Last Thursday, Bullard rattled markets by saying he thought the Fed should raise its benchmark short-term borrowing rate a full percentage point by July. That triggered investors to price in a faster pace of rate rises, and the possibility of a 50-basis point hike in March, rather than a more typical 25bp move. Inflation in India has hit its highest level in seven months, as cost of living pressures build globally. India’s annual retail inflation rose to 6.01% in January, its highest pace since June, up from 5.66% in December. It was lifted by prices of food and manufactured items, as well as higher fuel costs. That takes the Consumer Prices Index above the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation target of 2% to 6%. Bloomberg has more details: The gains were driven by rising cost of food and fuel. Food price inflation accelerated 5.43%, while clothing and footwear prices rose 8.84% and fuel and light prices rose 9.32% A surge in oil prices and upbeat demand following fewer pandemic curbs are seen adding to price pressures, leading many economists to question the RBI’s dovish inflation projection BP’s chief executive, Bernard Looney, has said today that the oil major is sticking with its Russian oil and gas business. Reuters has the details: BP is the largest foreign investor in Russia with a 19.75% stake in the country’s national oil company Rosneft. It also holds stake in several other oil and gas projects in the country. “Quite frankly, there is no impact on our ongoing operations in Russia and we are sticking to the business,” Looney said at a conference in Cairo. He added that BP will comply with any western sanctions on Moscow. BP’s near-20% stake in Rosneft is a legacy of its joint venture with a string of Russian oligarchs, called TNK-BP, which was later dissolved to form Rosneft. That stake helped to lift BP’s annual profits to an eight-year high: Amid growing fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Milan stock exchange’s FTSE Mib index shed 3.7% in early trading, in line with other European markets, our Southern Italy correspondent Lorenzo Tondo writes. With markets now recovering a little, the FTSE Mib is now down 2.3% so far today. The spread between Italian government bonds and German borrowing costs widened today too. Italy’s news agency ANSA said: “The spread between Italy’s 10-year BTP bond and the German Bund rose to 169 basis points, up from 165 at the end of business on Friday, while the yield on the BTP was 1.90%.” Italian Foreign Minister Luigi Di Maio will travel on a diplomatic mission to Moscow and Kiev on Tuesday for talks over the Ukraine crisis. In the retail world, JD Sports and Footasylum have been fined almost £5m for sharing commercially sensitive information during an investigation by the UK competition watchdog. The CMA imposed the penalty for breaching an order that barred the two merged companies from integrating further, after finding that their chairmen held multiple clandestine meetings including one caught on video in a car park near Bury in Greater Manchester. More here: The London stock market has recovered a little ground, with the FTSE 100 index now down 1.3% after a nervous morning. It’s off by around 95 points, or 1.25%, at 7565 points, with airline group IAG (which owns British Airways) recovering a little, but still down 5%. It’s followed by industrial software group Aveva (-4.6%) and investment group Abrdn (-4.5%). Financial stocks are also lower. This would be the Footsie’s biggest drop in three weeks (since Monday 24 January, when worries about a possible Ukraine invasion rocked markets). Brad Bechtel of Jefferies says markets have begun the week on a sour note: It’s all about Russia/Ukraine as we start the week. The tensions remain elevated with very little progress from any of the talks that have occurred between Russia and western nations. Biden and Putin had an hour-long chat on Saturday and nothing came of it. US tech stocks are heading for a soft open: The UK tax department has seized three non-fungible tokens (NFTs) as part of an investigation into a suspected VAT fraud scheme involving 250 fake companies. HM Revenue and Customs said on Monday it had seized the NFTs and arrested three people on suspicion of attempting to defraud it out of £1.4m. It is the first time a UK law enforcement agency has seized an NFT. NFTs are unique digital tokens that first appeared in 2014 and can be bought and sold in crypto or traditional currencies but which have no tangible form of their own. Nick Sharp, HMRC’s deputy director economic crime, said the NFT seizure “serves as a warning to anyone who thinks they can use crypto assets to hide money from HMRC”, adding: “We constantly adapt to new technology to ensure we keep pace with how criminals and evaders look to conceal their assets.” Here’s the full story: Helen Davenport, partner at the law firm Gowling WLG, says “This clearly demonstrates the impact-growth of this area and the difficulties that fraudsters face when using crypto-assets to hide their wrongdoings - contrary perhaps to some public perception regarding their nature. HMRC’s move, alongside a recent crackdown by the ASA on misleading advertising around cryptocurrencies, further demonstrates the authorities and regulators’ growing focus on crypto-assets. “It is also a good example of HMRC’s practices evolving in line with the changing nature of the economy and taking into account the increasing value and prevalence of digital assets.” The jump in fuel costs will put more pressure on household budgets, with inflation expected to rise above 7% in April. British employers are expecting to award pay rises of 3% in 2022, the highest in at least a decade, though well below the rate of inflation, as they try to recruit and retain workers, according to a new survey of businesses. The expected pay rise comes amid persistent signs of a tight labour market, with almost two-thirds of employers expecting to have difficulties filling job vacancies in the coming six months, according to a survey of more than 1,000 recruitment and human resources workers by YouGov for the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD). Pay growth has risen sharply higher than it was before the pandemic, thanks in part to the pace of the economic recovery following coronavirus lockdowns at the start of the pandemic in 2020. Average weekly earnings rose by 4.2% year on year in the three months to November 2021, faster than at any point between the financial crisis in 2008 and the start of the pandemic in 2020, according to the Office for National Statistics. The latest data on wages and employment will be published on Tuesday, with economists expecting pay growth to slow, but remain above pre-pandemic levels. More details here. Petrol and diesel prices in the UK have hit record highs, adding to the cost of living squeeze on families and the inflationary pressures hitting businesses. The average price of a litre of petrol topped 148p for the first time ever on Sunday, at 148.02p. That lifts the petrol price over the previous high, set in late November. It means filling up a 55-litre family car from empty would cost £81.41, points out motoring body RAC. Diesel has also reached a new all-time high at 151.57p, having risen above its previous record last week. RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams warned that fuel prices are likely to keep rising, with the Ukraine crisis having pushed oil to a seven-year high this morning. With the oil price teetering on the brink of $100 a barrel and retailers keen to pass on the increase in wholesale fuel quickly, new records could now be set on a daily basis in the coming weeks. “The oil price is rising due to tensions between Russia – the world’s third biggest oil producer – and Ukraine, along with oil production remaining out of kilter with demand as the world emerges from the pandemic. As a result drivers in the UK could be in for an even worse ride as pump prices look certain to go up even more. Luke Bosdet, the AA’s fuel price spokesman, said that worries about energy supplies have pushed up fuel costs: “The cost of living crisis has been ratcheted up yet another notch, tightening the vice on family spending when it faces other pressures from impending domestic energy cost and tax increases. Prices have soared on the back of wholesale fuel prices, which have jumped amid a resurgence in demand following the reopening of global economies, but have also been spurred in recent days by concerns that Russian tensions could have an impact on supply. Wall Street is on track to open lower, as fears of a Ukraine invasion worry investors. The S&amp;P 500 futures contract is down 0.75%, with the Nasdaq seen dropping around 1%. New York stocks fell on Friday night, with the S&amp;P 500 benchmark losing 1.9% after the US warned a Russian invasion of Ukraine could come within days. Mounting fears of an imminent Russian attack on Ukraine triggered a global share sell-off on Monday, and prompted oil prices to hit a seven-year high. European markets followed Asian shares sharply lower, with the UK’s FTSE 100 down 160 points, or 2%, at 7,501 in morning trading. Travel-related stocks were hardest hit, including the British Airways owner, IAG, which was the biggest faller on London’s blue-chip index, down 7%. The jet engine maker Rolls-Royce was down 4%, as only five companies on the FTSE 100 made it into positive territory. There were heavy falls across Europe, led by Germany’s Dax, which was down 3.7%. Italy’s FTSE MiB, France’s Cac and Spain’s Ibex all fell by about 3.5%. Heightened expectations of a Russian invasion of Ukraine prompted renewed fears of disrupted energy exports at a time when the market is already tight. It drove the price of Brent crude oil to above $96 (£71) a barrel for the first time since September 2014, before easing back to $94. Here’s the full story: Oil has dipped back from its seven-year highs, with Brent crude back at $94.50 per barrel. The International Energy Agency’s (IEA) chief Fatih Birol this morning urged the OPEC+ group of oil producers to close the gap between its words and its actions (more here). On Friday, the IEA said the failure of Opec and its allies to hit their production quotes was creating market volatility. After over two hours trading, European stock markets are still deep in the red, with Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC down around 3.2%. Every stock on the DAX is lower, led by Deutsche Bank (-4.8%) and insurance groups Munich Re (-4.5%) and Allianz (-4.3%). Tiremaker Continental (-4.3%) and carmaker Volkswagen (-4.1%) are also in the DAX top fallers. It’s a similar picture in Paris, where banks such as Societe Generale (-6.5%) and BNP Paribas are in the fallers (-5.1%), along with industrial groups and carmakers such as Renault (-4.9%). Neil Wilson of Markets.com explains: Banks and Autos led the decliners on the [pan-European] Stoxx 600 with losses of around 3-4% Banks are being hit as they are not only exposed to Russia through outstanding loans (SocGen, UniCredit etc) but also fears that Russia could be cut off from the Swift payments network. The VIX index, which tracks volatility in the markets (known as Wall Street’s fear gauge) has risen to its highest level in just over two weeks: The US dollar is strengthening today, hitting a two-week high, as nervous investors seek a safe haven. This has pulled the pound down by half a cent to $1.351, with the euro down 0.3% at $1.132, their lowest levels in around a week. Carlo Alberto De Casa, external market analyst at Kinesis Money, says the Ukraine crisis is Tensions between Russia and the West are the main market driver today. For months inflation, central banks and monetary policy have been the main topics for investors. The situation has suddenly changed in the last few days, as tension over Ukraine rose. On the currency markets, the US Dollar remains strong, while both WTI (West Texas Intermediate), and Brent (the benchmark for the oil of the North European Sea) are traded above $94/barrel. The 100-dollar mark does not seem too far and this, of course, could push inflation even further. The price of gas has jumped, on concerns that Russian supplies to Europe could be disrupted. The UK wholesale gas contract for next-day delivery has risen 8% to 197p per therm. That’s a two-week high, and over four times its level a year ago, when gas cost around 42p/therm. It’s still below December’s record highs around 450p/therm. European energy prices have also jumped, with the Dutch wholesale gas benchmarks up over 10%. Bloomberg has the details: “The immediate focus is on the potential for a disruption in Russian energy supplies to Europe, which would be very difficult to deal with, and could create a true energy shortage even beyond the challenge that we’re already seeing,” said Jason Bordoff, director of the Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University. “But before that, Europe was already in an energy crisis.” Benchmark European gas prices jumped as much as 14% to 88 euros a megawatt-hour, the highest for a most-active contract since Jan. 31. German electricity for March surged 11% to 177 euros a megawatt-hour. Russia is Europe’s largest supplier of gas, of which a third flows through Ukraine’s gas pipelines to countries across the continent. Russian gas flows have been around a quarter lower than usual over the past year, and a invasion of Ukraine could lead to a cut in exports. Last week, US President Joe Biden vowed to shut down the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany if Moscow invades Ukraine. It runs under the Baltic Sea, so would deprive Kyiv of lucrative gas transit fees, but does not yet have clearance to operate. Russia and Ukraine’s government bonds are falling heavily this morning, on concerns that an invasion could be imminent. Reuters has the details: Both country’s bonds fell to the lowest of the crisis so far, with Ukraine’s government bonds losing as much as 7 cents, or roughly 10%, and Russia’s bonds down as much as 3.1 cents. The selloff is gathering pace in London, with the FTSE 100 index now down 1.9%. The blue-chip index has shed around 150 points to 7510, with travel stocks and banks still leading the fallers in the City. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor says: “Geopolitical tensions between Russia and Ukraine have sparked nervousness at the start of the week with European markets opening in the red, falling to three-week lows driven by travel &amp; leisure and the banking sector. The weekend has provided no let up for markets after Wall Street’s sell-off on Friday when the S&amp;P 500 slumped nearly 2%. The FTSE 100 is under pressure, heading back down towards 7,500 as the next major support level. While most stocks in the index are in the red, precious metals miner Fresnillo is among a handful of stocks in the green as investors flock to its relative safety.” Europe’s stock markets have all tumbled in early trading. Germany’s DAX index has dropped by 2.75%, France’s CAC index is 2.7% lower, while Italy’s FTSE MIB has lost 3.65% as fears of a Ukraine invasion rattle investors. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says ‘’Just as the storm of Covid appeared to be receding, the growing expectation of an invasion of Ukraine is the fresh threat now unnerving investors, with confidence plunging in many parts of the world. With worries that inflation is already running far too hot, the possibility Russia troops could move across the border has led to another surge in the oil price, she adds: Energy markets are clearly on edge and if supplies are threatened there is a risk oil will shoot up even higher, adding to price pressures for companies. The FTSE 250 index of mid-size companies listed in London has fallen by 1.8%, dragged down by travel companies. Budget airlines Wizz Air (-8.8%) and easyJet (-3.9%), cruise operator Carnival (-7.6%) and holiday operator TUI (-5.9%) are all among the big fallers. British Airways parent company, IAG, is leading the FTSE 100 fallers, with its shares tumbling 7.5%. Rolls-Royce, which makes and services jet engines, has fallen 4.5%. Financial stocks are also leading in the fallers, with Barclays down 4.7%, Lloyds down 4% and NatWest off 3.8%. The UK’s FTSE share index has fallen 1.3% at the start of trading. The blue-chip index has dropped by around 100 points to 7560, as the Ukraine crisis worries investors. Almost every stock is in the red, with 95 of the 100 companies on the FTSE 100 opening lower. The Ukraine crisis could drive Brent crude oil over $100/barrel for the first time since September 2014, analysts say. Naeem Aslam, chief market analyst at Avatrade, explains: The potential jump in oil prices depends on what sort of sanctions the United States of America and its allies are likely to impose on Russia if it actually invades its neighbour. Even before the conflict, oil prices were under pressure as demand was rapidly climbing because of the global economic recovery and supply-side constraints and lower inventories. The price of Brent crude oil is currently trading around $95.70 per barrel, while the price of WTI crude oil is nearly $94.61 per barrel. In Moscow, the benchmark RTS share index has dropped around 2.9% in early trading, to around a two-week low. The dollar-denominated RTS is down around 10% since the start of 2022, having hit a one-year low in January when fears of conflict in Ukraine rattled markets. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The markets are on edge today as fears of imminent Russian military action in Ukraine rise, hitting stocks and pushing oil to a seven-year high. Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, hit the $96/barrel mark for the first time since September 2014, as geopolitical risks over Ukraine ripple through global markets. Oil jumped as traders anticipated that a Russian invasion of Ukraine would disrupt energy exports. That would cause disruption at a time when the market is already tight with demand rising and supplies stretched. Such a supply shock would rattle economies emerging from the pandemic, driving inflation even higher, while the broader financial system could be rocked if sanctions are imposed on Russia. As Kyle Rodda of IG explains: Markets are preparing for the risk of war in Europe, and it’s adding to the complex of issues driving uncertainty and volatility in global markets currently. US reports on Friday suggested an invasion by Russian into Ukraine could come as soon as this week – earlier than expected, because it’s been thought the Russians would avoid making such a move before the end of the Beijing Olympics to placate the Chinese – with further reports today suggesting Wednesday may be the planned day. From a humanitarian point of view, international relations pundits suggest this could be catastrophic. For the markets, the concern is about the impact such a conflict will have on fragile energy markets, Europeans economic growth, and the broader financial system if sanctions are slapped on Russia Friday night’s warning by the US of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine soon has rattled investors, hitting stock markets. With talks between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin by phone over the weekend failing to ease tensions, risk sentiment is souring. Stocks markets across Asia-Pacific have fallen sharply, with Japan’s Nikkei has lost 2.2% and China’s CSI 300 index is down over 1%. European markets are set to open lower, with the UK’s FTSE 100 index currently expected to drop around 1% when the market opens at 8am in London. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv today, as western governments step up their diplomatic push to avert a Russian invasion of Ukraine. On the eve of his departure, Scholz said that any Russia attack would lead to “tough sanctions that we have carefully prepared and which we can immediately put into force”. He said: “(These trips are) about how we can find a way to ensure peace in Europe,” Scholz will then visit Moscow on Tuesday to press home the economic cost of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Here’s our latest news story on the Ukraine crisis: Investors are already jittery about inflation, with prices rising at the fastest rate in 40 years in the US, and 30 years in the UK. That’s expected to push interest rates higher this year, with America’s Federal Reserve expected to hike borrowing costs up to seven times in 2021. The agenda 7am GMT: China’s Foreign direct investment data for January Noon GMT: India’s inflation rate for January 4.15pm GMT: ECB president Christine Lagarde speech at the European Parliament on the 20th anniversary of euro banknotes and coinsNatWest has become the first bank in 2022 to announce it will close some of its outlets as customers shun branches for mobile banking. The high street lender will shut 32 branches across its NatWest and Royal Bank of Scotland brands in England and Wales over the next year. The bank, which is majority owned by the taxpayer, said the closures were a result of customers shifting to mobile and online banking “because it is faster and easier for people to manage their financial lives”. It confirmed 21 of the closures would be NatWest branches, and 11 of them RBS. Planned closures include the RBS branch in NatWest’s headquarters in Bishopsgate, in the heart of the City of London. Most staff will be moved to other branches, but 12 jobs will be at risk. A report by the banking trade body UK Finance underlined the rapid pace of change in spending habits during the pandemic, with more people retreating from cash and opting for phones and computers to pay for goods and services online. NatWest’s move may fuel concerns about millions of people being left behind as the shift to a cashless society speeds up. About 1.2 million consumers mainly used cash for their day-to-day spending during 2020, down from 2.1 million people in 2019. Addressing concerns about how the closures will impact groups who do not use digital services, the bank said: “We take our responsibility seriously to support the people who face challenges in moving online, so we are investing to provide them with support and alternatives that work for them.” NatWest will contact vulnerable customers before the closures to discuss alternative payment methods, a spokesperson said, alongside the rollout of a new nationwide postal cash delivery service. The round of cuts comes after consumer organisation Citizens Advice revealed more than 200 post offices have closed in the past two years – the equivalent of two a week – leaving “huge gaps” in communities that depend on them for essential tasks such as paying bills. Older and disabled people, carers, and people who do not use the internet are also disproportionately affected, the report said. The government owns about 52% of NatWest after spending £45bn bailing out the lender 13 years ago. It plans to sell a stake over the next year in a trading plan that will return the bank to majority private ownership. Analysts predict the bank’s operating profit before tax in 2021, to be announced on Friday, will be just above £4bn.Before the Super Bowl could officially kick off in Los Angeles, someone had to raise the curtain on this distinctly post-Covid festival of American glitz and glamour – so why not the biggest movie star on the planet. In a WWE-style teaser that played over the enormous video board that hovers over SoFi Stadium like a serpentine halo, the Rock set the tone for Super Gold Sunday, TV-speak for the cosmic-like coincidence of a Super Bowl falling during the middle weekend of the Winter Olympics – a first. Over the course of a two-minute monologue the actor-wrestler also known as Dwayne Johnson valorized the gladiators here as well as the others gritting it out under our flag in the Beijing Olympics. And he made sure to justify why we should stay tuned to the exception of all else. “It’s about the idea that this game [the Super Bowl] and these Games [the Olympics] can achieve one of the most precious feats of all – bringing us all together for a celebration of who we are.” And as 70,000 fans at SoFi Stadium lost their minds when the Rock was revealed at midfield, a cordless mic in the grip of his anaconda-like right arm and a single eyebrow arched, you couldn’t help but wonder: Um, who are we exactly? Set aside for a moment the fact that the Beijing Olympics have been less a celebration of human achievement than a panoply of human rights crises, free speech and press crackdowns and doping-aided cheating scandals; what’s more, the Games appear to be filling time until war breaks out in Ukraine. Here in Los Angeles, the Super Bowl followed the Hollywood cliche of a tale of two cities. Amid the star-studded confines of SoFi Stadium was a story of wretched excess. But the scene outside offered a sadder story of the city’s many unhoused citizens. True, it’s a story as old as modern capitalism itself. And as a former Californian I was sadly prepared for the sight of people living in tents on downtown city streets just trying to survive. Still: there was something about the weekend’s juxtaposition of haves and have nots that was especially jarring. It’s one thing for a city to help erect a $5bn stadium less than an hour’s drive from Skid Row. It’s quite another for jersey-wearing fans, many holding four-figure tickets for the big game, to sidestep Angelenos pushing belongings-filled shopping carts or passed out on the sidewalk altogether along the route to the pregame carnival around the LA Convention Center. The unhoused who weren’t totally left alone were shooed away by street sweepers and security forces on bikes. These Dickensian scenes unfolded amid near-90-degree temperatures, a reminder of yet another way in which one of the more hospitable refuges for the unhoused is becoming increasingly untenable. It’s a class disparity that only figures to widen as LA builds itself up to host the 2028 Summer Games, both literally and figuratively. But of course the Super Bowl’s job isn’t to call attention to that. Its job is to entertain. It’s to stage a $9m half-time show headlined by a kid from Compton who parlayed his musical talent to pull himself out of inner-city poverty on the way to becoming a near billionaire. It’s about Sean Penn, Martha Stewart and other loaded A-listers rooting on the equally well-heeled celebrities on the field. It’s about suspending disbelief to properly immerse ourselves in entertainment. It’s about dreaming of who we could be instead of accepting what we are – one nation, under consumption, ever divisible. The only notable exception is the Rock. Everybody genuinely seems to like him. The Super Bowl was supposed to be LA’s comeback party. But if anything, it showed just how much the place hasn’t changed. This is very much still a city in which staggering wealth and abject poverty coexist without ever really touching, like so much oil and vinegar. When it comes to all-American celebrations of who we are, in the end, the city was a perfect host.At 6.30am on the day after the tsunami hit, I went into work. I am a procurement officer at the Ministry of Lands in Tonga, and work as a photographer on the side. I had seen videos on Facebook that showed the waves from the tsunami reached the ministry’s building in the capital of Nuku’alofa and I wanted to see if I could help with the cleanup. Top: A boat found more than 60 metres from the sea on Tungua. The owner checks for damage and a way to haul it back to the ocean. Bottom: A police station on the beach on Nomuka island next to what remains of a main road. When I got to town, I was shocked to see the capital looking like a dump. I started snapping pictures. There was no one at the office when I got there so I went over to the National Emergency Management Office (Nemo) to see if anyone was there. One of our heads of division, Viliami Folau, was there and was trying to reach any of the staff members to be part of the first response team to the Ha’apai islands, which were nearest to the volcano, to see the extent of the damage. But communications were down and he couldn’t reach anyone. He asked me if I would be willing to go since he couldn’t reach anyone else. Of course, I agreed. Staff from the Ministry of Health counting supply stocks as people approach asking for medicine. At 2pm the navy patrol boat left for the Ha’apai group of islands carrying me, another colleague, two police officers, three nurses, one doctor, two members from Nemo and the boat’s crew. The boat was stocked with whatever emergency supplies Nemo managed to get within that short period of time. Top: A primary school on the island of Tungua, the furthest point the tsunami reached. Bottom: Debris litters the streets on the island of Ha’afeva as children follow officials It took us more than 18 hours to get to Nomuka, the closest island of Ha’apai to Tonga’s main island Tongatapu – a trip that normally takes four hours. Debris in the water, mostly ash and volcanic rocks, kept causing our engine to fail. Top: Local people wait for the sun to set at a damaged community hall on Fonoi. Bottom: Dead fish strewn across the beach on Nomuka. As we reached Nomuka and the other islands in Ha’apai, the foul smell of dead fish and wet ash greeted us. When we arrived in Nomuka, the women were already in tears. The look in their eyes as they saw us coming in the boat was heartbreaking. They didn’t think that help was coming, since communications were down. Stories of what they experienced filled the beach – some were crying, some couldn’t complete their stories as they were too emotional to continue. It was clear the people of Nomuka were in fear of another eruption, because they were so close to the volcano. The tsunami wiped out the chairs and decorations at the Free Weslyan Church on Tungua island. I was broken to see what was happening. I didn’t realise this until later, but I was too shocked to take pictures while they were telling their stories. I was caught in the moment, reliving their experiences while passing on what I heard to the navy and the others on the boat. Some of those on Nomuka were willing to relocate to Tongatapu, leaving their history and connection to the island in search of a safer place to live.A senior Metropolitan police commander who wrote his force’s current drug strategy faces the sack after being accused of taking cannabis, LSD and magic mushrooms. Commander Julian Bennett – who oversaw the dismissal of two officers for drug misuse – took the drugs while on holiday in France, a gross misconduct hearing has been told. The police officer – who has been suspended on full pay since July 2021, pending an investigation by the Met’s directorate of professional standards – allegedly took the drugs on holiday between February 2019 and July 2020. He is accused of refusing to provide a drug sample on 21 July 2020. After being informed on that occasion that there was reasonable cause to suspect that he had used cannabis, he allegedly claimed he had taken CBD (cannabidiol) for a medical condition with his face as a reason for refusing. A photograph sent on WhatsApp showing cannabis on a table had been submitted as evidence, the hearing in London was told. The hearing, which had been listed to take place over the course of this week, was adjourned until 23 May this year after lawyers for Bennett argued that it would not be “fair” to proceed because they had not received all the WhatsApp messages, emails and SMSs they wanted, including a year’s worth from one witness. John Beggs, defending Bennett, said: “Although we are all committed to getting this hearing on the way in the public interest, in the interest of the Metropolitan police service and in the interest of Mr Bennett, fairness must trump disposition.” Beggs said the witness may have “cherry-picked” the messages that had been disclosed. Mark Ley-Morgan QC, representing the police, said they had disclosed all relevant material. Bennett, who faces dismissal from the force for gross misconduct over the alleged drug use, wrote the MPS drug strategy for 2017-21 as a commander for territorial policing. The document, titled “Dealing with the impact of drugs on communities”, set out plans to “raise awareness of the dangers of drug misuse”. Bennett also presided over 74 misconduct hearings, involving 90 officers, between June 2010 and February 2012, according to a freedom of information request lodged in 2021. Out of these hearings,, 56 officers were dismissed – more than 75%. A further FoI request in 2020 found that Bennett chaired 69 of the hearings during the time period and that two officers were dismissed for drugs misuse. When he was suspended, Bennett was a lead for the Met on criminal justice – an area that includes managing prosecutions and pandemic planning. He joined the force in 1977 and has served in a range of high-profile roles including operations to tackle moped gangs in London and planning for the 2012 London Olympics. He also chaired the panel that sacked PC Simon Harwood, the Met police officer who struck and pushed Ian Tomlinson as he walked away from riot officers on the fringe of the G20 protests in London, after a disciplinary hearing found he had committed gross misconduct. He headed a Scotland Yard panel that dismissed misconduct charges in 2019 against five officers involved in an incident that led to the death of Sean Rigg, a black musician. • This article’s headline was amended on 17 February 2022 to better reflect the text of the article.London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, ousted Cressida Dick as Met chief to deflect from his own failings, the chair of the Metropolitan Police Federation has said. Ken Marsh, who leads the body representing rank-and-file officers in Britain’s largest force, claimed his members had no faith in Khan and needed to support any changes otherwise they would not work. He insisted the Metropolitan police commissioner had been reforming the force’s culture before she was pushed out. Government sources say they believe radical change is needed in the Met, the same view held by Khan. The home secretary, Priti Patel, and Khan are expected this week to discuss the attributes they want to see in the next commissioner. A government source denied claims the mayor would be excluded from the selection process, pointing out it was mandated by law. In his attack, Marsh said Met morale was at rock bottom after Dick quit last week. Khan had told her that her plans for ridding the Met of racism, misogyny and boosting flagging public confidence were not good enough. Marsh said: “We’ve got to put some context on what we are talking about. The incidents that have taken place are horrific. We do not want these individuals in the job. “But the federation will continue to speak up for our good officers. We totally accept that we have to deliver for the public and work to improve confidence, but if you haven’t got your workforce with you then you are not going to achieve what you’re setting out to achieve. “Frankly, what we are viewing is politicians trying to use policing and the career of the country’s most senior police leader to deflect from their own failings.” Chris Excell, the chair of the Metropolitan Black Police Association, said the next commissioner had to accept the force was still plagued by institutional racism. “New leadership must be willing to fully acknowledge the importance of the task ahead and produce a plan of action that guards against deflection or non-acceptance of institutional racism,” Excell said. A Home Office source said that despite press reports over the weekend, the Conservative home secretary and the Labour mayor were in broad agreement. “Both of them believe there needs to be radical change in the Met. The need for radical change is evident for all to see,” they said. A spokesperson for the mayor hit back at the Marsh warning, downplaying the idea that the crisis would hamper efforts to rebuild public trust. “It was the mayor’s view that a change of leadership was the only way to address this crisis in trust,” they said. “The mayor has always made clear that there are thousands of incredibly brave and decent police officers at the Met who we owe a huge debt of gratitude. But the series of scandals seen in recent years has tarnished the reputation of the police, which is so crucial to policing by consent. “Downplaying the scale of the change required is only going to hinder, not help, the vital process of restoring Londoners’ trust in the Met.” Talks continue about how long Dick will remain as commissioner and whether she will get any payout. She had been granted a two-year contract extension due to start in April. She took an annual salary of £230,000 but was entitled to £40,000 a year more. Government and City Hall sources insist the search for her replacement will be genuinely open and there are no favourites in mind.