Conor Benn took a significant step up the ranks of the welterweight division, which is the most competitive category in contemporary boxing, when he stopped the American veteran Chris Algieri with a finish of clinical brutality near the end of the fourth round in Liverpool on Saturday night. It was a devastating stoppage, which was greeted ecstatically by Nigel Benn, Conor’s father, who roared his approval at ringside. Almost as impressively, the 25-year-old Benn boxed with a new maturity and calm throughout the contest. He also showed good defence as he slid away from Algieri’s punches with such alacrity that the crowd responded with appreciative applause. But from the outset the contest looked one-sided as Benn backed Algieri against the ropes. The older fighter stuck his tongue out in the opening round as if he had nothing to fear but at the break his cornermen were already trying to curb the swelling around his eyes. Algieri went down for the first time in the second round when a cuffing left hook caught him off balance. He tumbled heavily to the canvas and rolled towards the ropes but Algieri looked more aggrieved than hurt as he was forced to take a standing eight count. Benn retained his discipline through the next two rounds and, in the finest performance of his career so far, he sealed his 20th straight victory with authority. He forced Algieri to retreat to the ropes and, with 10 seconds left in the fourth round, produced his stunning knockout. A left jab down the pipe was followed by a perfect right hand which made Algieri crumple forward, in slow motion, before falling face first towards the canvas. It was a worrying knockout but, fortunately, Algieri was helped to his feet after a few minutes. Benn consoled him but it was a sad end to Algieri’s career. Beyond Benn’s impressive improvement this was a skilful piece of matchmaking. Algieri is well known in America, where he now works as a boxing pundit, and he remains in excellent condition. He had also lost only three bouts in his previous 28 and those defeats had been against Manny Pacquiao, Amir Khan and Errol Spence. Pacquiao and Spence are supreme talents and Benn has never faced a fighter of their calibre. Algieri used to be a solid pro and he would once have been a real test for Benn. But he is now 37. Victory over a faded Algieri does not mean Benn is ready to fight the prodigies of the division. Jaron Ennis and Vergil Ortiz are the two most intriguing young welterweights in boxing and Eddie Hearn, Benn’s promoter, knows he needs to keep his fighter away from such gifted company in the immediate future. Spence and Terence Crawford, the two kings of the division, offer an even more formidable threat. They are so good that they are both in the top five pound-for-pound rankings. Benn is hungry and intense, and he carries real power allied to his new composure, but he is still some way from being ready for any of the premier American welterweights. At least beating Algieri so decisively allows him to believe he is closing the gap which separates him from the very best in his red-hot division. In the other headline bout Ireland’s Katie Taylor, the undisputed world lightweight champion, won a clear decision on all three scorecards against Firuza Sharipova – her unheralded but tough opponent from Kazakhstan. Taylor has had some hard and testing bouts in recent years while compiling her flawless 20-0 record and she would have hoped for an easier night. Sharipova, who had exuded feisty confidence all week, came to win and she was ready to resort to roughhouse tactics to try to unsettle the far more experienced champion. But Taylor was willing to trade, trusting her faster hands against the technically sound and rugged challenger. The champion was far from her best but early in the second round she backed up Sharipova and caught her with a sharp left. In the corner after the round ice had to be applied to a swelling to Sharipova’s left eye. But Sharipova remained full of ambition and she won some rounds with her aggressive and determined boxing. She seemed undeterred by the cut over her left eye which bloodied her white top. She was intent on turning their battle into a dogfight and in the sixth round she was warned and deducted a point for hitting Taylor after they were told to break. There was plenty of brawling and Taylor looked a little flat but she still did the more accomplished work – although Sharipova won the eighth to show that she was still trying to find a way to win. But in the ninth Taylor snapped back Sharipova’s head with some accurate counters. The last of these landed just as the bell rang and the 27-year-old fighter from Kazakhstan smiled wearily at the champion. Sharipova came out fast for the last round and flurries of punches were greeted by whoops from her corner. But Taylor was still in control and, amid the grappling and brawling, she landed a final few combinations in mild rebuke of her spiky opponent. Taylor had told me a few weeks ago that, while knowing little about her opponent, she expected that Sharipova would have excellent technical skills – as most fighters schooled in Kazakhstan are good technicians. Sharipova matched that prediction, with added dollops of hostility and grit, but there was little doubt that Taylor had won the decision. The way is now clear for Taylor to fight Amanda Serrano, the great Puerto Rican, in the most lucrative contest in the history of women’s boxing. There are legitimate expectations that both Taylor and Serrano will make more than a million dollars when they meet in the ring next year. That will be a contest of great significance and, with Christmas looming and after a testing year, the 35-year-old champion deserves a break from the ring after another bruising if decisive victory.There is a contrarian view of Britain’s economic outlook. Those who subscribe to it argue that despite fresh government restrictions to combat the Omicron variant, the recovery is robust and the Bank of England will have to raise interest rates when it meets this week. It is a minority view in the City, but it could find favour inside Threadneedle Street when members of the nine-strong monetary policy committee (MPC) gather, and bring a surprise increase in the base rate from 0.1% to 0.25%. Three-quarters of investors are now betting on rates staying where they are, but Sanjay Raja, chief UK economist at Deutsche Bank, is not among them. “Fundamentally,” he says “news of the Omicron variant has changed very little on the medium-term economic outlook.” He points out that inflation is high and heading above 5%, there are record job vacancies and unemployment has continued to fall, even though the furlough scheme ended abruptly at the end of September. Over at the Bank of England, several hawkish policymakers believe that without higher borrowing costs to calm price increases, workers might start seeking double-digit wage rises, triggering a wage/price spiral and raising the spectre of soaring inflation into 2023 and beyond. George Buckley, chief economist at Nomura, asks: “Does the Bank really want to be in a position in two to three months’ time where inflation has risen further, the virus is once again in retreat, and yet it has failed to get policy rates off the ground?” The only reason for another delay would be if Office for National Statistics figures, due this week, shortly before the MPC meets, show a deterioration in the labour market, in particular a rise in unemployment or a slowing of wages growth. “The labour market is of course the only key data point between now and [the] meeting that could change things for us,” says Raja. Most economists in the Square Mile have cut the odds of a rate rise in response to the working from home directive issued by Downing Street. A dramatic slowdown in the UK’s GDP growth in October to just 0.1% – amid flagging business and consumer confidence before the government’s restrictions – is another factor that could weigh against a rate rise. That could mean Bank policymakers are forced to admit that rather than taking the lead among central banks and being the first to increase borrowing costs since the pandemic started, they will play the same game as the Bank of Japan, the People’s Bank of China and the European Central Bank (ECB), and keep credit ultra-cheap. There is a consensus in the City that the ECB, which also meets on Thursday, will reject calls for tighter monetary policies, especially from Germans afflicted by annual inflation already running at 6%. ECB president Christine Lagarde has sought to calm those concerned by rising prices, telling them inflation is “transitory” and tighter monetary policy will do little to depress inflationary pressures that date back a year or more in the supply chains of carmakers, laptop assemblers and timber importers. The US economy is the outlier. It has raced back to rude health on the back of a huge government stimulus package. Federal Reserve chief Jerome Powell said recently that inflation was “not transitory” and Fed action was needed to tame rising prices. After US inflation hit 6.8% in November, its highest level since 1982, analysts now expect four or even six rate rises by the end of 2023. But US economic growth has begun to wane, and Omicron could prove devastating for the large numbers of unvaccinated Americans. The outlook remains uncertain.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Ministers announced a huge expansion of the booster vaccine campaign on Saturday night, amid warnings that further restrictions will be needed imminently to prevent tens of thousands of deaths. With new Covid measures being discussed in Whitehall and claims of people being turned away from booster walk-in centres, third jabs will be opened up to those in their 30s from Monday in England. Those who had their second jab three months ago or more will be eligible. It follows a warning from leading scientists that failure to impose tougher Covid restrictions to limit the spread of the Omicron variant could lead to a further 25,000 to 75,000 deaths over the next five months. The researchers, based at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, predicted that a massive wave of infections was likely to sweep the nation in January. At best, this could lead to about 175,000 hospital admissions and 24,700 deaths by the end of April next year. However, under their most pessimistic scenario, there could be up to 75,000 deaths and a total of 492,000 hospital admissions – the latter figure being almost twice as high as the peak of hospitalisations that were seen in January 2021. It would put a struggling NHS under severe strain. The team behind the study said the actual outcome will depend on how well the Omicron variant escapes vaccine protection and how effective booster jabs are at restoring protection against the virus. “We may have to endure more stringent restrictions to ensure the NHS is not overwhelmed,” said Dr Rosanna Barnard, co-leader of the study. “Mask-wearing, social distancing and booster jabs are vital, but may not be enough. Nobody wants to endure another lockdown, but last-resort measures may be required to protect health services.” But the government’s prospects of successfully imposing new restrictions on the public were questioned on Saturday by senior behavioural experts. They have warned that reports of Downing Street parties, where Covid rules were allegedly flouted last year, have caused widespread anger and resentment. “It is always more difficult to re-apply restrictions because people are fatigued and generally fed up,” said Linda Bauld, a professor of public health at Edinburgh University. “But now it’s going to be even harder, because trust has been eroded to a very significant level. People are really fed up with the government. And if you don’t trust the government, why would you do what the government asked you to do?” Bauld said it was likely that far more people would flout rules if they were asked to limit numbers allowed indoors at one time, as happened last winter. “Many are likely to say: I’m fed up, I don’t trust this government, and I want to see my friends and family, so I’m just going to ignore the rule.” The government is also under extreme pressure from its own backbenchers over the imposition of plan B measures last week. Boris Johnson faces his biggest-ever parliamentary rebellion on Tuesday, meaning that the restrictions are likely to be enshrined in law only with Labour’s support. The rebellion will make it harder for Johnson to impose further measures should they be recommended in the days ahead. Whitehall sources said that time was needed to see what effect the measures already imposed had on the course of the virus. An additional 633 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant were reported across the UK on Saturday, according to the UK Health Security Agency. It brings the total number of confirmed cases to 1,898. While 30- to 39-year-olds will be able to book their booster from Monday, under-30s have been turning to online forums to find vaccination centres willing to ignore government guidance and offer them the jab. On Reddit, nearly 25,000 people are a member of the UK community GetJabbed, where they are sharing locations of clinics in cities such as London, Manchester and Liverpool offering boosters to younger people. One poster linking to a vaccination clinic in Essex said that they were offered the jab within five minutes of arriving, “no questions about age or living in the area”. Another reported getting a jab in Smethwick, near Birmingham, while other under-40s said they had been vaccinated on Saturday in Woking, Basildon, Hounslow and Bristol. Labour also claimed that on current trends, the government was on course to miss its target of giving everyone a booster jab by the end of January. “The NHS should continue to prioritise those most at risk, including the elderly, housebound and care home residents, but there is no reason others who are eligible and keen to get their booster vaccines now should be turned away,” said Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary. “We want to make sure everyone can enjoy Christmas safely this year, as well as protecting our NHS. The best way to do that is boosting the booster campaign.” An NHS spokesperson said: “NHS sites are expected to vaccinate those most at risk from the coronavirus first in line with JCVI [Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation] guidance – which at present is people aged 40 and over, as well as those with health conditions and healthcare workers, but this will be extended to over-30s from Monday. “The NHS is rapidly mobilising to ensure people are offered lifesaving protection as quickly and as safely as possible so when you are called we strongly advise you to get your booster jab.” Health chiefs warned that the NHS was now under such stress that further prioritising boosters would have an impact elsewhere in the service. “The NHS will obviously do all it can to speed up the booster injections if that’s what’s needed,” said Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts. “But we need to recognise the complex logistics involved, as the government’s chief medical officer stressed [last] week. “We also need to recognise the wide range of other pressures the NHS is under. Amazing though our staff are, they can’t deliver the impossible. As we saw [last] week with GPs and over- 75 health checks and new patients, we are now at the stage where prioritising a new pressure means deprioritising somewhere else.” Eleanor Riley, a professor of immunology and infectious disease at Edinburgh University, added that Omicron was now spreading so fast that people were now “very likely” to meet someone infected with the Covid-19 variant. As a result, a lot of people could still end up in hospital even if the coronavirus mutation proves to provoke milder symptoms than the Delta variant, as some researchers have suggested.The Australian government is staring down calls to intervene to secure Julian Assange’s freedom, after a British court cleared the way for the WikiLeaks co-founder to be extradited to the US to face espionage charges. The government said it was monitoring the Australian citizen’s case closely, but would “continue to respect the UK legal process – including any further appeals under UK law” – and emphasised Australia was “not a party to the case”. The high court in London ruled on Friday that Assange could be extradited to the US, sparking a vow from Assange’s legal team to appeal. It also prompted warnings from press freedom and rights groups that the prosecution of a publisher under the US Espionage Act sets “a dangerous precedent”. Assange was remanded in custody and Friday’s ruling paves the way for the British home secretary, Priti Patel, to ultimately decide whether or not Assange should be extradited to the US. It has led to fresh calls for the Australian government to take a stand, with the independent Tasmanian MP Andrew Wilkie calling on the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to “end this lunacy” and demand the US and UK release Assange. Labor said it believed the matter had “dragged on for too long” and the Morrison government should “do what it can encourage the US government to bring this matter to a close”. The Greens also called on the foreign minister, Marise Payne, to “urgently speak to the US and tell them to drop these absurd charges and end Assange’s torture”. In response to a request for comment on the latest developments, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was “monitoring Mr Assange’s case closely, as we do for other Australians detained and subject to court proceedings overseas”. “Australia will continue to respect the UK legal process – including any further appeals under UK law,” a department spokesperson said. “It is for Mr Assange to decide how to respond to the high court decision. Australia is not a party to the case.” The spokesperson said Australia continued to offer Assange consular assistance and seek his consent to discuss his health situation with prison officials, but he had “not responded to our offers”. “The Australian government has raised the situation of Mr Assange with US and UK counterparts – including our expectations of due process, humane and fair treatment, access to proper medical and other care, and access to his legal team – and will continue to do so.” Payne is in Liverpool in the UK this weekend to attend a G7 foreign and development ministers’ meeting. She met with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, on the sidelines of the meeting but there was no mention of Assange in the US readout of the talks. The Guardian has asked Payne and Morrison’s offices whether they would consider asking Patel not to sign off on the extradition and the US to drop its pursuit of Assange. Assange’s fiancee, Stella Moris, told the Mail on Sunday Assange was suffering like an animal trapped in a cage in a zoo. He had a “mini-stroke” in Belmarsh Prison in October, she said. “Julian is struggling and I fear this mini-stroke could be the precursor to a more major attack. It compounds our fears about his ability to survive the longer this long legal battle goes on,” Moris told the newspaper. “I believe this constant chess game, battle after battle, the extreme stress, is what caused Julian’s stroke on October 27.” The case against Assange relates to WikiLeaks’s publication of hundreds of thousands of leaked documents about the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, as well as diplomatic cables, in 2010 and 2011. The US alleges Assange conspired with army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning to crack a password hash to a classified US Department of Defence computer. Reporters Without Borders said Assange “faces possible life imprisonment for publishing information in the public interest”. The group said the US Espionage Act lacked a public interest defence, and the precedent “could be applied to any media outlet that published stories based on the leaked documents, or indeed any journalist, publisher or source anywhere in the world”. Reporters Without Borders called on the US government to “drop its more than decade-long case against Assange once and for all, in line with its stated commitment to protecting media freedom”. The US offered a number of assurances that were crucial to the successful appeal. These included that Assange would not be subject to “special administrative measures” or held at a maximum security “ADX” facility and could apply, if convicted, to be transferred to a prison in Australia. The US assurances were described in Friday’s ruling by Lord Burnett of Maldon, the lord chief justice, and Lord Justice Holroyde as “solemn undertakings offered by one government to another”. They remitted the case to the Westminster magistrates court with a direction to send the case to Patel.The waiting time for Covid-19 vaccine booster shots in Australia has been cut from six months to five in a bid to keep people protected against the virus and slow its spread as the Omicron variant emerges. The fast-tracking of booster shots was announced on Sunday and will begin immediately. “We do believe that boosters are going to be much more important … to give that extra immunity, particularly as the Omicron variant is likely to spread around the world,” the federal health department secretary, Brendan Murphy, said. The US-made Moderna vaccine has also been approved by authorities as a booster jab. Here’s what you need to know about the latest changes. What is the new timeframe? Given the presence of both the Omicron and Delta variants, the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) now recommends Covid-19 vaccine booster shots for adults who completed their primary course of vaccination five or more months ago. “Timely receipt of a booster dose is particularly important for people with increased exposure risk … or who have risk factors for severe disease,” Atagi said in a statement. Under the new timeframe, more than 4.1 million Australians will be eligible for a booster by 31 December, compared with about 1.75 million if the six-month interval had been retained. Who is eligible? Anybody aged 18 and over who completed their vaccination five months ago is eligible for a booster. Atagi is not currently recommending booster doses for people aged 12 to 17, or those who are severely immunocompromised and have already had a third dose. Booster programs will be rolled out in residential aged care facilities, and for people with disability who live in shared residential accommodation. Many of these people were prioritised for early vaccination and are now due for their booster dose. Which vaccines are available? People can choose either the Pfizer or Modern mRNA vaccine as a booster shot, irrespective of which vaccine they had for their initial course. The AstraZeneca is not preferred for booster shots. But people can have it as a booster if they: Can’t have the Pfizer vaccine for medical reasons Had two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine previously The health secretary, Brendan Murphy, said on Sunday: If you had Pfizer or AstraZeneca or Moderna as your primary course, you can have either Pfizer or Moderna as a booster. The evidence would suggest that there’s no clear difference. So depends what’s available and people sometimes might have a preference. The two mRNA are very similar to the side effects that we see with the primary course: mainly sore arms occasionally, sometimes a bit of a fever. But generally speaking, the evidence suggests that the side effects following a booster are actually less than the side effects following the second dose. Where can you get it? More than 8,500 GPs, community pharmacies, Aboriginal community controlled health organisations, commonwealth and state government clinics are able to offer either or both the Moderna and Pfizer boosters. Individual clinics and state and territory clinics can begin bookings and administering boosters immediately. People eligible for a booster vaccine can make an appointment through the vaccine clinic finder. More than 670,000 booster shots have already been administered in Australia. Will my booster show up on my vaccine passport? Yes. The health minister, Greg Hunt, previously said Medicare’s vaccination records would be updated to reflect third doses. Two courses of a vaccine is still regarded as fully vaccinated. What does the science say about wait times? When he announced the shortened timeframe, Hunt said data from Israel “shows boosters supporting reductions in the rate of infection in eligible age groups, severe disease in those aged over 40 years and deaths in those over 60 years”. One study of Israelis aged over 60 “found that the rates of confirmed Covid-19 and severe illness were substantially lower among those who received a booster [third] dose”. The participants in the study had all finished their initial vaccination course “at least five months earlier”. An Israeli health department study found that a “booster dose shows improved protection against confirmed infection in ages 16 years and above” and adverse events are not more acute than first or second doses. Late last month, the UK halved its minimum gap for Covid booster jabs from six months to three, after the government accepted advice to speed up the program to limit the spread of Omicron.That’s all for tonight. Thanks as always for following along with us and be sure to check out the fight report here. What a performance from Lomachenko. The 33-year-old landed 44% of his total punches and 58% of his power punches, according to Compubox’s punch statistics. Commey landed only 12% of his blows and absorbed 36 landed punches in the seventh round alone, the most of his career. He’s now made his pitch to fight George Kambosos Jr for the unified lightweight title, saying he will go to Australia to do it. “I will go anywhere I need to go to fight him,” he says. As expected, Lomachenko wins a wide decision by scores of 117-110, 119-108 and 119-108. The partisan crowd of 8,555 in the lower bowl at Madison Square Garden, many waking Ukrainian flags, roar in approach. Lomachenko didn’t make the statement he was hoping for, but this masterclass performance shows he’s very much in the crowded mix at 135lbs. Round 12 Lomachenko tries to close in style while Commey is in full survival mode, clinching and wrapping and generally holding on for dear life. This one is headed to the cards and it won’t be controversial. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 119-108 Commey) Round 11 Another for Loma. The only question remaining is whether he will get the statement-making knockout he’s angling for. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 109-99 Commey) Round 10 Another easy round for Lomachenko. Commey showing tremendous heart, still throwing with bad intentions and trying to land a punch that will change the fight, but not much else. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 99-90 Commey) Round 9 After barely surviving the seventh and getting his feet back under him during a relatively quiet eighth, Commey is throwing heavy punches in Lomachenko’s and even landing a few. Serious grit from the Ghanaian. But after that initial burst Lomachenko cruises, almost looking disinterested. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 89-81 Commey) Round 8 The doctor inspects Commey before the start of the round before allowing the fight to continue. It’s another one-sided round for Lomachenko, but a bit less activity after he threw a ton of punches in the seventh. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 79-72 Commey) Round 7 Lomachenko drops Commey with a left hook and the crowd expodes. The Ukrainian twice screams to Commey’s corner to stop the fight. Commey beats the count and the referee allows him to continue. Can’t imagine this goes much longer. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-8 Commey (Lomachenko 69-63 Commey) Round 6 The crowd buzzes in anticipation as Lomachenko traps Commey in a neutral corner and batters away, looking to close the show with a knockout. Commey is throwing back, however, and lands a couple thudding body shots from his defensive posture before escaping to the center of the ring. Commey’s best round since the first but Lomachenko’s sheer offensive output, especially in the first minute, is enough to win the round. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 59-55 Commey) Round 5 Another masterful round for Lomachenko, who’s beating Commey to the punch as the blows take their toll and the ghanaian’s workrate begins to wane. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 49-46 Commey) Round 4 Lomachenko continues to heat up, landing crisp combinations to the head and body. Commey is still active but something needs to change or it’s unlikely this one is going the scheduled 12 rounds. Commey jabbing less and Lomachenko’s overhand left finding its purchase with alarming frequency. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 39-37 Commey) Round 3 The difference in hand speed, footwork and overall ringcraft is starting to show as Lomachenko is really showing his class, cracking Commey with one stiging left hand after another upstairs. Commey is landing shots but Lomachenko is simply throwing more and landing the harder, better shots. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 29-28 Commey) Round 2 Lomachenko is coming alive in the second, throwing and landing more. Commey catches Lomachenko stationary in the pocket and lands a left uppercut flush but the Ukrainian takes it well. And Lomachenko lands a crisp three-punch combinations in the last 10 seconds that sends Commey reeling backwards into the ropes and ignites the crowd – then gestures to his opponent to go to his corner from the center of the ring before the bell sounds. Nasty stuff. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 10-9 Commey (Lomachenko 19-19 Commey) Round 1 Chants of “Lo-ma! Lo-ma!” ring through the lower bowl of the Garden as the fighters are given their final instructions. And there’s the bell! Both men spend the first minute circling one another and trading feints with next to no punches thrown in the center of the right. And the second minute. Not much action at all as they measure one another. And it’s Commey who breaks the peace by barelling in and landing a few shots to the body. Lomachenko showing his customary great footwork and landing a couple of scoring blows at the end, but not enough to outscore Commey’s activity. Guardian’s unofficial score: Lomachenko 9-10 Commey (Lomachenko 9-10 Commey) The fighters are making their entrances. Commey is making his way to the ring in a white robe with blue and black trim. The song is an unusual one: More Than Gold by the Nigerian gospel artist Judith Kanayo. And now here comes Lomachenko, marching out of the tunnel to the familiar Rob Dougan’s Clubbed to Death (aka The Matrix song). The ring announcer is making the introductions and going through the particulars and we should be under way momentarily! And wouldn’t you know who’s just turned up: Tyson Fury! Shortly after this video montage played on big screen at the Garden commemorating longtime promoter Bob Arum’s 90th birthday this past Wednesday, the WBC heavyweight champion burst from the tunnel to roars, climbed into the ring and sang three songs for his boss and the crowd: Happy Birthday, then He’s A Jolly Good Fellow, and finally an off-key rendition of Don McLean’s American Pie. ... and Jared Anderson has just smashed the Oleksandr Teslenko by second-round TKO. The rising American contender, who answered the opening bell in a southpaw stance before switching back to orthodoz, dropped the Ukrainian with a right hand upstairs midway through the second round. Teslenko beat the count but looked shaky and the referee waved it off at the 1:33 mark. Anderson improves to 11-0 with 11 knockouts and looks ready for a step-up fight sooner than later. Hello and welcome to New York for tonight’s lightweight fight between Vasiliy Lomachenko and Richard Commey. We’re ringside at Madison Square Garden as Lomachenko, the two-time Olympic gold medalist three-weight champion from Ukraine who for years had been widely regarded as boxing’s pound-for-pound No 1, looks to fight his way back into the lightweight championship picture after last year’s unanimous-decision defeat at the hands of Teófimo López. López, of course, lost the IBF, WBA and WBO lightweight titles he captured from Lomachenko in a major upset to Australia’s George Kambosos Jr last month. Top Rank supremo Bob Arum, who promotes the 33-year-old Ukrainian star, believes a victory tonight over the hard-hitting Commey will position Lomachenko as a mandatory challenger for Kambosos next year. Lomachenko (15-2, 11 KOs), who rebounded from the López setback with a ninth-round stoppage of Masayoshi Nakatani in June, said he was happy, healthy and ready to get back in line at Thursday’s final press conference. “I’m very excited because this is the next step of my boxing career,” he said. Commey (30-3, 27 KOs), a 34-year-old from Ghana who’s also suffered a loss to López, is more than eager to play spoiler and move ahead in a crowded lightweight division that’s been among the sport’s hottest of late. “Losing is part of boxing, so regardless of how you lose, it’s all about coming back,” Commey said. “So whatever happened with the Teófimo López fight, it is what it is and I took it as a man. I knew I needed to come back and I came back very strong, and that is the reason why Loma chose me, and Saturday we are going to see what happens.” The final preliminary bout of the night as under way as the fancied American heavyweight prospect Jared Anderson faces Ukrainian Oleksandr Teslenko. (Anderson, who’s knocked out all 10 of his opponents as a professional, was last seen on the Tyson Fury-Deontay Wilder III undercard in October.) That means Lomachenko and Commey should be making their ringwalks by the top of the hour. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s Donald McRae’s report off the action in Liverpool earlier today.Vasiliy Lomachenko made his pitch for a lightweight title shot with a masterclass performance that showed why he was for years regarded as boxing’s pound-for-pound best. The two-time Olympic gold medalist and three-weight champion from Ukraine won nearly every round against Richard Commey on Saturday night at Madison Square Garden, dropping the hard-hitting Ghanaian in the seventh before cruising to a unanimous-decision win by scores of 117-110, 119-108 and 119-108. (The Guardian had it 119-108.) Lomachenko (16-2, 11 KOs), a former champion at featherweight, junior lightweight and lightweight, raced out to an early lead as the gulf in hand speed, footwork and overall ringcraft between the fighters was apparent from the start of the second round after a feeling-out first. Commey (30-4, 27 KOs), the 34-year-old from Accra who held the IBF’s version of the lightweight title in 2019, attempted to use the jab to keep his opponent’s blinding attacks at bay, but was sent reeling backward into the ropes by a stinging combination near the end of the second that ignited the crowd of 8,555 mostly Lomachenko supporters that packed the lower bowl of the Garden’s big room. The Ukrainian southpaw, whose ability to control distance and create angles with balletic footwork evoke the bullet-time origins of his initial nickname (‘The Matrix’, since usurped by the equally evocative ‘Hi-Tech’), continued to heat up in the third and fourth, landing crisp combinations to the head and body. The overhand left in particular found a home with alarming frequency as the blows took their toll and Commey’s workrate began to wane. The audience buzzed in anticipation in the sixth when Lomachenko trapped Commey in a neutral corner and battered away, looking to close the show with a knockout. But the wounded Ghanaian fought back valiantly, bringing the fight to the center of the ring and landing body shots until the bell. Then came the seventh, when Lomachenko badly mistreated his opponent with shots to the head and body thrown from all angles, pouring on the punishment until he finally dumped his foe to the canvas with a concussive left hook. After Commey beat the count and the referee permitted him to continue, Lomachenko twice urged his opponent’s corner to stop the fight from the center of the ring before the end of the round. “I saw his situation,” Lomachenko said. “It was very hard for him. That’s why I said: ‘Hey, stop the fight.’ He is a true warrior. He has a big heart and we continue and we show for people 12 great rounds.” With the durable Commey fighting on sheer grit and not much else, the only question over the closing frames was whether Lomachenko could finish matters inside the distance. The Ghanaian did bravely make it to the final bell, but only after spending the 12th round in full-blown survival mode, clinching and wrapping up and generally holding on for dear life. “I think the round I dropped down, I just took my eyes off him for a second and that’s it,” a tearful Commey said afterwards. “He’s a great fighter.” The Compubox punch statistics gave quantitative context to Lomachenko’s dominance: he landed 248 of 554 total punches (45%), including 188 of 323 power shots (58%). Commey connected on just 73 of 614 blows (12%), absorbing more shots during the gruesome seventh (36) than in any other round of his career. The 33-year-old Lomachenko, who turned professional after an extraordinary amateur career where he won 396 of 397 fights and Olympic golds at the Beijing and London Games in different weight classes, is looking to fight his way back into the championship picture in the talent-rich 135lb weight class after losing his IBF, WBA and WBO title straps to Teófimo López last year by an uncontroversial decision in Las Vegas. López’s reign proved short-lived as the 24-year-old Brooklyn native lost the belts on his first defense in a major upset to Australia’s George Kambosos Jr last month. After Saturday’s fight, Lomachenko said he would happily travel to Australia if it meant a shot at Kambosos and a chance to resume the pursuit of his long-held goal: unifying all four major lightweight titles. “I will go anywhere I need to go to fight him,” he said. “I need this chance. And if God gives me this chance I’ll take it.” If not Kambosos, there will be no shortage of opportunity for Lomachenko in a crowded lightweight division that’s been among the sport’s hottest of late, including potential fights with WBC champion Devin Haney, three-weight titleholder Gervonta Davis or social-media sensation Ryan Garcia. “I said before I don’t like talking about myself,” Lomachenko said. “We have in this weight division we have a lot of great fighters. We have a lot of top fighters. So we can organize a lot of great fights in the future.” The co-main event proved far shorter as rising American heavyweight contender Jared Anderson scored a second-round TKO of Oleksandr Teslenko, improving to 11-0 with 11 knockouts. Anderson, who answered the bell in a southpaw stance before switching back to orthodox, dropped the Ukrainian with a vicious combination upstairs midway through the second. Teslenko beat the count but looked on shaky legs and the referee waved it off at the 1:33 mark. Shortly after, WBC heavyweight champion Tyson Fury made a surprise appearance to celebrate the birthday of longtime promoter Bob Arum, who turned 90 on Wednesday. After emerging from the tunnel to roars from the crowd, Fury climbed through the ropes and sang three songs from the ring: Happy Birthday, then He’s A Jolly Good Fellow followed by an off-key rendition of Don McLean’s American Pie. Afterward, Fury descended to greet Arum before crossing paths at ringside with Oleksandr Usyk, the Ukrainian heavyweight who holds the other three major title belts in the division and was in attendance to support his countryman in the main event. The brief encounter appeared friendly and, one can hope, bodes well for a four-belt unification fight between the pair to determine an undisputed heavyweight champion for the first time in more than two decades.China has responded “irrationally” to the Aukus pact between Australia, the United States and Britain, the defence minister Peter Dutton says. The conservative Australian minister continues to mount forthright criticism of the Chinese government, accusing it of “bullying” countries that stand up to Beijing. Dutton on Sunday said the Australian government had formed the Aukus partnership with the US and the UK because it wanted to see “see increased stability and peace in our region”. “The response by China to that, I think, was irrational,” Dutton told Sky News Australia. He said it was wrong to suggest Australia was the one fuelling an arms race in the region “when we’re talking about acquiring eight nuclear-powered submarines at a time when China has 355 vessels in its [naval] fleet, going to 400 within the next nine years”. “And they are producing on a tonnage rate more naval assets every 18 months than what the Royal Australian Navy has in its entire fleet,” Dutton said. China has sought to portray the Aukus deal as an “Anglo-Saxon clique” and a threat to the nuclear non-proliferation system. China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, likened Australia to “a naughty guy”, saying it would be branded as a “sabre wielder” rather than a “peace defender” as a result of the plan. But the concerns are not confined to China, with the Australian government moving to allay Malaysia and Indonesia’s worries that the Aukus deal could add to a regional arms race and pose nuclear non-proliferation issues. Tensions with Beijing are set to increase, after Australia joined the US and the UK last week in announcing a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics in protest over human rights abuses in China’s Xinjiang region. China’s foreign ministry said those countries would pay a price for their “mistaken acts” and “posturing”. When asked on Sunday about this threat, Dutton said China issues such comments “regularly and not just against Australia”. The defence minister said China had also “threatened” Lithuania with trade actions in recent weeks, adding: “We see it more and more regularly and it’s unsettling and it’s unnecessary to be honest.” Dutton – who has been accused of ramping up national security rhetoric for political purposes as a federal election looms – said it was important to “be realistic” about how China’s outlook had “changed quite dramatically” under Xi Jinping’s leadership. He said the Australian government’s “problem is with the Chinese government, not with the Chinese people”. He said Australia had “an incredibly successful diaspora community” with more than a million people of Chinese origin “who have made an enormous contribution to our country”. Dutton attracted controversy last month when he said it would be “inconceivable” that Australia wouldn’t come to Taiwan’s aid if the US defended the democratically governed island against an invasion by China. He denied this amounted to pre-committing Australia to war. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, discussed tensions across the Taiwan Strait during a meeting with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, in the UK on Saturday. The US state department said the pair had “reiterated support for a peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues without resorting to threats or coercion and emphasised Taiwan’s important contributions to global health development”. Payne and Blinken met on the sidelines of a G7 foreign and development ministers’ meeting in Liverpool. They also “agreed on the importance of having a Senate-confirmed Ambassador in place in Canberra as soon as possible in light of the scope and scale of shared challenges we face”. The Biden administration is yet to name an ambassador to Australia but there has been speculation that it may nominate Caroline Kennedy, the former ambassador to Japan and daughter of John F Kennedy. Amid continued competition for regional influence, the Australian government announced on Sunday it would join with the US and Japan to fund a new undersea telecommunications cable in the Pacific. The project, estimated to cost up to $A104m, aims to improve internet services in Kiribati, Nauru and the Federated States of Micronesia. Payne said such partnerships “meet genuine needs” and “respect sovereignty”. Regional security will be one of the main topics on the agenda when South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, meets with Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison in Canberra on Monday.Walk the Line 8pm, ITV A new musical gameshow from the ingenious, infernal mind of Simon Cowell. At the end of the rainbow, a cool half a million pounds. But in order to get anywhere near it, the performers will have to gamble as well as sing: the winner of each show will have the option of cashing out and leaving with £10,000 or risking it all for a shot at the jackpot. Doing the judging, a panel consisting of Gary Barlow, Alesha Dixon, Craig David and an incongruous Dawn French. Phil Harrison Tracey Emin: This Cultural Life 7.30pm, BBC Four Known for her opinions as much as her artistic output, Tracey Emin delves into formative life events with John Wilson, including recent bladder cancer treatment and her two abortions. There are lighter topics – from an early encounter with Rothko’s work to her Margate childhood – and Emin is reliably candid throughout. Henry Wong You Don’t Know Me 9pm, BBC One Tom Edge’s taut thriller concludes with a second Sunday/Monday double bill. Hero (Sam Adewunmi) has stirred up forces he cannot control, with the drama ably conveying his desperate lack of options. Now he receives assistance from a friend, but it might be more hindrance than help. Jack Seale I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! Final 9pm, ITV After a few gruelling weeks in the castle – regrettably punctuated by a few presumably less-than-gruelling nights in a hotel as Storm Arwen swept through Wales – we’ve reached the climax of this festival of celeb-bonding, eating challenges and Prime Minister-baiting. Who will conquer the Castle? PH Close to Me 9pm, Channel 4 It’s the final episode of this compelling mystery drama adapted from Amanda Reynolds’s novel. But will Jo (Connie Nielsen) finally uncover the reality behind her head injury? First, she’ll have to discharge herself from hospital. Then, there will be appalling revelations to face. PH American Rust 9pm, Sky Atlantic Another double bill of the rust belt-set cop-drama. Tonight, the gloomy chief of police Del Harris (Jeff Daniels) races against the clock to dig up an anonymous eyewitness. Meanwhile, Lee (Julia Mayorga) seeks some professional advice about who she should protect. Ali Catterall Film choice Another Round (Thomas Vinterberg, 2020) 10.25am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere An ambivalent attitude towards drinking and its central role in society suffuses this Oscar-winning Danish drama from Thomas Vinterberg. Mads Mikkelsen uses his hangdog features to fine effect as worn-down teacher Martin, unhappily married and bored of trying to inspire his students. When he and three colleagues start taking daily doses of alcohol as a psychological experiment, they enjoy a brief kick of creativity and joie de vivre. However, their incipient addictions increasingly complicate relationships at work and home. Vinterberg, the director of similarly forensic dissections of social norms in Festen and The Hunt, avoids easy answers as tragedy unfolds. Simon Wardell Live sport WSL Football: Brighton v Man United 12.15pm, BBC Two. At the People’s Pension Stadium. F1: The Abu Dhabi Grand Prix 12.55pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The final race of the season.Every month of Boris Johnson’s premiership brings a new reminder of his rank unfitness for office. As the country is on the verge of an Omicron wave that could pose a profound challenge to the NHS, the government is mired in a deep political crisis entirely of its own making, after a week in which yet more of Johnson’s hypocrisy and corruption have been exposed. A year ago, citizens made huge sacrifices in obeying Covid restrictions to limit the number of individuals who lost their lives in the second wave. As in the first wave of the pandemic, Johnson left it far too late to introduce social restrictions last autumn, with the result that thousands died needlessly and more damage than necessary was inflicted on the economy. But public compliance with restrictions when they were eventually brought in was high, as people did their bit to ease pressure on the NHS and save lives. Relatives missed saying final goodbyes to loved ones with Covid; grandparents missed first Christmases; more people than usual spent Christmas alone. Yet we have discovered that individuals working for the government held Christmas parties across Whitehall, including in No 10, in flagrant breach of the government’s own regulations that so many people abided by, at great personal cost. Johnson’s claims that he did not know about the reported parties in No 10 or the cultures of entitlement that fuelled them are not credible. No one in government has taken adequate responsibility for what happened. It reveals an abject disregard for the public and has further undermined trust in the government at a critical phase of the pandemic, just when ministers are asking the public to comply with extra Covid measures. The revelations that Johnson’s team had so little respect for the public have prompted a political crisis just at the moment when the government should be focused on what action is needed to combat the Omicron variant. Emerging data has suggested the new variant is far more transmissible than Delta and that a double vaccine provides much less protection against symptomatic infection, although a booster dose is very effective. It is too early to tell the extent to which Omicron is associated with serious illness, hospital admissions and death in a population with the UK’s levels of immunity and age profile, but even if the risk of hospital admissions is half that of Delta, its significant transmissibility advantage means there is a very substantial risk that, without further action, the NHS could be overwhelmed this winter. This is why Professor John Edmunds, one of the government’s scientific advisers, has said Omicron represents a “very severe setback” to hopes of bringing the virus under control. On Wednesday, the government announced it would be introducing its plan B measures: compulsory masks in more settings, Covid passports for nightclubs and large-capacity venues and asking people to work from home if they can. But many experts have raised doubts about whether these will make enough of a difference to the spread of Omicron. While levels of immunity are better than they were last winter, Omicron’s transmission advantage means Johnson now faces a similar decision to last Christmas: should he take precautionary action now in order to avoid tougher social restrictions to prevent the NHS from being overwhelmed later? Ministers should be considering further measures, such as extending vaccine passports to all forms of hospitality, and re-extending self-isolation to all contacts of Covid cases, while, as we have long argued, ensuring everyone has access to decent sick pay so they can afford to test if they have symptoms and to self-isolate if positive. Moreover, while boosters have rightly been heralded as the first line of defence against Omicron, many who are officially eligible for the booster dose have been unable to access it due to limited capacity across the UK. The booster programme has proceeded in a more lethargic fashion than the original rollout of vaccines, despite the risk of a more vaccine-resistant strain such as Omicron emerging. There should have been an unrelenting drive within government last week to rapidly expand vaccine capacity across the four nations. But just as Johnson’s sole focus should be on the booster rollout and any further measures needed to combat Omicron, his premiership is being consumed by a self-inflicted political crisis. His political authority in the Conservative party has ebbed away as a result of his terrible handling of the Owen Paterson corruption scandal, the revelations that he misled the government’s adviser on ministerial interests on the funding of the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat and the political fallout of his senior staff holding parties while the country was in lockdown. He faces a significant backbench rebellion over a parliamentary vote on the introduction of plan B, let alone on any further measures. We know Johnson is a man who has elected to put personal interests before country time and again: there is a risk that he is again being too slow to take the action required because he is swayed by retaining the support of newly emboldened rebellious backbenchers. It is a national misfortune that we have a man who is by far and away the worst postwar prime minister in office at the time of the worst postwar crisis. Johnson lacks any shred of integrity, is driven by ego and self-interest and has been prepared to mislead voters over and over again. He is incompetent and embodies the entitled politician who sees politics as a game rather than a duty. He is utterly unfit to govern Britain.Phillip Inman’s article on the dire state of local government finances sheds a light on what has been going on for decades, something I witnessed as a councillor on various authorities between 1987 and 2017 (“‘Councils have been short-changed. We need more government money’”, Business). Cllr Jayne Kirkham is pulling her punches when she opines that Cornwall has been “short-changed by the government”. In my opinion, local councils have been systematically emasculated by successive governments, at least since the end of the Second World War. It is time to reform local government finance and structure in England before repatriating some of the powers it used to enjoy. The surviving remnants of the three-tier system in England (county, district, town/parish) need urgently to be replaced by unitary authorities, while retaining and strengthening the town/neighbourhood councils, which would bring English local government broadly in line with its counterparts in the other three UK nations. Council tax needs to be replaced by a local income tax and/or a land value tax. Just don’t give us any more local supremos, aka mayors or governors. Democracy is not safe if it rests in the hands of a single person, regardless of their mandate, as Boris Johnson proves to us every day. John Marriott North Hykeham, Lincoln I have great sympathy with Jayne Kirkham, Labour councillor in Cornwall. Cornwall is indeed one of the poorest regions in Europe and before Brexit was a beneficiary of millions of pounds from the EU social funds. However, Cornish people voted by a majority for Brexit, the Conservatives swept to power in the council elections in May and all six of Cornwall’s Westminster constituencies are blue. I would leave it up to them to sort out. That is local democracy and public accountability. You get what you vote for. Paul Goodman Loughborough, Leicestershire Vaccinate the world Sir Jeremy Farrar suggests that, unless there is global vaccination coverage, a new variant is likely to overcome our armoury of vaccines (“Progress on Covid now ‘squandered’, warns expert”, News). Professor Sir Andrew Pollard and Gordon Brown have been saying something very similar for some time. According to the OECD last week, it would cost $50bn (£38bn) to vaccinate the world. If the world’s highest income countries (81, according to the World Bank) had the political will, these countries would only have to contribute £470m each. When we remember that the UK’s track and trace system cost £37bn, £470m is a drop in the ocean. These costs would be greatly reduced if governments approved a waiver of intellectual property rights related to Covid-19 technologies. This is supported by more than 100 governments, but not ours. Global vaccine equality demands that the UK does the right thing and contributes to an urgent vaccination programme. Putting the strong moral argument aside, it is in our own best interests to do so. Phil Powell Oxford Tomato yoghurt does exist Come on, Séamas O’Reilly, use your amazing imagination – tomato yoghurt is easily contrived with a spoonful of ketchup added to plain yoghurt (“My son’s Heston Blumenthal potential comes into its own – and means we’re late for nursery”, the New Review). One of my children would not eat yoghurt with bits in, at a time when smooth ones were unavailable, so in typical earth mother mode I would sieve out the bits and he was happy with the result. Catherine Roome Staplehurst, Kent Care system not the solution I agree wholeheartedly that social workers need to engage all their critical skills when assessing parenting behaviour (“Don’t be fooled by deceitful parents, top child expert warns social workers”, News). However, I am less sure that proposing more children should be taken into care is necessarily the solution, given the shortcomings of our current system. We know that children in care are more likely to do poorly in education, to experience problems with physical and mental health and to enter the criminal justice system. As adults, these experiences have a long-term effect and consequently affect their own parenting abilities. Unless we are prepared to invest substantially in a system that does much better for these children, expanding the numbers in care is not the answer. Pam Hibbert Llangammarch Wells, Powys A rood awakening While I agree with Jonathan Bouquet that “cathedrals are not theme parks” (“May I have a word?”, Comment), I can’t agree that they were created to instil wonderment, awe and lift the soul. It depended who you were. A secular view is that the awe was engendered by segregation of the masses from the hallowed and secure area of the sanctuary by a screen that gave limited view of the ceremonials undertaken by the hierarchy. The masses had to stand, there were no pews until relatively recently, but the old and infirm could “go to the wall” to sit on stone shelves. Many cathedrals had wall paintings and often sculpture that depicted or promised damnation, torture or the sufferings of saints. It was fear that engendered the “awe” for them. For me, modern, freer access creates the awe. I see cathedrals as art that is made fluid by the additions and changes over the centuries. Perhaps the next wave of fluidity for Notre Dame will again demonstrate that the building is the star and the contents another aspect of change and self-awareness. Jonathan Hauxwell Crosshills, North Yorkshire Who’s the tyrant? “A cruel tyrant is crushing a democracy. People are dying. So what is the west going to do about it?” (Foreign affairs commentary): on reading this headline, I initially thought this report was talking about the UK, not Myanmar. Pete Lavender Woodthorpe, NottinghamThe Black Friar, 41-43 Blackfriars Road, Salford M3 7DB (0161 667 9555). Starters and small plates £5–£15; mains £15–£38; desserts £8–£9; wines from £25 a bottle Viewed from the air, the Black Friar in Salford could look a little like Charlie Bucket’s rackety family home in the original movie of Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory. It’s a humble old redbrick Victorian building of just two storeys, hemmed in by towering grey stone and steel apartment blocks. It seems to be an afterthought – the corner site that no one thought to develop. And indeed, it was empty and derelict, staring blank-eyed out over the dual carriageway for 15 years. Twice, fires ripped through it. Then the building was refurbished and pressed into service as the marketing suite for the handsome newbuilds going up around it. Now it’s a pub once more. Step through the corner entrance and it looks much as you would expect: wood floors, a stove with logs stacked on either side, squishy armchairs. It’s a riot of Victoriana lite. There’s Boddingtons, Beavertown and Seven Brothers Easy IPA on draught. But look closer. It quickly becomes clear the original redbrick building has been subsumed into the development around it. There are light and airy modern extensions in all directions. Floors are tiled in a dizzying black and white. Dining rooms with plateglass windows lead down to a space with an open kitchen and shelves stacked with pots of brilliant red-leafed poinsettias. There are patios strung with fairy lights. Keep all that in mind. For this is clearly now a local boozer with a particular locality in mind: the Spectrum development of which it is now a part. After a long day working at the very cutting edge of modern media communications, or whatever it is the denizens of these tidy apartments do, they might peer down upon the pub from their eyrie and decide they can’t be fagged to cook and will instead come down here, to drop £50 a head on dinner. The chef, Ben Chaplin, comes from the glossy 20 Stories in Spinningfields. Don’t therefore expect the food to be confined to essence of British pub. Originally, there were two menus: a casual grazing job for lunchtimes, and then something altogether fancier for the evenings. Coincidently, on the very day I turn up, they have merged them. What you now get is a hybrid. There are pies and terrines and fish and chips from the boozer side of the ledger, and altogether grander things involving truffles and champagne from the fat-walleted end. When I get on to those prices some of you may wish to start curling your noses like the Catherine Tate characters Janice and Ray while shouting, “And this! In Salford! The dirty robbing bastards.” Get it out of your system now. This is an ambitious pub in a Greater Manchester which is evolving quickly. What matters is that the cooking is big and bullish and, for the most part, on point. A slab of boar and pheasant terrine has just the right balance of fat to meat. It’s robustly seasoned and has been allowed to come to room temperature, so that the flavours haven’t been murdered by fridge chill. It’s a testament to the charcutier’s craft. Alongside is a warm brioche roll flecked with truffle and a bold chutney of walnut and pear. If you’re going to pay £10 for a terrine, you want it to look like this. From the shiny restaurant side of things come big fat scallops. Two are seared to that gorgeous golden brown that shouts, “Eat me! Eat me now!” The third is crusted in a black garlic crumb so that it looks not unlike a giant truffle. Then you cut in to find the pearly white. They sit on a velvety white garlic purée, scribbled through with a parsley jelly that has started to melt in the languorous warmth. This is serious cookery: both profoundly beautiful and profoundly eatable. Any bit of the brioche left over from the terrine is quickly pressed into service. There’s a daily pie. The pie liberationists will be pleased to know that it is very much a single item, clad from top to toe in crumbly, flaky puff. Pie purists will agree that if you can’t throw it across a room with one hand, it’s not a pie. This is a pie. Today it’s stacked to the lid with braised chicken and leek and very good it is, too. On the side is a heap of proper mash, crunchy green beans and a jug of hot gravy, which I sip. I tell myself I am doing this for professional reasons, though obviously sipping gravy should be a thing. It is rich and sticky and meaty; the sort you’ll be licking off your lips for hours to come even when it’s long gone. The £17 price tag is on the enthusiastic side. By comparison, the pies at the Windmill in London’s Mayfair cost £16, while, as Janice and Ray might point out, we really are on the edge of a dual carriageway in Salford. A dish of turbot with smoked eel choucroute, champagne velouté and caviar is a brave £32. Turbot is an expensive fish, but for that money the cooking should be spot on. I find myself yearning for the brightness controls you get on an Instagram picture. The turbot, while sensitively cooked, has been heavily seasoned. There’s the dice of already salty smoked eel through the vinegared and shredded cabbage. The frothy champagne velouté is also heftily seasoned and then on top, more symbol of northwestern largesse than vital ingredient, is the spoonful of caviar. It doesn’t need to be there. There’s a very good dish indeed fighting to get out from underneath all this overkill. A side of roast squash under fistfuls of toasted seeds and spiced pine nuts ends up acting as a rather good foil to all the overwrought drama. The dessert list includes the much-loved usual suspects: an apple and blackberry crumble, a sticky toffee pudding, a chocolate fondant. It’s reassuring for all that. We share a beautifully made bitter orange parfait, a gift to marmalade lovers everywhere, which comes with an open-crumbed olive oil cake, a little orange gel and a scoop of soothing labneh. As with everything we are served, even that misfire of a turbot dish, there is attention to detail here. The front-of-house team is well drilled, the drink options are broad and all the various spaces look very pretty indeed. I’d be rather chuffed if the Black Friar was my local. Instead, it’s the local for those now above it, living life at altitude. News bites The supermarket chain Asda is collaborating with the digital food brand and delivery company The Lean Kitchen Network to develop a new instore food counter, featuring what they call some of the “nation’s most loved brands”. What this means is a menu including Cheesy Wotsits Mac ’n’ Cheese and Doritos Loaded Nachos. This stunning victory for new product development will be rolled out to more stores in coming months, alongside a delivery option, should you want a Cheesy Wotsits Mac ’n’ Cheese to arrive at your door. As ever, I am only the reporter. The chef Mitch Tonks, who has just launched a new range of quality tinned fish, has a second new venture. Rockfish Seafood at Home will enable customers to buy fish direct from Brixham market in Devon for delivery to their homes the next day. There will be information on what’s available from that day’s catch, unusual cuts rarely seen on fish counters, and instant alerts for specific catches coming in. You can sign up here, to get information on the new service, which launches in January. The family owned company Modern Persian Kitchen, which delivers a wide range of Iranian dishes across the mainland UK from its base in Cleveland, is crowdfunding to raise £75,000 of investment so they can expand into events catering, cookery classes, supper clubs and more. Investors will be rewarded with equity in the company. modernpersiankitchen.co.uk Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1Kingspan predominantly manufactures insulation, not cladding, as an article suggested (Principles v money: from tennis to F1, this is the real contest taking over global sport, 5 December, page 48). The piece also referred to yen when yuan was meant. An article misspelled Usman Khawaja’s surname as Kawaja (England can step up and enjoy freedom of the no-context Ashes, 5 December, Sport, page 12). People would need to be 78 or older to have voted in the 1964 election, not 75 or older, as stated in an opinion piece, because the voting age at the time was 21 (Keir Starmer should learn from how Wilson and Blair led Labour to success, 5 December, page 45). A review of Unalome by Graeme Cheevers said news of the restaurant’s launch had prompted speculation that this might be “the place that brings a Michelin star back to Glasgow”. In fact, Cail Bruich gained a Michelin star in January to become the city’s first place to receive the accolade in 18 years (5 December, Magazine, page 51). Syngas is short for synthesis gas, not synthetic gas (Making stuff from thin air, 5 December, New Review, page 25). Homophone corner: “As with all the finest Lieder singers, [Padmore] can yolk his own experience – four decades, performing all kinds of repertoire – to the demands of the music, from simple longing to anguish” (Classical, 5 December, New Review, page 34). Easy rider? We’ll miss the roar, but electric motorbikes can’t kill our road romance Olivia Rodrigo: Spotify’s tracking is all about smoke and mirrors Buy your dog a canine Christmas pudding if you want to get its tail wagging Poll reveals huge public cynicism, with just 5% of respondents believing politicians work for public good Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Waitrose Mulled Wine, Castilla La Mancha, Spain NV 2.25L (£14.99, Waitrose) I’m not sure mulled wine warrants the full Felicity Cloake, “how to make the perfect …” treatment. There’s no real call for precision. It’s supposed to be thrown together, with all the ingredients followed by that imperiously vague cook’s instruction “to taste” rather than measurements to the last millilitre or gram. Still, I suppose there are some essential elements. Or at least, on each occasion I’ve enjoyed mulled wine the pot has had the same key constituents: clove, cinnamon, star anise, oranges and lemons. And wine, of course, although my preference is for port, which brings more body, depth of flavour and that little extra nip of alcohol even if the pot’s been on the stove a while, as well as being sweet enough not to require added sugar. Still, if you can’t be faffed with making your own, Waitrose’s version, based not on port but a sufficiently robust southern Spanish red, does this once-a-year-job perfectly well. Chairman’s Reserve Spiced Rum (from £23.15, distillersdirect.com; masterofmalt.com; Waitrose) I understand that mulled wine is not to everyone’s taste; that it’s now strongly redolent of city centre squares filled with rows of sheds with speakers blasting Slade and stacks of slightly stale German lebkuchen. So for Christmas fair and mulled wine refuseniks, I am tapping the sign saying: other spiced drinks are available! Mulled cider, perhaps, which, when heavy on the cinnamon and ginger (and with or without a nip of calvados or ginger liqueur), in my view works better than wine as a seasonally warm and spicy drink, playing on much the same range of flavours you’d find in an apple pie. Or, even better, the king of wintry warm booze, hot buttered rum: melted butter, maple syrup or muscovado sugar, a stick of cinnamon, and a good double measure of rum, which, for an extra aromatic festive hit, could be a spiced version such as the luscious Chairman’s Reserve from St Lucia – a drink that is just as good as late night solo sipper, whatever the season. Luscombe Hot Ginger Beer (£21.30, 12 x 27cl, luscombe.co.uk; £6.85, 4 x 27cl, abelandcole.co.uk) Ginger is the spice that looms largest in my kitchen. It’s my one concession to homeopathy: that fiery heat must surely have some effect in warding off germs and boosting my immune system. And if that proves to be so much wishful thinking, never mind: the root is also the beating heart of some of great Christmas drinks. First among equals, the King’s Ginger Liqueur (£23.50, 50cl, bbr.com) updated its recipe in 2020, which may account for what I thought was a little extra definition the last time I tried it. But this distillate of ginger and lemon peel is not all that different in zingy effect to the original version created for King Edward VII in 1903, and it’s still the thing I’d have in a hip flask on a frosty Boxing Day walk. My other current favourite ginger drink is entirely alcohol free. Quite apart from being delicious – the infusion of spicy heat balanced with tang – and a fine match for Thai curry, Devon fruit drink makers Luscombe’s Hot Ginger Beer may also be the best, head-clearing hangover antidote I’ve ever tried. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachThe question Several times in my childhood I was sexually abused by different men, starting from age six. I was raised as the oldest child of a single mum who often struggled to cope. Having also raised kids on my own – both are now adults – I understand the challenges and exhaustions of sole parenting. However, I don’t understand a number of neglectful decisions she made, including leaving one or all of us in the care of unknown adults or, worse, adults who were suspected of abusive behaviour, for overnight stays. Understanding that Mum is emotionally vulnerable has meant my siblings and I don’t raise these issues with her in the interests of keeping the peace. Even so, in recent years Mum has made a habit of raising the issue of my assaults unprompted, to explain that she wasn’t a bad parent. Or she will invoke a conversation about how she was a good mother, then she brings up a traumatic incident that she insists wasn’t her fault. I’ve been diagnosed with PTSD due to the assaults. I cannot see any choice other than to cut communication with Mum to manage the distress her behaviour causes and I am in the process of seeking counselling. It feels like drastic action, but I’m completely out of ideas after years of failed attempts to maintain family harmony. Philippa’s answer I’m sorry all this happened to you and that you still live with the consequences of it. Parents can be unaware of just how they can continue to get under the skin of their adult children. You hate her bringing up the subject of your abuse, but I wonder what it would mean to you, to hear your mother say something like: “I made terrible mistakes when you were a child. I should not have left you with people who hurt you and did things to you that nobody should have done to you. I am sorry I could not do better. I am regretting this very much. I wish I could take it out of your life. I am sorry that I caused so much pain.” And then how it would be for you if she never again mentioned it, unless you brought up the subject? Would that be enough to make it tolerable to be with her? I can imagine it might feel agonising for your mother to admit that her actions had bad consequences that you still live with. Or that she had had a choice about them. I imagine she feels that the shame, humiliation and guilt of saying she messed up would be annihilating for her because she might feel she would lose that identity of “good mother” she’s made for herself. She doesn’t want to feel obliterated, so she wants to be right. Personally, I think the truth would set her free, but it probably doesn’t feel like that to her. If you award her that “good mother” label what happens to your experience? Would it be like denying what your experience has been? The appellations of “good” or “bad” mother are never helpful. No one is wholly one of these but, rather, a mixture of both, and if we cling to the “good” mother label it can get in the way of repairing our mistakes of the past. Sometimes, all we can do is ask for what we want. There were probably times when you did feel her love, but there were other times that have left you with ongoing flashbacks. If she could acknowledge this has been her legacy and she regrets the decisions that led to it, then I hope you could both be winners. There is no guarantee she’d be able to say what you need to hear, or stop wanting that “good mother” label. What is in your power to change, you have got in motion. You are seeking out counselling and when you work through all your experiences and feelings and have them validated, it may bring you some peace. Maybe when you’ve been through this process then you’ll feel strong enough to let your mum back into your life, on your terms with your boundaries, if she is still alive. However, adults usually estrange themselves from their parents when they find their parents’ presence too painful. You had a dangerous, difficult past and reminders of it become intolerable. Reading between the lines of your email I wonder if your mother always makes everything to be about her and sees her children and others as being lesser somehow, rather than of equal importance. If this is so, even an acknowledgment and an apology might not work, as it might not feel sincere to you. Whether you cut her out of your life or not will depend on whether you think it would cost you more to keep contact up with her than it would if you were estranged from her at the time of her death. Only you can know that. Maybe showing her your email to me and even the reply might help her choose between insisting she was a “good mother” or owning what the effect of her decisions have had on you. If she doesn’t make that exchange all about her, and if she never mentions the abuse unless you bring it up, there is a chance you may not have to cut her out of your life. For trauma therapy advice, contact emdrassociation.org.uk If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.uk‘Some thoughts on the phone,’ the Observer Magazine cover of 2 November 1986, with its nod to Rodin’s The Thinker, was not, in fact, a philosophical treatise on the nature of human communication but a guide to the many goods and services one could then buy over the phone. The introduction began with one eye clearly on BT’s recent privatisation in 1984 – ‘Dial P for Privatisation, a nasty new phone book and commercially sponsored pips.’ It was also the beginning of BT’s speaking clock sponsored by Accurist, beloved of pranksters who would call its premium-rate line at friends’ homes and leave it to rack up costs. I’m saying nothing. So what kinds of things could you buy? ‘Baskets of fruit, exotic or homegrown. Will deliver anywhere in UK, but not at weekend… Access, American Express, Diners Club.’ Clearly designed for early exponents of the 5:2 diet. How about a five-day course to help you stop smoking? ‘Smokers Quitline repeats a weekly sequence of tapes full of advice for nicotinies.’ Or perhaps you’re ‘tense, nervous, irritable’ in which case, ‘Stress is just one of the tapes in Healthcall’s selection of 130, covering health matters from drug abuse to migraine.’ It’s not a great sell for Pearl Derby’s oyster with pearl – ‘a single oyster guaranteed to contain a pearl. The oyster isn’t edible, and comes in a plastic container that doesn’t qualify as gift-wrapping.’ Or, for £25, you could have ‘a star in the sky named after you or a friend, complete with certificate of registration and place in the universe’. No doubt a prelude to buying our own constellation in the heavenly firmament of Zuckerberg’s metaverse. Talking of meta, you could have ordered a Rumour 10 Dialatron phone, which ‘logs 10 numbers on memory’ for £17.99, or – back when novelty phones were big – a phone shaped like a can of Pepsi, a baby grand piano or a frog that croaks for attention… all by phone.There’s maybe nothing as naked as a winter larch. Like a sphinx cat, at first it looks wrong, as if there is something missing – newly bald, needle-less. The journey here, though, is remarkable. The baby-soft new green in spring. The metamorphosis in autumn. Oranges, yellows, branches like fluffy tiger tails. I planted two tiny saplings in Denmark 14 years ago. They are giants now. We are here for a quick week to see my mother-in-law, in remission from being poorly. The pain has for now near-miraculously gone. There is lots to do on the plot. Remarkably, there hasn’t yet been a frost. And this from a place where the northern sea sometimes freezes. Locals have been known to drive over the ice. The nasturtiums have spread out like extravagant octopuses. Multi-limbed, luxuriant, jewelled with dew. Most of the trees have long turned; the last hanging leaves coloured old gold and rust. The twin oaks have dumped countless barrowloads. Smothering, leathery. My hands blister with gathering some of it up. The grass too long, dotted with herb robert and other flowers. Henri’s hands are blistered, too: from planting narcissi bulbs. It’s dry, so we fix the mower at its highest setting. Henri trims. It works. We spread some of the broken leaf on the borders. As always there is too much to do in the time we have away from remote working. We pick the last apples from the old-style Danish tree: Ingrid Marie from Funen. Henri makes her pie. We store the rest of the fruit in the garden shed, hoping the mice have left. We have a polecat that moves into the roof most winters. I reluctantly block its most obvious path and scatter broken-up fat balls to placate the pheasant who shrieks indignantly under the hanging feeders. We still need to thin out random cherry trees, bird-sown. But that will wait until we are back, at Christmas. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comWe are going to close this blog now. Thanks all for your company, comments and correspondence. Be well, all of you. To leave you, here’s a summary of today’s developments: The waiting time for Covid-19 vaccine booster shots in Australia has been cut from six months to five. Queensland will open its borders to fully vaccinated travellers, who won’t have to quarantine, from 1am Monday. Up to 50,000 travellers are expected to enter the state over the next few days. The Omicron variant has hospitalised its first patient in Australia, a person in NSW. Victoria will drop hotel quarantine for travellers arriving from the nine southern African countries listed as of concern for Omicron. Moderna has been confirmed by Atagi as a booster shot for anyone aged over 18. Large anti-vaccine mandate protests were seen in Melbourne and Sydney. My colleague Daniel Hurst is asking a valid question here... I’m finishing up for today and handing the blog back to Ben Doherty. Stay well, everyone! The biggest story of today is definitely the announcement that the waiting time for Covid-19 vaccine booster shots in Australia has been cut from six months to five. This has been done in a bid to keep people protected against the virus and slow its spread as the Omicron variant emerges. Got questions? We probably answered them in this handy explainer. Check it out here: As I reported early this morning, Western Australia has closed its borders to Queensland following a rise in local cases there. Those coming from Tasmania are the only people (in the world) who can travel to WA without quarantining. But premier Mark McGowan did promise to reopen the border once 90% of eligible West Australians are fully vaccinated. He will set a date for this once WA hits 80%, which will be soon because 79.62% are currently fully vaccinated. Liberal federal member for Brighton James Newbury will once again run at the next election, despite a preselection challenge. Newbury received 115 votes of 195. AAP reports: SA Health on Sunday confirmed the new cases are two children, a teenager, four men aged between 20 and 50 and three women after between 20 and 70. Six are close contacts of a positive case and one acquired their infection interstate, while the remaining three cases are under investigation. It brings the total number of active cases in the state to 64, including three people in hospital. SA Health said a team would be sent to Indulkana in the APY Lands in the state’s far north-west to support increased testing and vaccination after Covid-19 was detected in the wastewater in the past week. Hundreds of protesters have also marched on the Gold Coast today, ahead of the Queensland border reopening for vaccinated travellers at 1am on Monday. Social media posts also show protesters at Tweed Heads in NSW. Protesters have taken to the streets in large numbers in Sydney and Melbourne to rally against Covid-19 vaccine mandates and passports. The protests this afternoon have been dubbed the “reclaim the line” rallies. Protesters met at Hyde Park in Sydney. Meanwhile, protesters in Melbourne gathered at state parliament with signs that said things like “we can stop vaccine passports” and “we can reignite democracy”. They began marching down Bourke Street about 12.20pm, reportedly chanting “free Victoria”. The Australian federal police have burned $5.2bn worth of drugs, AAP reports. The AFP burned 25.8 tonnes – the weighing of four adult male African elephants – worth of licit drugs in 2021 found on Australian shores. The destruction program estimates the value of methamphetamine, MDMA, amphetamines, cannabis and fast-acting stimulants found at more than $5 billion. Using furnaces that reach up to 1400C, AFP officers were on site as the drugs went up in a filtered smoke then safely released. The eastern command in NSW dominated Australia’s illegal drug trafficking market, with police burning 19.4 tonnes this year. The AFP said their burning program was the culmination of efforts to stamping out organised crime in Australia. The Australian government is staring down calls to intervene to secure Julian Assange’s freedom, after a British court cleared the way for the WikiLeaks co-founder to be extradited to the US to face espionage charges. The government said it was monitoring the Australian citizen’s case closely, but would “continue to respect the UK legal process – including any further appeals under UK law” – and emphasised Australia was “not a party to the case”. Read the full story from Daniel Hurst here: Speaking of Victoria, let’s take a closer look at today’s Covid-19 cases. Victoria reported 1,069 new locally-acquired Covid-19 cases today. This brings the total number of active cases in the state to 11,393. There are 310 people admitted to hospital with Covid, with 74 active cases in ICU. Of those, 37 are on a ventilator. Two people with Covid-19 in their 70s and 80s have tragically died. In Victoria, from 11:59pm tonight, fully vaccinated travellers from South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Malawi, or Mozambique will no longer be required to undertake 14 days in hotel quarantine. In a statement, the state’s health department said that travellers arriving from these countries will follow the rules applying to travellers arriving from other countries. If fully vaccinated, they must self-quarantine at home or at a private accommodation for 72 hours, get tested within 24 hours of arriving, and get tested again between days five and seven after arriving. As Jen King has pointed out, the updated Queensland entry pass (the one you need to be able to cross the border from 1am) will only become available one hour before). King has been speaking to people on the border. She says “many are desperate and in a highly agitated, anxious state. Also, where to print a pass at 12:34am while living in a tent?” It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here again to bring you the blog this afternoon. Thanks again to Ben Doherty. Reporter Jen King is at the NSW-Queensland border today for the Guardian, ahead of the Queensland border reopening at 1am (Monday morning). As Queensland records one new Covid-19 case, and readies to reopen its borders, the state’s treasurer Cameron Dick has warned the days of low infection rates are set to end. Tens of thousands of people are expected to enter Queensland in the days following the border reopening to the rest of the country from 1am on Monday. The one overseas case of Covid-19 recorded in the 24 hours to 6.30am on Sunday is a man in his 30s who arrived from Nigeria. Health authorities are closely monitoring the genomic sequencing to see if it is the Omicron variant. Dick said it was “very good news” only one case had been detected, but warned the state border reopening meant “these days won’t last”. It will be the first time in 229 days people will not need to quarantine on arrival, provided they are fully vaccinated. “These days will finish as soon as the virus comes to Queensland,” Dick told reporters on Sunday. He urged the 19% of eligible Queenslanders who have not yet been fully vaccinated to get the jab to minimise the spread of the virus. Almost 81% of those eligible in the state have now received two doses. Queensland’s police commissioner Katarina Carroll urged people wanting to visit the state from 13 December to be patient, travel outside peak hours, and expect extensive delays. She estimated “tens of thousands” of people would be hoping to cross into the Sunshine State in the next few days. The border pass system will become available online on Sunday evening and will provide different measures for separate areas. Only those who are fully vaccinated, and provide a negative result to a Covid-19 test taken within the last 72 hours, will be admitted into the state. There is only one international flight scheduled to land in Queensland on Monday, with 12 people on board, she said. Deputy chief health officer James Smith said he expected more strain to be put on the public health system. He said the state was still at least six months away from living comfortably with Covid-19. At the beginning of her meeting with Blinken, Payne said it had been “a year of real highs”. Payne said: Can I say at the beginning though our deep condolences in relation to the terrible tornado impacts in the United States, the news is very distressing. These things always happen at the most awful time of year, and I feel deeply for those families who are impacted and I convey Australia’s deepest sympathies. But we have achieved a great deal in 2021, whether it is the announcement of Aukus, a really important trilateral partnership that Australia has with the United States and the United Kingdom and the outcomes of our first Quad leaders meeting in person, held notwithstanding Covid but withstanding all of the challenges, and the really practical actions that enables us to take and work with partners in the region. And I know that you and I and our friends from Japan and India really value those engagements. They are now cemented into our future, whether it’s the Quad, whether it is Aukus and the concrete that that is the Australia — United States Alliance, for us, underpins all of that effort. So looking forward to talking this evening and great to be here, back for the G7+. Australia’s foreign minister Marise Payne and the US secretary of state Antony Blinken have agreed on “the importance of committing to ambitious climate action in the next decade”, according to the US. They have also called for “peaceful resolution” of issues across the Taiwan Strait after a meeting in the UK. Payne is in Liverpool in the UK this weekend to attend a G7 Foreign and Development Ministers’ Meeting. She met with Blinken on the sidelines of the meeting. The US state department said the pair had met “to reinforce our ongoing efforts to promote peace and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific”. The US readout said: They discussed deepening the U.S.-Australia alliance, the importance of committing to ambitious climate action in the next decade, and the need for like-minded allies and partners to continue to defend, strengthen, and renew democracy around the world. They expressed concern over Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine and reiterated support for a peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues without resorting to threats or coercion and emphasised Taiwan’s important contributions to global health development. Both leaders recommitted to our joint efforts in the region and to build back better from COVID-19. They also agreed on the importance of having a Senate-confirmed Ambassador in place in Canberra as soon as possible in light of the scope and scale of shared challenges we face. (The Biden administration is yet to name an ambassador to Australia but there has been speculation that it may nominate Caroline Kennedy, the former ambassador to Japan who happens to be the daughter of John F Kennedy.) I’m going to hand the blog over to my brilliant colleague, Ben Doherty to bring you the news over lunch! Now that Hunt’s press conference is finished, let’s turn back to the case numbers that have come out of New South Wales today. NSW Health announced that the Argyle House nightclub in Newcastle was visited by a confirmed case of Covid-19 likely to have the Omicron variant. Anyone who attended the venue from 9pm on Wednesday 8 December until 3am the next morning must immediately get tested, isolate and await further advice from NSW Health. NSW Health said that confirmed cases of Covid-19, linked to a previously reported outbreak on a party boat cruise on Sydney Harbour on 3 December, attended The Argyle House. Hunt was asked whether the Coalition would be willing to deal with the crossbench should there be a hung parliament at the next election. Hunt says that the much of the crossbench are “to the left of not just the Labor party, but to the left of the Greens”. So I’ll take that as a no. Finally, Hunt was asked about the next federal election, and whether he thinks that Labor could win. The next election is ultimately a choice. It’s a choice between Scott Morrison as prime minister or Anthony Albanese as prime minister. If you’re not voting for the Coalition, you’re voting for Anthony Albanese ... This is Anthony Albanese as prime minister with a huge hit to electricity prices, with no control of the budget, and with very weak international security and border credentials versus Scott Morrison, who has seen us through the pandemic, who, along with Josh Frydenberg, has outstanding economic credentials and they know how to create jobs, they know how to create income, and they know how to give people the best chance at the life of their choice. South Korean president Moon Jae-in arrived in Canberra today. Hunt is asked what he and Morrison will discuss. Hunt says they will be discussing three things: One is the global response to Covid, South Korea has been another standout country in their protection. Two is regional security and looking at a peaceful cooperative arrangement. And third is economic opportunity: how do we work together to boost jobs and to boost income in both countries? Murphy says that there isn’t any good evidence to suggest that it is better to have a Pfizer booster if you had Pfizer for your first two shots. If you had Pfizer or AstraZeneca or Moderna as your primary course, you can have either Pfizer or Moderna as a booster. The evidence would suggest that there’s no clear difference. So depends what’s available and people sometimes might have a preference. Adding to that, Hunt says that Pfizer and Moderna are both considered “universal boosters”. None of us think about the brand of our flu vaccine, we shouldn’t be thinking about the brand of our Covid vaccine. Reporter: “Last week Atagi advised that there was no evidence to bring forward boosters. I’m wondering what’s changed since last week? Have you had access to data that you didn’t have last week? And on a related point - is this also about lapsing demand for boosters once we get to that heightened increase next year around March?” Hunt: No, this is based off the latest international evidence. We tasked Atagi with reviewing weekly exactly as Professor Murphy has said the emerging data and evidence and we have seen from Pfizer and we have seen from the international evidence emerging data in relation to the optimal time period. The health department secretary Brendan Murphy says that over the last week, Atagi has had access to “what we call the laboratory in-vitro neutralisation data, which is a complicated way of saying tests in the lab to see how the immunity from the primary vaccination declines over time, particularly in relation to Omicron”. Atagi felt that there was a good reason to get people boosters if possible before that six-month mark so they felt bringing it forward to five months was worth doing and particularly based on some data out of Israel which showed that is a very good time. Hunt is asked how many doses of Pfizer and Moderna we have in Australia at the moment. He says Australia has so far received 7.2m Moderna doses and approximately 40m Pfizer doses. In addition, we have more than 28m AstraZeneca doses. Hunt adds that: We’re sharing those doses overseas and we’re also making sure that there’s enough for all Australians. So we have enough already to deal with all of the possible demand for primary doses or boosters inAustralia and in terms of our international supply, overseas, we have now past the 10 million mark of doses provided to our Pacific and south-east Asian neighbours. Hunt is asked whether Australia is still planning on sending expiring mRNA doses to our neighbours in the Pacific and south-east Asia, and whether shortening the dosage interval will mean fewer doses can be sent? Hunt suggests the announcement today makes no difference to that plan. We have 151m doses that have been set aside for boosters. There’s enough for all Australians. It makes no difference to the number of boosters that are expected to be had. It just brings that time frame forward and we have sufficient in the country now to meet all of the needs and so we’re well stocked in terms of AstraZeneca for the primary doses, Pfizer and Moderna and we’re in a very strong place in relation to those and at the same time we’re continuing to meet our international commitments and we’re actually well ahead of schedule on our international commitments. As to the side-effects from booster shots, Brendan Murphy, the secretary of the health department, says: The two mRNA are very similar to the side effects that we see with the primary course: mainly sore arms occasionally, sometimes a bit of a fever and. But generally speaking, the evidence suggests that the side effects following a booster are actually less than the side effects following the second dose. So people would expect to see the same relatively mild side effects we have seen with the other mRNA vaccines. Hunt is asked what measure are being taken to ensure people know they are eligible for the booster shots, and what the side effects are around the boosters? Hunt says that the government will soon launch a booster campaign which will launch in the lead up to Christmas and following Christmas. He adds that: We have over 8,500 primary care points of presence that can provide boosters with the announcement about Moderna. Over 9,000 when state clinics are included in that. I want to thank the states and territories for their work, our Indigenous medical community for their work. Hunt: With one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, with one of the lowest rates of loss of life and one of the strongest economic recoveries, Australia is doing incredibly well, but the shorter time for boosters, the extra booster option with Moderna which Brendan [Murphy] and I have had today, gives Australians more access, earlier access, and more confidence that despite all of the challenge we’ll get through it. Hunt says that 683,000 people have had their boosters in Australia, “well ahead of expectations, well ahead of schedule”. He says that the decision to bring forward the booster eligibility will mean “an extra 1.5 million people are now eligible to immediately access the boosters”. Hunt confirms that from today: Moderna boosters have been approved by Atagi and will be made available to everybody aged 18 and older in Australia; and Atagi has recommended that the wait time for Covid-19 boosters be brought forward from six months to five months, in light of international evidence around the efficacy and impact of the Omicron variant. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking at a press conference in Melbourne. From 1am Monday, travellers from interstate hot spots can travel to Queensland by road and air, provided they are fully vaccinated, give evidence of a negative test in the previous 72 hours, complete a border pass and get a test on day five. Queensland police commissioner, Katarina Carol, asked people to “be patient and plan ahead, to travel outside of those peak hours if we can, and to ensure that you do have your correct pass”. Queensland now has 47 active Covid-19 cases. Authorities urge Queenslanders to remain vigilant, get tested if they have symptoms, and check-in at venues, noting that “anecdotally we have heard that people are perhaps slacking off a little big with regard to checking in and using their check-in apps”. A man who’s in his 30s who has recently arrived in Australia from Nigeria has tested positive for Covid-19 in Queensland. Authorities say that, given the fact he travelled from Africa, they’re “very closely following his genomic sequencing results which should be available in the next day or two days”. Queensland authorities are speaking ahead of the state’s plan to reopen the border tomorrow. Tragically, two more people have died from Covid-19 in NSW. NSW Health reported that an unvaccinated man in his 70s from Sydney’s inner west died at Concord Hospital. An unvaccinated man in his 80s from south-eastern Sydney sadly died at Sutherland Hospital. NSW Health have also provided more information about the 485 new cases of Covid-19 reported today. There are currently 156 cases admitted to hospital, with 23 people intensive care. Of these, seven require ventilation, NSW Health confirmed in a statement. To date, one Omicron case has been admitted to hospital in NSW for treatment of Covid-19. This brings the state’s total to 55. If you want a recap of Saturday’s Covid-19 news, you can check out my article from yesterday. New South Wales recorded the highest number of daily Covid cases since early October while Victoria reported 13 Covid deaths and 1,193 new cases on Saturday. Plus, the Aacta awards became Covid exposure site after a hospitality worker at the Sydney Opera House tested positive for the virus on the day the awards were held. Read the full story here: Federal health minister Greg Hunt is doing a media event at 11am; he and secretary of the Department of Health Brendan Murphy will get their Covid-19 booster shots. There’ll be a press conference afterwards and I will, of course, be bringing you all the updates! Reports emerged yesterday afternoon that Victorian authorities were investigating a seven potential Omicron infections. AAP reports: As of Saturday, authorities were responding to three existing Omicron infections. “One of the positive cases is a returned traveller who was previously identified with the Omicron variant while in hotel quarantine,” the health department said. “The other two positive Omicron cases sat together in the same row on a flight that landed in Melbourne from Dubai on 30 November. Testing was also being conducted in relation to four other passengers on the same flight and three household contacts. The statement from Marise Payne also says improved connectivity and access to digital technologies “can provide significant economic and social benefits and are key enablers of sustainable development”. This is more than an infrastructure investment. It represents an enduring partnership to deliver practical and meaningful solutions at a time of unprecedented economic and strategic challenges in our region. This project builds on the strong foundations of trilateral collaboration between Australia, Japan, and the United States in the Indo-Pacific, including support for Palau’s undersea cable. It is a further demonstration of our shared commitment to quality, transparent, fiscally sustainable, catalytic infrastructure partnerships with, and between, Pacific nations. There is some coded language in the statement contrasting the project with the approach taken by China: These partnerships meet genuine needs, respect sovereignty, and complement the Trilateral Infrastructure Partnership and the Build Back Better World (B3W) initiative. Trilateral partners will continue to work together to promote an open, inclusive and resilient region. The estimated cost of the project is up to $US80m (about $AU104m). The Australian government will join with Japan and the US to fund a new undersea cable in the Pacific, aiming to improve internet services in Kiribati, Nauru and the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). The foreign minister, Marise Payne, issued a joint statement with her counterparts in the five countries to say the project “highlights our commitment to work together on critical telecommunications infrastructure and contribute to reliable and secure internet for the region”. The proposed undersea cable will provide faster, higher quality, and more reliable and secure communications to approximately 100,000 people across three countries. This will support increased economic growth, drive development opportunities, and help to improve living standards as the region recovers from the severe impacts of COVID-19. The new cable will connect Kosrae (FSM), Nauru, and Tarawa (Kiribati) with the existing HANTRU-1 cable at Pohnpei (FSM), providing internet connectivity through a submarine cable for the first time. In case you want to read it in full, here’s health minister Greg Hunt’s statement regarding Australia’s Covid-19 vaccine booster program changes here: With the federal election set to take place next year, one question that comes up is: who will replace Christian Porter in the Perth electorate? The urban fringe division that hugs the coast north of Perth has belonged to the Liberals for 33 years, with Porter holding Pearce for nearly a decade before his dramatic fall from grace. But Labor has hopes of overturning the 7.5% margin from the 2019 election, with the help of favourable boundary changes, and poll watchers say it can only be a woman to step into Porter’s shoes after this year’s revelations about the toxic culture in federal parliament. Read the full story from Narelle Towie here: A few small caveats at the end of Greg Hunt’s release about availability of the boosters: Subject to the readiness of providers, both the availability of Moderna for a booster and the access from five months will come into effect immediately. There are over 8,500 GP’s, Community Pharmacies, Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations, Commonwealth and State clinics providing access to either or both of Moderna and Pfizer for boosters. Individual clinics and State and Territory clinics will be free to commence immediately and will indicate when they are ready to provide boosters subject to bookings. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, says Scott Morrison is “looking forward very much” to welcoming South Korean president Moon Jae-in to Australia. Moon is due to meet with the prime minister in Canberra tomorrow. While in Australia, Moon is also scheduled to meet with the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese - an engagement that Dutton described as “a sign of respect”. In an interview on Sky News, Dutton said South Korea was an important trading partner with shared values. Dutton said South Korea lived “under the constant threat of North Korea” and noted Australia’s contribution to the Korean War in the 1950s. Moon is due to finish his term in early May. Dutton gave a hint of some of the announcements likely to come out of the visit in the coming days: I think it underscores particularly during Covid, where where travel is very difficult, what South Korea see in the Australian relationship. They see it as a vital relationship as do we. And there is an enormous amount of upside on trading, particularly in relation to green energy and hydrogen, a very important partner in that regard. So I think this really signals a deepening of the already very strong relationship between our two countries. It’s official. The routine interval for booster shots is being cut from six to five months. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) has issued the following new advice: Given the likelihood of ongoing transmission of both Omicron and Delta variants, ATAGI recommends COVID-19 booster vaccination for anyone aged 18 and older who completed their primary course of COVID-19 vaccination 5 or more months ago. Timely receipt of a booster dose is particularly important for people with increased exposure risk (e.g. occupational risk or outbreak areas) or who have risk factors for severe disease. Either Comirnaty (Pfizer) or Spikevax (Moderna) are recommended for use as a booster vaccine, and are considered equally acceptable. ATAGI reiterates that a third (primary) dose of COVID-19 vaccine is also recommended for anyone with immunocompromising conditions, a minimum of two months after their second dose. The full advice can be found here. Atagi has also issued recommendations on the use of Spikevax (Moderna) as a Covid-19 booster vaccine, which can be read here. The health minister, Greg Hunt, welcomed the updated advice. In a statement, he said: Everyone living in Australia aged 18 and over who has completed their primary two-dose course of vaccination at least five months ago is now eligible to have an additional booster shot. This was previously recommended to be six months from a second dose. A booster dose, five or more months after the second dose, will make sure that the protection from the primary course is even stronger and longer lasting and should help prevent spread of the virus. Data from Israel shows boosters supporting reductions in the rate of infection in eligible age groups, severe disease in those aged over 40 years and deaths in those over 60 years. Hunt described Australia as “a vaccination nation” with more than 40m Covid-19 vaccines having been administered to date. The government says people eligible for a booster vaccine can make an appointment by visiting www.australia.gov.au or through the Vaccine Clinic Finder at www.health.gov.au. You may be wondering why Australia would consider shortening the wait time for Covid-19 booster shots. It’s early days, but the data around the Omicron variant so far shows that two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine offers less defence against symptomatic infections from the Omicron variant, compared with Delta. But the great news is that experts say a booster jab raises the protection against the Omicron variant considerably. Read the Guardian’s latest story on the findings here: Peter Dutton, speaking to Sky News this morning, also encouraged everyone to get their Covid-19 booster shot. We’re seeing, you know, 200 or 300 cases a day in New South Wales at the moment, the hospital rate is manageable and mortality rate very low. So we have to keep a mindful eye on what’s happening into the future, encourage people to get the vaccination and in particular now, the booster. I had mine last week, and if we do that, then we can get back to, you know, a life as normal as possible and people can reunite with their families over Christmas without the fear of being locked down or having to do two weeks before they arrive or two weeks after they get back to their home state. We want Australia to get on with it, and having travelled overseas only a few weeks ago, that’s exactly what’s happening in other parts of the world. We need to accept that we’ve got one of the best health systems in the world, the ability to deal with it and to deal with it sensibly. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, is encouraging people to get the booster shots as soon as they are eligible. Dutton also says he hopes people can “reunite with their families over Christmas without the fear of being locked down or having to do two weeks before they arrive or two weeks after they get back to their home state”. In an interview on Sky News this morning, Dutton was asked about the plan to bring forward booster shots by a month and the federal government’s desire to avoid a return to lockdowns. Dutton replied that it was important to recognise the mental health and domestic violence implications of lockdowns. He said: People don’t want to go back to that [lockdowns]. I think that’s the general sentiment, frankly, across the country, including my home state of Queensland. We need to make sure that we understand we’re living with this now. And that’s the idea of getting to 80 or 90% vaccination rates, in some cases as Greg Hunt pointed out the other day, people over the age of 60 now 99% vaccinated - quite a remarkable achievement. And people recognise that we are going to have this variant, we are going to have the next variant. And we’ve got the health system that can underpin the success. Western Australia is increasing border restrictions for travellers from Queensland due to a rise in Covid-19 cases over there. The news comes just days before WA was set to reopen its borders. Our friends at AAP have the story: Premier Mark McGowan says Queensland will be elevated from a “very low risk” to a “low risk” jurisdiction from 12.01am on Monday. That means travellers from the Sunshine State must be fully vaccinated, test negative and complete 14 days’ quarantine on arrival in WA. Anyone already in WA who’s been to a Queensland exposure site will need to quarantine for 14 days and get tested. Mr McGowan says the tightening is needed because Queensland has recorded seven local cases in the last two days and is easing its border restrictions on Monday. “With community spread now being experienced in Queensland and its expected move to relax border controls and quarantine requirements with COVID-positive jurisdictions, in the midst of Omicron, we need to take caution and strengthen our border controls with Queensland,” he said in a statement on Saturday. “This will inconvenience people however we know border controls work to keep WA safe and they’re effective in managing the risks of COVID-19 entering the community - while we don’t yet have sufficient levels of vaccination coverage.” He has promised to reopen once 90 per cent of eligible West Australians are fully vaccinated and said he will set a date once WA hits 80 per cent. Some 88.42 per cent of residents have had one dose of a vaccine and 79.62 per cent are fully vaccinated. Victorian health minister Brett Sutton tweeted his support for bringing the Covid-19 booster shot wait time forward to five months. Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the headlines today, Sunday 12 December 2021. The Australian government is expected to announce that it will cut the wait time for Covid-19 booster shots from six months to five, in an effort to combat the fast-spreading Omicron variant. Health minister Greg Hunt told Nine newspapers: A booster dose, five or more months after the second dose, will make sure that the protection from the primary course is even stronger and longer lasting and should help prevent spread of the virus. Data from Israel shows boosters supporting reductions in the rate of infection in eligible age groups, severe disease in those aged over 40 years and deaths in those over 60 years. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) has also approved the Moderna Covid-19 booster to be offered alongside Pfizer, the ABC has reported.He might not be a household name, but you’ll certainly be familiar with the hairstyles he’s created over the decades for the catwalk, magazine covers and ad campaigns. Guido Palau, the man behind some of the most influential hair in fashion, was showing off his form again in London last week – on the front of British Vogue, with the unconventional 54-year-old supermodel Kristen McMenamy, and at a Jack Kerouac-inspired Dior men’s show. The 59-year-old Dorset-born, Anglo-Iberian Palau also published #Hairtests, a spiral-bound book that captures the presentation of hair, or relative relaxation of it, over the course of the pandemic amid broad re-negotiations around gender and diversity. “We all manage to curate something we’re interested in, flowers or animals or whatever, on Instagram,” Palau – known in the fashion world simply as “Guido” – told the Observer on his way to a test for the show at Kensington’s Olympia last week. “I just happen to be into hair.” Palau, who is known to execute dozens of shows and can have 100 producers and hairstylists under his direction at each, is a protege of Vidal Sassoon and was a close collaborator of the late Alexander McQueen. He is also one of the key figures to bring the grungy, anti-perfection and individualistic movement of British fashion in the early 90s to the wider world. It may be that, as philosophy and politics falter, it will again be up to hairdressers to provide clues to what women often know and men less easily grasp: that among exterior clues to the interior life, hair can be the most instructive. “I’m being informed the whole time. Most people have hair on their head – though a lot of people don’t – so the way hair is worn, intentionally or not, interests me. Combed, brushed or dyed, put up or down in their own way, it’s all something I pick up on.” The images in the book document hairstyles in profile and without makeup, taken on an iPhone, and later posted online. They are an impression, in a sense, of what was – and still is – happening, in a vulnerable time. “Young people are looking at the 90s again and [are] inspired by that time. We see it in the individualism of the models, but [also] in a more diverse, inclusive way. When there’s a reaction in fashion that sticks, it’s always something to do with the world changing because fashion and beauty reflect the times.” For one, the changes beauty currently reflects are less gendered. “Masculine and feminine seem kind of old now, so I try to look at their profile, see what fits. It’s more fluid. I’ve always been interested in an ambiguous kind of sexuality, and always wanted hair to be slightly questionable.” Fashion, of course, has taken its share of recent criticism for lapses in approach and sensitivity to issues of social justice. “There’s a new awareness to how people feel or have felt in the past, and rightfully so,” he says. Palau’s craft, then, is to take from the street, interpret, place in a fashion show or magazine and filter back. It is, by definition, a highly mutable process. “I can’t really tell. People might see it in a different way, and then take it back, consciously or unconsciously, or it’s just in the zeitgeist. People are more aware now, because there’s so much more information out there than when I started, when we didn’t know where references came from.” Instagram is affecting the changes, in part because visual information is being posted and absorbed, as Palau says, all day long. “Beauty trends are coming into our home, or into our hand, all the time.” There was a moment early in the pandemic when the beauty business, for reasons of social distance, effectively ceased to function, returning people to do-it-yourself, make-do-and-mend. To Palau, Covid has given people time to reflect on self-presentation, and that, in turn, has propelled a return to individualism. “If a woman wants to go out with damp hair because she’s just washed it, nonchalantly cool, it should be completely acceptable. Wet hair always looks sexy, and hair in fashion is what people wear anyway. So it’s about realness or reality. No one should feel they have to look a certain way for anyone bar themselves, and the idea of social acceptability is hopefully breaking down. The way your hair looks should be your idea of it.” That, in a sense, is a throwback to the 90s. But even the most maligned decades, like the 80s, came with cool looks as sub-cults, from goths to New Wave to New Romantics, proliferated alongside the glamour dos of Dallas or the yuppies. “Fashion takes from the past but it never really goes back. If you do, it’s a pastiche.” Palau is not of any particular church, though friends joke that he’s never seen a pudding bowl he doesn’t love. “Hair is important to everyone. Women love to talk about it, men love to talk about it. Sometimes it gets a bit of a short straw and people don’t realise how difficult it is to do well. It is psychologically impactful as it changes the way people feel and look. When you look back, it’s amazing how it’s changed and how it defines social aspects of life.”During 20 years of war in Afghanistan, according to the US-based Watson Institute’s Costs of War Project, about 176,000 people were killed, of whom 46,000 were civilians. Dreadful though they are, these figures are dwarfed by predictions by the World Health Organization that 1 million Afghan children under five will die of starvation this winter. Another 2.2 million will suffer acute malnutrition – unless urgent action is taken. Relief organisations have warned for months of an impending humanitarian catastrophe. Now the catastrophe has arrived. “Hunger in the country has reached truly unprecedented levels,” the UN refugee agency said on 3 December. “Nearly 23 million people – that is 55% of the population – are facing extreme levels of hunger and nearly 9 million of them are at risk of famine.” If the international community, and especially the US and Britain, which abandoned the country in August, is to prevent, or even mitigate, this coming disaster, it must act now. Some emergency aid has been supplied since the Taliban took power in Kabul, but nowhere near enough. A Marshall Plan for Afghanistan is required. Many crises are converging. The war and its aftermath have left 3.5 million people displaced. They are particularly vulnerable. Foreign assistance, amounting to 75% of all public spending, has halted. Teachers, health professionals and civil servants have not been paid for months. As Covid rages, a drought has caused harvests to fail. While Taliban commanders direct scant resources towards feeding and paying their fighters, the economy has seized up. The banking system is breaking down, cash and savings are hard to access, prices are rising. Per capita annual income is forecast to drop next year from $509 (£380) to $350 (£260). These are starvation wages. Meanwhile, the US Treasury and IMF have frozen $9.5bn of Afghan assets. According to the Costs of War Project, the US has spent $2.3tn in Afghanistan since 2001. Yet direct and indirect gains, such as healthcare provision, schooling for girls and integration of women into the workforce, are being squandered, mainly due to the Taliban’s feudal attitudes but also for lack of continued western support. This self-defeating regression threatens to rebound on the west. Analysts suggest Europe could face a huge new refugee crisis next spring. Last week, 15 EU states agreed to take in 40,000 Afghans. This is welcome, but it’s a drop in the ocean. Wealthy countries, and Priti Patel’s flailing Home Office, must do more, better, quickly. The main reasons for western governments’ reluctance to step back in – fear of validating Taliban rule and misuse of donor funds – remain valid. Yet given the urgency of the crisis, ways around this political roadblock must be found. Proposed measures to ease UN sanctions, waivers for relief agencies, cash transfers via private banks and the unfreezing of individuals’ assets should be pursued. A longer-term international assistance strategy must be formulated. In Britain, much attention remains focused on August’s evacuation debacle. Concerns about the Foreign Office’s failure to adequately respond to Afghans’ emailed pleas for help, first reported in the Observer, and the negligent performance of then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, have been compounded by a whistleblower’s revelations painting a picture of endemic incompetence. Raphael Marshall, who has since resigned his Foreign Office job, confirmed the impression that Raab was out of his depth. It’s surprising and disappointing that he is still in government and it’s dismaying that his successor, Liz Truss, appears to be as much interested in advancing her Tory leadership ambitions as she is in helping Afghans. By invading Afghanistan, Britain and the US began a fight they could not finish. By leaving in a panic, they precipitated another disaster. If they are to prevent a third catastrophe, as they should, they must hurry to the aid of the starving Afghan people – immediately, generously and without further prevarication.The skin on our hands is quite fragile and constant washing and exposure to the elements really puts it through its paces – which is why we are all battling stressed, cracked, dry hands. Regular use of a decent hand cream will rectify this. Some body lotions and creams double up as great hand creams, but these are few and far between. They’re also cumbersome. You need something that travels easily because, in this case certainly, size matters. So what else makes a good hand cream? It should have longevity; you shouldn’t have to apply 10 times a day. It should absorb into your skin as opposed to languishing lazily on the surface. It should be intensely moisturising, but not greasy – if, post-application, your fingers stick to everything, that is a fail. The range here ticks all these boxes and more. If you are looking for something heavy duty and pragmatic for very dry and/or sensitive skin, Eucerin, Aveeno and Kiehl’s are great and widely available, as is the shea butter-infused L’Occitane classic. Fan of Glossier’s You fragrance? Think of its fast-absorbing hand cream as its lightly scented cousin. Margaret Dabbs and Kat Burki are excellent for mature skins. For some fancy stocking-filler material, look no further than Byredo, Chanel and Aesop. Whatever the case, just get some hand cream; it’ll stop your hands ageing quicker than the rest of you. 1. Eucerin Urea Repair Plus Hand Cream, £6.75, boots.com 2. Glossier Hand Cream £16, glossier.com 3. Byredo Tulipmania Hand Cream £30, byredo.com 4. Margaret Dabbs Pure Repairing Hand Cream £16, margaretdabbs.co.uk 5. Aveeno Daily Moisturising Hand Cream £3.99, boots.com 6. L’Occitane Shea Butter Hand Cream £21.50, loccitane.com 7. Kiehl’s Ultimate Strength Hand Salve £22, kiehls.com 8. Chanel La Crème Main £46, chanel.com 9. Aesop Reverence Aromatique Hand Balm £21, aesop.com 10. Kat Burki Hand Therapy £45, feelunique.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoA person in New South Wales has been admitted to hospital infected with the Omicron variant of Covid-19, the first Omicron patient to be hospitalised since it arrived in Australia last month. It comes as thousands of protesters marched through capital cities on Sunday to oppose vaccine mandates, and Western Australia and Queensland prepared to reopen their borders. After two years of border closures, the WA premier, Mark McGowan, is on Monday due to announce when the state’s borders will reopen to domestic and international travellers, after reaching the 80% vaccination milestone at the weekend. And “tens of thousands” of people are expected to cross into Queensland after its borders reopen at 1am on Monday. It will be the first time in 229 days people will not need to quarantine on arrival, provided they are fully vaccinated. Police have urged patience from travellers. “It’s been very, very difficult to estimate but I could safely say anywhere between 20 and 40 or 50,000 additional vehicles,” said the commissioner, Katarina Carroll. “We don’t know exactly whether people would be coming immediately or will delay the trip for a couple of days.” Carroll urged people wanting to visit Queensland from 13 December to travel outside peak hours, and said they should expect significant delays. Queensland reported one overseas case of Covid-19 on Sunday – a man in his 30s who arrived from Nigeria. Health authorities are monitoring the genomic sequencing of his infection to see if it is the Omicron variant. The Queensland treasurer, Cameron Dick, said it was “very good news” only one case had been detected but warned the border reopening meant the days of very low infection numbers “won’t last”. Booster jab interval reduced The federal government on Sunday announced it would cut the waiting time for Covid-19 vaccine booster shots from six months to five under a plan to counter the spread of the new strain. Evidence from the UK says the spread of Omicron appears to be doubling every two to three days in that country. Prof Neil Ferguson, a member of the UK government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, said while Omicron now only represented 2% 3% of new infections, it was likely to be the dominant strain across the UK by the end of the year. “It’s likely to overtake Delta before Christmas at this rate,” he said, adding it could be necessary to impose new lockdowns as a result. NSW recorded 10 new cases of Omicron in the 24 hours to 8pm Saturday night – still only a fraction of the 485 new cases recorded. That brings to 55 the total number of Omicron cases in the state. A confirmed Omicron case visited the Argyle House nightclub in Newcastle on 8 December. That case is linked to an earlier outbreak on a party boat cruise on Sydney Harbour a week earlier. In Victoria, there were no new confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in the past 24 hours. There remain three confirmed cases in total. Genomic sequencing is also under way to confirm the variant for seven other probable Omicron cases who have tested positive for Covid-19. The federal government said its decision to bring forward the timeframe for fully vaccinated people to get their booster vaccination from six months to five was motivated by the rapid global spread of Omicron. “We do believe that boosters are going to be much more important … to give that extra immunity, particularly as the Omicron variant is likely to spread around the world,” said the federal health department secretary, Brendan Murphy. Meanwhile, Victoria will no longer require hotel quarantine for fully vaccinated travellers from the nine southern African countries previously identified as of concern over Omicron – South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Malawi, and Mozambique. Travellers arriving from those countries will follow the rules applying to travellers arriving from other countries. Protesters again gathered at Victorian parliament in Melbourne on Sunday afternoon, chanting “free Victoria” before marching down Bourke Street. In Sydney, thousands gathered at Hyde Park to rally against vaccine mandates for a range of workplaces. The protests were part of a national day of action across the country, with demonstrations also in Queensland, Perth, Canberra, Adelaide and Hobart.On 19 December last year Boris Johnson appeared in Downing Street to tell the nation more bad news about Covid-19 that would affect the plans of millions of people at Christmas. “Yesterday afternoon I was briefed on the latest data showing the virus spreading more rapidly in London and the south-east of England than would be expected,” he said. Reading from a script that, a year on, seems depressingly familiar, he said a new strain of Covid-19 (which would become known as the Alpha variant) was taking hold and was thought to be up to 70% more transmissible than the old one. “We know enough already to be sure we must act now,” Johnson told the country. So grave was the situation that the PM had convened an urgent meeting of ministers on the Covid operations committee the previous evening to discuss the need for tough and deeply unwelcome new restrictions, including rules that would mean people in tier 4 areas could not mix with anyone outside their household – even on Christmas Day. On that same Friday evening when Johnson and his ministers met, however, the last thing on the minds of some members of his staff at Downing Street – and a favoured few across Whitehall departments – was a new variant or fresh Covid rules. Instead they were getting ready for some festive fun behind the big black door of No 10. In an area of Downing Street occupied by advisers and his press team, through which Johnson and his wife, Carrie, have to pass to get to their flat at the top of the building, several dozen officials gathered over the course of that evening for drinks, nibbles and party games at the end of another long week. It appears to have been a blatant breach of rules by people whose day job was to communicate the need for compliance to the nation. But this was the heart of power. “Most of them in there had had Covid. They had been ill. They thought somehow things didn’t apply to them,” said a senior government source. “I think they were just rather blasé. They called it the plague pit in there because it had ripped through the building. So they thought, well, we have been bloodied by it. What more can happen to us? But it was fucking stupid. It shows the arrogance. Put it out there with an invitation, and you are demarcating it as an event, for God’s sake.” * * * When news of this and other alleged Downing Street “parties” first broke in the media at the end of November, the prime minister and his staff denied any wrongdoing. Johnson insisted that he had known nothing at the time and had been assured since that if a small get-together had happened, it had been fully compliant with rules in place at the time. There was nothing to worry about. But this weekend, when Johnson should be happily celebrating the birth on Thursday morning of his seventh child, a baby daughter, while preoccupying himself on the work front with a new emerging Covid crisis, the issue of “partygate” has blown up in his face and is consuming many in Downing Street. This, and other self-inflicted crises that call into question not just the prime minister’s judgment but his honesty and integrity, have coincided and fed off each other in a way that even some ministers sense now threatens his premiership, not least because, as one former minister put it: “We are talking about this bollocks instead of what matters, and it is happening again, again and again”. This weekend large sections of the Tory party are in total despair. Only a month ago it was the Owen Paterson affair, a catastrophic prime ministerial misjudgment which triggered weeks of Tory sleaze stories. It is the regularity of these disasters that incredibly has led some Conservative MPs to think, for the first time, about scenarios under which the man who won them an 80-strong majority two years ago might have to be thrown overboard. And all as yet another Covid variant, Omicron, surges across the UK, requiring public compliance and patience with another round of government restrictions at Christmas. To add to Johnson’s woes, a giant Tory rebellion looms over his latest package of Covid restrictions, due to be voted on in the Commons on Tuesday. “It is a total farce and a total disaster,” said one senior Tory MP. “How can we have authority as a party of government when the public see this hypocrisy going on? The party thing has really angered everyone and the timing is beyond awful. It is worse than Barnard Castle with my constituents. The next few days will be critical.” Wednesday was a truly terrible day for Boris Johnson, one of those when it seemed things simply could not get any worse for the PM. The evening before, ITV News had broadcast leaked footage in which Downing Street staff, including Allegra Stratton, the PM’s official spokesperson at the time, laughed about the hitherto flatly denied Christmas party, four days after it had clearly happened. Officials had been rehearsing with Stratton for planned broadcast press conferences (which then never happened because everyone concluded the idea would backfire) and wanted to see how she would react and what she would say if journalists ever found out. Ed Oldfield, who still works at No 10 as an adviser on broadcast media matters, was posing as a journalist and said he had heard that a Christmas party had taken place. What was the government response? Stratton was flummoxed, and laughed nervously before asking, “What’s the answer?” To guffaws in the room, she then offered that “this fictional party was a business meeting … and it was not socially distanced”. It was clear to the millions who saw the footage that the often denied event had most definitely taken place – and that everyone who knew about it feared that one day it would leak out. At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Johnson offered a grovelling, excruciating apology for the video and the way his staff had behaved. It was another hugely damaging U-turn. He said he was “appalled and sickened”, though he did not actually admit that the party had happened. That, he insisted, would be for the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, to establish in a new inquiry. Case would within hours widen that inquiry to include allegations about other parties, including one in Johnson’s own flat a year or so ago. Unlike at PMQs two weeks before, when many seats were left vacant as Tory MPs stayed away out of disgust at the Paterson disaster, this time they were packed in behind Johnson. But not to cheer him on. Rather, they looked on in deathly silence at the macabre events as Keir Starmer twisted the knife. The prime minister tried to inject some Covid vaccine bounce back into his backbenchers, talking about the government’s record on boosters, but the old tricks were falling flat. He was on his own amid a sea of morose faces. The reasons were more than just about the party. Before MPs had entered the chamber, strong rumours had been circulating that Johnson and his cabinet were about to do what they had suggested would not be necessary before Christmas, and order their Covid “plan B” to be implemented, meaning a return to tighter restrictions with vaccine passports in nightclubs, more mask-wearing and other new rules. And this as the row about non-compliance among Downing Street staff raged on. So cynical had even his own MPs become that the automatic suspicion of some was that new rules were an attempt to divert attention away from “partygate”. Tory MP William Wragg stood up and said as much: “Very few will be convinced by this diversionary tactic,” he told his leader, in an intervention that drew gasps from all sides. * * * Outside the chamber, Tory MPs were in a state of open despair. One Johnson loyalist said he thought the PM could still rescue the situation, but added quickly that if he didn’t by early in the new year the party would show its ruthless streak. “Unlike Labour, we are good at getting rid of liabilities. If this goes on, we act.” What angered many was the backlash they were already feeling from their constituents. “The film about the party did it. That filled up my inbox overnight. Worse than anything I have had before. That was the trigger,” said a former minister. Something else had changed, almost overnight. Normally unexcitable Tory backbenchers were beginning to discuss life after Johnson and mull possible successors. Several talked about Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, being “on manoeuvres”, and Jeremy Hunt never having closed down his failed 2019 leadership bid. Some admitted writing, if not sending, letters of no confidence to Sir Graham Brady, chair of the 1922 Committee, as they toyed with attempting to trigger a leadership contest. “It’s not dated, but it’s sitting on my desk,” said one MP. It was the depressing cycle of crisis after crisis that had led him to put pen to paper. Were other letters being written? “I think the answer to that is undoubtedly yes. Whether it gets to the trigger figure this side of the new year, I’m not sure. But it’s end of empire stuff.” Several MPs said that Johnson’s weakness was all the greater because he lacked any die-in-the-ditch allies. “He has nobody who will stand for the last bit of hand-to-hand combat. He’s on the field alone. The emperor doesn’t have new clothes. He is just wandering around stark bollock naked,” observed another MP. “I’ve got members, my colleagues are saying they’ve got members, saying, ‘I voted for Johnson as I thought he was brilliant. I was duped. He’s a clown. He’s got to go.’” In midweek, Downing Street tried to get senior ministers on radio and TV to defend Johnson, but they all found excuses not to do so. Later on Wednesday afternoon, a tearful Stratton appeared outside her London home and announced her resignation, which Johnson accepted, presumably hoping that would at least restore some calm. But the next day – after Johnson had spent the night at a London hospital as his wife gave birth – the PM was having to deal with new and potentially even more serious issues about the way the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat had been paid for, at a cost of more than £100,000. The Electoral Commission ruled in a report that the Tory party had broken electoral law by failing to declare money given by Tory donor Lord Brownlow as a donation. The commission also mentioned a WhatsApp message that Johnson sent to Brownlow asking for money, months before Johnson said he first dealt with the peer on the matter. Johnson’s adviser on ministerial interests, Lord Geidt, who had investigated the refurbishment and cleared Johnson of wrongdoing was said to be furious and to have considered quitting. If he still does so, he will be the second standards chief under Johnson to have resigned because of the PM’s own behaviour. The adviser on parliamentary standards, Kathryn Stone, is now said to be considering launching her own investigation into the issue. “If Geidt goes I think that could be very serious indeed,” said a former cabinet minister on Saturday. Another well-placed MP said it was not impossible that Johnson, like Paterson, could be recommended for suspension from the Commons. * * * This coming week will, most MPs believe, be a critical one for Johnson. On Tuesday, several dozen Tory MPs are threatening to rebel over the new Covid restrictions. Many believe the case has not been made that the Omicron variant requires such intervention, when there is scientific evidence to suggest that it only causes relatively mild disease. They also want Johnson to show that he meant it when he said the country needs to live with Covid-19. “It is a basic issue of principle,” one rebel said. “It’s about civil liberties.” Then on Thursday, voters go to the polls in what should be the safest of safe Tory seats in a byelection in North Shropshire caused by the resignation of Paterson, whose case started the whole downward spiral for Johnson. Sensing an unlikely electoral scalp, the Liberal Democrats have been flooding the constituency and were on course to have a record number of activists there this weekend. The party has made 37,000 “contact attempts” with constituency voters. A memo to staff from its chief executive on Friday revealed that, according to responses it had reviewed from voters who said they would cast a ballot on Thursday, the Tories – who enjoyed a 23,000 majority at the last election – now had a one-point poll lead. The Lib Dem projection puts the Tories on 40%, the Lib Dems on 39% and Labour on 12%, with Reform UK and the Greens on 4% each. As our Opinium poll shows today, support for Johnson is fast ebbing away. In just a few weeks, a comfortable Tory advantage has turned into a nine-point lead for Labour. One senior Tory MP said that in the current atmosphere he would not be surprised if his party lost. “Boris will be praying that we hang on, so he can get through to Christmas and then regroup. But there is a lot of anger out there. We thought he was an electoral asset. But this is the worst possible time for the Tory party led by Boris to be asking the electorate to keep the faith.”What time are you up? Around 5.30am. I feed the birds. My favourites are the cardinals. They get bullied by the blue jays – thuggish, corrupt-cop-looking creatures. The doves, in turn, bully the blue jays. It’s wholly wrong that they are known as birds of peace. I’m no ornithologist; this is all based on what I’ve observed from my window. What’s next? I’ll empty the dishwasher, make myself a coffee, then I’ll work. I figure working four or five hours every day is the same as Monday to Friday, 9-5. If I’ve got the mental capacity to write, I will. If not, I might finesse a single sentence. Nothing gives me more satisfaction than making a piece of writing work. What’s for lunch? Unfortunately I have diverticulitis; all I can eat is fruit, vegetables and grains. Sunday lunch is no different – lots of wheat and barley. How do you relax? A long hike. There’s a 12-mile walk along country lanes beyond our Upstate New York village, passing forlorn farms, views of the Catskills, and increasing gentrification. I see exotic animals: chipmunks and groundhogs. Have you seen a racoon lift itself out of a dustbin? The first thing you see are its weird, humanlike hands. Sundays growing up? The best you could hope for was something being sold for more money than you anticipated on Antiques Roadshow. Through my teens I was forced to work at my father’s Cardiff warehouse. Afterwards, I’d go – underage – to a casino and play the slot machines. When I told my parents, my father forced them to return all the money I’d lost. Sunday evening? Me, my wife Elaine and the dogs watch TV. At the moment that’s Boardwalk Empire, which is brilliant – although it kills off all its interesting female characters. Then I do certain things to help myself fall asleep, which I probably shouldn’t be explicit about. Things Fell Apart is on BBC Radio 4 on Tuesdays at 9am and on BBC SoundsBoris Johnson is facing the most testing week of his troubled premiership as a mounting Tory rebellion over new Covid-19 restrictions threatens his authority in parliament and a supposedly safe Conservative seat appears on a knife-edge ahead of a byelection on Thursday. After a tumultuous week for the prime minister, which saw him having to apologise over the way his officials joked about a rule-busting Christmas party in Downing Street last year and deny that he had misled his own standards adviser over the refurbishment of his flat in Downing Street, even some of his most loyal supporters are now privately raising questions about his chances of leading the party into the next general election. Tory MPs say potential successors to Johnson, including the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the former health secretary Jeremy Hunt are already gearing up for the possibility of a leadership contest in the new year and sounding out opinion in the party about levels of support. “Liz is the one with momentum,” said one former minister. “But Rishi is out there too. And Jeremy never gave up the campaign he ran in 2019.” Another very senior figure in the party said he suspected that Johnson was being set up for a fall by senior ministers who wanted him to be defeated over new Covid-19 rules, in the belief that this could fatally wound him. MPs will vote in the Commons on Tuesday on a range of Plan B measures that Johnson and his ministers have agreed are needed to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, which scientists now believe will overtake Delta as the dominant strain by the end of this month. Many Conservative MPs are furious about plans to make so-called vaccine passports mandatory for large venues. The proposals will mean those who have not been fully vaccinated, or cannot show a negative lateral flow test result, will not be able to enter indoor venues with more than 500 people, unseated outdoor venues with more than 4,000 people and any venue with more than 10,000 people from Wednesday. The plan B measures also include compulsory mask-wearing in most public indoor settings, as well as guidance for employees to work from home where they can to stem transmission. Some Tories believe that the measures were pushed by Johnson to deflect attention from the controversies engulfing Downing Street. Former Cabinet ministers David Davis, Esther McVey, Liam Fox and Greg Clark are among those to have voiced concerns about the scaling-up of restrictions. Clark, a former business secretary, said the government had “jumped the gun” by acting before more was known about the impact Omicron could have on hospital admissions. Between 50 and 80 Tory MPs are said to be considering voting against the government or abstaining, leaving Johnson potentially relying on Labour votes to get the measures approved by parliament. There are rumours of ministerial resignations unless the government shifts its ground. Labour has said it will back the measures, insisting it does not want Johnson to have to water down restrictions sought by the government’s own scientific and medical advisers. On Saturday night, the former cabinet minister Damian Green indicated he would not be supporting the government unless it could be shown that Omicron was a more lethal variant than its predecessor. He said: “If the government wants to convince people it needs to come up with some evidence that the Omicron variant is not just more transmissible than Delta but also that it is more dangerous.” Another leading backbencher said the numbers not supporting the government could even climb to over 100, which would be a severe dent in Johnson’s ability to hold his parliamentary party together. Another former minister told the Observer: “This is matter of principle for many of us. We were told that as a country we have to learn to live with this virus so can we not try to do rather than curtail people’s liberties?” On Wednesday, Johnson, whose wife, Carrie, had a baby daughter last week, is expected to appear before a tense end-of-term meeting of the 1922 committee of Tory backbenchers. Then on Thursday voters will go to the polls in a byelection in the supposedly safe Tory seat of North Shropshire, vacant after the resignation of Owen Paterson, who was found to have breached parliamentary lobbying rules. The Lib Dems are reporting this weekend that they have closed the gap with the Tories so the seat is now too close to call, as they pour activists into the constituency.There’s a communal prayer of penitence that is often used in Church of England services. In it, worshippers confess that they have sinned against their fellow humans “in thought, and word, and deed; through negligence, through weakness, through our own deliberate fault”. Concise yet powerful, it recognises the different ways we can harm each other. Sins of omission and of carelessness are no less damaging, or requiring of forgiveness, than those born of malice. We live in a period when our personal contributions to systemic injustice, many of them unintentional, are becoming increasingly obvious. Our new age of enlightenment has illuminated any number of dark corners that society has long failed (or refused) to notice. Cricket, the sport I love, has just endured a particularly punishing month of reckoning. First, Azeem Rafiq’s public testimony against his former county, Yorkshire, forced the English game to admit that its anti-racism stance wasn’t worth the T-shirts it was printed on. Then, right before the Ashes, Australia’s then-captain admitted sending sexually explicit messages to a colleague. In both cases, players, coaches and commentators found themselves suddenly jobless, while the sport’s administrators have scrambled, with little dignity, to contain the fallout. Rafiq said he had no interest in shaming individuals, but in exposing the culture of which their actions were a part. The fact that he was undermined with the revelation of antisemitic tweets from his past is symptomatic of our default position, to respond to calls for societal change with charges of hypocrisy. Each new sally in the culture wars requires its own forensic dig through social media. Each corresponding “Gotcha” moment detracts and distracts from the widespread need for justice, education and understanding that has inspired such powerful movements as Black Lives Matter and the #MeToo movement. Attitudinal and behavioural changes in our society are as rapid as they are overdue. Generations Z and Alpha will grow up with a far greater understanding than their predecessors of how insidious and widespread is the human instinct to “other” one another and how enshrined it is in our political systems and social networks. For anyone older, this is a time of reassessment. How many of us can honestly say we haven’t laughed at comedy based on stereotypes we’d blench at now, whether it’s our parents laughing at funny foreigners in 70s sitcoms or Rachel sniggering at the word “homo” in Friends? Given the insults that liberally littered schooldays past – girls calling each other “retards” or boys calling each other “gay” – who hasn’t used language they’d cringe to repeat or stayed silent at something they would quickly denounce today? No wonder many feel defensive, threatened, overwhelmed: having good intentions, and being decent in our individual encounters, is no longer enough. We’re living in an era when we’re being asked to listen and learn in ways that many of us haven’t done before. If it were easy to admit and apologise for our complicity in social “norms” that hurt others, we might have solved some of these problems. But even saying sorry for the smallest things can feel beyond us, especially under the scrutiny of social media that is quick to point the finger. While our first thoughts in these situations must be with the victims of injustice, it’s possible to feel horror for the discrimination they’ve endured (and we’ve ignored) yet retain an instinctive sympathy for those caught in the crude spotlight of their own errors. Perhaps that’s not an unselfish feeling. It’s born of the utter surety that some of our own past thoughts, beliefs and utterances might not withstand such scrutiny, whether or not our timelines are devoid of casually racist memes. Occasionally, it feels as though we’re living in a world of mutually assured destruction. There are few enough of us with clean hands, yet still, in our moral panic, we sacrifice our scapegoats and revel in other people’s downfalls. The more loudly we exercise our judgment on “historical messages” or thoughtless speech or crass attempts at humour, the harder it becomes for everyone else to own their mistakes. We can’t escape, and we can’t progress, if we’re trapped in a circle holding guns to each other’s heads. We have to find a new model for taking responsibility that tempers justice with mercy. We need to adopt a readiness to forgive that stops us getting so self-righteous and stoking divides. We must make space for grace. We also have to admit – to ourselves, to others – that we’re all susceptible to human nature and human flaws. Understanding how or why someone said or did something wrong, whether through deep-rooted and unchallenged prejudice or wilful ignorance, or worse, isn’t the same as condoning it. Acknowledging our mistakes and changing our behaviour is the most vital thing we can do. We’re more likely and able to make amends if we’re not terrified of lifelong judgment and if we don’t feel singled out for blame. In our secular society, we’ve let go of many of the rituals that allow us to acknowledge communal wrongdoing and encourage us to seek corporate forgiveness. Many would, understandably, choke on the hypocrisy of the absolution that religious establishments offer, when so many of them have been implicated in oppressive systems of their own. But maybe we’ve struggled to replace them with anything else that can recognise and relieve the heavy tonnage of our collective guilt. Instead, we point out the mote in our brother’s eye. Or we outsource atonement to actual corporations and other organisations we can hold accountable for actions and behaviour that exist at a safe distance. There’s surely a reason why the mea culpas doled out by PR departments these days have started to sound less like careful legalese and more like liturgy. “Our sport did not welcome you, our game did not accept you as it should have done,” intoned the ECB’s press release. It could almost have come with an amen at the end. • Emma John is a freelance writer and authorI first met Helen in the late 90s, when I attended an audition for a play at the Donmar Warehouse in London – I think Colin Farrell got the role. For some reason, she was there. I was just starting out, really nervous, and I think she picked up on that. We went outside at one point to smoke a rollie and she was really kind and supportive. I mentioned it to her when we started doing Peaky Blinders and she actually remembered it. Helen had this genuine compassion. It was part of her DNA. She wasn’t an actor who turned up, did the gig and went home. All the way through Peaky Blinders, she would chat to members of the crew as well as the actors. She knew everyone’s name. It’s a huge collaboration making a series like that and it’s easy to think it’s only about the actors, but she was always very aware of the collective aspect of what we do. At the wrap for series two, she actually got up and performed a poem to us all. It was about how special the show was and how great the crew were. It was humorous, but really considerate. She had obviously put a lot of thought into it. It was pure Helen. On Peaky Blinders, I think the key relationship was always between my character, Tommy, and her character, Polly. It was complex. She was his aunt, but sometimes his mother and sometimes his sister. At times, they were almost a husband and wife team. In terms of her acting, I sensed from the start that she was operating on a different level. She elevated every scene we were given on the page. She would find some small, telling thing and mine it in order to make the scene more emotionally intense. Her preparation was rigorous because she wanted to make every scene as good as it could possibly be. She constantly came in with ideas, suggestions, queries. It was inspiring, especially for the younger actors, who all looked up to her. The thing was, though, she couldn’t take praise. She was immune to it, even embarrassed by it. She’d just brush it off. I think people adored her for that when we’d be out promoting the show. She was grounded. Helen gave Polly that matriarchal aspect and imbued her with a degree of humanity and fallibility that a lot of people connected with. Family is central to the drama in Peaky Blinders. It was one of the first British TV dramas that portrayed a working-class family as strong and powerful in the way that American series do. We did talk about the violence from time to time. It’s never Hollywood superhero violence - it has real consequences. Nevertheless, I think Helen did struggle with it and she spoke publicly about that. She was honest and open about her feelings in that way. On set, a lot of the scenes could be incredibly intense, but we had such a laugh. She was so funny, very dry and self-deprecating. With a series like Peaky Blinders, when you’re in it for the long haul, you really need to have a partner on set that you can laugh and joke with. If I was worried about anything, I’d go and see her. Helen was my closest pal on the set and I think I can say that the same was the case for her. There was a moment when we both realised the series had become this global phenomenon and for me it was quite tricky in a way. She was much more comfortable in the public role – dealing with the fans and all the media attention. That stuff terrifies me, so I was in awe of how she could do that with such ease and grace. She walked that line really elegantly. Towards the end, Helen was incredibly private about her illness. She did not tell everyone, so most people on the set were unaware, even on series five, when she was really ill and having treatment. Never ever would she ask for sympathy. She just wasn’t that kind of person. I spoke to her close to the end and she was still making jokes. The way she handled it was just so absolutely brave and dignified. She would have been in series six if the pandemic hadn’t put everything on hold. We were just five days away from shooting in March 2020 when the lockdown was announced. Helen was the heart of that show and it was hard to make it without her. Really hard. There was this huge absence on the set. We all felt it. She died while we were shooting. She was too young. You can’t help but think of all the amazing roles she would have had. As an actor, Helen was all about truth, dedication, commitment, ambition, empathy. When I think of her best performances, it’s her power and her presence that come to mind most of all. As a person, you just run out of superlatives. I guess for me her kindness is what I miss the most. I think about her a lot. I still can’t believe she’s not here.The Wonderland psychedelic business conference, held recently in Miami, Florida, drew large crowds and big-name keynote speakers – such as former heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson – with the promise of a booming new sector. It is being suggested that the next big development in mental healthcare will come in the form of psychedelic drugs: substances such as psilocybin (magic mushrooms), ayahuasca (a plant-based mixture from South America), and DMT (a naturally occurring hallucinogenic). While these substances have been illegal and primarily associated with countercultures such as the hippies of the 1960s and ravers of the 1990s, changes in laws and scientific breakthroughs in psychedelic treatments for depression and anxiety have created a new industry projected to be worth £8bn by 2027. Much as happened with the cannabis industry a decade ago, a culture clash is now developing between social justice activists who fought for the legalisation of psychedelics and wealthy white men, often new to the drugs, who have the resources to dominate an emerging industry. Two years ago in the US, the city of Denver voted to decriminalise psilocybin mushrooms. It was quickly followed by Oakland and Santa Cruz in California, the state of Oregon, and then Seattle, which added ayahuasca, ibogaine and non-peyote-derived mescaline to the list. Some of these campaigns enjoyed financial support from large companies such as the organic soap producer Dr Bronner’s. Celebrities including actors Megan Fox, Will Smith and Jada Pinkett-Smith and talk show host Chelsea Handler have testified to the psychologically transformative powers of a psychedelic trip. As the buzz around these drugs heralds a new industry, will those profiting maintain the countercultural ideals of the people who popularised the drugs? “This isn’t the 1960s all over again,” the former chief executive of MindMed, JR Rahn, told Forbes as his company was attempting to get approval from the FDA, the US regulator, for its specific types of LSD to treat anxiety. “I want nothing to do with those kinds of folks who want to decriminalise psychedelics.” Much of the effort to legalise such substances is centred on offsetting the damage that the “war on drugs” has caused in impoverished communities – often by promising people of colour an economic path into this new, lucrative industry. However, for many of the early investors in psychedelics who are able carry the legalisation baton to the finishing line, the strategy is often to craft a limited version of the industry that places them exclusively in charge. “The idea that psychedelics should only be used to heal something that is broken within you – rather than as a way to communally understand our world – is the narrow definition that will get FDA approval,” says Jason Ortiz, co-founder of the Minority Cannabis Business Association, and executive director of Students For Sensible Drug Policy. “That communal bonding will be lost if we’re only pressing it into pills.” Ortiz fears that if psychedelics fall exclusively into the hands of big pharma, plants often deemed sacred by Native Americans – and the surely lucrative industry awaiting them – will follow the same path as the legal marijuana industry. Legalisation here has seen the rich get richer, while minorities and psychedelic pioneers were left out in the cold. “There’s an institutionalisation of psychedelic drugs happening that will make them less accessible to the common person,” Ortiz says. “A lot of these corporations come from big pharma and have established networks within the FDA. Movements for justice threaten that monopoly by saying that folks should be able to cultivate, sell and consume these substances on their own.” Ortiz is pursuing decriminalisation for all psychedelics, allowing individuals to make their own choices about whether and how to take them. He views the pharmaceuticals industry as a threat to that. However, the chief executive of Enveric Biosciences in Florida, Joseph Tucker, says that to “do it the pharma way” will simply provide users with more confidence, a better experience and fewer side effects. He points to the synthesis of willow bark into aspirin in the 19th century – turning a traditional cure into a more effective, less toxic medicine. Enveric is creating psychedelic-derived molecules and synthetic cannabinoids for the treatment of mental health disorders, and is currently pursuing FDA approval for its products. “With psilocybin, there can be cardiotoxic effects if it’s taken every day, and there’s also serotonin syndrome [caused by excessive levels of the neurotransmitter in the body],” Tucker says. “But the biggest issues are with the trip itself. Bad trips rely on three major variables: dose, [mind]set and setting. So people try to really control the mindset and setting, and that constrains how you’re able to utilise those therapeutics. In many clinical trials, 90% of patients are screened out for having the wrong mindset, and so it won’t work for them.” Tucker points to ketamine – an anaesthetic that is often erroneously characterised as a psychedelic because of its history as a club drug – as an example of a drug with psychedelic effects that has been shown to be effective in mental health treatments, independent of therapy. Ketamine’s approval for “off-label” use, and its proven efficacy in treating depression and anxiety, has led to a number of clinics popping up across the US where those suffering can legally access it in a medically supervised environment. Elsewhere, the head of Los Angeles-based Irwin Naturals, Klee Irwin, says: “What I’ve done for 27 years is collect the best of what’s around and put it together into something accessible for all people. So I’ll take what indigenous people have discovered through some herbal concoction, and I’ll take it and put it into a bottle that you can get at Walmart.” As a publicly traded company and health supplement supplier for big US names such as Costco, Walgreens, CVS and Walmart, Irwin Naturals certainly has the track record to commercialise and legitimise psychedelics. In 2018, Irwin had to convince his more conservative investors that cannabis-derived CBD products were a smart, and not too risky, endeavour: he was proved right when the company became one of the largest CBD wholesalers in the nation. Before the Wonderland conference, Irwin made headlines by announcing that his company would be entering the markets for psychedelics and THC, the psychoactive component of cannabis. “I wouldn’t have been able to do this two years ago: it would’ve been too scary,” Irwin says. “But right now there’s this perfect quiet before the storm – an opportunity for us to slip in [to the psychedelics industry] as the first truly household-name brand, which can be viewed publicly as a validation of plant medicine. Soon it will be far less demonised and there’ll be a whole bunch of people dogpiling in just to make money.” Irwin distinguishes himself from those motivated exclusively by profit by his intention to keep prices low and thereby make the products accessible to all income groups. In this way, he feels the necessary social justice goals can be achieved via big business. “When we started selling CBD, we collapsed the pricing floor by selling it at half the price per milligram of the lowest-priced producer,” he says. “Since we are the largest, we can bully our competitors to chase us to the floor in terms of pricing, and we are about to do the same thing with marijuana.” Irwin sees the mental health crisis in America as an emergency that warrants an FDA fast-track for psychedelic drug approval – as was achieved with Covid vaccines. And he believes companies with the power to drive the prices down should do so as a public good. “There are around 600 ketamine clinics in the US, and they’re all mom-and-pop-owned, like video stores before Blockbuster,” Irwin says. “What we want to do is acquire some of them, and open up some new ones.” For psychedelics such as psilocybin and ayahuasca, which are not approved in America, Irwin is opening retreats in nearby countries such as Costa Rica and Jamaica, preparing his company for what he sees as inevitable drug-law shifts in the US. Ortiz of the Minority Cannabis Business Association says that, on the whole, large investments in the psychedelic industry are not inherently a bad thing so long as people of all levels of privilege have access to the substances, and the chance to enter the industry. “That will help dissolve the stigma around these substances, and there will be countless people who have their mental health issues addressed, and that’s a good thing for society in general. That being said, it’s important that it’s not solely owned by anyone.”To understand the forces shaping American politics, one state will be impossible to overlook in 2022: Georgia. The Peach State will offer the biggest litmus test yet of former US president Donald Trump’s grip on the Republican party, and the persistence of his false claims of election fraud, as well as a guide to whether Democrats can expect the nation to move in their direction. It will also offer something of a laboratory experiment for new voting restrictions and the threat they pose to democracy. “Georgia enters into the realm of Florida 2000, Ohio 2004, Pennsylvania 2020 as the pivotal state,” said John Zogby, an author and pollster. “It’ll be a benchmark for 2024. It’s important demographically because it’s in a state of balance right now. It’s having its moment.” The southern, socially conservative state was a bulwark of the Confederacy during the civil war. But it is now home to a film industry dubbed the “the Hollywood of the south”. It produced Congressman John Lewis, a civil rights hero. But it also produced Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, a far-right conspiracy theorist. Its outsized role came into focus last year when Joe Biden became the first Democratic presidential nominee to win it since Bill Clinton in 1992. Then, in January, Democrats won two Senate runoff elections, giving Biden an unexpected majority and dramatically scaling up his ambitions. Now the plotlines that have dominated US politics for the past decade are set to converge in Georgia again. Trump supporters have turned out in force at local Republican meetings and sought to gain control of the state party apparatus, purging officials considered insufficiently loyal. The ex-president has also inspired a slate of devotees to seek statewide office, including former senator David Perdue, who this week launched a challenge against incumbent Republican governor Brian Kemp. Trump has fumed against Kemp over the governor’s refusal to overturn the election results last year, even after several recounts and audits affirmed Biden’s victory. Perdue has immediately grabbed on to the mantle of baseless election lies, telling Axios this week he would not have voted to certify the election, then joining a lawsuit seeking to prove he and Trump were cheated out of election victories. Kemp said last year he was required by law to certify the election. The former president called Kemp “a very weak governor” in a statement endorsing Perdue on Monday, citing nothing specific in his opposition to the sitting governor apart from his position on “election integrity”. “Most importantly,” Trump said of Kemp, “he can’t win because the MAGA [Make America great again] base – which is enormous – will never vote for him.” If he is proven wrong and Kemp prevails, it would be a humiliating defeat for Trump, offering a sign that his influence over the Republican party is slipping. Such a rebuke might even help dissuade him from running for president again in 2024. Eric Erickson, a conservative writer and radio host based in Georgia, said: “It certainly would impact his electoral college map in 2024 and it would definitely suggest that the voters are ready to move on. When you look at the polling, I think people are looking towards 2024 and maybe they’re ready to look at the future instead of the past.” The primary for governor is not the only battle here with wider implications. Trump is backing former football star Herschel Walker in a Republican primary for Senate against state agriculture commissioner Gary Black. The winner will go forward to challenge Warnock. Lower down the ballot there is also a high stakes election for secretary of state, Georgia’s top election official. Trump has endorsed Jody Hice, a congressman, in his bid to oust fellow Republican Brad Raffensperger from the secretary of state’s office. Trump has attacked Raffensperger ever since he refused to go along with his request to “find” enough votes to overturn the election. Robert P Jones, chief executive and founder of the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI), said: “We’ve got basically a Maga versus chamber of commerce battle going on and what makes it particularly poignant is the role that governor Brian Kemp and secretary of state Brad Raffensperger played in the last presidential election. “They were two Republicans that stood on the side of democracy and resisted Donald Trump’s request to overthrow the fair results of the election. In that way, they’ve they’ve been put in the crosshairs by Trump and are being challenged from the right by David Perdue on the one hand and Jody Hice on the other, both of whom have repeated this big lie that Trump actually won in Georgia.” “They’re essentially running on this Make America great again big lie, so it’ll be a real test to see how that plays out among Republicans in the primaries – before you even get to the general election.” Whichever Republican candidate for governor emerges from months of infighting they will still have to face Democrat Stacey Abrams, a voting rights activist campaigning to become the first Black female governor in American history. Abrams narrowly lost to Kemp in 2018 in what proved a flashpoint election. It was a contest that encapsulated how Georgia is changing – Abrams symbolized a new progressive Georgia, while Kemp represented the old conservative guard. Such trends surfaced again in January when Democrats Raphael Warnock, who is African American, and Jon Ossoff, who is Jewish, defeated Kelly Loeffler and Perdue, both of whom are white Christians. Jones, who was born in Atlanta, Georgia, added: “What’s also at play here is the changing face of the country and the kind of candidates that might represent the way the demographics are changing.” “If you go back to right before the 2008 election, Georgia was 53% white and Christian. Today it’s 41% white and Christian. Just between the beginning when Barack Obama was running and today, things have changed quite dramatically. It also has this urban-rural divide that so many states, particularly southern and peripheral south states, have: Atlanta and its suburbs versus the rest of the more rural state.” Just as she did in 2018, Abrams is likely to make voting rights a central issue. During that campaign, she highlighted serious election problems in Georgia, including the way the state was disproportionately flagging Black voters for removal from the rolls and a surge in polling place closures in the state. Now the stakes around voting rights are even higher. In March, Georgia Republicans enacted sweeping new voting restrictions, even though there was no evidence of fraud in the 2020 election. The new law gives voters less time to request an absentee ballot and requires them to provide information from a state ID on both the ballot request and ballot itself. It also limits the use of ballot drop boxes to one box per 100,000 voters, and allows them to be in use only during early voting hours. The boxes were used for the first time in 2020, when they proved popular and were available 24/7. The new law adds an additional day of Saturday early voting and makes Sunday early voting optional. Kemp has staunchly defended the measure, even as the state faced enormous pressure from Major League Baseball and other companies. The justice department and several other civic action groups are suing Georgia over the law. Helen Butler, a longtime organizer in Georgia, said she is already seeing the effects of the new voting law on the ground there. During municipal elections earlier this year, she said her group, the Georgia Coalition for the People’s Agenda, had seen an uptick in people who wanted rides to the polls because they were wary of using an absentee ballot. The new law also limited what kind of assistance her group could give voters with mail-in ballots, she said. “We’re tired of always seeing barriers put in place to us being able to exercise our right to vote.” Events in Georgia will be closely watched elsewhere. Trump has endorsed more than 60 midterm candidates across the country, including several running against Republican incumbents. Some strategists fear he could sabotage his own party as it seeks to regain the House and Senate. Democrats, meanwhile, have tried to learn from Abrams’ ability to generate enthusiasm. Andra Gillespie, an associate professor of political science at Emory University in Atlanta, said: “There is a very real story in Georgia about Stacey Abrams organising and finding the Democratic voters and getting people to turn out and vote. It was a story that started well before the 2018 cycle.” “She’s going to want to try to continue to build on that momentum but what she’s facing is that Republicans know that’s what she’s doing. They are aware that she’s probably the best in the business at being able to get people to turn out to vote and they are going to match those efforts with their own get-out-their-own effort.”CNN found itself at the center of the US news cycle this week, after its primetime host Chris Cuomo was abruptly fired for helping to shape the response of his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo to multiple accusations of sexual harassment. The younger sibling, 51, lost three jobs in as many days – as CNN host, Sirius satellite radio jock, and a contract for a book provisionally titled Deep Denial – and now faces an investigation by outside lawyers for CNN, while the elder Cuomo, 64, faces a justice department investigation stemming from a damning report issued by New York’s attorney general. But the scandal has also placed CNN in the crosshairs after Cuomo accused his boss, network president Jeff Zucker, of knowing about his involvement in trying to manage his brother’s scandal. “There were no secrets about this, as other individuals besides Mr Cuomo can attest,” a Cuomo spokesman told the Wall Street Journal last weekend. The network hit back, calling the accusations “patently false” and illustrated why he had been fired “for violating our standards and practices, as well as his lack of candor”. CNN then announced it would resist paying out $18m remaining on Cuomo’s four-year contract, a deal that amounted to $25,000 a night for an hour-long primetime segment. Cuomo is understood to have hired LA attorney Bryan Freedman, and CNN is working with litigator Daniel Petrocelli. It was a remarkable end to what had always appeared a chummy relationship between the star and his employer, who had seemed firm in backing him. But CNN’s problems do not end there. Fellow star Don Lemon, whose primetime hour came after Cuomo’s, has been accused of sexual harassment in a bar three years ago. Lemon’s accuser, ex-bartender Dustin Hice, made the claims on the Megyn Kelly Show this week. Lemon also came up in the staged attack of Empire star Jussie Smollett, when the actor testified at trial that he received a text from Lemon warning him that his decision not to hand his phone records over to detectives had triggered an investigation. Until the moment of Cuomo’s termination from the cable news station, he and CNN had expressed a “family first, job second” rationale. “This was a very unique situation, and so we did allow for some leeway for Chris that, you know, was unique to that situation for somebody in that role with a brother in that role during a once-in-a-lifetime pandemic,” Zucker told a CNN town hall, reported The Wrap. Tanya Selvaratnam, one of four women who accused New York attorney general Eric Schneiderman of physical abuse, leading to Schneiderman’s resignation, says CNN’s efforts to keep the host on long after his involvement with his brother’s efforts to stay in office were interlocked. “These power structures in politics and the media have been designed to propagate misogyny and hierarchy,” Selvaratnam said. “Those at the top of the hierarchy, inherently characterized by white patriarchy, will stop at nothing to maintain their power until their wrongdoing is fully exposed – and even then they’ll try to hang on to it.” The interplay between politics and the media is hardly new, but represents a broader crisis for journalism in America, says Kyle Pope, editor-in-chief of the Columbia Journalism Review. “CNN benefited from the relationship between Andrew and Chris Cuomo during Covid lockdowns when they aired what were misguided, inappropriate, fawning interviews. CNN touted that, calling it great insight into a critical moment. For CNN to now claim they are shocked that those two were so intertwined is ridiculous.” But the larger question concerns to what extent US cable news has handed over its most viewed, and therefore profitable, hours over to political commentary. Once that was an issue that largely affected rightwing Fox News. Then left-leaning MSNBC. Now supposedly mainstream channels like CNN are at it. “Fox News was the first to really blur the lines between news and opinion, and it was not un-noticed that they became the most watched and the most profitable. They had this ridiculous fig leaf of being straight news during the day and at some magical moment we switch to something else. CNN and MSNBC then mimicked them,” said Pope. But, Pope pointed out, viewers don’t differentiate, and like everything else during the Trump era, everything became exaggerated. “I watched Fox on one side and CNN and MSNBC on the other became more and more opinionated as the presidency wore on, to the point that they could not pull themselves out.” And that, he said, is the case across TV and print. “You can ask the question: what’s driving what? Is it the country driving the polarization? Or is that opinion is cheaper to produce? Or is the news driving the polarization? Whatever it is, it’s clearly this is what’s happening.” “The fallback position of new organization of ‘well, it’s complicated’ is clearly a ridiculous journalistic response,” Pope said, which typifies news businesses’ response to Trump to brand themselves as identity-markers. “So it becomes very difficult from managers to say they screwed up because it plays right into the hands of the other guy.” Robert Thompson, director of the Bleier Center for Television and popular culture at Syracuse University, said the Cuomo saga is no more than another stop in the creation of a cable news star system. “It was a dangerous game for Fox, as it is now for CNN.” Thompson said that Chris Cuomo’s ratings began to collapse before his brother finally stepped down in early November, a sign perhaps that the brothers’ fortunes were closely linked. But the cable new channels have all seen precipitous drops in primetime viewers over the past year, with CNN down 77%, MSNBC 59%, and Fox News down 35%. According to ratings data compiled by Nielsen, Fox News recorded an average primetime audience of 2.6m viewers in November, followed by MSNBC with 1.1m, and CNN with 654,000. As CNN deliberates on Cuomo’s replacement, it might reflect on other times when a single show or personality has floated a network – the eras of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire or American Idol, or even Bill Cosby. “It’s the danger of single-crop planting. It’s fine until a certain weevil comes along,” Thompson pointed out. “Primetime news and primetime entertainment are all playing the same game – to maximize audiences.” The acceleration of news-opinion often gets laid at the door of Trump, who explicitly used CNN coverage as a bargaining chip to threaten Time-Warner’s tie-up with AT&amp;T. “I don’t entirely blame CNN, but they certainly did become the anti-Fox,” said Jim Sleeper, a former lecturer in political science at Yale. In the post-Cuomo CNN era,will we see a continuation of primetime opinion or kick it back to cooler heads from the news division “I think CNN might subtly retune to make it seem like they’re offering objective news,” Sleeper adds. But it is also possible – given the economic temptations of opinion as news as a ratings-grabber – that the reverse may happen as they look to replace Cuomo. The lessons of Tucker Carlson’s success at Fox News, where ever-increasing ratings has been rewarded with big audiences and growing power, seem obvious. “We got into a dynamic that’s caused real distress in the American news culture and traditions,” Sleeper said.When Oliver Postgate, the late maestro of children’s television programmes, first invited young viewers to travel with him “in our imaginations across the vast starry stretches of outer space”, he was introducing many of them to a lifeform they would never forget: the Clanger. These little pink, knitted, nozzle-nosed aliens, Postgate suggested, were really rather like us, living out their lives on the “small planet wrapped in clouds” they called home. Now it has emerged they were much more like us than we thought. A new book put together by Postgate’s son, Daniel, is to make public the full scripts of the puzzling show for the first time and to confirm a rumour often dismissed as heresy: yes, the Clangers did use the odd profanity and actually spoke a language that was very close to our own. The strange swanee-whistle voices that entertained millions of children on the BBC show in the 1970s were actually noted down in a full and detailed screenplay, written out in English. “People have often wondered whether there was swearing,” said Postgate, who revived the show for a new generation in 2015. He is surprised, he said, by the idea the soundtrack of whistles could ever have been entirely improvised. “Some people don’t realise that the scripts were written in English. And those who do often speculate on whether a certain amount of bad language – swearing, to be blunt – had been slipped into their conversations.” The magical, intergalactic introduction to the show, written and voiced by Postgate, went on to draw viewers in “very close”, suggesting that they “look and listen very carefully”. Those children who did just that may well have noticed that the show’s fictional location, a “calm serene orb”, was inhabited by beings with a short temper. “It was a very much a 70s family,” said the Clanger creator’s son. “So they were a bit abrasive with each other. Nothing really bad, but you can’t get away with that so much now.” Those voicing the Clangers may not have used immersive acting techniques like the Method to get into character, but they did have to know what was being expressed. “Now fans of the show can look and see exactly what my dad had written for the Clangers to say. After all, you can’t just whistle away in any old nonsense. The whistlers have to know their motivation.” In addition, Postgate explained to the Observer, the more volatile dialogue for the Soup Dragon was also written down in the script by his father. The sounds made by the enigmatic Iron Chicken, however, were simply indicated by tone. “The Iron Chicken was more emotive. So they were either plaintive noises or enthusiastic.” Clangers: The Complete Scripts 1969 to 1974 is being published by the crowdfunded publishing house Unbound, and contains 27 scripts, alongside Oliver Postgate’s special musical notation for each episode. It also reproduces many of the original illustrations created by Postgate’s collaborator, Peter Firmin, and several sketches showing the evolution of the unique creatures on the show, including the Soup Dragon and the Froglets. It even reprints the knitting patterns for the original Clanger characters’ models. Postgate senior, who died in 2008, was also behind popular children’s shows Pogles’ Wood, Noggin the Nog, Ivor the Engine and Bagpuss. He once said in an interview that Major Clanger, when confronted with a door that would not open in an early episode, can be heard whistling the words: “Sod it, the bloody thing has stuck again.” At the time it was unclear if Postgate was merely teasing his audience, especially as he added that the nicer child would be more likely to hear the line as: “Oh dear, the silly thing’s not working properly.” The newly published scripts make it clear the ruder version was on the money. “My dad’s original intention was for the series to be shown without narration, so it would be left up to the viewer to decide what the Clangers were saying,” said Postgate. “Indeed, when Clangers was shown at a festival in Germany, he asked a German producer whether he could follow the story. ‘Of course! They are speaking perfect German!’ the producer said.” The book also details a minor Postgate scandal surrounding the Pogles. “I have included some new documents in the book that show how my dad and Peter presented their ideas. At first the BBC were quite casual and laissez-faire about what they did. Then they introduced the Pogle Witch and some children were terrified. After that the BBC wanted to be clear exactly what they were going to do. In effect, the Pogle Witch was banned.” Postgate also suspects his father drew on some intriguing sources in the show: “The series came out shortly after the release of David Bowie’s Space Oddity album. And clearly, space was in the air in those days, what with the lunar landings. It was a creative touchstone.” The family’s political legacy was also an inspiration. “My dad came from a strong socialist heritage,” said Postgate. “His grandfather was the Labour MP George Lansbury. Lansbury’s philosophy had a lasting influence and I think it’s apparent in his stories.” The Clangers were briefly drawn into this combative arena in a special one-off episode called Vote for Froglet, in which Postgate tried to persuade the planet’s residents of the virtues of the two-party system. After a snap election, with the Soup Dragon running on the “free soup for all” ticket, the Clangers were unconvinced and stuck with their enlightened autonomous collective. And what of that powerful opening sequence, with the camera tracking across the cosmos? Well, Postgate believes his father may have been inspired by the footage that opens one of Britain’s most celebrated films, Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger’s A Matter of Life and Death. “I often wonder if he consciously reused the images and ideas that open that film. I would not be surprised. He shared a lot of Powell and Pressburger’s vision of Englishness – the pastoral idealism.”During the closing stages of Margaret Thatcher’s premiership, I said to the Conservative MP John Biffen: “I think Mrs Thatcher must be suffering.” This was surprising, coming from such a long-term critic of Thatcherism as myself, but so was the reply from Biffen, a former member of her cabinet and also, for years, her leader of the Commons. “Yes,” he replied, “but is she suffering enough?” Biffen was strongly opposed to the poll tax – a proposal for local authority taxation which would apply the same rate to rich and poor – general opposition to which eventually contributed to Thatcher’s fall from power in 1990. Biffen was also MP for the Oswestry constituency, which later became North Shropshire. North Shropshire is in the news. A solid Conservative seat where there is going to be a byelection on Thursday as a result of the “sleaze”-enforced, if reluctant, resignation of Owen Paterson, but one which, according to the latest odds, the Liberal Democrats might win, given the way the public finally seems to be catching up with what an appalling government Boris Johnson has landed them with – Johnson, of course, being in the lead when it comes to the debasement of modern British political standards. Now, I did not get where I am today by making political forecasts, let alone following the betting. Nevertheless, byelections can spring surprises. There was an interesting one way back in 1985, when my then colleague Adam Raphael was covering the Brecon and Radnor byelection, which Neil Kinnock, then leader of the Labour party, had obviously hoped his candidate would win. Neil and Adam had a £10 bet on the result. But Labour’s support was dented by an incendiary speech by the National Union of Mineworkers’ leader, Arthur Scargill, and the seat went by a narrow margin to the Liberals. Neil paid up with a £10 cheque, which Adam did not cash, but instead framed for posterity. Alas, it turns out that the writing on the cheque has completely faded away. Posterity will have to take their word for it. If the North Shropshire byelection does produce an upset, this might well be the final nail in the coffin of Johnson’s troubled premiership. But whether this might benefit Labour is an open question. Kinnock and his deputy Roy Hattersley had reasonable hopes they would defeat Thatcher in a general election, but by ruthlessly dispensing with her in favour of John Major, the Tories got themselves a new lease of life. The good news is that Labour’s present leader, Sir Keir Starmer, has also had a new lease of life with his forensic assault on this frightful government. But we must wait to see whether he and Labour can turn up the heat on the disaster of Brexit. I was disappointed to read an article by Lionel Barber, former editor of the Financial Times, in which he said that he and some distinguished colleagues on the new Independent Commission on UK-EU Relations were united in the view that “there can be no question of refighting the Brexit referendum or reopening the question of EU membership. The war is over, the Leavers won.” This is desperately defeatist. They acknowledge that “Brexit isn’t working” then say “the task of the commission is to help fix it”. But Brexit can’t be “fixed”. As Kinnock recently observed: “You cannot mend a burst tyre.” Day by day the news gets worse: our so-called Brexit negotiator Lord Frost has alarmed the Biden administration with what his “renegotiation” of the Northern Ireland protocol might portend for peace in Northern Ireland, and he unashamedly wants to abandon the European social model – to which the UK, by way of having previously championed the single market, has made a major contribution. Frost and his colleagues fantasise about a trade deal with the US which is simply not on the cards. Trump-era tariffs on US imports of steel and aluminium? Down for members of the EU, but not for the UK. Pig farmers? Sheep farmers? Thousands of small and medium-sized British businesses? All suffering from the absurdity of Brexit. It is more than five years since 37% of the electorate voted for Brexit, in response to a number of grossly misleading promises. As I wrote recently, I ask many people I encounter what they think of Brexit, and the response is decidedly negative. As for the younger generation – the many people who have become eligible to vote since 2016 – my strong impression is that they are overwhelmingly in favour of rejoining. Labour should go for it!The Chief’s Chief is the most consequential book on the Trump presidency. In his memoir, Mark Meadows confesses to possibly putting Joe Biden’s life in jeopardy and then covering it up – all in easily digested prose and an unadorned voice. If nothing else, the book has provided plenty of ammunition for Donald Trump to have concluded that Meadows “betrayed” him. Trump has trashed The Chief’s Chief as “fake news”, derided Meadows as “fucking stupid”, and falsely claimed that the book “confirmed” that he “did not have Covid before or during the debate”. Actually, when it comes to events in Cleveland on 29 September 2020, Meadows writes: “We’ll probably never know whether President Trump was positive that evening.” But we know he very well might have been. And to think Trump gave Meadows a blurb for his cover: “We will have a big future together”. Hopefully, Meadows received at least 30 pieces of silver as an advance. By the numbers, Trump came in contact with approximately 500 people between the time he received his first positive test, which was followed by a negative one, and his announcement that he did indeed have Covid. Not surprisingly, Trump blamed others for giving him the virus, even intimating that gold star military families did it. Last week, after the Guardian broke news of Meadows’ book, Michael Shear of the New York Times recalled: “Hours after he received the call from Meadows informing him of a positive test, Trump came to the back of AF1 without a mask and talked with reporters for about 10 minutes.” “Several days later”, Shear himself tested positive. The 45th president looks like “patient zero”, a one-man super-spreader. Switching topics, Meadows tags Biden for getting overly handsy and says Andrew Cuomo ogled Hope Hicks. Unsurprisingly, Meadows omits mention of allegations against his own boss. Just one example? E Jean Carroll’s defamation lawsuit against Trump, arising from an alleged rape in a department store dressing room. Turning to Republican politics, Meadows, a former North Carolina congressman, accuses John Boehner, once House Speaker, of acting like a “Mafia Don”. Again, Meadows does not mention the boss’s behavior. As reported by Joshua Green in Devil’s Bargain, Trump once laced into Paul Manafort, his sometime campaign manager, thus: “You treat me like a baby! Am I like a baby to you … Am I a fucking baby, Paul?” Manafort was convicted on bank and tax charges in 2018. But he stayed a loyal foot soldier and received a pardon from Trump. With Christmas just weeks away, Meadows throws in the following Trump quote as a holiday bonus: “I’m the only one who can save us.” Meadows isn’t the sole Trump administration alum doing his darnedest to portray their guy as America’s saviour. But he is the only one who lets us know Trump tested positive before he tested negative. And that makes his book one for the ages. ••• Other would-be stocking stuffers by Trump insiders convey that they were either in the dark about that fateful Covid test or took care not to share. Kayleigh McEnany, Trump’s final press secretary; Peter Navarro, an economics adviser; and Scott Atlas, a Covid adviser, are out with books of their own. In her non-tell-all, McEnany makes sure we know of her academic credentials and reiterates her claim that she never lied to reporters. After all, she writes, her education at “Oxford, Harvard and Georgetown” meant she always relied on “truthful, well-sourced, well-researched information”. She doesn’t mention her time at the University of Miami much. But no matter. Elite degrees say more about future earnings and marriage prospects than a penchant for truth. Trump attended the University of Pennsylvania. Boris Johnson, Oxford. Richard Nixon went to Duke and Bill Clinton is a graduate of Yale. Nixon was disbarred, Clinton’s law license suspended. Boris is Boris. McEnany thanks the deity repeatedly. Her title, For Such a Time as This, riffs off the Book of Esther. She stays on message for more than 200 pages, lauding Trump for standing for “faith, conservatism and freedom”. But that first positive Covid test, on 26 September, described by Meadows and since confirmed by Maggie Haberman and other pillars of the Washington press? Nada. McEnany writes that on 1 October 2020, two days after the Trump-Biden debate, she learned for the first time that Trump and Melania had “tested positive for Covid-19”. On 2 October, Trump was helicoptered to hospital. On 5 October, McEnany was told she had the virus too. She does not draw a line to Trump’s recklessness. “Thankfully,” she writes, “everyone in the White House made a full and complete recovery, including me.” Not true. McEnany does not mention Crede Bailey, head of the White House security office. When she was Trump’s press secretary, she did. Asked about Bailey at a briefing, McEnany said: “Our heart goes out to his family. They have asked for privacy. And he is recovering, from what I understand. We are very pleased to see that. But he and his family will be in our prayers.” On a GoFundMe page set up to help pay for Bailey’s treatment, a friend wrote: “Crede beat Covid-19 but it came at a significant cost: his big toe on his left foot as well as his right foot and lower leg had to be amputated.” Bailey also suffered long-term lung, heart, liver and kidney damage. According to his family, Trump has never publicly acknowledged Bailey’s “illness”. McEnany delivers a bouquet to Meadows. “You were a constant reminder of faith,” she gushes. “Thank you for being an inspiring leader for the entire West Wing.” Navarro would probably disagree. In fact, it’s a good bet he would concur with Trump’s new assessment of Meadows’ intelligence. In his book, In Trump Time, Navarro repeatedly takes Meadows to task for insufficient loyalty and accessibility. According to Navarro, after Trump lost to Biden, the White House chief of staff’s heart and body were too often not at the White House. “Wherever the heck” Meadows was, Navarro says, he sounded “like Napoleon after Waterloo, getting ready to be shipped out to Elba”. Navarro also blames Meadows for failing to heed a purported warning in 2019 from Cleta Mitchell, a Republican activist and lawyer, that the Democrats “were getting ready to steal the election”. When Meadows was pressed in September 2020 about his failure to act on this tip, Navarro says, all he could muster was, “It just didn’t happen.” The fact that both the House and Senate have documented Meadows’ efforts to put the squeeze on Republican election officials fails to impress Navarro. The Chief’s Chief may have also waived Meadows’ claim of executive privilege. Either way, Meadows’s latest about-face on cooperating with the House select committee investigating the events of 6 January is unlikely to alter Navarro’s impression of him. As for Mitchell, she resigned from her law firm over her role in an infamous call between Trump and Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state. On top of pushing the line that the Democrats stole the election, Navarro lambasts numerous officials for failing to confront China, Mike Pence among them. Significantly, as he goes after Trump’s star-crossed vice-president, Navarro sounds a now-familiar trope of the anti-democratic right. He brands Pence a treacherous “Brutus” who betrayed Trump, an “American Caesar”. Did Navarro forget those gallows bearing Pence’s name? Regardless, the shoutout to a murdered Roman emperor is meant as a full-throated compliment. During the 2016 campaign, Paul LePage, then governor of Maine, thought Trump needed to show some “authoritarian power”. Last May, Michael Anton of the rightwing Claremont Institute pondered whether the US needed a caesar. Anton was joined on air by Curtis Yarvin, AKA Mencius Moldbug, a self-described monarchist and pillar of the Dark Enlightenment, a take embraced by the alt-right. Navarro demands “full forensic audits” of the 2020 election and posits that the 6 January insurrection may have been “perpetrated by those who sought to provoke an attack on our Capitol as a means of derailing” a Trump electoral college win. ••• In A Plague Upon Our House, Scott Atlas goes after Deborah Birx and Anthony Fauci for grabbing headlines but ignores both Trump’s prediction that Covid, “one day – it’s like a miracle – it will disappear” and his admission to Bob Woodward that Covid would be worse than he told the public. Covid has killed nearly 800,000 Americans – and counting. The US faces another Covid winter, with more than 100,000 new cases daily and the Omicron variant looming. Vaccine resistance and Covid deaths have become red-state hallmarks. Atlas is a radiologist and a fellow at the conservative Hoover Institution at Stanford University. He joined the Trump White House in August 2020 and resigned after the election. As a Covid adviser he opposed expanded testing and isolation, calling such measures “grossly misguided”. Rather, he argued that the virus could be stymied and herd immunity attained once 20% to 25% of the population contracted it. In his book, he appears to discount the impact of long Covid. Confronted by an open letter from Stanford faculty challenging his credentials, Atlas threatened legal retaliation. Marc Kasowitz, Trump’s lawyer, demanded immediate retraction. None followed. Atlas, however, did get one big thing right: opposing school closures, which he characterized as an “egregious and inexplicable” policy failure. Closures helped cost the Democrats Virginia. Glenn Youngkin’s win in that race for governor was about more than critical race theory. Trump and Trumpism will remain a force in the Republican party in the years to come. Meadows, McEnaney, Navarro and Atlas are counting on it. Earlier this month, however, Chris Christie spoke at a dinner of DC poohbahs. “I gave Donald Trump my undying loyalty,” he said. “And as we learned this week, he definitely gave me Covid.” Just a reminder, folks.Winter storms in the hills can change the best of plans. Outside the door of the tiny Norwegian touring cabin, snow is blowing sideways and drifting across our tracks. Wreaths of mist filter the surrounding trees into charcoal smudges. Walking to the woodshed, let alone a long day travelling on skis with heavy rucksacks, seems unappealing. So we throw another log into the woodburner and break out the cards and Kindles to wait out the weather. My wife and I are in Sandfløten, a small hut in the woods in the mountains east of Lillehammer. The plan on this short tour is to cross an area of ungroomed ski paths to link up with huts on the managed cross-country ski trails around the resort of Sjusjøen – around four days’ travelling in total. With a tight schedule, a lost day means a change of plans: we will now retrace our route over two days via the Målia hut to our starting point. We are on our first tour together on backcountry skis, heavier metal-edged cross-country skis. While we had both done cross-country day trips in the past, and I’d been touring on Alpine skis, this is our first multi-day trip on Nordic touring gear. The idea was born a couple of months earlier, when we spent Christmas in Oslo and went cross-country skiing from a metro station on the outskirts out into the forest. So we’d joined the Norwegian Trekking Association (the DNT), which runs a network of more than 500 huts, and planned to come back and ski from hut to hut. The plan is to travel light. Take the train from Oslo and a bus to our starting point. Then leave a change of clothes and our ski bags at a hotel in Hamar. Everything else – dehydrated meals, sleeping bags, a collapsible snow shovel, dry clothes for the hut – will go in the rucksacks. We plotted the route for ease and safety, following well-travelled parts of the Hedmarksvidda, an area of low mountain moorland dotted with hamlets and crossed by roads. Our starting point is the small ski station at Budor. From the trailhead, the skiing will be all uphill at first until we hit a rolling plateau. We clip into the skis and kick off, the waxed bases gripping as we set off uphill, quickly warming up, and finding a slow but steady rhythm. After a while the trees thin out into a rolling white landscape dotted with small copses, with higher fells visible in the distance. The first descents, with rucksacks pulling our centres of gravity backwards, are a little tense, but everything is working. At a crossroads we meet a wiry skier in his mid-60s who plans to ski 50km that day. We are much less ambitious, aiming for the Målia, a half-day’s travel away. The DNT’s huts come in three classes: catered, where hot meals are served; semi-catered like Målia, where there is a larder and food is bought on an honesty system; and uncatered, where there is cooking gas, firewood and beds. A master key, supplied for a deposit, unlocks all of the cabins. We reach an empty hut, let ourselves in and light the stove to warm it up and start drying our kit, damp from the day’s efforts. This hut sleeps 10 and can be busy in Norway’s winter school holidays in normal times – but not last winter, in the throes of the pandemic. (It is understood that visitors to huts that do not need booking can sleep on the floor.) The solar-powered hut batteries are full, which means there’s electric light and we can charge our phones and GPS. We cook a meal and settle down to read. After dark, another guest arrives with her dog, who sleeps in a crate provided in one of the rooms. The next day takes us over hillier terrain, downhill at first and then a climb to a small hamlet and before a descent to an icy road. From here the trail is tougher to the next hut, the uncatered shelter at Sandfløten. The unmade path leads through dense woods across hidden stream beds and tripping roots, marked occasionally by paint blazes that are easy to miss. We are following the map, GPS and some old ski tracks from time to time. Evening is falling and the hut, when we reach it, is visible only when we are almost on it, a dark cube among the trees. The last visitor, we see from the guestbook, was here two weeks ago. There is more work to do here. The hut’s door and the path to the woodshed and toilet need shovelling. The cooking gas canister and spare are both empty, which means boiling water for our dehydrated meals requires heating it from melted snow, a laborious process. But it is warm and cosy inside. We go for an evening ski through the woods around the hut, making our own tracks across the snow-covered ponds and frozen marshes. When it comes, the storm begins gently. The morning of the third day should take us through untracked woods and over a small pass. The mist creeps in and then the first flurries of snow fall. The weather worsens quickly and the trees are dim in front of us. We could navigate through the forest but opt to turn back to Sandfløten. Soon there’s wind and a heavy fall of snow. As we are sleeping, a warm front passes over, bringing rain, followed by another freeze. Retracing our steps towards Målia, we encounter challenging conditions. Lower down the snow is wet and heavy. As we climb up again we find fresh drifts that have frozen solid like hummocks of ice-cream, pretty but slippery and very difficult to ski. What had been relatively easy on the way out is now exhausting. At times the skis come off and we walk the most challenging sections. The last day is kinder, with a dusting of fresh snow. As we have breakfast, the track-making machine passes the hut, repairing the route to Budor. The skiing is pleasant as we come back over the plateau to a mixture of dark clouds and sunshine that lights up a silvery landscape. The final long descent to a lunch of pancakes and coffee in the cafe is fast and easy, and we think about a hot shower, clean clothes, a hotel bed and the train back to Oslo in the morning. We are tired but have a sense of achievement. The memory of the woods around Sandfløten with only the sound of the wind and birds calling will linger for a long time.Rinko Kawauchi began taking pictures of fireworks when she was living alone in Tokyo in 1997. At the time, she was spending her days working out what kind of photographer she wanted to be, a process she recalls as “agonising trial and repetition”. Often in the evenings she would find firework displays, which, she says, provided her “with a sort of healing… Alongside people of all ages, I would look up at the sky and marvel at the beautiful sparks. In an instant they would vanish – and so would we return to our own daily lives. In a chaotic world, such moments felt like salvation: an affirmation of being alive.” Her images from that time are included in a group exhibition devoted to the broad theme of fire, involving finalists for this year’s Prix Pictet at the V&amp;A. Many of the pictures in the show focus on awful incendiary power: the inferno and aftermath of forest fires that are an ever more common feature of the warming planet and the charred devastation that fire can bring to environments and to communities. Kawauchi’s photographs provide little epiphanies of human joy in that context. This one looks almost medieval in its collective engagement with the heavens. The crowd, bathed in milky blue light, fixes its attention on the sudden, human-made star of wonder in the east. The spectacle appears hardly dulled by familiarity, as if the singular brilliance above the horizon, with its trail of fire, were a cosmic event or a portent. “I always keep poeticism in mind during my image-making process,” Kawauchi says. Her firework pictures, far from a night-time distraction, influenced her subsequent work, which has been all about capturing the ways in which everyday experience is sometimes flooded with surprising and ephemeral light. • Prix Pictet: Fire is at the V&amp;A, London, from Thursday 16 December to 9 JanuaryIt’s Sunday morning, less than a week after the US supreme court signaled that it was ready to pave the way for new restrictions on abortion rights in the US, and I’m on the phone with a Dutch abortion provider who has watched the proceedings from half a world away. Dr Rebecca Gomperts tells me that she’s shocked with the situation in Texas, which recently enacted a near total ban on legal abortion – not because the state government passed the law, but because doctors in the state are largely complying with it. “I would have thought that all these clinics would have said, ‘We’ll just do it,’” she tells me. For decades, Gomperts has been doing just that. Gomperts has made her career providing free or very low-cost abortions to patients in need around the world, regardless of local law. In 2018, she founded Aid Access, a site that allows women in the US to get abortions with the help of 10 US-based providers. The doctors “do it [via telemedicine] in their own states, like New York, California, Washington.” Doctors write prescriptions for drugs that induce miscarriage, which then get sent to a pharmacy in India that Gomperts vetted herself. And from India, the drugs get shipped to women’s homes – including in states, like Texas, where abortion is practically inaccessible and legally all but banned. Founded especially to help American women – and to evade legal challenges in the US – Aid Access is one of the most affordable ways to get a safe abortion in America. “They only charge $150,” Gomperts says. The website says they try to help women who cannot pay, too. The project has already come under fire from the anti-choice powers that be. In 2019, the FDA issued Gomperts a cease-and-desist letter. She didn’t comply. When Trump health department secretary Alex Azar began blocking payments to Aid Access and seizing its packages from the mail, she sued him. But Gomperts has been helping women who face restrictive legal regimes get safe abortions since long before the advent of Aid Access. Her career as an abortion rights activist didn’t start online, but on a boat. *** In the late 1990s, when Gomperts was a young activist, she travelled to countries where abortion was illegal and met woman after woman whose lives and health had been warped by unwanted pregnancies or unsafe procedures. But Gomperts had an idea. Twelve miles off a coast, in international waters, local laws don’t apply – instead, vessels must follow the laws of the country whose flag they fly. Gomperts was from the Netherlands, a nation with some of the most permissive abortion laws in the world. A boat flying a Dutch flag could legally dock in a country that banned or criminalized abortion, pick up local women in need, and then take them out to sea, to perform safe abortions on the water, beyond the reach of misogynist laws. The project espoused a kind of radical pragmatism – clever in its evasion of the law, defiant in its determination to grant women the choice that their governments denied them. Women on Waves was born. It was the beginning of Gomperts’ career as perhaps the world’s most inventive abortion access activist. Few human rights campaigners have been so daring and incendiary in their tactics, and few have provoked the ire of so many different national governments. In Morocco, she was chased out of a port. In Poland, a group of rageful men greeted her at a dock, screaming that she was a Nazi. She didn’t even make it to Portugal – the government sent two warships to stop her boat from entering territorial waters. But the massive and hostile resistance to her work didn’t make her back down; it made her diversify her tactics. She came to see her job as a combination of direct provision, legal challenges, lobbying, public health education campaigns and scientific research. “I think the combination is extremely important,” she says. “A lot of our work is advocacy. Direct provision makes visible the obstacles to abortion care, and that’s also where we do most of the research … We were the first ones that were writing about the safety of telemedical abortions and self-managed abortions.” Gomperts never visits another country without an invitation from a local women’s group, and once she arrives, she not only provides abortions but also shares best practices for helping women end their pregnancies once she’s gone. “We have trained all the women’s organizations” that they work with, she says. “We started training them to run [abortion help] hotlines in 2008. So, we’ve done all of it.” Much of her work, too, has involved publicity. For years, wherever the boat went, cameras followed, and Gomperts, for all her radicalism, proved a savvy and skilful manipulator of the media. “When I was founding Women on Waves, that was one of the criticisms actually,” she tells me. “Many of the classic abortion rights activists, they said, ‘You cannot combine these two’” – provision and publicity – “‘because it’s about vulnerable women.’ But what I found is actually that women that need abortions, that are living in a situation where their rights are being denied – they want to be a part of [changing] that.” She recalls one woman she met on a trip to Mexico, who had been offered a way to have a safe, but clandestine, abortion in her home town. “She says, ‘No. I want to have a legal abortion.’” The woman insisted on boarding the boat. *** In the two decades since she began Women on Waves, the organization has spun off into multiple different projects, all meant to increase practical access to abortion in places where it is illegal. There are the sister sites Aid Access (for the US) and Women on Web (for the rest of the world), which stretch the technicalities of the law to ship pills to women in the mail. There is the Safe Abortion app, which helps users calculate gestational time, tells them which abortion methods could be effective, and provides instructions for how to use World Health Organization– approved drugs. And there are the hotlines and email addresses that Gomperts and her team have set up in countries around the world, where women can speak to a real human being who will give them accurate information about how to access drugs without a prescription, how to take the medication, and how to stay safe before, during, and after the termination. Her interventions range from the strictly practical to the intrepidly cheeky. In 2015, she travelled to Frankfurt an der Oder, a German town on the border with Poland, where abortion is illegal. Once there, she flew abortion pills over the border into the Polish town of Slubice in a drone. These pills – mifepristone and misoprostol – are Gomperts’ real life’s work. The boat, the websites, the drones – all these are mere vessels for the true message that safe abortion is possible with medication, even in countries where it is illegal. Women need not ingest poison, or insert long, sharp objects through their cervix. They can just take some pills. In our conversation, Gomperts is adamant on this point: there is no reason, she argues, to require extensive medical exams or interventions before administering abortion pills. She cites studies showing both the safety of the medications themselves, and the reliability of prescribing them without the expensive and often inaccessible prerequisites of in-person doctor’s visits and ultrasounds. Recent pandemic history backs her up. Since the advent of Covid, “The UK has been massively returning to telemedical abortion,” she says, “without ultrasounds, without any of those things.” The results? Women in early pregnancy have been having perfectly safe, effective abortions on their own. “Women are capable of doing this,” Gomperts says. “I mean, it’s not very different from a miscarriage, and we trust women to have miscarriages on their own without medical intervention.” In fact, if a self-managed abortion patient does run into complication – a rare event –Gomperts and her organizations recommend that she go to a local doctor, and tell them that she is having a spontaneous miscarriage. A doctor can’t tell that she’s taken pills, and the treatment is the same. To Gomperts, there is little question that the risks of providing abortions to women who lack legal permission to get them are outweighed by the moral righteousness of her mission. This is part of what is so refreshing about her: the frankness of her feminist commitment. Many people will say that abortion access is a human rights issue, but too few are willing to treat it with the urgency that that label demands. This is part of Gomperts’ argument: that principled people have a moral obligation to break unjust laws. Which brings us to the question of dignity. I’m struck, again and again, at the sheer amount of effort – logistical, legal, monetary – that Gomperts and her colleagues must put into providing abortions. On the one hand, this effort is a testament to their dedication; on the other hand, the fact that such exertion is necessary at all in order to allow women to control their own lives is degrading and cruel. But to Gomperts, her great effort to grant abortion access signifies a great respect for her patients. “One of the things that we try to do, actually, by providing the services, is to strengthen their dignity and empowerment,” she says. “It shows them that we trust them.” In this way, her work gives women back some of the respect that abortion bans take away from them. All her projects are based upon this radical premise: That women are adults, who can be trusted with their own lives. On the phone, Gomperts is friendly and vivacious. Even in hostile interviews, she projects an almost preternatural calm. The writer Michelle Goldberg once referred to this quality as Gomperts’ “serene audacity”. Towards the end of our call, I ask her how she manages to retain her composure, even in conversations where people challenge women’s right to refuse pregnancy – the cause to which she has devoted her life. I expect her to tell me about her media training or her self-discipline, the strategies she deploys to keep her face straight and her voice steady. But for the first time in our conversation, the line goes silent. “That is a hard question,” she says, finally. “I don’t know … I don’t know how to answer that.” Later, I realize that it is as if I had asked her how she remains calm while explaining that the Earth is not flat, that the sky is not green. She has the confidence of a bone-deep conviction: Women deserve to choose.Two competing forces will determine Omicron’s impact on the nation over the next few weeks. The power of booster jabs to give last-minute protection against Covid-19 will be pitted against the new variant’s ability to elude existing immunity. The outcome will decide whether our festive season is going to be muted or miserable. If enough arms are jabbed with booster vaccines, while Omicron turns out to have poor powers to evade immunity, then there is hope hospital cases will be contained and the NHS will be protected. Severe restrictions in the new year – including the prospect of lockdowns – could be avoided. But if Omicron is found to evade existing immunity quite easily, while booster campaigns provide poor overall protection, then the country faces a very grim winter with strict restrictions needed for some time. According to a study by scientists at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, the first scenario – poor Omicron escape from immunity matched by effective booster jab protection – would trigger a wave of infection that could lead to 175,000 hospital admissions and 24,700 deaths by the end of April. Closure of some entertainment venues and restrictions on indoor hospitality would be enough to control case numbers. By contrast, the most pessimistic scenario – high immune escape from vaccines and low effectiveness of booster jabs – would see 74,800 deaths while there would be 492,000 hospital admissions, a figure twice as high as the peak seen in January 2021. Far stricter restrictions, including lockdowns, would then have to be considered. “These results suggest that Omicron has the potential to cause substantial surges in cases, hospital admissions and deaths in populations with high levels of immunity, including England,” the team state in their paper, which has not yet been peer-reviewed. Nicholas Davies, co-leader of the study team, described Omicron’s threat to the UK as “worrying”. Presented with evidence like this, many scientists have warned that urgent action should now be taken to hold back infections while booster campaigns are accelerated and given time to take effect. “Cases are doubling every two to three days which means there is a real risk the curve is going to get very steep around Christmas and New Year,” said the vaccine expert Peter English. “That means panic measures could be brought in at the last minute and disrupt people’s festive plans. I am also desperately sad for my colleagues in clinical practice who face a January that is going to be worse than anything we’ve seen so far and at a time when they are now exhausted.” However, the epidemiologist Prof Mark Woolhouse, of Edinburgh University, counselled caution. “Lockdown interventions buy time, that is true, but they also cause wider harm. Other, more sustainable measures – such as wider use of self-testing – may prove to be more viable.” The crucial point about making strict interventions was not to prevent the population getting Covid but to avoid too many people getting it at the same time, he added. “I don’t expect to live out my years without getting Covid once or twice some time in the future – and that applies to the rest of the population. Individual risks have not changed. The problem is that it looks as though an awful lot of us are going to encounter it in the next few weeks.” Other scientists said they were slightly more optimistic. The virologist Prof Ian Jones, of Reading University, said the grimmest scenarios did not take into account the availability of new antiviral drugs that have been shown to lessen the impact of the virus if given soon after infection. “If this better clinical picture is factored in, the link between infection and severe disease may not be as high as assumed here, and the outcome not as alarming.” This point was backed by Prof Paul Hunter, an infectious diseases expert at the University of East Anglia, who said there was evidence that Omicron was associated with less severe disease and that models overestimated hospital admissions, possibly substantially. “I suspect these models overstate risk of hospitalisation and deaths and the worst case scenarios are unlikely to be seen.” If the dangers of Omicron turn out to be exaggerated, the prospects of further variants disrupting society cannot be ignored, said the global health researcher Michael Head, of Southampton University, who accused rich countries including the UK of hoarding vaccines instead of sending them to nations with less well-developed health services. “We don’t know how often this coronavirus can change its clothes and emerge with a new look but the risks of new variants emerging are higher in under-vaccinated populations. The coronavirus has not finished with us.” • This article was amended on 12 December 2021. An earlier version misnamed Nicholas Davies as “Nicholas Wright”.I’m uneasy. After an autumn defined by the prime minister’s lies and evasions, voters in the North Shropshire byelection this Thursday should and must send a decisive message that enough is enough. That the careless lack of integrity and honesty that are the hallmarks of his government, culminating in taking the public for fools in denying the existence of a Christmas party that plainly was, are degrading politics and with it the functioning of the British state. But will they? The bookmakers certainly make the Lib Dems favourites to take the seat. A leaked internal Lib Dem postal poll taken before the extraordinary events of the past week put their candidate just 10 points behind the Tory frontrunner. Now the margin must be closer. The Lib Dems are surely the challenger. Indeed, there was an informal understanding between the Labour and Lib Dem leaderships that just as the Lib Dems would not campaign actively in Old Bexley and Sidcup, giving Labour a free run, so Labour would return the favour in North Shropshire. Every shadow cabinet minister was required not to campaign in the seat: none has. First-past-the-post voting imposes tough choices. Every Labour and Green voter must put aside their prime party affiliation and back the Lib Dem candidate while those decent Tories who can’t bring themselves to vote for a non-Tory might consider staying away from the polls . What was done at the Chesham and Amersham byelection in June, where the Labour candidate received just 622 votes, must be repeated. Imagine what it would have felt like, had the contest been tighter, to have been one of those 622, waking up to realise you had the chance to send a crucial signal – but blew it. (In the end, in Chesham and Amersham, the Lib Dems won by a handsome margin.) Yet despite the bookmakers’ odds, Chesham and Amersham may not be repeated. North Shropshire is pro-Brexit and a Tory citadel, a rural constituency where vestigial semi-feudalism and social deference give succour to Toryism. There, to be Conservative is somehow non-political, part of the natural English order of things. The system of lord lieutenants, an office established by Henry VIII as the monarch’s representative in every county, lives on, its holders typically Conservative, even if undeclared. But their countywide good works serve to lift Toryism out of party politics. Thus Shropshire’s lord lieutenancy office has a typical roll call of the county’s great and good – squires, retired military, local business people, the landed – cementing the county into the Tory camp. With no major towns, industry or universities in the constituency to provide balance, it is an inestimable electoral asset; nobody, despite the pantomime in No 10, can be certain which way it will now jump. The catalytic influence will be the reports that Christopher Geidt, the Queen’s former private secretary, now the prime minister’s adviser on ethics and standards, is considering resigning because Johnson lied to him when he said he did not know when and who was funding the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. If monarchist, “non-political” Geidt goes early this week, it will be decisive. It will be a signal to Tory England that one of their best allies considers their leader an inveterate liar. Johnson’s career as PM will be over. Who with any standing or self-respect could succeed Geidt? Here, although it will stick in many Labour activists’ craw, is the crucial social role played by the Lib Dems. They, too, can enjoy in some places a standing as somehow “non-political”, notwithstanding their political leanings. This explains why they are a crucial part of any progressive alliance. They will be the beneficiaries in North Shropshire of Tory disintegration, as they would be in other parts of rural England in a general election. Their 12 MPs could easily rise to over 50 – if there is intelligent tactical voting. In the 1997 general election, tactical voting was worth up to 30 seats; as the then Observer editor, I spent a large part of the annual promotional budget on a poll of 20 marginals to support just that aim. All the seats fell to Labour or the Lib Dems. It was also in that election that Michael Portillo, then defence secretary, unexpectedly lost the hitherto safe Enfield Southgate seat. In 2019, there was not much evidence of tactical voting; the “non-political” were not going to play any part in putting Jeremy Corbyn into Downing Street. Sir Keir Starmer may be criticised by the left for his moderation and caution; in a first-past-the-post voting system it is a crucial asset in emboldening tactical voting. The open question is how to encourage what is a strategic necessity; the chance of Labour winning 125 seats to form a government demands an impossible swing. There will have to be Lib Dem gains and an agreement that the party will support a Labour-led government. Everyone knows this truth – not acknowledging it holds more risk than evading it. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, was only floored, in an otherwise devastating attack on the government on the Today programme, when he was asked if he would support tactical voting in North Shropshire. The stock reply – the electorate don’t want party fixes but clear choices – is nonsense with first past the post. Indeed, to endorse first past the post is to legitimise one of the chief building blocks of Tory England’s grip on government: it is the glue that holds the party together and, given the opposition vote splitting, confers continual electoral ascendancy. Openly to admit what is now being done privately would instead give a new seriousness of purpose to British politics and allow opposition politicians not to dodge the obvious question that tripped up Streeting. If the voters of North Shropshire have a sacred duty not to vote Tory this Thursday, Starmer and Ed Davey have a parallel responsibility. British capitalism, society and democracy need a fundamental reset, as does our broken relationship with Europe. None of this is going to come from Johnson or the amoral party that indulged him. It requires a broad-based progressive government. Tactical voting must step out of the shadows: it is time for it to be formalised in a transparent public pact. The times demand no less. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnistWhile Downing Street spent a disastrous week attempting to deal with scandals over parties and wallpaper – and the prime minister was juggling the crises with the birth of a daughter – things were somewhat more serene for another member of his top team. Rather than dealing with resignations among staff or the latest revelations about Whitehall Christmas parties, foreign secretary Liz Truss has spent the weekend boosting her credentials as a stateswoman, using a meeting of her international counterparts in Liverpool to pitch herself as one of those protecting “the frontiers of freedom” around the world. Her high-profile outing at the G7 meeting comes after a week that could scarcely have contrasted more starkly with the chaos engulfing No 10. The gathering came after a bilateral meeting with US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and a major speech appealing to the Tory base, appealing for a “confident, outward-looking, patriotic and positive” Britain. And Christmas parties? “Last Christmas, I was spending time getting trade deals over the line,” she said. Combined with pictures of the foreign secretary channelling Margaret Thatcher, pictured aboard a British tank in Estonia, it is little surprise that Tory MPs suggest Truss is now firmly and deliberately established as a leading contender to succeed Johnson, especially if his premiership should last months rather than years. Her prominence is already causing tension among supporters of the chancellor, Rishi Sunak – the other pre-eminent candidate to replace the prime minister. Allies of Sunak have long been suspicious of No 10’s treatment of Truss, suspecting that she was set up as a rival to the chancellor in order to clip his wings. “Clearly she plans to bash her way to final two [in a leadership contest] then allow a Trumpian base to carry her into No 10,” said one. “God help us!” Tories said Sunak had adopted a different tactic while the government was on the ropes – to hunker down. The other obvious leadership contender is Jeremy Hunt, who came a distant second to Johnson in the last leadership contest. He is said by colleagues never to have relinquished his ambitions and has maintained the good relations he built up with MPs during his last campaign. He has won further support through his handling of the health select committee, but some believe his long time as health secretary could leave him open to criticism. “Any form of pandemic scenario planning was non-existent,” said one MP who supported Hunt last time. “That could be something that others can beat him over the head about.” Other previous big hitters suddenly look less likely to run. Sajid Javid, who at one time seemed the obvious replacement for Johnson’s predecessor Theresa May, is not said to be particularly active. Then there is Michael Gove, who destroyed Johnson’s first leadership campaign in the wake of the Brexit vote before imploding in another attempt in 2019, after it emerged he had taken cocaine in his journalism years. Asked last week whether Gove was the answer, his former adviser Dominic Cummings – who went on to serve Johnson as the prime minister’s chief adviser – replied simply: “No.” Cummings has previously spared Sunak from criticism over Covid. He said on his blog that he had thoughts about the future leadership, but that it would not be helpful if he expressed any views now. There are outsiders that Tory MPs believe could throw their hats into the ring. One is Mark Harper, the former chief whip who has built a reputation with lockdown sceptics as a leading voice in the Covid Recovery Group. He ran when May was toppled in 2019 and could manage to gather enough support to make a dent in the race. “Never confuse electability with people’s self-belief,” said one Tory MP. “Who might say ‘Oh, you know, I’ve carved out a bit of a reputation’? Mark Harper might throw his hat in the ring again. He could play the liberty and common sense card, which plays well with some.” It all leaves Keir Starmer’s team with an interesting dilemma. Would Labour rather fight Johnson at the next election, wounded but with a winning track record with the electorate, or a new, untested opponent without his baggage? Some Tories said that despite winning in 2019, Johnson was now the easier opponent for Labour. “Starmer must be praying that Johnson stays where he is,” said a senior MP. “There’s no other burlesque clown figure who could take over. Whoever takes over is going to be more sober, serious-looking and sounding like a prime minister. And you take away at a stroke Keir’s USP, which is: ‘I look like a prime minister and I’m not chaotic.’”The citizens of Margate, wrote TS Eliot, were “humble people who expect nothing”. That seems to include their expectations of prime minister Boris Johnson. After weeks of revelations about lockdown Christmas parties, accusations of lying about his Downing Street flat refurbishment, and claims that he ordered dogs and cats to be given priority in the Afghanistan evacuation, Johnson’s popularity has slumped in the polls. Yet this seaside town is surely where he can rely on support. Voters in the constituencies of North Thanet and South Thanet were solidly in favour of leaving the European Union in 2016, and gave the two Tory MPs, Sir Roger Gale and Craig Mackinlay, substantial majorities in 2019. The icy wind ripping across Margate sands may be coming for the prime minister though. His supporters seem unbothered by the latest scandals, but some of those who voted for Brexit and the Conservatives now believe Johnson is unfit to govern. In the old town, John Greves uses an expletive to describe Johnson. “He’s a very, very clever man but I’m sad to say he’s absolutely clueless,” he says. Greves, a local businessman, has raised funds for the local Conservative party and been involved in local politics for some time. He is pleased that Brexit happened and believes that “you need Tories to make the money and socialists to tell you how to spend the profits”. He worries that people seem not to care about each other any more. Christmas parties and wallpaper are irrelevant, he believes, but he is hugely frustrated by Johnson. “He needs to walk,” he says. “He is incapable of representing this country. He got into No 10 on the back of getting Brexit done. He’s in No 10, he got Brexit done, and now he’s there, he’s found out that he doesn’t want to be there.” Past the Turner Contemporary gallery, the beach is almost entirely deserted. Inside a Wetherspoons pub on the seafront, Mike Simmons is relaxing with a lunchtime pint and a copy of the Telegraph. He turns 77 in a few weeks and dismisses talk of Christmas parties and wallpaper, although he is unhappy about the allegation that animals were prioritised over people during the evacuation of Kabul. “I put a lot of it down to the wife – she’s got too much influence,” he says, referring to Carrie Johnson. “My son-in-law has been in Bosnia and Iraq – I love dogs but people have got to come first.” Gale described the No 10 party as “another Barnard Castle moment”, but Simmons thinks the prime minister’s problem has been his inability to handle advisers like Dominic Cummings. “OK, that idiot should have gone to Specsavers instead of driving to wherever it was, but anyone in their right mind would have kept him under control. And Johnson’s future? “I can’t see him lasting the next two years if he carries on like he has done. But who’s going to take his place? I don’t think Dominic Raab is up to it. [Michael] Gove is brilliant, but he’s like poison.” Alan Hatton hasn’t voted in recent elections, although he was previously a Tory voter who backed Tony Blair and thought Jeremy Corbyn’s nationalisation plans were sound. Here is the most solid support for Johnson so far. “I couldn’t care less about the wallpaper,” he says. “I can’t understand why he couldn’t get a government payment to redecorate Downing Street. Most politicians aren’t that well paid.” He’s happy to look past the Christmas party as well. “It could have been an impromptu party. No one obeyed the Covid rules to the letter. He got Brexit done. I don’t know why he’s being lambasted now. He just needs to get people jobs.” On the high street, there is further support for Johnson. “It’s a year old,” says Roger Newton, when the Christmas parties are mentioned. “Downing Street is his home. I don’t think we should be poking around in there.” He is generally pleased with the handling of the pandemic and the latest announcements about moving to “plan B” measures on Covid, as well as the government’s general direction. He balks at the No 10 flat refurbishments. “That is a bit of a dodgy situation,” he says. “They had given him £30,000. You would have thought that would be enough. But I think the working-class people probably like him. Even if he is a bit of a loose cannon.” It’s not hard to also find people in Margate who express loathing for the prime minister. Mike Kerslake says Johnson has “sent the reputation of the country into the gutter”, while Carol Hudd, a retired teacher, adopts Keir Starmer’s “trivial person” description. Yet if the Labour leader hopes those sentiments will translate into votes, he may struggle. Lynne Jardine doesn’t vote, she says, and is fatalistic about the Christmas parties. “It’s no surprise” she says. “Last Christmas, I got Covid and I had to spend a week on my own. I just slept most of the time.” Things have got much worse for her though. Her 17-year-old son broke his back after falling off a cliff and is paralysed. They have a wheelchair that is not appropriate and will have to wait two years for the local authority to adapt their rented home. The money spent on Downing Street is “disgusting”, she says. “We don’t get any help.” Her anger is not limited to the governing party, though. “None of them deliver what they promise. They all lie.”The slut-shaming – or something very much like it – of the four key witnesses against Ghislaine Maxwell and her late lover, Jeffrey Epstein is, almost, a thing of beauty, a dark wonder to behold. You’ve got to admire the way Maxwell’s multimillion-dollar attorneys break her accusers on the rack of their own human frailty. No one dare call it torture: we’re watching justice at work, the Ghislaine Maxwell defence team way. In order of appearance witness “Jane” was challenged as a drug user from a wealthy but deeply unhappy home; witness “Kate” was a drug user with a troubled mother; witness Carolyn – to give her some privacy the court accepted her request to use only her real first name – had a single parent mother who was an alcoholic and a drug addict, who became an alcoholic and a drug addict herself, who left school when she was 14, who did not, said her ex-boyfriend Shawn “have the reading ability” to say Ms Maxwell’s first name, Ghislaine. So Carolyn called her Maxwell. Witness Annie Farmer – her full real name, was 16, the child of a divorced single mum but not herself broken, not at all. The ages of the women when they say Maxwell helped Epstein sexually abuse them were Jane: 14, Kate: 17, Carolyn: 14 and Annie: 16. You might say there’s a pattern of behaviour by Maxwell and Epstein right there. Carolyn said of the woman whose first name she couldn’t articulate, Ghislaine, that she booked her for sex massages with her lover and once came into the massage room in the Epstein mansion in Palm Beach and molested her: “I was fully nude and she [Ghislaine] came in and she felt my boobs and my hips and my buttocks and said that … I had a great body for Mr Epstein and his friends.” Carolyn said that she gave Epstein about 100 massages, all of them sexual, all of them ending with him masturbating. Shawn said of Carolyn, one of three girlfriends he says he pimped out to Maxwell and Epstein: “She was a child”, one who, “only had two jobs ever. She worked at Arby’s [a US fast food combine] and she worked for Jeffrey” [Epstein]. Carolyn’s grandfather raped her when she was four years old. Ten years later, she said she was sexually abused by Epstein and Maxwell. Enter a second Jeffrey, this one bearing the surname Pagliuca, one of the defence team at the Manhattan federal court trying Ghislaine Maxwell on six charges of, effectively, grooming girls and very young women to sate her millionaire lover’s paedophilia. Ghislaine Maxwell denies all six counts. Pagliuca had great sport, crushing Carolyn’s spirit so that at one point proceedings had to stop while Carolyn just uttered heart-rending sobs. Pagliuca, with his bouffant grey curly hair a spitting image for another great American, Jerry Springer, read out Carolyn’s surname by mistake. Funnily enough, he’d got previous for this, also reading out the true first name of the first female witness, “Jane”. A famous actor in a long-running Hollywood TV soap opera, Jane had told the court she feared public disgrace if she gave evidence under her own name: “I’ve always just wanted to put this past me. I moved on with my life. I work in the entertainment industry and victim shaming is still very present to this day.” So Pagliuca made the same mistake of helping anyone in court with half an eye work out the true identity of anonymised witnesses, twice. What was striking about these serial verbal mishaps is that, on song, Pagliuca is extraordinarily fluent, brutal even, when flaying the skin of a woman who left school at the age of 14. He brought up a 2007 interview Carolyn had given to the FBI, before the infamous sweetheart deal that saw Epstein serve a farcically short time in prison for being a serial paedophile. The mechanics of this are worth noting: time and again Pagliuca would rattle out the bundle number, the document number “0005”, the page, the tab, the paragraph and then stick it to Carolyn, kind of suggesting that when there was a discrepancy in her evidence, suggesting without the articulation of it, that she had been lying then or was lying now. Lost in the legal weeds, Carolyn started to retreat into her own misery, sometimes saying “I don’t recall”, sometime barking at him like a cornered animal, sometimes muttering a mute sob. Despite Pagliuca at his worst, she kept coming back at him: a wholly authentic human being. The defence case proper will start this week but it’s obvious that their strategy is to paint Maxwell as a victim of the wicked Epstein. Pagliuca noted that Carolyn had been paid $3.25m from Epstein’s estate after the paedophile’s suicide. Pagliuca prodded Carolyn if there was an “incentive for you to stick to your story” after she got her money. Carolyn shot back: “The only thing Ms Maxwell was involved in was fondling my breast and my buttocks, and for that my soul is broken and so is my heart. Money will not ever fix what that woman has done to me.” And then she was lost in grief. Not long afterwards, the prosecution put up a JP Morgan banker who set out that Maxwell had received $30m from Epstein when he was very much alive. A victim, perhaps, but a very rich one. Shortly before the trial Rachel Johnson revealed how at Oxford she once saw “shiny Glamazon” Ghislaine Maxwell resting her “high-heeled boot” and fixing her “naughty eyes” on her brother Boris, now prime minister. Rachel concluded that it was “hard not to pity” Ghislaine. I feel twice-sorry for Ghislaine Maxwell: first, because her father Robert was a monster; second, because the conditions in the jail in which she is being held on remand are grim beyond belief. But watching how her defence lawyers earn their big money, how they use their wits to trash sad and broken women, my pity for Ghislaine Maxwell shrivels with every passing day. The trial continues. John Sweeney is the host of two podcasts, Hunting Ghislaine, and Hunting Ghislaine, The Trial. His book, also called Hunting Ghislaine, will be published next year.Six children, seven – it could sound like a lot to take on. But the rocket and car entrepreneur and father of six Elon Musk, says it is imperative that humankind follows his example – likewise that of Boris Johnson and Jacob Rees-Mogg – and puts population maintenance first. “There are not enough people,” Musk told a US business audience last week. “I can’t emphasise this enough, there are not enough people.” He was renewing his warning that advocates of smaller families, among them Britain’s prime minister and Prince Harry, have got it wrong. Harry received an award not long ago for pledging to have no more than two children. Before that, Johnson, whose growing family is still believed to be in single figures, spotted that the “primary challenge facing our species” is people like himself. From a plane window, he wrote: “You have a horrifying vision of habitations multiplying and replicating like bacilli in a petri dish.” But now Musk announces, in language only marginally more temperate, that the scariest thing is the opposite: “Please look at the numbers – if people don’t have more children, civilisation is going to crumble. Mark my words.” The numbers indeed show that, as in the UK, US fertility rates, already below replacement level, declined still further in 2020, by 4%. What’s less certain is that this spells disaster or, if it does, that there is anything, short of building a new Gilead, that pronatalists from Musk to Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, can do about it. Birthrate-boosting programmes conflict with those for educating girls: the more educated women are, the fewer children they have. The Social Market Foundation wondered, in a recent assessment of the UK’s “baby shortage”, if bigger families would even add to parental contentment. Although parents tend to say they’d have liked more children, “studies also suggest childbearing has a limited effect on parental happiness and life satisfaction”. At least, it’s been noted of Musk, the car magnate has followed his own reproductive advice. Asked last week if this philosophy had informed his own family size, Musk agreed that, just like our own Rees-Mogg, who reportedly hopes for a seventh, he strives, insemination-wise, to set an example. Similarly, there is no denying that the billionaire makes his domestic pronatalism sound both easy and fun, telling Maureen Dowd: “I think babies are super-cool and really people need to have more babies.” Juggling six children with running his car and space exploration businesses has never, you note, featured among the reasons for postponing SpaceX’s first crewed base on Mars. How on earth does he do it? Does he, like some of those mega-mothers you read about, complete all the week’s meal-planning and cooking on a Sunday? Leave them to cry? Follow the example of the UK’s favourite “superwoman” Helena Morrissey (when she takes over from her house husband)? In what will hopefully evolve into a Musk child-rearing manual featuring the level of detail already available on his Mars space colony (“food would be grown on solar-powered hydroponic farms”), he has shared some hints on the early years. Since, he’s concluded, babies “are just eating and pooping machines”, his (now ex-) partner, the singer Grimes, had a “much bigger role”, in looking after his sixth and her first child, a boy called X Æ A-Xii. “Right now, there’s not much I can do,” he said. “When the kid gets older, there will be more of a role for me.” On raising older ones – he has five surviving (the first died in infancy) with his first wife – Musk offers: “If I have a trip for Tesla to China, for example, I’ll bring the kids with me and we’ll go see the Great Wall or we took the bullet train from Beijing to Xi’an and saw the Terracotta Warriors.” For more on family routine we turn to a piece by Justine Wilson, a writer and the former Mrs Musk. She mentions a staff of five. “But the whirlwind of glitter couldn’t disguise a growing void at the core. Elon was obsessed with his work: when he was home, his mind was elsewhere.” In that respect, time has done little, to judge by his latest tweets, to make Musk more domesticated. Debating his lifestyle choices with the public, he offers: “It would be nice to have a bit more free time on my hands as opposed to just working day and night, from when I wake up to when I go to sleep seven days a week.” Far from undermining his population advice, Musk’s striking indifference to the implications of a scheme that will depend, as with all reproductive fantasies, on women’s biological compliance, may actually have helped. Fellow pronatalists who acknowledge, with various hero-mother inducements, the required female sacrifice in independence, earnings and influence, thereby risk, like Hungary’s Orbán, unhappy comparisons with Soviet predecessors. Glory to the mother heroine! It’s no time since Dorothy Byrne, the president of Murray Edwards College, Cambridge, was pilloried for urging female students to consider their egg supply. But by dint of ignoring the reality for the female providers if his six-kid revolution caught on, Musk won himself a respectful hearing. True, he also overlooked a few areas of interest to all would-be parents who now lack the resources to have, even, a below replacement number family. Childcare might have been a good place for a useful visionary to start. On the other hand, if he’s right about the threat posed to innovation by depopulation, it only underlines the need for more affluent altruists, such as Musk, to personally keep on breeding, recruiting whatever young women might be required to guarantee the future supply of ideas. In a difficult week for Mr and Mrs Johnson, credit is similarly due to both for their latest contribution to saving civilisation. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistThis summer, Riz Ahmed took aim at Hollywood and the wider film industry. In a speech that was somehow both measured and searingly furious, the British actor called out the “toxic portrayals” of Muslim characters in TV and movies. Using research that he was directly involved in commissioning, Ahmed showed how Muslims, who make up almost a quarter of the world’s population, are either “invisible or villains” in our screen entertainment. He said that this omission resulted not just in “lost audiences” but “lost lives” because of the “dehumanising and demonising” ways that Muslims were often depicted. In fact, Ahmed noted, some of the most prestigious and awards-laden releases of recent years were “frankly racist”: specifically The Hurt Locker and Argo, both of which won best picture at the Oscars, and Marvel’s Black Panther, which earned more than $1bn at the box office. The speech in June, which launched an initiative called the Blueprint for Muslim Inclusion, was many things: timely, vital and, for some, eye-opening. But mainly, on Ahmed’s part, it felt brave, even risky. Actors typically don’t take potshots at their paymasters, the studios. They almost never single out specific, very successful films for criticism. “If you’re going to say something, say it, I guess, right?” says Ahmed today. “I’m not trying to attack anyone personally, it’s just about trying to call out a collective blind spot. So am I worried it would have a knockback on my career? I dunno…” Ahmed pauses, starts again. “You know, this is all just a bonus,” he goes on. “I never expected I’d be able to have a career. They haven’t noticed I’ve snuck in. They are going to throw me out any minute. It’s probably that kind of thing. Nick all the sweets while you can. Trash the place. Tell them whatever you want. Maybe there’s some of that going on.” He won’t say it himself, but right now Ahmed has the run of the sweet shop. After years of sustained excellence, working his way up through acclaimed indies such as Chris Morris’s Four Lions and the Reluctant Fundamentalist, then smaller parts in Hollywood spectaculars (Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, Venom), 2021 was the year that Ahmed landed centre stage. In April, he was nominated for a best actor Oscar for his performance in Sound of Metal as Ruben, a heavy-metal drummer who loses his hearing. He didn’t win, but the fact that he was the first Muslim ever to be nominated in that category started a debate that Ahmed has taken on. This month, he became the youngest recipient of the Richard Harris Award, the highest honour from Bifa (the British Independent Film Awards). In the citation, it praised “his outstanding work, both on-screen and off”. This has been a busy, creatively fertile period for Ahmed. He also co-wrote and starred in Mogul Mowgli, a semi-autobiographical tale of a self-involved rapper who is diagnosed with an autoimmune disease and has to trade a big tour of Europe for life back at home with his English-Pakistani family. The film was soundtracked by much of Ahmed’s own music, which came from his 2020 album The Long Goodbye. Ahmed has always made music – first as an MC and then as part of a rap duo, Swet Shop Boys – but that didn’t lessen the surprise of some critics that he really knows what he’s doing. “Ahmed’s ability to weave experience and cultural touchstones into an affecting tale of heartache, loss, and redemption is something of a marvel,” was the verdict of hard-to-please music review website Pitchfork. We’re talking this evening over Zoom, because of a Covid scare – mine, not his. Ahmed is in a London hotel, waiting for a Bafta Q&amp;A event to start and picks at some dinner. “Just some kind of salad situation,” he says, “I think there’s lentils in it…” Ahmed’s dressed up, in a smart, striped jacket from Australian designers Song for the Mute, and I tell him it reminds me of early lockdown when everyone, going mad, did video-call eat-alongs. “Did people do that?” asks Ahmed, then mock-offended: “No one invited me!” Ahmed looks back on his Oscar nomination as a “rollercoaster, innit?” Mainly, though, he was stunned by it. Sound of Metal was not expected to be a film that would be shortlisted for six Academy Awards. It had a first-time director, Darius Marder, and a script that knocked around in different forms for more than 10 years. One of the delays was because of Marder having difficulty finding a lead actor who would commit to the regimen he demanded for the character of Ruben. Finally, the director met with Ahmed, a man who could never be accused of lacking dedication. For eight months, Ahmed spent two hours a day each on learning sign language, having drum lessons and working out with a trainer. The rest of the time, he prepped with an acting coach. Even that was almost not enough. The day before Sound of Metal was due to shoot, the production lost its financing. Only a final-hour scramble from Marder got it back on track. “You really don’t know if anyone will see a film like that,” says Ahmed. “It’s like, here’s a dude, he’s never made a film before; here’s a script, been around for 10 years, can’t get it made; getting money for it, you get like 10p. You gotta learn all this shit, it could all go horribly wrong. “No one wanted to make this film,” he exclaims, his dark eyes alert and flickering, like a meerkat guarding its mound. “You couldn’t finance this film! No one wanted to put me in that role in this film, no one. For whatever reason, it didn’t make sense to people.” That Sound of Metal even exists then is a hail-mary; that it went on to be nominated for Baftas and Oscars is altogether more unexpected and impressive. And so, when it started being noticed that a Muslim had never previously been in the running for the most prestigious acting award, Ahmed felt conflicted. “Some people go like, ‘Oh, first Muslim, this and that,’” he says. “And your initial reaction is like, ‘What’s that got to do with anything?’ Then you have another feeling: ‘But actually, wait that is relevant, insofar as like, why hasn’t this happened before? That’s weird.’ So always that kind of push and pull.” Ahmed continues to feel that push and pull; he has it now in our interview. It would be much more straightforward to talk about learning to play the drums, instead of having to explain why it matters that, in the 200 most popular films made between 2017 and 2019, only 1.6% of the nearly 9,000 speaking characters were Muslim. That, in 181 of those 200 films, there were no Muslim characters at all. “There’s a voice in my head right now that’s just going, ‘Oh my God, come on, get off this stuff, man!’” Ahmed admits. “Like 70% of my interviews end up being about politics and representation and all that.” Partly Ahmed reasons that, if he doesn’t do it, who will? But also, his resolve has been stiffened by Covid, a period in which his aunt and uncle both died from the virus. “We’re just here for this long, man!” he says, snapping his fingers. “A lot of us lost a lot of people. You’re just here for two seconds so you’ve got to try and worry about something bigger than yourself because, guess what? None of us are getting out of this alive!” Ahmed laughs, shakes his head. “I dunno,” he sighs, “I’m sounding incredibly fucking pretentious.” Ahmed has always had a disruptive streak. He was born in Wembley, north London, to Pakistani parents; he didn’t start to speak English until he went to school when he was six. Instead, he stayed at home with his mum, his “best friend”, speaking Urdu, watching comedy sketch shows such as Fifty Fifty, which was loosely based on Saturday Night Live. Aged 11, Ahmed won a scholarship to a private school, Merchant Taylors’, whose alumni include archbishops and Nobel laureates. “I had quite a volcanic energy as a kid,” Ahmed recalls. “I remember in my first week of school, I put a chair through the window. I was quite lucky really I had some teachers that were like, ‘Right, we’ve got to channel this somehow.’” One teacher, Mr Roseblade, told him that if he wanted to get into a decent university, he should become involved in extracurricular projects. This – and his innate skill for arguing with everyone – led to debating and drama. “It was really, really, really genuinely just therapeutic for me,” says Ahmed. “You are not allowed to feel intense emotions in your day-to-day life: it’s not safe or it’s not cool or it’s not the done thing. And it’s like, ‘What do I do with all this shit? They’re telling me I’ll get kicked out if I feel these things so where do you want me to put it?’ So it was a space where anything’s possible.” Ahmed made it to Oxford University, where he studied philosophy, politics and economics, hated it, wanted to leave, stuck it out. He did some acting there, but when he graduated, he was half-hearted about pursuing it. “I thought, ‘It’s not realistic, so I’ll just apply for one drama school and if I don’t get in, then it’s not meant to be,” he says. “And I applied to Central School of Speech and Drama for the one-year MA classical acting course. I thought, ‘I want to be in and out in one year. Let’s not prolong this inevitable car crash.’” Why “car crash”? Ahmed points out that with the exception of the sketch comedy Goodness Gracious Me, which ran on the BBC from 1998 to 2001, there was little to indicate there were any opportunities for British South Asians in entertainment. “You’ve got to remember, things feel really different now, but this was 2004, 2005,” says Ahmed. “Let’s pull up IMDb for 2004, pull out the Radio Times, show me where and how I’m earning a living for my family? Show me how I’m able to apply my craft and do so with dignity? It’s just not a thing.” In 2007, the director Danny Boyle was on the hunt for the lead for his new movie Slumdog Millionaire. Ahmed auditioned but lost out to the Skins actor Dev Patel. “When Slumdog Millionaire came up, I’d already been working for a few years,” says Ahmed. “And it was like, ‘There’s never been anything like this! A lead role in a film and it’s for a young brown dude.’ And when I didn’t get it, straight away, I was like, ‘Well, that’s it, it’s done, there’s not going to be another one of those.’” A turning point for Ahmed came in his early 30s, around 2013. He was getting by in the UK, but the work, he admits, “had kind of dried up”. On a night out in London with Idris Elba, he asked for advice. “He was like, ‘You should go to America,’” says Ahmed. “And I said, ‘Now what would they do with someone like me over there? There’s no point.’ And he just said, ‘Don’t categorise yourself. Even if they do.’” Ahmed booked a ticket, and one of his first auditions was for the psychological thriller Nightcrawler, and a character called Rick – which he liked because it didn’t immediately identify him as Muslim or a person of colour – who worked for Jake Gyllenhaal’s ambulance-chasing news service. This then led to a career-defining turn in the HBO series The Night Of, in which he was a student who has a one-night stand with a white woman and then finds her brutally murdered. The role won Ahmed an Emmy, and his feet have scarcely touched the ground since. “The promised land,” is what Ahmed calls the phase of his career that he’s entered. In an essay in 2016 for The Good Immigrant, a book about race and immigration in the UK, he defined it as a place “where you play a character whose story is not intrinsically linked to his race. There, I am not a terror suspect, nor a victim of forced marriage. There, my name might even be Dave.” Ruben in the Sound of Metal is a “promised land” role. So is Ahmed’s new film Encounter, in which he plays Malik (the character, in the original script, was called Marcus, but Ahmed pushed for the name change, because he thought it would add “layers and psychological conflict”). Malik is a former Marine, and father of two sons, who believes that parasites are invading earth and assuming control of human hosts. In desperation, he takes his children on a road trip to keep them safe. Ahmed suspected he wasn’t an obvious candidate for Encounter and that made him more determined to land the role. He is known for going deep in his preparations: if a part requires an accent, he’s talking that way, day and night, throughout the shoot. But what intrigued and scared him about Encounter was that Malik was a father, albeit an unconventional one who lets his kids eat as much ice-cream as they want and blow off steam by firing his gun. “It’s good sometimes to not know fully what you’re doing, because if you’re not fully in control, interesting things can happen,” Ahmed reasons. “You know, ‘I’m shitting it because I don’t know how to be a dad. Oh, that’s what Malik feels.’ So you lean into that fear a little bit.” The pandemic era has seen major changes for Ahmed personally as well as professionally. Last year, he married the American novelist Fatima Farheen Mirza, whom he met in a café in New York when he was filming Sound of Metal. “We were both jostling over the same laptop plug points,” he told the talkshow host Jimmy Fallon. Ahmed, who still mainly lives in west London, is clearly a private sort, but hints that Covid was at least partly responsible for his decision to marry. “In the pandemic, spending more time at home, sitting with yourself a bit more, that was really clarifying in lots of ways,” he says, when I ask how life has changed since his wedding. “Particularly losing loved ones. Like I said, before you know it, this will all be over. So work out what matters to you, stand by it and just don’t fuck about. Get on with it!” It’s time to wrap up our chat; I finish by asking Ahmed what he hopes his legacy will be. It’s a clichéd interview standard and he smiles, cuts straight through the bullshit: “I’m only 38 years old, bro! Do you know something I don’t? Do I need to get a fucking doctor’s checkup now? Shit, what did they tell you, man?” Still, I persevere: does Ahmed want to be remembered for his acting and his music? Or is his real aim set on bringing about systemic change in representation in the film industry? Ahmed turns serious for a moment and, eyes blazing, fires back, “Do I have to pick between the two?” Encounter is out now on Amazon Prime Stylist Julie Ragolia; photographer’s assistant Jack Storer; styling assistant Florence Armstrong; tailor Nick James; grooming by Tara Hickman using ArmaniA year ago last week, rugby was thrown into turmoil. Steve Thompson, a 2003 World Cup winner, announced that he and seven other former players were launching a lawsuit against World Rugby, the Rugby Football Union and the Welsh Rugby Union, after their diagnoses of dementia or, in the case of the 31-year-old Adam Hughes, post-concussion syndrome. The players with dementia were all in their early 40s. The eight have since been joined by another 150, drawn from the same generation, with a further 75 from rugby league. Fifty more, and counting, wait in the wings weighing up their options. Of the 150, half have been diagnosed, the other half have been tested and await results, but all report similar unnerving symptoms. Who knows how many others are suffering in silence? And who knows how many more from this generation, the first to play full careers in the professional era, will develop conditions in the next 20 to 30 years? If they are diagnosed before the age of 65, their dementia will be categorised as “early onset”, or unusually young. For anyone in their 30s or early 40s, the odds of such a diagnosis are around one in 10,000. The 75 diagnosed already represent roughly one in 20 of those who played rugby union in England or Wales during the first 15 years of the professional era. The lawsuit is still in its pre-action phase, a routine of information-gathering and posturing between parties. If a settlement cannot be reached, proceedings will be issued, probably in the new year. The best guess is that a date for trial will be set within a couple of years of that. A settlement out of court could bring an end to proceedings but the prospects of this happening any time soon seem remote. The three defendants are governing bodies of a sport that knows the issue of brain injury represents a threat to its very existence. The line they must tread as they try to take responsible steps to address the problem while not admitting liability is delicate. As for the sort of unqualified acknowledgement many would like to see of the gravity of the predicament, such a confession would hardly reassure mums and dads across the world of rugby’s wholesome charms. We should not be surprised, then, that there seems no settlement on the horizon, or that some of the recent releases from the defendants have smacked of jockeying for position in advance of a hearing. Meanwhile, the independent studies keep tumbling in. The Drake Foundation engaged in an extraordinary game of press-release tennis with the RFU recently, each offering its different interpretations of the same study they had partnered up to produce. You can guess whose take was the more airbrushed. Other independent research institutions, such as those at Durham University and the University of South Wales (USW), have weighed in this year with more research that inches us ever closer to certainty about the hideous truth hardwired into collision sports. The more players improve, the more dangerous they become to each other, particularly in the most precious realm of all, that of cognitive health. Worse still, with every study the hypothesis firms up that it is not the arbitrary syndrome known as concussion that is the key factor in one’s risk of developing neurodegenerative disease in later life. So far almost all of rugby’s attempts to address the crisis have focused on concussion management, as have the majority of the findings of the inquiry by the digital, culture, media and sport committee of backbench MPs that was set up this year to look into the relationship between sport and long-term brain injury. The government’s response last week necessarily focused on concussion too, but neuroscience is now virtually certain the decisive variable is the sheer number of blows taken over a long career, otherwise known in the field as “cumulative dose”. What no tweak to the laws has ever achieved – and realistically ever could – is to reduce significantly the number of collisions per match in the modern game, or even just to stop its escalation as the fitness and power of players increases year after year, despite the plateau in their size that was reached circa 2010. A reduction of the blows suffered outside match day is an area for exploration. Under pressure from one of the benefits of the past year, the emergence of independent player-support groups such as Progressive Rugby and Head for Change, World Rugby has issued a recommendation that teams restrict contact training to at most 15 minutes a week. That could only help but, bar perhaps the odd unreconstructed coaching regime, most profess to a bare minimum already. This elicits a more hopeful hypothesis – that the hinterland between the amateur era and the more sophisticated methods of the current will prove a one-off. No consolation for those who played through it, but maybe the prospects for those playing now have already improved. The counter-evidence is a continuing escalation in the intensity of the matches themselves, as charted by burgeoning tackle and ruck counts and soon, we hope, the extensive use of instrumented mouthguards to anatomise the toll on each player in real time. The plan to adopt this technology across the Premiership was recently delayed by another season because, it is understood, the RFU and World Rugby could not agree on which technology to use. The latest studies do not suggest the worst is over. The Drake Foundation released one in the summer that revealed abnormal reductions in white matter in the brains of half of a cohort of current elite players, and axonal injury in 23% of them. Another from USW a couple of weeks later mapped changes in cerebrovascular function across a season and found a direct link to the number of “contact events”. And these are just within a given season. Further studies are in the offing, comparing the starting point of the brains of collision athletes in off-season with those in non-collision sports. Do not expect good news. Which brings us to the dread question of the number of games. Play fewer games, take fewer blows. The equation is simple. Harder to negotiate is the relationship between reducing games and keeping the sport afloat financially. There is barely an institution in rugby that is not haemorrhaging money as things are. The only way they could begin to countenance losing fixtures or increasing squad sizes would be to cut back on player pay. The irony is that the very danger to which players are exposing themselves for our entertainment makes such a policy anathema to any right-thinking observer. Watch the players’ forebears go down with terminal conditions, then dock their pay. There might be one other development more disastrous for the sport’s image, and that is for its governing bodies to take on its stricken former players in a court of law. That is the path rugby seems as set on now as it was this time a year ago. To see a graceful way out of the predicament that does not turn off more parents looking to occupy their kids on a Sunday morning is next to impossible. Because this is not about conspiracy or criminal intent. This is what happens when a collision sport goes from a part‑time amateur status to full-time professional, when players stop drinking beer and start on protein shakes, when science brings to bear all its advances to improve them, when the defining energy of a new century anyway is the lust of everyone, from schoolkid to international, to “be the best I can be”. When athletes in a collision sport pursue that blessed state, the repercussions of their increased threat to each other are deleterious. You cannot repeatedly collide with other people without repeatedly jolting your head. A year on, rugby is nowhere nearer solving this conundrum than any of the rest of them.Do we really need a remake of West Side Story? Having won 10 Oscars (a record for a musical), including best picture, Robert Wise and Jerome Robbins’s 1961 screen incarnation of the 1957 Broadway musical hit remains a much-loved and much-watched “classic”; a self-consciously streetwise affair with weapons-grade earworm tunes and choreography that kids would try to mimic in school playgrounds for decades. Yet even the most ardent fan of the original would have to admit that time has not been kind to the sight of Natalie Wood playing a Latina. Hooray, then, for screen newcomer Rachel Zegler, who landed the lead role of Maria from an open casting call, and whose vibrantly natural performance almost singlehandedly justifies this “reimagining” from director Steven Spielberg. The story, which transposes the star-crossed lovers of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet from Renaissance-era Verona to postwar New York, hardly needs rehearsing. Suffice to say that Spielberg’s version opens with what could be an outtake from the later stages of Saving Private Ryan – an aerial view of what looks like a bomb site, over which a wrecking ball ominously hangs. This is the stamping ground of the Jets, the white gang fighting a turf war with their sworn Puerto Rican enemies, the Sharks. Ansel Elgort is Tony, a one-time troublemaker now attempting to put his past behind him. When Tony falls for Maria at a dance designed to bring harmony between warring clans (a “social experiment”), he incurs the wrath of friends and foes alike. With a once-and-for-all rumble on the cards, into which gang leader Riff (the sinewy Mike Faist) seems determined to drag his old friend, the scene is set for cross-cultural tragedy of love and death. Shot in handsome widescreen vistas by Janusz Kaminski, Spielberg’s West Side Story starts with a strangely subdued palette that bursts into vibrant colour during skirt-swirling dancehall showdowns. Early scenes of the Jets staking out their turf call to mind the ragged street urchins from Lionel Bart’s Oliver!, another stage musical hit that became a 60s screen staple. Yet while Jon M Chu’s recent screen adaptation of In the Heights gave us wall-walking scenes that adventurously turned the world on its side, Spielberg and Kaminski lean into the simpler, low-angle, 45-degree tilts that have become common parlance in New York gang movies. As for the set-piece songs, Elgort struggles to breathe much life into Maria, his voice tinged with a touch of the Tony Hadleys whenever he gets into his upper register. It’s a shortcoming laid bare when he duets with Zegler, the agility of her voice putting his to shame. Odd, too, that Elgort, a hoofer who literally danced his way through the opening credits of Baby Driver, seems somewhat flat-footed when compared to his springy Jet counterparts. Could this duck-lipped, baby-faced Tony really have been just one punch away from murder? Where Spielberg and screenwriter Tony Kushner’s version comes into its own is in the moments where it dares to find its own distinct voice – nowhere more so than in placing Somewhere in the hands of Rita Moreno. Having played Anita in the 1961 film, a role thrillingly filled here by Ariana DeBose, Moreno, who also gets an exec-producer credit, comes to embody the heart and soul of this new production. As Valentina, widowed owner of Doc’s Drugstore, Moreno provides the genetic link between the past and the present, lending a sense of gravitas to scenes that might otherwise have teetered into parody. For me, her low-key rendition ofthe song is up there with the opening track of Tom Waits’s 1978 album Blue Valentine, rich in fragile, heartbreaking pathos. Other smart moves include casting the non-binary actor Iris Menas as Anybodys, a performance that has something of the oomph of Linda Manz’s brilliant turn in The Wanderers, repaying the inspirational debt that Philip Kaufman’s 1979 cult classic owed to the Wise/Robbins West Side Story, bringing everything full circle.Panettone and yule logs Vergani pistachio and chocolate panettone 750g, £18.80, eataly.slerp.com The dough is light, nice density, perfectly proved, really good aeration. The pistachio is lovely and prominent throughout. A really great Christmas variation. ★★★★★ Waitrose tiramisu panettone 750g, £7.50, waitrose.com Gimmicky and fun. The middle bit is not bad. I like the chocolate topping. The dough is a bit dense. ★★★ Marks &amp; Spencer triple chocolate panettone 750g, £10, ocado.com Very nice panettone. Good topping, and I really like the pools of chocolate in the dough. It tastes like it could do with a bit more proving but, other than that, a good option for a chocolate lover. ★★★★ Aldi Specially Selected yule log 435g, £3.29, aldi.co.uk Doesn’t push the boat out, it’s just a nice, standard, nostalgic yule log. Exactly what my mum or my granny would have. ★★★ By Sainsbury’s chocolate yule pups cakes 5 x 135g, £2.20, sainsburys.co.uk Cute to look at, my kids would go mad for them. They would be good at a family party. Nice idea, everyone loves a dog, but too sweet for me. Even the filling is quite sweet. ★★ Mince pies Tesco Finest all butter pastry speculoos tarts 4, £3, tesco.com The pastry is nice, really short, but I don’t like the topping. And I’m not getting enough mincemeat. ★★ Morrisons Free From gingerbread crumble mince pies 4, £2.50, morrisons.com Gingerbread and mincemeat is a good pairing. I quite like a crumble top. I would want it warm with some cream. I wouldn’t have guessed it’s gluten free. ★★★ Aldi Specially Selected all butter classic mince pies 6, £1.49, aldi.co.uk Granny would approve. I like how gooey the filling is. All you need from a shop-bought mince pie. ★★★★★ Waitrose No.1 brown butter mince pies with Courvoisier 6, £2.40, waitrose.com Ooh, very nice, I get the booze straight away. The pastry is fine and nicely golden. The mincemeat is chunky and punchy because of the Courvoisier. ★★★★ Stollen and more Taste the Difference millionaires torte 1.08kg, £10, sainsburys.com Looks festive. But I’m not a fan of millionaires shortbread – for me, that’s too sweet. I don’t think I’m getting any definition from the layers. The biscuity bottom layer is a little better. ★★ Marks &amp; Spencer chocolate sourdough 400g, £3, marksandspencer.com Trying this straight up was fine, but as soon as it’s toasted and slathered in salty butter … oh my word, so delicious. Perfectly chocolatey. ★★★★★ Waitrose Heston The Giant Cracking Penny 700g, £20, waitrose.com It’s not that Christmassy. The filling is moussey, not very easy to cut. But I like the thickness of the chocolate surrounding it. It’s a really good chocolate pudding. ★★★★ TOP TASTE Selfridges Selection marzipan stollen 500g, £19.99, selfridges.com Utterly divine. I love the sugar crust, the marzipan is perfect. Great plump juicy fruit – spot on. ★★★★★ Baker Street stollen bites 275g, £3, tesco.com Nice level of marzipan. Straight away I can smell the almond … maybe a bit heavy with it. But in terms of a bite-size thing with a Christmas vibe, I would say very nice. ★★★★ Tesco Finest mini iced fruit cake 150g, £2.50, tesco.com I tend not to like miniature stuff, but I have a family who don’t love Christmas cake, so this is perfect. Good fruit distribution, thick layer of marzipan and the icing is good. Not too sweet. Cute. ★★★★ Georgina Hayden is a food writer and author of Taverna: Recipes From a Cypriot KitchenMwalimu Shakur could only talk for six minutes. Shakur is at California’s Corcoran state prison, where there have been 1,290 Covid cases and seven deaths since the pandemic hit. During our phone call just before Thanksgiving, the prison was on the verge of graduating from the tight phase one reopening protocols that typically follow an outbreak – just as millions of Americans on the outside prepared to mark the milestone of an in-person holiday season. This meant that Shakur and the other 3,604 men at Corcoran were allotted just one hour each day to shower and stand in line for the handful of phones. Phase two would grant the men an additional 30 minutes out of cell, and the return of in-person visits. But it hadn’t happened yet. “That’s supposed to be starting today, so we’ll see,” Shakur told me. Someone was waiting for the phone, so he had to go. Even as Covid infection rates begin to climb across the US, the arrival of vaccines and boosters have made many feel like the pandemic is over. In prisons, however, life looks much like it did at the start of the pandemic. Quarantines and lockdowns remain common, along with confusing and conflicting information from the people in charge. For incarcerated people nationwide, it’s almost as if the spring of 2020 keeps repeating itself. I’ve spent years reporting on prison conditions across the country – conditions that were often deplorable even before Covid hit. Last March, when I began receiving letters from incarcerated people detailing their experiences of the pandemic, those early letters mirrored the confusion promulgated by top government authorities about the virus. Now, nearly two years later, many describe policies that seem more punitive than preventive. ‘I’m more afraid of another lockdown than of getting sick’ Inside prisons across the US, 34 of every 100 people are known to have been infected with Covid, nearly four times the infection rate of the general US population. Public health researchers cite crowding as a major contributing factor; several state prison systems and the federal Bureau of Prisons are operating past 100% capacity. All the while, incarcerated people have reported being stuck in cramped cells and crowded dorms with little access to PPE, soap, or other cleaning supplies, among prison staff who often flout masking protocols with little consequence. “I think the most disturbing thing for me is the no-mask guards,” says “Alice”, who incarcerated in the federal prison in Aliceville, Alabama, which has remained crowded throughout the pandemic. (Alice asked that her real name be withheld to avoid retaliation.) But Alice cites other concerns, too: large numbers of unvaccinated people; a lack of testing; mingling between units in the dining hall during lunch. She has stopped going to lunch altogether. “In some ways, I feel like a sitting duck, with another wave of Covid just around the corner,” Alice says. “The flimsy cotton masks we are given are no comfort there, either.” Alice isn’t just worried for her health. Over the summer, she says that women who exhibited Covid-like symptoms were taken to solitary confinement, where they spent 23 hours alone in a cell. “Conditions there were horrendous, and some people were truly traumatized by that experience and still talk about it in my unit,” she says. Meanwhile, the remaining women were locked in their cells for 23 hours each day, with one hour allowed for phone calls and showers. Elena House-Hay, age 25, is one of 992 prisoners at Pennsylvania’s Muncy women’s prison, where more than 500 Covid cases have been reported since the pandemic began. Like Alice, she dreads the thought of another outbreak. After testing positive for the virus last winter, House-Hay says she had to drag all her belongings through the snow to the prison’s quarantine unit, an open dormitory with 32 cubicles that each contained two bunk beds. During the two 30-minute periods the women were allowed out of cell each day, they had to choose between showering or standing in line to phone home, send mail or sync their prison-issued tablets to receive and send e-messages. It was a miserable experience. “I’m more afraid of the psychological consequences of another lockdown than I am of getting sick,” says House-Hay. The fallout of ‘utter mismanagement’ The persistent threat of Covid in prisons has taken a painful toll on the loved ones of those who are incarcerated. Though the majority of prison systems have reinstated outside visits, many have placed restrictive new visitation guidelines into place. At Muncy, for instance, House-Hay reports that the women are allowed to briefly hug but not kiss their visitors. They can no longer share food from the prison’s vending machines, nor can children sit on their incarcerated parent’s lap. But some jails and prisons have not reinstated visits. The Spokane county jail in Washington state is among those that have not; the facility was also slow to adopt video calls, which only became available this July. For Maddesyn George, who was arrested in July 2020, the lack of video or in-person visits meant missing a year of her baby daughter’s life. She watched her daughter Shynne grow from a four-month-old infant to a 19-month-old toddler through photographs that her parents mailed. Now, she can see her on a screen for half an hour – but only if Shynne can stay focused on the computer. Even in prisons that have reinstated visits, dramatic new restrictions on visiting hours pose another barrier to in-person family contact. Before the pandemic, Aliceville offered six-hour visits on weekends, and family members could visit both days. Now, visits are limited to one hour behind glass. At Muncy, pre-pandemic visits could last all day if visitors were traveling more than three hours, or if the visiting room wasn’t busy, and guests could visit for several days in a row; today, they get one two-and-a-half-hour visit a week. For both House-Hay and Alice, whose families live hundreds of miles from their respective prisons, the curtailed lengths have been prohibitive. Alice takes advantage of the free video calls offered at Aliceville, scheduling three to four each week with her partner and children. While they’re “certainly better than nothing,” Alice says the calls are no replacement for in-person visits. But for now, the Bureau of Prisons says that Aliceville’s visiting hours will not be extended, nor will contact visits be reinstated because of the fluctuating transmission rate in the surrounding community. “At this point, prisons are using the utter mismanagement of Covid as an excuse to not reinstate normal operations,” says Alice. “[Due to] their lack of Covid prevention measures, [they will] prolong the pandemic inside – and, with it, all the restrictions and hardships.” For House-Hay, the winter seems a bit more promising. Pennsylvania began offering prisoners incentives for vaccinations early on; in Muncy, that has resulted in the full vaccination of 78% of incarcerated people (as opposed to just 45% of staff). Because she is vaccinated, House-Hay is allowed to borrow books from the prison library, spend time in the prison yard, work at the prison metal shop and eat meals outside her cell. She makes Christmas decorations and plays games with friends in the common area. “It is not normal,” she says, “but it is not stagnation.”Don’t socialise, said Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, discussing the spread of a new Covid variant, if you “don’t particularly need to”. Well. Upon hearing this I immediately began breaking the concept down into digestible parts. What is social? What is need? What is the thing where you are fizzing with excitement at the promise of going out but then, after dragging your best dry-clean-only to the bar through sodden cold and joining a conversation about dairy, you feel suddenly extremely weary and in urgent need of silence? Is that the “particularly” clause? Is that the “don’t”? It’s sage advice, admittedly, even without the threat of death. The need to socialise has been brought into sharp relief over the past two years, the need to hold a hand that’s not your own, the need to bitch a little shittily about celebrity affairs, the need to simply eat a meal you have not toasted yourself. But many of us have also found, between the yearning and loneliness, some forgotten pleasure in being alone. Many of us also have performed a sometimes-unconscious winnowing of friendships, streamlining our social lives so we now need only leave the house for people we love, friends who are going to make us laugh, or strangers whose presence will improve our posture, bringing out our best and hidden selves. The absence of socialising has allowed us to consider it more carefully than ever before, what it’s for, what it does for us, what we become when it is taken away. Why we can dread it, too, and we have understood afresh our anxiety around parties. Today, scarred by the pandemic and fattened by its lockdowns, we have the opportunity to organise our wobbling calendars around these lessons we’ve learned, rather than fling ourselves into it headfirst as if a pile of leaves. “Don’t socialise if you don’t particularly need to” – here is a phrase that might save a generation from five years of weak drinks and bad sex, a phrase that has the potential to smother the idea of fomo like paper round rock. Sure, it has been known to happen, that a mediocre invitation leads to adventure and certain small blisses. I am aware of pub visits that, at 11pm, cracked open to reveal romance, chips, a particular kind of back-of-bus decadence, but for every one of those there are 10 of the other. Ten jolly jaunts to a second location where what can only be described as the “vibe” sours and ferments within seconds, suddenly shining a virtual black light on all the night’s stains. Ten horror films for every romcom, 10 awkward encounters with someone called Nik or Bunny, 10 drinks drunk before revealing a wet cigarette at the bottom of the glass. I had been considering throwing a Christmas party, but do I particularly need to? Last week’s episode of Succession helped answer my question. Kendall Roy threw a party in the shape of a breakdown, a strobe-lit, loveless, haunted playground of a 40th, a roiling psychodrama soundtracked by the Chemical Brothers. “I took the wrong drugs in the wrong order,” hisses his brother-in-law Tom, “and I can’t get happy.” Upon watching this antipathy party where, even through three layers of screen, viewers could taste the cocaine in the back of their throats, I deleted my guestlist. I did not particularly need, no, to throw a party right now, when the risk of it being an anxiety-superspreader event was high. I could suddenly picture it – friends wielding negative Covid tests as they stepped gingerly into my tinsel-strangled home. Music playing in fitful starts, the wifi gently weeping under the sudden weight of strange phones. Someone dancing bravely alone in the living room. I would have got the snacks all wrong of course – little bowls of tuna pasta with a ketchup garnish, bits of apple scattered across occasional tables, some tepid Muller Corners. Mulled cava on arrival, the simple request that everybody asked to bring their own straw. The two people who managed to hook up, against all odds and with their partners sleeping at home, would inevitably conceive, despite being nearly 50 and with laminated statements of infertility from their doctor. All the fantasies of celebration I’d been harbouring since ignoring a series of birthdays deflated with one prick of the UK Health Security Agency’s pin. Did I particularly need to socialise? Or was I, in fact, being a whingy little baby, desperate to relive the parties of my childhood where I was the special girl allowed to eat as much cake as I wanted while someone’s brother drank everyone’s Ribena and vomited on the coats? Did I want to see these people, my friends, or had the pandemic curdled our relationships to the point where we no longer had anything to say beyond the shiverly, “So what have you been up to?” Was it simply a mass of people that I wanted, their unventilated bodies, their cracker outstretched and looking for dip? Or did I need them? Did I particularly need them, as a living monument to survival? Did I particularly need to gather people around me, in laughter and candlelight, proof I was known and proof I existed? Well, Dr Harries, the jury’s out. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanCo-op Irresistible pigs in blankets crisps 150g, £1.70, coop.co.uk The crisps are fabulous – waves and waves of piggy gourgeousness. And I like the crinkle cut. ★★★★ Tesco Finest savoury nibbles selection 115g, £2, tesco.com The cheese and poppyseed twists are a bit dry and loveless. Nothing celebratory about the cheese and garlic twists, I didn’t get much butter. The breadsticks could double as an equine toothbrush. ★★ Marks &amp; Spencer turkey feast combo mix crisps 150g, £1.50, marksandspencer.com A real 1970s glorious hit of flavour, enormous amount of punch. A great snack to have with drinks – they make you very thirsty. A retro tongue-in-cheek marvellous thing. ★★★★ Morrisons turkey and stuffing balls 300g, £1.50, morrisons.com Pleasant enough, but overwhelmingly stuffing. There’s not a great length of flavour. They are moreish but airy. They don’t have the impact I want. ★★ Daylesford Organic mature cheddar cheese straws 100g, £5.99, daylesford.com Really good strong cheddar. Not as flaky as I want, but they have a heft to them with an after note of clean butter. Heavy like a biscuit. ★★ Taste the Difference crab and lemon mousse pots 2 x 170g, £4, sainsburys.co.uk The lemon has a dessert texture. I’m confused. Good delicate flavour of crab but the lemon is almost overwhelming. It’s not that it doesn’t work but I can’t chalk it up to working brilliantly either. ★★★ Morrisons The Best roasted mushroom vegan paté 150g, £4, morrisons.com A woodland mushroom taste, but light to the point that you’re almost reaching for flavour - but I could eat more of it. ★★★ Morrisons The Best vegan smoked salmon and cream cheese 2 x 130g, £4, morrisons.com Nothing pleasant about that cream cheese. The “salmon” is shaved carrots – visually not appealing but pleasant in flavour. Pretty dismal. ★ Waitrose No 1 truffle prosciutto crudo 80g, £6, waitrose.com Just the right amount of bite, just the right salting, luxurious amount of truffle. It’s a really elegant antipasto. Very, very impressive. ★★★★★ BEST BUY Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference oak smoked salmon 200g, £7.70, sainsburys.co.uk One of the finest salmons I have tasted. The smoking is delicate and elegant. ★★★★★ Waitrose No 1 gravadlax 120g, £6, waitrose.com The gravadlax is a real disappointment. It was fragile and insubstantial in texture but the real rub was that it was salty beyond palatable. ★★ Marks &amp; Spencer clementine snow globe gin liqueur 70cl, £20, ocado.com Absolutely beautiful to look at, absolutely delicious to taste. It’s festive, celebratory, sweet, fruity and really brought a smile to my face. ★★★★ Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference clementine bucks fizz 75cl, £3.50, sainsburys.co.uk This is absolutely delightful. The real joy of a clementine thrill. Fruity, lively, with a lovely fizz that stayed even after the bottle had been open for a while. Really great way to add a sparkle to Christmas. ★★★★ Waitrose mulled wine 75cl, £5.45, waitrosecellar.com This was light and full of a berry freshness. It didn’t have the deep comfort of a rich mulled wine but was very pleasant and drinkable. ★★★ TOP TASTE Selfridges Selection mulled wine 750ml, £16.99, selfridges.com This is a very wondrous mulled wine. Deep, full of Christmas berries, but with an almost port-like elegance. A fantastic length of flavour. ★★★★★ Nisha Katona is CEO and executive chef of Mowgli Street Food restaurantsChocolates Waitrose No 1 luxury chocolate box 288g, £16, waitrose.com Good sheen, tempered nicely. It looks classy. The dark chocolate stick is crisp, quite bitter, not too fatty. The shells are well made. A special occasion box, the sort you buy for Mum or your wife. ★★★★ BEST BUY: Marks &amp; Spencer magic &amp; sparkle chocolates 345g, £20, ocado.com Wow! Open it and the stars twinkle. The dark chocolate is bland, the caramelised white is better. For a sweet tooth but I’d buy it. ★★★★ Aldi Moser Roth Swiss classic assortment 182g, £3.99, aldi.co.uk The chocolate looks very shiny. It’s a bit fatty. Really inoffensive, no one is going to hate them but you’re not going to think they are the best thing ever. ★★ Marks &amp; Spencer ho-ho-homball 210g, £6, ocado.com Not a great aftertaste. It’s aimed at the kids market. Looks good fun, tastes sweet, relatively rich and quite high in fat content. ★★★ Co-op Irresistible fairtrade salted caramel truffles 136g, £5, coop.co.uk Rich, creamy, you wouldn’t overindulge: you could do two or three with a coffee. I like the way it looks, it feels very festive. Not bad that. ★★★★ Tesco Free From caramel flavour choc smash bauble 158g, £4, tesco.com I’m quite impressed. I was expecting that to be horrible. The white chocolate buttons are very sweet. As a free-from thing, I think that’s pretty good. ★★★★ Waitrose Santa’s chocolate treat box 85g, £5.50, waitrose.com A carrot that doesn’t taste of carrot or chocolate, it’s just sugar and cocoa butter. But if you were leaving it out for Santa, it’s good fun for the kids – I know my little man would love it. ★★★★ Cheese TOP TASTE: Tesco Finest brie de meaux 170g, £2.75, tesco.com Amazing. Perfectly ripe. Punchy. People often think brie is quite mild but when it’s matured like this and it’s aged, it’s beautiful. Great for a family at Christmas. ★★★★★ Tesco Finest Swiss gruyere 195g, £3, tesco.com Very nutty, quite rich. Texturally it’s great, you know that would melt lovely. That’s a good cheese. I would quite happily have it on a cheeseboard. ★★★★ Waitrose chocca mocha wensleydale 200g, £3, waitrose.com You can taste the chocolate and coffee, which is a bit weird as it’s not sweet. Some daredevil lunatics will love it. For me, it doesn’t represent what cheese is about in any way. ★ Marks &amp; Spencer truffle mature cheddar 300g, £5.50, marksandspencer.com The truffle tastes a bit strange to me. Would I stick this on my cheeseboard? Probably not. If it was at someone’s house, yes. ★★★ Waitrose No 1 saint marcellin 80g, £3, waitrose.com Cor, that tastes like a farmyard! If you walk around a petting zoo, that’s what it tastes like. Your kids will hate it. ★★★★★ Waitrose cropwell bishop blue stilton 300g, £4.95, waitrose.com That’s a good all-rounder blue cheese, for people who are never really quite sure about blue cheese. Quite inoffensive, stilton for beginners, rich and creamy. ★★★★ Jam and chutney Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference cranberry chilli jam 220g, £1.50, sainsburys.co.uk You wouldn’t eat this with cheese at all. No... but you would have that with butter on your toast for breakfast on Boxing Day morning. ★★★ Daylesford Organic plum and port chutney 220g, £6.99, daylesford.com For Christmas only. It’s got too much cinnamony, gingery spice mix. Is it the perfect accompaniment for cheese? Probably not but you’d eat it at Christmas and enjoy it. ★★★ Tom Kerridge is chef-owner of the two-Michelin-starred Hand &amp; Flowers, MarlowOne of the best things about old-school gardening advice is how it connects us, in a very direct way, with our shared heritage. However, by the same token, many practices can keep us tethered to cultural ideas that are long past their practical or even aesthetic relevance. Just like the fact that we now know the incredibly laborious Victorian practice of double-digging each autumn ironically degrades soil, reduces fertility and even releases atmospheric carbon. I think it’s high time we add ditching the slavish devotion to leaf-raking to the list of outdated practices. The basic idea behind this traditional task is really just one of neatness, harking back to an era where regimented precision of perfect lawn stripes and rows of bedding plants like a horticultural military parade were considered a universal goal for all “good” gardeners. Fallen leaves not only ruined the illusion of a plot under the complete control of the human hand but, it was argued, could smother garden plants under a thick blanket of rotting matter, encouraging pests and stifling growth. So gathering up this biodegradable matter, shoving it in endless plastic sacks and loading it on lorries to landfill was considered an excellent use of time and resources. However, the scientific reality is that by doing so gardeners essentially turned trees into nutrient pumps, drawing minerals out of the ground to create their canopies each spring, then carting off these nutrients which would otherwise be returned to the soil, slowly but surely degrading its fertility. Of course, leaves don’t just provide a free source of fertiliser, the organic fibres they are made out of also improve soil texture, helping it absorb far more water and air, which are essential for healthy plant growth. Ironically, as most plants you would grow under trees are adapted to woodland environments, not only will the vast majority be unfazed by autumnal leaf cover, but they will actively benefit from the protective layer nutrient-rich fallen leaves provide, sealing in moisture while insulating from harsh winter temperatures. Even on lawns, scientific studies have shown that as long as about 50% of the surface remains uncovered, fallen leaves not only improve grass growth next year, but can impede the growth of weeds such as dandelions. Simply removing the excess leaves in places where they are too dense on lawns and chucking it on flower, fruit and veg borders will give you free fertiliser and soil conditioner while simultaneously slashing your workload. So the moral of the story, much like digging, is that a little raking to clear paths or prevent the total covering of lawns can certainly have merit, but simply abandoning the chore of wholesale leaf removal not only is better for your back, but the planet, and frankly your garden, too. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekThe cyclones that repeatedly hit his village deep in Bangladesh’s south did not just bring waist-high water that washed everything away, they forced Shayma Kanta Mistri to make a choice about his future. The salt waters that had surged in from the nearby Bay of Bengal ruined his paddy fields, which were already providing only a tenuous living that had to be supplemented by seasonal labouring for other farmers. Mistri needed to adapt or leave. Everywhere in Shyamnagar, there are signs of people refusing to just accept that climate change will force them to move. This is the most south-western part of Satkhira district and one of the areas in Bangladesh most vulnerable to the climate crisis. Rice fields have been turned into ponds by owners who realise their land will not easily recover and so have begun farming crab and shrimp. People are fighting back to avoid the fate of thousands of others, who have had to leave for overcrowded cities, broken by the effects of global heating on their land and their lives. “We faced so many cyclones – Sidr, Aila, Bulbul, Amphan – and they brought waters that came up to here on the street,” said Mistri, holding his hand at waist level. “When the waters left it was like a desert, all the plants and trees were dying from the salt and there was no clear water to drink either. There were only a few people with money who could survive these conditions. “We could not live from farming any longer. We had to think about other ways to make our living.” Mistri had planned to start a shrimp farm but was encouraged by Practical Action, a charity that helps smallholder farmers, and its local partner Shushilan, to move into crab farming because it had a low start-up cost and crabs were less vulnerable to white spot syndrome, a virus that plagues shrimp farms. Now he can make an average of 2,000 taka (£17.60) per day by selling 100kg of soft-shell crabs from 2kg of crablets that he buys from local fishermen. He had previously only run a nursery, rearing the crablets and then selling junior crabs to bigger crab farms, but taught himself the sensitive and valuable technique of harvesting the crab at the moment it sheds its hard shell. “Now I’m more comfortable. We have a more secure income and both of my children are in school – my son has almost graduated from college,” said Mistri. Aside from the profit, the quick turnaround means he earns throughout the year, softening the losses of the storms that can leave rice farmers without an income for months because of the crop damage and time it takes to prepare the land. Satkhira and the south-west have borne the brunt of the weather changes, repeatedly being hit by major cyclones that have displaced millions and caused permanent changes to the land. During last year’s cyclone Amphan winds hit 151kmph and flooded a quarter of Satkhira, which the UN said was the worst-hit district. According to a 2016 study from the University of Jessore (now Jashore), two-thirds of migrants from south-western Bangladesh moved because they had to give up farming. Most went to cities where they worked as day labourers, while some did seasonal agricultural work. Those who were able to stay were people who had diversified, especially crab and shrimp farmers. Practical Action’s field coordinator, AJM Shafiqul Islam, said the charity’s work is about ensuring people are offered the most suitable solution and support to help build their resilience to the climate crisis. “Since cyclone Sidr [in 2007], the people of this area have struggled with salinity in their soil but these methods are transforming lives. Shayma had very little before but now he has a poultry farm alongside the crabs that he built with the income. He no longer has to travel to sell his labour,” said Islam. “This works for the farmers who have limited income. It helps them work with the change of their land and also hopefully it will stop them having to migrate. They will be able to live sustainably.” The threat to Shyamnagar’s people is evident on Gabura, an island encircled by two rivers of the Sundarbans mangrove forest, which is frequently inundated during cyclones and is losing its coast to erosion. Locals live in fragile homes mounted on stilts, and say a quarter of people have now given up and moved elsewhere. Those who remain are reliant on catching crabs or collecting honey from the forest but their income is curtailed by government limits to protect the forest’s resources. Islam says Practical Action’s work is also about bringing balance. “These farmers look to wild sources like the river or the Sunderbans, which is vulnerable environmentally and needs to be protected. The government is also establishing crab hatcheries but someone has to raise them, so these crab nurseries for smallholder farmers can be the intermediaries,” said Islam. That balance also applies to other methods being encouraged here, such as teaching farmers how to grow extra vegetables in the mud walkways between plots of land. Archana Boyda, 24, provides farmers in her area with compost using dung from her two cows and earthworms she was given by the charity. Boyda has six vats of her compost in a tent outside her home. She had been living in a leaking mud hut that was destroyed by a falling tree during cyclone Amphan. But Boyda had been saving the 3,000 taka she earned a month with her husband and they have built a new wooden house on a platform raised above any floodwaters. “Amphan had a really big effect on us, the house was destroyed and we had nowhere to go so we just tried to cover the gaps with sheets. This house is still not finished but it is so much better and our life is becoming more secure, step by step,” she said. Donate to our charity appeal here.Last week marked a fundamental shift in the way the Conservatives relate to their leader. They are upset and feel betrayed by Boris Johnson, but that’s not the most dangerous feeling. After all, most MPs who backed him did so knowing he had a tenuous relationship with the truth and that he would happily turn over others in order to survive. No, the bigger change is that Tory MPs are now actively discussing who could be the next big winner, as they no longer have confidence in this prime minister’s relationship with the electorate. The vultures are circling. There are plenty of these potential leadership candidates visible, from prominent cabinet ministers holding dinners with ambitious young MPs who they hope will join their campaigns to outsiders who’ve been biding their time on the backbenches. They know that the prime minister is wounded enough for them to fly a little closer than previously. They see the polls, including today’s for the Observer, which has the Tory party on its lowest share of the vote since August 2019 at 32%, and Johnson’s approval ratings at an all-time low. They’ve been on the doorstep in North Shropshire, where voters were already angry before news broke of the partying in Downing Street last Christmas. And they’ve had more than enough flak from their own constituency associations to know the government is no longer being given the benefit of the doubt. Even MPs who still think Johnson is the person to back for now accept that the Christmas party row has had huge cut-through. “My constituents have brought it up, yes,” concedes one loyalist. “But often just ridiculing me for not getting an invite.” Perhaps even more worryingly, a number of Conservative MPs report falling trust in the vaccine programme. One, who has previously been a Johnson supporter and still wants the PM to do well, tells me: “I’ve been getting emails from pro-vaxxers saying, ‘I’ve just had my third injection in a matter of months; what more do you want from me?’” This should seriously concern Johnson because he has been banking on the goodwill from the success of the vaccine programme. It seems he may have taken so much political credit from this one thing that has gone well for the government that he is now in the red. One MP who understands the party well says: “There’s a view that a line has been crossed and it’s about competency and respect for the office of prime minister.” Some MPs might not care about either of those things if Johnson is still capable of keeping their party in government, but the problem is they aren’t sure about that either. “He’s like a used-car salesman who sticks glue in the tank in order to stop the car knocking. You don’t go back to that salesman and buy another car, do you?” Another senior Tory explains: “They thought he was this magic, natural-born winner. But the magic is pretty shaky and it’s not going to stop being shaky. His judgment is so poor and it’s a clear pattern here, with at least three things – Dominic Cummings, Owen Paterson and now the Christmas party – which creates a narrative rather than a sense these are one-off events. They know now there will always be a next one.” The question is how many “next ones” will there be before the vultures swoop? They are carrion birds, only feasting when it’s game over rather than killing off live prey. And none of them thinks things have reached that stage yet. When the government’s plan B measures come before the Commons this week, Johnson will be further wounded. At least 60 Conservative MPs have said they are not going to support the measures, which include vaccine passports. Again, Johnson has aggravated the rebels by thinking aloud about the possibility of mandatory vaccinations and by introducing the restrictions at an earlier stage of the spread of the Omicron variant than he had previously indicated. Previous revolts have left a majority of Conservative MPs, even those who still plan to back the government on Tuesday, without any confidence in the assurances of the prime minister that this really will be the last time he turns off the economy to stop a new wave of Covid infections. They expect that in the new year, they will be asked once again to march through the lobbies supporting even tighter and less liberal measures. Even if the Tories lose the North Shropshire byelection, there is not a prospect of an imminent vote of no confidence in the prime minister. For one thing, his opponents know that if it came now, he would win it in the same way Theresa May, who was visibly weaker than him, won hers. One says: “I want him to go. But now would be the wrong time to reach the threshold [of letters calling for a no-confidence vote].” But even Johnson’s supporters tell me they have given him three months to turn things around before it’s too late. This might still be too short a timeframe for some of the vultures, who need a little longer to shore up support. Backers of Rishi Sunak, for instance, think he needs to show he has more experience before he has a chance of winning a leadership contest. He and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, have been conspicuously dining backbenchers, though have largely kept their operations deniable by restricting these meals to the 2019 intake of MPs, therefore enabling them to say they’re just getting to know their new colleagues. Truss is the most popular in leadership league tables, but many Conservatives have been bewildered by her recent photoshoot on a tank in Estonia. “That went down very badly in the tearoom,” reports one MP. “It’s almost heresy to pass yourself off as Thatcher in such an obvious way. Allow other people to draw the comparisons rather than doing it so nakedly yourself.” It seems that trying to dress up as Margaret Thatcher is tantamount in Tory circles to the offence of impersonating a police officer. “It’s also the thing you do if you’ve not had to make any serious decisions yet,” snipes a backbencher. Truss and Sunak aren’t the only vultures. Indeed, one of the blessings for the prime minister is the sheer number of hopeful replacements in the skies above him. “There is no dauphin,” explains a Conservative. “A majority of people don’t know who to switch to.” The right of the party have been talking up Dominic Raab as their possible candidate. Some MPs report the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, being particularly assiduous in the tearoom. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, made it known he was “upset” by the video of Downing Street staffers joking about their partying exploits. Others like the way Tom Tugendhat, chair of the foreign affairs select committee, has built a serious profile for himself outside government. Johnson does still have his cabinet backers, despite the list of ambitious ministers above. Some are exasperated that the wider party doesn’t understand that vaccine passports have to be measured as a method of behavioural change in getting those who are hesitant to take up a jab and lead to the end of restrictions rather than years of disruption. Others think the problem lies in his staff team – those that are left, anyway. When Allegra Stratton quit last week, the knives were also out in No 10 for comms chief Jack Doyle, given he was responsible for the government’s untenable messaging about the party he had reportedly attended while Stratton chose to go home. MPs are more annoyed with Johnson’s chief of staff, Dan Rosenfeld, who they think has no understanding of how the party works. The prime minister has also managed to alienate many of the people who backed him when he wasn’t a dead cert to win the Tory leadership. “He’s not shown a degree of loyalty to anyone who was close to him on the leadership,” says one such early supporter. “But he has shown immense loyalty to people who weren’t involved, like Hancock and Raab. He’s lost a lot of us, like Jake Berry, Robert Jenrick and so on. If Jenrick had been in government he would have gone out to defend him this week when no one else did. But he’s dropped him too.” Even if Downing Street has a relaunch in the new year with new staff and a better comms operation, Johnson won’t have changed. That was one of the things that attracted Tories and voters to him in the first place: he’s not someone who rebrands himself according to the political weather, but is his own man who doesn’t care if people see his flaws. But that attribute can be in itself a flaw because MPs don’t have faith that he will become someone they can trust again. And he is so used to getting away with it, he doesn’t seem to realise how vulnerable he is. “There is a real risk that he could end up in a Theresa May situation of him being in No 10 and not in power for a year,” warns a supporter. But May was in that position because she lost the Tory majority in an election. It would be quite something if Johnson ended up with the same troubles from the comfort of being a winner. • Isabel Hardman is assistant editor of the SpectatorThe UK government is facing a major legal challenge against its policy of prosecuting asylum seekers who steer boats across the Channel under smuggling laws. Since the start of 2020, Immigration Enforcement has brought 67 successful prosecutions related to piloting small boats. But after court challenges earlier in the year, the Crown Prosecution Service issued new guidance advising that passengers – even those who take a turn steering – are potentially vulnerable asylum seekers who should not be prosecuted. Despite this guidance prosecutions have continued. Lawyers for several individuals jailed on smuggling charges will put their cases at the court of appeal on Tuesday, arguing that they were attempting to be rescued at sea so they could claim asylum. Clare Moseley, the director of Care for Calais, who has given evidence for recent hearings, told the Observer that the people steering boats are not criminals making money out of the crossings. “In Calais people tell us that they have to take their phone so they can call the coastguard or Border Force from the boat; these people are happy to meet the authorities – their full intention is to claim asylum. “Some migrants drive the boat in order to get a place on it because they can’t afford to pay a smuggler. These people are victims of conflicts, torture and persecution, they are not criminals.” The appeals were triggered by a case in May when an Iranian man, Fouad Kakaei, had his smuggling conviction overturned at a retrial after spending 17 months in jail. He told UK authorities he had taken the tiller to stop the boat sinking. A Home Office spokesperson said at the time: “We are deeply disappointed by today’s verdict. The government is determined to crack down on the criminals who facilitate illegal entry into the UK and put lives at risk.” After Kakaei’s verdict was overturned, the Crown Prosecution Service issued its new guidance on Channel crossing prosecutions, stating: “Recognising migrants and asylum seekers often have no choice in how they travel and face exploitation by organised crime groups, prosecutors are… asked to consider the… public interest factors in charging those merely entering illegally… Passengers of boats and other vehicles should not be prosecuted unless they are repeat offenders or have previously been deported.” Despite the new guidance, prosecutions are still going ahead. Last week 36-year-old Hammad al-Shamari was jailed for two-and-a-half years for steering a boat with 25 people, including small children, across the Channel. He is a Kuwaiti Bidoon, a group persecuted by the government and often left stateless. The prosecutions are part of a wider pattern of governments across Europe using increasingly harsh laws against migrants and refugees. In Italy police have arrested more than 2,500 people for smuggling or aiding illegal immigration since 2013, often using anti-mafia laws to bring charges. Earlier this year Boris Johnson said that the government would “ruthlessly stiffen the sentences for anybody who is involved in this kind of people smuggling and trafficking human beings across the Channel”. The nationality and borders bill that is currently making its way through parliament could make it easier to prosecute people who are crossing the Channel as well as increasing the sentence to life for the offence of assisting unlawful immigration. Tom Pursglove, minister for justice and tackling illegal migration, said after the most recent case: “Small boat pilots put the lives of everyone in their boat in mortal danger and it is right that we deter further attempts by bringing them to justice. “Our new plan for immigration will help prevent these dangerous crossings by introducing tougher penalties for those who risk people’s lives by facilitating illegal immigration.”The number of patients stuck in hospital in England despite being medically fit to leave nearly doubled between February and November this year. The rise is worrying health experts, who say it is more evidence that the crisis in the adult care system is creating backlogs in the NHS. NHS England data shows that the number of times hospital trusts were unable to discharge a patient who no longer met the criteria to stay in hospital increased from 223,593 in February to 402,211 in November – a rise of almost 80%. The data shows the extent of “stranded patients” – people who are clinically fit to leave hospital but cannot be discharged, often because of a lack of adult care or NHS community health provision. As a result, patients find themselves stuck in an environment where they pick up infections, while hospitals are unable to free up bed space for new admissions. The Observer has also obtained data on “delayed transfers of care” (DTOC), which measures the number of days individual patients stayed in hospital after they were ready to be discharged. NHS England stopped collecting DTOC statistics at the start of the pandemic, but a freedom of information request found 26 hospital trusts that are still recording these figures – with DTOC numbers rising by nearly 75% between February and October. Miriam Deakin, director of policy and strategy at NHS Providers, the membership body for NHS trusts, said: “Trusts do all they can to reduce delayed transfers of care, given its impact on patients. However, with the latest performance figures showing more than one in 10 beds are occupied by patients who are medically fit to leave hospital, there is a pressing need to invest in social care and care in the community. “In addition, urgent investment is needed in the social care sector including in home-care services – which is why we have called for retention payments to support people to remain within the care workforce over these critical winter months.” University Hospitals Dorset NHS Foundation Trust saw acute care DTOC numbers increase from 2,701 on 1 April to 4,452 on 1 October. DTOC cases caused by problems securing care packages at home doubled in that time, while those arising from difficulties in finding beds in community hospitals more than doubled. Dr Tristan Richardson, clinical director for medicine at University Hospitals Dorset NHS Foundation Trust, said: “If we have a patient who can’t leave hospital because a package of care is not available to support them at home, or there is not a place in a care home, for example, that means a patient can’t move from our emergency department on to a ward.” He added that this “fills up our emergency department, which in turn means other patients are waiting to enter the emergency department in ambulances, and consequently those ambulances can’t then be attending an emergency in the community. The knock-on effect presents a clear compromise to all patients.” A report from Dorset council in November described the link between the crisis in adult care and delayed discharges from hospitals: “The shortage of home care and therapy support is… having an adverse impact on the local hospitals; people are waiting for packages of care… to be available before they are discharged. Therefore increasing length of stay and decreasing hospital capacity.” The report identified “significant gaps in workforce capacity such as the lack of home care and therapy workers”, and noted that the workload of hospital social work teams had tripled but that the “workforce has not increased to match the demand”. David Fothergill, of the Local Government Association, said: “Councils and care providers are doing all they can to ensure people are able to safely return from hospital to their homes and communities as quickly as possible, despite multiple and ongoing pressures. “These include, but is not limited to, significant shortages in the social care workforces, with more than 100,000 vacancies available on any given day, and extremely high turnover rates. “Recent extra government funding for care workforce retention and recruitment will help, but this falls well short of enabling an immediate significant uplift in pay, which is the single biggest factor behind staffing shortages.” NHS England did not respond to a request for comment.Keir Starmer and the new shadow foreign secretary David Lammy held two hours of private talks with former US president Barack Obama last week about how centre-left parties can return to power – amid new optimism over Labour’s chances at the next election. Starmer had been due to travel to Washington to meet Obama in person but the multiple crises engulfing Boris Johnson’s government persuaded him to join the discussions by video link, while Lammy attended in person. Lammy told the Observer that the confidential discussions with Obama and other key figures in Washington were about strategy and tactics, and formed part of an information and ideas exchange with centre-left parties that had won recent elections, including against the populist right. While not divulging Obama’s precise advice on tactics, Lammy – who would become the UK’s first black foreign secretary if Labour came to power – suggested that issues including imbalances in party funding and the media were front and centre of the discussions. “It really is about how progressive parties win and how Labour can fight back in an environment where our opponents have 10-to-one more funds than us,” Lammy said. “Obviously, in the United States there is Fox News, but we have similar challenges in the UK. Getting our message across and learning collectively is really important. We are heartened by President Biden winning in the United States and Olaf Scholz in Germany. We have got to learn the lessons, and Keir is determined that we learn winning ways. With Labour surging into a nine-point lead in Sunday’s Opinium poll for the Observer – the largest Labour advantage since 2014 recorded by Opinium – a sense of belief is beginning to build among senior Labour figures that the Tories are increasingly vulnerable. Lammy said Obama was encouraging. “He knows that things can change very much with politics. The themes and challenges are common. Progressive parties have found themselves on the back foot in a populist age, and we have to learn from each other and from colleagues who are winning.” Shortly after Joe Biden led the Democrats to victory over Donald Trump in November last year, Starmer said the US election held “stark lessons” for Labour, noting that the Democrats’ “path to victory was paved by a broad coalition, including states and communities that four years ago turned away from them.” Lammy, appointed shadow foreign secretary less than a fortnight ago in Starmer’s frontbench reshuffle, said the UK needed to return to being a respected and reliable partner on the international stage after the era of Boris Johnson. “Britain can be a force for good, but very sadly this government’s foreign policy position is built on contradictions. We have become an unreliable, inconsistent partner. The government trumpets international law but repeatedly and openly breaks it. It seeks peace in Yemen while selling arms to Saudi Arabia. You can’t promise to protect armed forces only to cut them, and slashing aid has been largely pilloried across the world. “We need to get back to being a consistent, reliable partner that puts values and human right at the centre of our place in the world. It is not about the rhetoric of global Britain or parading around on tanks, which I saw Liz Truss doing a few weeks ago as a sort of Pound Shop version of Margaret Thatcher. “These are very serious times. We have got alarm bells in Ukraine, we have got a deep and painful winter for many in Afghanistan, emerging problems in the Balkans, a rising China where there are real concerns – not just about human rights but also about the way China is aggressively treating citizens in Hong Kong, and sabre-rattling in relation to Taiwan. This is a dangerous, challenging context and we need Britain once again to be a consistent, reliable partner that befits a country that is the sixth-biggest economy in the world.” While he was clear that the UK had left the EU for good and that the matter was settled, Lammy insisted that under Labour it would build a “new relationship with the EU”, which in turn would bolster relations with Washington. On his US visit, Lammy said people were worried about Johnson’s threat to invoke article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol and the possible consequences. “Politicians have raised with me their real concern about the Good Friday agreement. It is noticed when Britain appears to be reneging on treaties and deals that it has struck. They have also noticed rising rhetoric between Boris Johnson and Emmanuel Macron. “We will build a new relationship with Europe. We are out of the EU – that is clear and that is settled. As the US increasingly looks to the Pacific and eyes issues in Asia particularly, because of China, it is even more important to our trusted special relationship with the US that we are at the centre of issues in Europe.” Lammy suggested that the UK’s best economic interests post-Brexit rested on it rebuilding close links with the EU, coupled with the pursuit of real substantial trade deals with countries outside the bloc. “Our economy has got smaller not just because of the pandemic but as a result of leaving the EU. We want to be a country where we have growth in the economy, where British businesses can prosper, where they are not tied up with red tape. And that does, of course, mean that we have got to be engaged in striking the best trade deals across the world.” Among his key priorities, he said, would be promoting UK development aid after Tory cuts, the battle against the climate crisis, and ensuring that Britain plays its part in supporting a fair shareout of vaccines to poorer countries in the continuing fight against Covid-19.When Emily first came to Paris this time last year, it was a dark day for critics in the City of Light, who dismissed it as being full of tired cliches. Now the young woman from Chicago that the French loved to hate is back for a second season of the Netflix show Emily in Paris. This time she may have a better reception from Parisians; surprisingly, they seem to be growing fond of her. The first series was accused of swerving from one shallow stereotype to another: featuring baguettes, berets, philandering Frenchmen and, most preposterous of allly of all, spotless boulevards. Needless to say, it was a huge success: Netflix said the romantic-comedy starring Lily Collins and written and produced by Darren Star, who gave us Sex and the City, was the “most popular” of last year, a feat Rolling Stone struggled to explain for a show it described as “comically inane”. For her latest outing in the capital, the gauche twentysomething American with the deafeningly loud fashion sense is less of a plouc (peasant), and has acquired something of the French touch. And, it is hinted, a little more of the language. American author Craig Carlson, whose diner Breakfast in America in Paris’s trendy Marais district features in one of season two’s episodes, told the Observer: “I can’t tell you what they filmed in the diner because that’s top secret, but I can say they [producers] were very aware of the criticisms and are addressing them. I think I can say we will see a more mature Emily.” Carlson said he and his French husband, Julien Chameroy, were initially doubtful about the series. “I was ready to stop after the first episode; here was an American in Paris not trying to learn French or integrate, and with this American worldview. But by the end of the first season, we loved it and couldn’t wait for the second.” Chameroy said he was not at all bothered by the French stereotypes. “Frankly, if you wanted it to be more realistic, you’d have to add even more challenges for Emily. France is a hard cookie to crack and she has had an easy time of it. I’m looking forward to her having to deal with the tax office.” He added: “Look at when she’s fired, and her colleague says not to worry because nobody gets fired like that in France – it’s so true. And the love triangle line is so French. I love it. Americans come here and have this rosy, sometimes prudish vision of Paris, but here we see love and sex intertwined … that’s the real Paris.” Laurence Herszberg, founder and director of the annual Series Mania festival, which features the best of international TV shows, said: “It’s true the series portrays a fantasy Paris and an image totally removed from reality, and yes it’s clichéd. but we have to see this for what it is, a romcom and a homage to the city. Even if it was badly received by French critics, the international success of the series is great publicity for Paris.” Darren Star told Entertainment Weekly there would be more French spoken in this season, when Emily is not in the scene, and it would be subtitled. Critics roasted the first season, with reviews funnier than the show. Rolling Stone magazine declared: “If the basic premise of the show defies logic, the narcotic experience of each episode mutes it altogether, deactivating the thinking part of your brain until you’re gazing at your screen like it’s a dentist who gassed you 20 minutes ago to rip out a molar.” Carlson, however, is having none of it: “We’ve noticed 70% of our customers, who are French and American, also loved it. Not just younger people but some older women too. I don’t think anyone should take it too seriously. It’s just great fun and escapism.”A Leeds-based firm of solicitors that has been acting on behalf of a debt company has caused an outcry after sending out letters claiming that the recipients had outstanding debts to the energy supplier E.ON. Numerous recipients have contacted us, and, since last weekend, the Trustpilot page of BW Legal has been inundated with people reporting they have received requests for unpaid energy bills for properties they say they weren’t living in at the time. Some said they had never had an E.ON account. Observer Cash understands the mailout featured three separate letters. One, headed E.ON, says that the recipient owes the debt for an unpaid gas and electricity bill. A second letter says the debt has been bought by Barnsley-based PRAC Financial, and the third that PRAC is represented by BW Legal. In one, seen by the Observer, the recipient is told by E.ON: “We have not been made aware of any valid reason why the balance has not been paid” and later warned that an account “may be generated” at a credit reference agency and the outstanding balance recorded on it. The second letter from PRAC adds: “We therefore strongly urge you to take this opportunity to speak with BW Legal about how they can assist you in managing repayment of your outstanding liability.” Rafael Heeb, a PhD student from Bristol, is one of those sent a letter. It stated that there was a balance due of £198, which would be reduced to £49 if he accepted a “pre-approved 75% discount”. Having spent hours on the phone to E.ON, he says he was told that the “debt” had been sold by E.ON to PRAC. However, the energy firm told him that it had been registered to the “occupier” of another flat in the same building as his. “I am not sure how BW Legal and PRAC managed to link my name with this account,” he says. “I have been told they have my personal details from the credit referencing agency TransUnion – yet looking at my TransUnion search history no such search from a company associated with the two companies in question can be found.” He adds: “I need to prove to them that I am not liable for this bill. But why should I? I happen to be an E.ON customer, my bills are up to date and my account in credit. This has caused me a huge amount of distress .” Other people sent the letters have reported the same experience, with some claiming the bills referred to addresses they had once lived in, but had left with no debts. The Trustpilot reviews suggest many are furious to have been contacted. Observer reader Simon Jones says he had received the same letter regarding a property he used to rent. “The period of the debt is after we moved out, the account number isn’t mine, and I can only assume BW and PRAC have linked me to my current address.” “The letters refer to credit reports etc,” he adds. “I’ve had no contact from E.ON in the preceding five and a half years since we left the property - we settled the account at the time and my credit report shows the account to be satisfied.” BW calls itself the UK’s largest independent law firm specialising in debt recovery services, and has built a multi-million-pound business, employing 250 people. In a statement BW Legal questioned the credibility of the reviews published on Trustpilot. It said in a statement: “Prior to writing to customers, our client (PRAC) has made enquiries with bureaus to trace (and verify) the occupants that were resident at the supply addresses at the time the energy was supplied. “If the customers did not reside at the property between the periods specified, they simply need to contact us and we will resolve this with them. The matter would be closed and that customer will no longer be contacted in relation to the debt.” E.ON says: “Following our own extensive attempts to collect the debt we were owed, we have passed on the debt owed to a third party, in this case BW Legal. “We have legitimately passed BW Legal the relevant property details and they have undertaken their own checks to identify people who they believe owe the debt. “However, anyone who believes they have been contacted in error and does not owe the debt should contact BW Legal, so that they can remove their details from the debt.” Some recipients of the letters have said they plan to report the matter to the Information Commissioner’s Office, believing that their data has been misused. Others say they plan to contact the Solicitors Regulation Authority. BW Legal says customers are entitled to contact regulatory bodies as they wish. It adds: “We are not disregarding any enquiries from customers, rather, we are proactively working with them to reach amicable solutions.”Best known as the jazz-facing guitarist in the influential Chicago post-rock outfit Tortoise, Parker, now based in LA, wears many berets: band leader, film composer, unstarry collaborator. Parker’s third solo album for the International Anthem label is a meditative gem that breaks with the more fully fleshed out style of his two previous outings. The New Breed (2016) memorialised Parker’s late father; last year’s Suite for Max Brown was dedicated to his mother, Maxine. This year’s Forfolks does away with collaborators in favour of self-quoting loops and minimal solo guitar – impressionistic daubings of notes playing out in the space between jazz, ambient and the daily practice of quietly sketching out a tune for oneself. There are deconstructed takes here on standards My Ideal and Thelonious Monk’s Ugly Beauty, both suffused with inquiring, beatless calm. The closing track, La Jetée, circles back to Jetty by Tortoise (1998) and Isotope 217’s iteration (1997). A few moments into a new track, the delicately arpeggiating Suffolk, Parker almost replays Tortoise’s most famous riff from 1998’s TNT. The title, meanwhile, makes reference to the culturally rich part of eastern Virginia where Parker was born – an area historically at the forefront of the fight against slavery.I first came across Shirley when I was elected to parliament in the spring of 1966, two years after she became an MP. I didn’t know her well for years, but later we became close. I think Shirley was the most empathetic person I’ve ever met in my life. It’s a quality I’m rather good at judging because I don’t have it myself! You’d watch her work a room at a local Labour event and she’d never start by smarming up to a regional leader or a councillor. She’d settle down next to somebody who she’d have no political reason to talk to – a solid party worker – and you’d watch this person’s face light up. This was always done spontaneously, without any ulterior motives. She just liked people and liked them to like her. She treated all people as if they had something important to say. She also had no side to her at all and that is why she was so hugely popular and loved by Labour moderates. It was also why Labour women just revered her and many of them, who sustained the Labour party through difficult times – and some still do – would have voted for her as SDP leader of the SDP. This was one of the reasons why Shirley from beginning to end was my choice for leader. The eventual leader, Roy Jenkins, had already been rejected by the Labour party [in the 1976 leadership election, coming third behind James Callaghan and Michael Foot]. He had few of the characteristics that would pull Labour people to us. Shirley did. She had been a member of the Labour party’s national executive committee, where she was very tough on the undemocratic left. She had proved herself a doughty fighter. The conversations that came to a head to create the SDP began on the first day of the Labour party conference in Blackpool in September 1980, in her hotel room. The mood was doom-laden – it had become clear that in almost every controversial area of policy the trade union votes were lined up with the Militant tendency for the biggest lurch to the left in Labour’s history. Shirley was right to remind people that there could be a “fascism of the left” – that was her phrase and a good one. She had all the qualifications to be leader of the SDP, but she didn’t want to do it. I knew she was having challenges in her personal life, though that had not stopped her breaking away from Labour. She was trying to get her marriage [to philosopher Bernard Williams, who had left her in 1971; she was a Roman Catholic] annulled at the time by the pope, so I knew she had a lot on. But had she been leader, I think most of the predictable attacks on the new party would have held little weight with millions of voters and I have no doubt that in the 1983 election we could have taken more votes than the Labour party. Margaret Thatcher’s kind of female leadership was also something lots of people didn’t like – and I think this might have pushed people to vote for a woman like Shirley. The SDP in its first year on its own was polling well ahead of the Liberals; above all because as our pollsters told us we were seen as a new party. By forming the SDP, we were choosing to deal with the Labour party’s internal problems in this way; had the SDP got ot 40 to 50 seats, we could have come back into some sort of arrangement with the Labour party. I think we’d have been able to do that with a decent Labour leader, like John Smith. Shirley could have helped us do that. Shirley and I progressively fell out over merging the SDP with the Liberals (I stayed with the SDP; she went with the Liberal Democrats). We weren’t in touch for years. Then in August 2006, Shirley, by then a Liberal Democrat peer, invited herself to our house in Greece. We were surprised but delighted. She said she was writing her autobiography and wanted to hear my side of the story. This again shows the mark of her. She also talked to my wife, Debbie, a literary agent, about various aspects of the book. With our feet dangling over the side of the dock in the Greek sea, Shirley and I started to discuss the past. I asked her bluntly why she did not stand in the Warrington byelection in 1981 (the first SDP seat that could have been won; Jenkins narrowly lost it), then did not contest the leadership in 1982 – I had helped get support together for her, but she nominated me instead. The frankness of her answer shocked me: she had lost her self-confidence to lead. She later wrote in her autobiography about how she had lost her self-confidence and had suffered quite a lot at the hands of Roy’s acolytes who had spread rumours about her being disorganised, indecisive and incapable of leadership, which had reached journalists. I was appalled. Here was this highly talented, empathetic, experienced politician, on the surface ambitious and self-confident, and it was not that she feared losing Warrington, but feared winning it. She was right in her book to say that I failed to recognise her lack of self-confidence back then. I was very sorry about it. But, after 2006, I am pleased to say we became friends again and she came out to Greece again in 2019, a little frail but she was still the life and soul of the household. You didn’t need to drink with Shirley around. She loved going to see the sights – she’d be plodding up the hill way ahead of me – “Oh, Shirley, I don’t want to bloody go up there” – “Oh, come on!” She was on great form and there was much laughter. We didn’t spend time on the ifs of politics at all. She was just a joy to be with.Lying. Refusing to follow rules. Mocking the little people. Deflecting any blame. Not just this government’s response to a Christmas party that “never took place”, but the response of successive governments to the issue of fire safety in buildings. Where the former reveals the depth of hypocrisy and contempt within elite circles, the latter exposes a culture of impunity that has had deadly consequences. Last week, the Grenfell Tower inquiry began the latest stage in which it will investigate the role of government policy. Jason Beer, QC for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, declared the department “deeply sorry for its past failures” that had helped create “an environment in which such a tragedy was possible”. For all the contrition, it was a fauxpology, an exercise in deflecting blame rather than in accepting responsibility. According to Beer, the government had erred in failing to recognise that building inspectors “would not diligently fulfil their responsibilities” and in putting “misplaced trust” in companies and contractors, a trust that had been “abused”. The real villains of the story, in other words, were building inspectors and private contractors; the government’s failure was in imagining that they would act as nobly as it itself would. It was another “it wasn’t a party, it was cheese and wine” moment, but no one was laughing. Inspectors, manufacturers and contractors have much to answer for. But far from being too “trusting”, governments have at best permitted, at worst encouraged, their practices. Successive administrations, Stephanie Barwise QC, counsel for bereaved families, told the inquiry, have viewed deadly fires “as something to be covered up or trivialised”, allowing “industry the latitude it wanted”. The story of the failures that led to Grenfell goes back at least 30 years to the Knowsley Heights fire of 1991. A block of flats in Huyton, Merseyside, Knowsley Heights had been chosen as a pilot for the government’s “Estates Action Programme” to reclad old, deteriorating estates using “Class 0” material. The debate around Class 0 is complex, but it is in essence material that is often taken to be fire-resistant but is not. As early as 1986, a Department of the Environment circular warned that “a risk of increased vertical fire spread has been identified during the laboratory testing of overcladding systems”. The warning was ignored. A fire broke out in Knowsley Heights just as predicted. Instead of learning the lessons, the authorities sought to hush up the findings. Inside Housing magazine unearthed a handwritten memo from the Building Research Establishment (BRE), the national research laboratory, which noted “a request” from the government press office “to play down the issue of the fire”. The BRE report on the Knowsley fire was kept for “limited circulation”. One reason, Barwise suggested, might have been the desire to avoid the expense of fixing combustible cladding. At that time, the cost was estimated at £500m. Today, it stands at more than £15bn. Eight years later, a fire at Garnock Court, a block of flats in Irvine, Scotland, covered in cladding similar to that in Knowsley Court, led to a death. The BRE report into the fire did not even mention the cladding. A Commons select committee investigating Garnock Court recommended that all cladding systems be required to be “entirely non-combustible” or, at least, “proven through full-scale testing not to pose an unacceptable level of risk”. It added ominously: “We do not believe that it should take a serious fire in which many people are killed before all reasonable steps are taken towards minimising the risks.” The then-Labour government ignored the recommendation by introducing a new testing regime but still maintaining approval for the use of Class 0 material – a loophole that allowed companies to continue using combustible cladding. A series of fires in other newly clad buildings followed, the most serious of which, before Grenfell, was at Lakanal House, in south London, in 2009, in which six people died. The government refused to make public its report into the fire, so as to “avoid giving the impression that we believe all buildings of this construction are inherently unsafe”. At the coroner’s inquest, it was revealed that Southwark council had carried out no fire safety checks at Lakanal or any other residential block, even though it had done so for buildings in which its own staff worked. The coroner’s recommendation for the government to review building guidance on cladding was, once more, ignored. Again, a Commons select committee, under the chairmanship of the late David Amess, took up the case, pressing the government to learn the lessons of Lakanal. Again, they were contemptuously ignored by a succession of ministers. “Should a major fire tragedy with loss of life occur… where the matters raised here were found to be contributory to the outcome, then the group would be bound to bring this to others’ attention,” Amess wrote in desperation to one minister, the Liberal Democrat Stephen Williams. He received no reply. “The consistent pattern of inadequate investigation and suppression of reports from Knowsley to… Lakanal goes beyond mere accident and involves government collusion,” Barwise observed. The actions of post-2010 administrations, with their mania for deregulation, obsession with cost-cutting and unbridled celebration of the profit motive, led government to “becoming the junior partner in the relationship” with the construction industry, thereby “permitting industry’s exploitation of the regulations”. And exploit it they did, scamming tests and selling materials they knew could kill. Since the Grenfell fire, the four biggest construction companies involved in the cladding disaster have collectively posted profits of £4.9bn, while their chief executives have pocketed nearly £50m in pay and perks. “Within the construction industry,” Beer told the inquiry, “there was a race to the bottom, with profits being prioritised over safety.” What he didn’t mention was the role of the government in permitting this. The state has, in recent decades, deliberately outsourced authority and power to independent organisations and private corporations, hollowing itself out, and refusing to take seriously its responsibility to the public. Even now, the government’s failure to meet the challenge of the cladding scandal, forcing individual leaseholders to face the ruinous consequences themselves, reveals how little attitudes have changed at the top. The collusion of politicians, regulators and corporations in permitting practices they knew were unsafe and could lead to mass death is one of the major scandals of our time. If only it would receive as much attention, and cause as much political turmoil, as a Christmas party at No 10. • This article was amended on 17 December 2021 because an earlier version said that “last week the Grenfell Tower inquiry began its final phase”. In fact the inquiry began the latest stage of Phase 2, a module which will look at government policy and investigate testing and fire risk assessments. It was also amended on 23 December 2021 to further clarify the author’s comment about the former Labour government’s response to select committee recommendations for strengthening building regulations; reference to the retention of Class 0 approval was added. • Response from Nick Raynsford – see Observer letters (30 January 2022). • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistTwitter might actually get its act together Twitter has an unfortunate reputation as the punchbag of social media. It has failed to deliver the huge returns of bigger rivals such as Facebook and Facebook-owned Instagram, it hasn’t been the cool new network for more than a decade and even its own most dedicated users love to drag it to oblivion. Investors have been similarly wary of the 300m-strong social network – it has lagged behind rivals in terms of features, revenue per user and for monetisation tools. Lots of people rely on Twitter to make at least part of their income, but tend to monetise it off the network, with no cut for Twitter. That might be starting to change. Twitter is trialling a “super follow” feature for people to support users they particularly like on the site, has bought the newsletter platform Revue and is integrating that with Twitter and has also bought up some other monetisation tools. With the departure of its part-time chief executive and co-founder Jack Dorsey, Twitter might be worth a second look in 2022. NFTs will remain hyped to oblivion, some people will lose their shirts If you managed to avoid any mention of NFTs – short for non-fungible tokens – online in 2021, you spend your time in far less nerdy corners of the internet than we do. Non-fungible essentially means that one token isn’t identical to the next one. So for a cryptocurrency, one bitcoin is no different from another bitcoin. For an NFT, each token is unique. That means NFTs have become popular as a way to record blockchain “ownership” of a particular piece of digital art or memorabilia. These have included clips of NBA scoring shots, gorilla avatars and generative art. Advocates say the ability to own digital art enables people to make ongoing creative work from the NFT they own, perhaps using it as the art for their company logo, adding it to existing intellectual property or even making a Gorillaz-style NFT avatar band. Sceptics here note that all of this was and is possible without any use of NFTs at all: it is what intellectual property rights already exist to enable, after all. In practice, owning an NFT only proves you own the NFT – an entry on a blockchain somewhere saying you “own” whatever it links to. That may or may not be true legally, depending on how scrupulous the seller was. If people are buying NFTs and driving up the price because they truly value the artworks on offer, then the gold rush could prove sustainable. If people are buying them solely because they think someone else will buy one for more, lots of people will lose big. One special thing to watch out for, for buyers and sellers alike, is platform fees. These can amount to hundreds of dollars – do remember the house always wins. Uber, Deliveroo and the gig economy will struggle to make money The delivery economy – and transport economy – is as big as it ever was, with home delivery of restaurant food and groceries still on the high it reached during the pandemic and demand for Uber-style transport up 20% to 40% on pre-pandemic levels. The problem is that it doesn’t seem to be any more profitable for the companies offering the service than it was beforehand. Uber upped its prices by 10% in London, but is still struggling to recruit drivers and in the UK it is 20,000 drivers short of what it would need to meet demand. Alongside that, even though it is showing a tiny “adjusted” paper profit, it is still burning through hundreds of millions in cash. The companies have new competition for labour too, in the form of a flurry of 10-minute grocery delivery startups, including Getir, Weezy and several more. Each of these is offering hefty discounts and cheap delivery to try to secure more customers than their rivals and so will be burning through cash at an alarming rate. Expect several of these to fail or to merge before 2022 is out. Jack Dorsey will start a blockchain company. Peter Thiel might invest Former Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey had been fairly obviously bored with his creation for some time, not least because his other company – the payments processor Square – has a valuation several times higher. If the subtle clues of Dorsey’s rare tweets largely being pro-blockchain hype and the fact of him owning a payments company weren’t enough, in the last weeks of 2021 Dorsey renamed the company Block. So, expect Jack Dorsey to launch a new blockchain-related subsidiary quite early in 2022 and don’t be surprised if Silicon Valley enfant terrible Peter Thiel invests – Thiel co-founded PayPal with the aim of breaking fiat currency and government control of money, so the appeal of blockchain as it hits maturity cannot be lost on him. DAOs will be the new Spacs This time last year, Spacs – short for special purpose acquisition companies – were the talk of the town. Spacs were a trick to help get your company publicly listed without the drawn-out, costly and risky process of an initial public offering (IPO). A company would be created, raise money and then look for a startup to merge with, skipping lots of regulatory steps. People feared it would undermine safeguards designed to protect regular investors. From now, though, Spacs feel like they’ve had their moment. While several startups, including BuzzFeed, went public via Spac in 2021, most of them underperformed the market and many lost money outright, meaning startups are eyeing up IPOs once again. The hot abbreviation as we enter 2022 then is DAO – short for decentralised autonomous organisation. DAOs, which generally use their own cryptocurrency to create a one-coin, one-vote democracy, raise money and seek to use it for some agreed purpose. One recently tried but failed to buy a copy of the US constitution, leading to an almighty row over refunds when it failed. Advocates see DAOs as the forefront of a new, democratised internet. Sceptics see a waste of time and effort, only an illusion of decentralisation, and big risks to naive investors not sure of the risks involved, or of the steep transaction fees. It’s possible both groups are right. People will try to make VR happen again The danger once anyone in technology starts using the phrases “immersive” or “living your life online” is that it’s almost inevitably followed by someone trying to make you wear a headset – and there’s no reason to believe Facebook’s attempt to push us on to the metaverse wearing their Oculus headsets will be any different. Users have generally avoided virtual reality. Heavy headsets, motion sickness, the poor content and the utter nerdiness of VR put almost everyone off. But with the metaverse, an immersive internet that we are assured will work properly this time, being big tech’s new fixation, expect to see a new flurry of VR hype very soon. Indie games will continue to have a renaissance This year was another banner year for indie gaming, with even notable indie flop No Man’s Sky, which drew widespread criticism on launch, now being acclaimed after turning itself around. Find-and-murder-your-friends indie Among Us became a huge lockdown hit, while Garden Story, Sable, Valheim and more broke through. Expect to see a similar slew of strong titles as the sector enjoys its renaissance in 2022. The podcast bubble won’t pop It’s safe to go back into your podcast app again. All those homemade lockdown podcasts launched by everyone’s boyfriend have deservedly withered on the vine and the state of podcast output is better than ever. Major professional broadcasters and production houses are making high-budget series, there is still a bustling indie scene and podcasting has found a voice beyond “two men in a shed”. The output is more diverse in terms of content and who’s behind the mic than with old media, and the monetisation is now working. Podcasts are a success story and we should take the win. …but the newsletter bubble might On the face of it, newsletters are enjoying a similar triumph, but here there are clouds on the horizon. Most of the top-table Substacks aren’t successful because they’re a counter to the culture wars, they’re successful because they fuel it. Substack hasn’t proved an escape from Twitter for authors, it has become an incentive to have Twitter beef and drive more subscriptions. A bigger problem is the price. If you subscribe to one newsletter, £4.99 a month or so seems reasonable. At four or five, you’re paying three or four times more for newsletters than you would for the New York Times. People are trimming their subs and wondering aloud whether there could be, say, a merged subscription at a lower price for numerous letters. Perhaps we could call it… a magazine? Ports are the new ports Finally, in the greatest U-turn since whatever Boris Johnson reversed himself on last week, Apple has done something it hasn’t in decades: it has added ports back on to its new MacBook Pro. After trimming them all the way down to simply two USB-C ports and a headphone jack, the new Pros have an HDMI port and even an SD card reader. We really are back to the future.Writing is a long-distance sport. And lonely. Many’s the night or early morning I’ve been closed in my office, working on a longer project and feeling the weight that no one but me can tippety tap those words out. But it’s also a time of discovery. This is when I look for inspiration among chocolate bars. The past few weeks some of Aurosó’s Sunrise Florins (left, £8, 75g) have been keeping me company. I love the delicious crisp of the very dark chocolate (90%) topped with sour cherries, blackberries and granola – that’s a concentrating treat. When the words won’t come and I have needed comfort, solace and a bit of ‘there, there’, this has been found in Pump Street’s wonderful, buttery, limited-edition 62% Croissant Bar (I know: genius!) (£6.25, 70g), which has croissant not only blended into the chocolate but flaked in, to provide something extraordinary. (Not chocolate but if you do order via the PS website, slip a box of eccles cakes, £15 for six, into your basket, they are superb.) For the home stretch – when I’ve broken the back of the piece – Chocolate Detective’s Silver Ox (a play on silver fox) 61% dark milk (£6.95, 70g). This is an unassuming-looking chocolate that yet deserves wider recognition as a very fine, high-cocoa content milk indeed. But that glorious moment when the piece is over, it’s done and I feel podium triumphant, I’ve indulged in Tosier’s exquisite – you really have to try them – limited-edition Freddy Rocks (£12, 150g); a softly crunchy hazelnut and feuilletine filling, richly swirled in 70% Haiti chocolate.An investigation to locate so-called “ghost children” who have fallen off the radar during the pandemic is to be launched by England’s children’s commissioner, the Observer can reveal, amid growing concerns over their welfare. In an intervention further highlighting the concerns over the whereabouts of tens of thousands of children, Rachel de Souza said she would immediately begin an exhaustive inquiry to find missing students in 10 areas to assess why they have disappeared from official view. She said it was part of a “call to arms” to tackle persistent absences since the pandemic began. She warned that the horrendous case of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, the six-year-old who was tortured to death by his stepmother and father in June last year, had injected further urgency into solving the problem. Some estimates have suggested that as many as 100,000 children are at risk of abuse after failing to return to school following the schools lockdown last year. Persistent absence increased to 16.3% in secondary schools in autumn 2020, compared with 15% in 2019, not including non-attendance because of Covid issues. De Souza told the Observer she feared a lack of provision for children with special educational needs was pushing them out of school, with pupils facing bullying and mental health problems. “We’re hearing lots of things about ‘ghost children’,” she said. “I hate that term. These are real flesh-and-blood children. We should be able to find out where every child in England is. We should be making sure they are in school or high-quality education. “Arthur’s case was heartbreaking. We have to wait for the serious case review, but you can’t help asking yourself: if we hadn’t been locked down, or had we been able to ensure he was in school, would we have been able to stop this? This weekend, I really reflected. We must do everything we can for safeguarding purposes to make sure children are in school, particularly the most vulnerable. There is no reason in 2021 why we shouldn’t be able to find out where every child is, and make sure they are in school, getting a decent education.” The 10 local authority areas to be investigated are currently being identified. De Souza said she would use her statutory powers to carry out the probe if necessary, but that all initial conversations suggested councils and other local institutions would cooperate. It comes after Ofsted’s chief inspector, Amanda Spielman, warned that ministers have “no handle” on who the missing children are or where they are. She said school absences had led to significant fall in the numbers of referrals to social care, potentially putting more children at risk of abuse. Spielman has called for an official register of children who are not attending school. De Souza said her office had received a huge amount of testimony from children not at school and their parents, which suggests that lack of mental health provision remains one cause behind absences. One 15-year-old boy said he had been on a mental health waiting list for three years. A 16-year-old boy said it had taken a year to have medication prescribed to help his mental health condition, meaning he missed a year of school and crucial exams. “If I was two years older I would have had some of the help I needed straight away, and may have not got into such a downward spiral,” he said. There is also evidence that a lack of provision for special educational needs is combining with mental health issues to fuel the problem. “My ADHD and the lack of support I have received over the years has made my mental health decline seriously,” said a 17-year-old boy not in school. “I am at risk and am worrying my family a lot.” Some children talked about the impact of bullying. One 13-year-old said he was “homeschooled due to being bullied at my secondary school”. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, said his department had now set up a new “attendance alliance” designed to bring together the key figures able to tackle the problem of missing school children. “They will be working over the coming months to make sure everyone working on the ground with children, as a teacher, football coach, mental health worker or in any other role, has the tools and resources they need to break down barriers to children attending school,” he said. “I welcome the children’s commissioner’s support with this work and will continue to prioritise taking action to make sure children have the opportunity to spend time in class with inspirational teachers and good friends – simply because it is the single most powerful tool at our disposal to make sure every child fulfils their potential.”If disaster strikes in the theatre, an understudy replaces a leading actor, sometimes even during the interval. Audiences adapt and occasionally a star is born. Yet performers, on stage or screen, are still seen as the last people who should be asking for flexible working. Instead they are expected to give their all, until their all gives in. Now, calls to allow job-sharing among casts, as well as for members of the backstage crew, are growing louder, in an attempt to make entertainment a better working environment. Leading the campaign are many new mothers, who argue there is no real reason why the burden of long hours and late evenings cannot be borne by two pairs of shoulders. “People are really responding to this. The idea of sharing is now really hitting a nerve,” said the actor Naomi Sheldon, who has been splitting the role of Adrianna in the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) production of The Comedy of Errors at the Barbican in London with fellow actor Hedydd Dylan. “I was quite tentative about it all,” said Sheldon, “but the whole thing has been an absolute dream.” Dylan played the role of a pregnant Adrianna in Stratford upon Avon and on tour. She then shared the part with Sheldon, before stepping down in November before the birth of her son. “I was nervous at first about how Hedydd would feel about the arrangement,” recalls Sheldon. “But having been an understudy to Hayley Atwell before, I knew that whatever my own take on the role might be, I needed to fit in. “This was not a production I had helped to shape, so I made sure I knew where I had to be to hit my marks on the stage. “Luckily for me, Hedydd turned out to be a class act,” added Sheldon. When the play’s director, Phillip Breen, learned Dylan was pregnant, he decided to make her character pregnant to match, allowing the actor to stay in the role throughout the run at Stratford upon Avon and on tour. “It worked rather well,” said Breen. “It raises the stakes between Adrianna and Antipholus of Ephesus and accounts for some of the complexities in their relationship, but also, ultimately, their great bond, too. It also gives an added dimension to the family reunion at the end.” Sheldon found the tight stage choreography and strict discipline on a production she describes as a “slick farce” helped her find her way, as she navigated her arrival in the cast. It soon became clear, though, that she could not just copy Dylan’s comic techniques. “We are very different creatures,” she said. “Hedydd is tall and elegant, with a lot of natural status on stage, while I’m shorter and have an erratic energy about me. Some of the cast have described it by saying that Hedydd’s portrayal of Adrianna is “like a lolloping greyhound” where as I am “more of a persistent terrier”. So, even if I’d wanted to do a version of Hedydd’s performance, I wouldn’t have been able.” Sheldon took over the role full-time last month after Dylan left ahead of the birth of her son. As a new parent of a baby girl and boy, Sheldon said she “never would’ve believed I would be able to play a demanding lead role at the RSC at this stage”, adding: “And when my babies were small, while we were sharing, I was able to spend the first half of the week at home with my babies.” “I felt proud that other actresses in a similar position might be encouraged and inspired by my experience and hopefully feel less frightened of the prospect of juggling an acting career and having a baby,” Dylan told the Observer. The RSC was following in the footsteps of Chichester Festival Theatre, which allowed the central role of Nellie Forbush in the musical South Pacific to be shared by the actors Gina Beck and Alex Young in the summer. Beck, who played the Rodgers and Hammerstein role until late August, said then she hoped the theatre’s “trailblazing attitude” would spread across the industry: “When carrying my first child I became unemployable and was unpaid for six months because I looked, well … pregnant.” Among other performers pushing for better working practices for families is the actor Romola Garai. Garai, who has just written and directed the horror film Amulet, out next month, remains determined to campaign for more production companies in theatre, film and television to let cast and crew share their workloads. Speaking to the Observer a few years ago, Garai said: “The liberal industries are seen as so lefty, but that masks the unbelievable backwardness of our employment practices – it’s terrible for carers and parents. I recently asked for a four-day week for the first time and I was laughed at.” Championing these arguments is the organisation Raising Films, which offers screen industry employers a checklist of tools to improve hiring practices. “It’s tough out there for independent producers putting teams together, but we’re facing such a massive skills shortage that we do need to be thinking of better ways to bring in and retain talent,” said Raising Films’ co-founder Nicky Bentham, a producer at Neon Films. “Not every role or every production is going to suit a job sharing scenario, but I think there’s probably more room for it than people might suspect.” Raising Films also runs a website that links workers to job sharing schemes, including the Media Parents, the union Bectu’s TakeTwo, and Share My Telly Job (SMTJ), set up by Louise Patel in 2015. Patel argues that inflexibility in television production means talented people leave the industry, or get stuck in roles below their skill level. It is a sadly limited attitude, she believes, in contrast with entertainment’s premium on creative thinking. Job sharing, Raising Films contends, also helps avoid the burnout that can hamper a career, and it builds in holiday cover for anxious employers. SMTJ’s co-director, Michelle Reynolds, compares a good job share to a marriage. “Trust and communication are key, as inevitably there will come a day when your job share partner makes a decision you do not agree with. You have to have a level of respect for that person to see their choice as equally valid.” SMTJ, Reynolds explains, was born out of frustration at the struggle to get back to work following the birth of children. The campaign was spurred on by reports of the huge drop-out rate of women working in television production. As a result, this year they created The Time Project, which is an industrywide way of recording hours for everyone working off-screen in British TV. “There is a myth that people who want to work flexibly are less committed to the job than their full-time counterparts. To that we say, no one will want the job share to succeed more than the job sharers themselves, as it is their key to staying in the career they love,” said Reynolds.The emergence and rapid spread of the Omicron Sars-CoV-2 variant feels like a flashback to last year’s grim festive season when much of the world went into lockdown to avert the worst of the Alpha variant wave. But though the sense of eerie, impending doom feels familiar, the epidemiological and political situations are different from one year ago. The Omicron wave represents a key turning point in the pandemic. But no plausible outcome looks particularly auspicious – it feels largely like a lose-lose deal. If if turns out to be roughly as severe as previous pandemic waves, it might normalise harsh mitigation measures and render the prospect of a return to post-pandemic normality fairly remote. If it turned out to be milder than feared, this could spell the end of lockdowns with Covid-19 on its way into endemicity. The cost would be a loss of trust in political and public health authorities, which may make it difficult to deal with future threats. Omicron is a different beast to the Alpha and Delta variants, which emerged in the pre-vaccine phase of the pandemic and spread in largely immunologically naive populations. Their threat came from the increased ability to replicate quickly within their host and their higher contagiousness. Both variants were associated with higher hospital admisssion rates and deaths. However, neither variant was good at escaping immune recognition, although each could cause occasional “breakthrough infections” in immunised people, with high contagiousness allowing these variants to barge through the first-line immune defence. Omicron is different. Rather than just relying on brute force, as Delta did, it is far better at sneaking through immune defences, thanks to a number of mutations that it acquired in key regions of its spike protein. These reduce the ability of neutralising antibodies to bind to it. As such, it spreads primarily by (re-)infecting previously immunised hosts. The centre of the Omicron outbreak was Gauteng province in South Africa, which experienced a dramatic rise of nearly 400% in the number of cases in the first week of December. The Gauteng outbreak seems to be receding with its peak expected within a week or so. Other regions of South Africa also show signs of their epidemics slowing down despite no measures having been taken to suppress transmission. Many countries are seeing rapid rises of Omicron cases, which are recorded as doubling every two to three days in the UK. But there is considerable uncertainty about the virulence of Omicron. Early, largely anecdotal, evidence from South Africa suggested Omicron might be milder. Such data has to be interpreted carefully as essentially all infections start with mild symptoms and there is a time lag before severe disease develops. As additional data has landed in the past two weeks, the hypothesis of the Omicron wave being significantly milder becomes increasingly plausible. Reported deaths and hospitalisations in South Africa, in particular those requiring intensive care or ventilation, have remained far below numbers recorded during previous waves. Virulence is not just a property of a pathogen but of the interaction with its host. Most populations on Earth have acquired high rates of immunisation through vaccination and prior infection. While Omicron can largely bypass neutralising antibodies, it remains well recognised by T-cells, which do the heavy lifting to control infections that can’t be averted. As such, vaccines largely retain their efficacy against severe symptoms caused by the variant and a recent third dose still seems to provide significant protection against infection. Irrespective of the relative virulence of Omicron, the large peak of cases anticipated over the coming weeks is expected to add further stress to healthcare services, which no government can allow to become overwhelmed under its watch. A case for harsh mitigation measures based entirely on the protection of healthcare services might be less well received by many nearly two years into the pandemic, in particular given the uncertainty around the severity of Omicron. The first lockdowns in early 2020 were generally well accepted by the population as a temporary measure in the face of an exceptional threat. Many felt that later lockdowns were justified as a means to delay the epidemic until the population could be vaccinated. A lockdown to deal with Omicron may be a more difficult sell; it comes with no obvious endpoint besides its objective to “flatten the curve” and allow for a marginal increase in the number of people vaccinated or boosted before the peak of the wave. How to respond to the Omicron wave poses extreme challenges to political and public health authorities globally. So far, western governments have enforced early, harsh travel bans against African countries, which have been widely criticised, including by the World Health Organization. Given the rapid rise in local community transmission of Omicron, those travel restrictions have lost all efficacy they might have had early on. Increasing the rate of vaccination, including third doses, in particular for those most at risk, should make a real difference in terms of morbidity and mortality over the coming months, but time is rapidly running out given the remarkably fast increase in daily Omicron case numbers. Many governments are also taking more intrusive or coercive measures, which could rapidly escalate to compare with previous lockdowns. How effective those measures are at reducing viral transmission over the coming weeks will largely depend on the population’s willingness to follow the rules. In the absence of a clear sense of fear and a possible loss of trust, adherence may be far lower. As I noted, Omicron’s legacy could be huge if its impact proves to be especially rough or mild. But even an intermediate outcome might cause additional resentment and further the deep divisions in society. • Francois Balloux is the director of the Genetics Institute at University College, LondonHurtling into town on a bike in the small hours of the morning wearing a tiger onesie might not be that unusual for the average 21-year-old. But if Amelia Luck from Fowey, Cornwall, is doing it, she isn’t rushing to a party or a rave – she is heading to the lifeboat station, responding to an emergency call-out that can come at any time of day or night. “When you hear that beep from the pager, your heart does a little jump and, well, you just run, no matter what time it is. You don’t know what situation you’re going to, you just go,” she said. Luck has just been appointed the helm of a Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) lifeboat, taking charge of Fowey’s inshore vessel after just four years volunteering with the charity. She is currently the youngest female helm and is one of a growing number of women across the country to have a leading role within the RNLI’s search and rescue teams, which are still very male-dominated. Like almost all RNLI crew, Luck is a volunteer who takes time out from her normal life to help those in trouble at sea whenever the call comes. She is currently doing an apprenticeship at a local cider firm but carries a pager at all times, prepared to drop everything when it goes off. “I can get to the station in a few minutes on my bike from home, although it’s harder in the summer, trying to weave through the tourists on the narrow streets,” said Luck. On average, within 13 minutes from receiving the initial instruction from the coastguard, the lifeboats are in the water. The RNLI has received criticism recently from anti-migrant groups over its role in saving people who have attempted to cross the Channel in small boats. Staff have been sent threatening emails and the charity’s website was hacked. A crew in Hastings, East Sussex, was reportedly subjected to abuse in late November as they tried to launch. When Luck heads out to sea, her only thought is for the safety of her crew and the people she is going to rescue. “When it’s stormy, you’re just worried about what’s going on out there and how the people you are going to are – how long they’ve been there and if they’re OK. That’s all you are thinking about,” she said. “You just want to get there as quickly and safely as possible.” Women still make up only 11% of the RNLI’s lifeboat crew, and when Luck joined she was the only female crew member at the station. “I remember standing there as a 17-year-old girl in a room full of men – it was pretty daunting. And I think they were a bit daunted too, worrying about things like would I need a separate changing room and loo,” she said. “But now nobody even thinks about it. I’m just another helm – I’m not treated any differently, although it took me a while to live down the tiger onesie episode.” She has been involved in 134 training and live lifeboat launches – from people cut off by the tide to paddle boarders in trouble – of which 36 were actual rescue incidents, or “shouts”, as they are called. “Every shout is different. You don’t know what you’re going to. And you don’t know what the weather’s really like until you get out there. It can be really calm here in the harbour but totally different out there,” she said. “It doesn’t matter to me about the weather because if I think to myself: if I don’t want to be out in that then think how those people are feeling out there at sea.” This December marks a sombre moment for RNLI volunteers, as they remember 40 years since one of the worst disasters. On 19 December 1981, the Penlee lifeboat, the Solomon Browne, set out in hurricane-force winds to reach a stricken cargo vessel drifting towards the rocky Cornish coast. After several attempts to rescue those onboard, contact with both vessels was lost. The eight crew of the Solomon Browne and the eight people onboard the Union Star cargo ship died. Patch Harvey, coxswain of Penlee’s current lifeboat, said, “It is important that we continue to remember the sacrifice made by the crew of the Solomon Browne, who gave everything to help others in need. They didn’t give up, and the spirit of the Solomon Browne crew lives on in all RNLI lifeboat volunteers, who continue to display the selfless commitment to saving lives at sea.” Lifeboat safety has vastly improved since the Penlee disaster, with better boats and volunteer training. But at the Fowey station, any shout still means a sleepless night for Luck’s mother, Jilly. Luck’s brother, Oli, and father, Adam, are also part of the Fowey RNLI. “My mum always said if you get a shout, please tell me, whatever time of night it is. So whenever I got paged, I’d run down the stairs and shout ‘Love you!’ as I went out the door, just to let her know that I was going. “Now my brother has a pager, and my dad, too. So the whole house is up when there is a shout at night. My mum is at the door as we go, waving us off. And she’s there when we come back too – I don’t think she even tries to go back to sleep until we’re home. “When it’s rough out there, often the whole crew will wait at the station to make sure everyone comes back safe – it’s what we do. “We’re a family. We do it for each other, and we do it for anyone in trouble at sea.” • This article was amended on 17 December 2021 because an earlier version said that Luck was the youngest ever female lifeboat helm. She is currently the youngest female helm. According to the RNLI website Elizabeth Hostvedt, an 18-year-old Norwegian student, became the first woman qualified to command an RNLI inshore lifeboat in 1969.Landscapers (Sky Atlantic) The Great (Starzplay) You Don’t Know Me (BBC One) | iPlayer How to Make It on OnlyFans (Channel 4) | All 4 Landscapers, Sky Atlantic’s new four-part true crime drama, shouldn’t work. It stars Olivia Colman and David Thewlis as Susan and Christopher Edwards, the “Mansfield murderers”, who in 1998 shot her parents and buried them in the garden (also amassing £245,000), and were finally sentenced to life imprisonment in 2014, with a minimum of 25 years each. Written by Ed Sinclair, Colman’s husband, and directed by Will Sharpe (Giri/Haji; Flowers), Landscapers is pretentious, wayward, hyper-conceptual – eschewing realism, shredding timelines – breaks all the rules of true crime, including the good ones. It’s also extraordinary, disquieting, beautiful; television as art. From the off (all episodes are available to stream), we’re plunged into Susan’s reality-distorting Hollywood obsession: westerns, romances, the squandering of huge sums on memorabilia, faked letters from Gérard Depardieu. The couple are impoverished in France, having been on the run for 15 years – needlessly, as nobody noticed the victims were missing – and librarian Susan lives in idealised “scenes”, casting accountant Christopher as her screen hero. This self-protective cocoon – Susan was abused by her father – is compounded by Christopher harbouring the kind of saviour complex that’s so often a front for control; even early on, their Great Love looks more of a tarted-up co-dependency doomed to shatter under pressure. This comes when Christopher gives them up and they return to England to face the police, brilliantly played by Kate O’Flynn, Samuel Anderson and Daniel Rigby, while Dipo Ola is wonderful as Susan’s kindly solicitor. Christopher’s betrayal is the moment when Susan’s mask of meekness slips to reveal childish rage, a nastiness that reminds you that, however confused the Edwards’s story of the murders becomes, murders they still were. Landscapers itself evolves into a writhing screen-Hydra of themes, moods and techniques: from black-and-white court scenes, snowy police interviews and a full-blown western sequence, to such a comprehensive smashing of the fourth wall that players leave one set to join another. Just as you think the Edwards are being too endearingly portrayed as bunglers and innocents – “My husband and I got ourselves into a bit of a pickle” – real-life news reports cut through the whimsy like a sharp syrup. Dennis Potter’s influence is here, but also Charlie Kaufman’s 2020 Netflix film I’m Thinking of Ending Things (which also starred Thewlis). The result is mesmeric and audacious, though without the anchorage of the lead performances it could still have turned into so much experimental shrapnel. Colman won an Oscar for The Favourite, but she’s even better here. She and Thewlis provide the (irregular) heartbeat of Landscapers – together, they live and breathe every strange, tortured moment of it. Tony McNamara co-wrote The Favourite, and his Starzplay dramedy The Great, about the rise of Russia’s Catherine the Great (played with wicked elan by Elle Fanning), is, well, great. Now returning for a 10-part second series, with episodes released singly until issued as a box set on Boxing Day, to say that The Great bears the weight of history lightly is an understatement. From what I can make out, it plonks on lavish costumes, sits in sumptuous palaces and feels good to go, wilfully spraying around anachronisms and outright filth like it’s Sex Education with powdered hair and corsets. You half expect Catherine’s husband, Nicholas Hoult’s Peter III, to arrive atop a skateboard, shouting his signature “Huzzah!”. As we rejoin them, Peter remains hampered by sycophants who indulge his every hot-headed move and Catherine is intent on forcing Peter to abdicate, while also bewailing her pregnancy, “a coup on your body”. While the whole cast is great, Fanning and Hoult’s chemistry is the jewel in the Greats’ imperial crown, though in Catherine’s scathing view it doesn’t exist: “I look at you and go dry like sand.” There’s more than a whiff of Blackadder here, but you won’t catch me complaining about that. You Don’t Know Me is a four-part thriller, adapted by Tom Edge (Vigil) from the book by barrister Imran Mahmood. It stars Samuel Adewunmi as Hero, a car salesman who’s dragged into the criminal underbelly in his quest to find mysterious new girlfriend (Sophie Wilde), resulting in him facing charges for the murder of local drug dealer Jamil (Roger Jean Nsengiyumva). The drama has barely begun before Hero sacks his barrister and is in court defending himself, explaining how the damning evidence (forensics, CCTV et al) isn’t proof of his guilt. From there it’s a veritable kaleidoscope of flashbacks, with occasional courtroom links. At times it all gets a bit bargain-bin Top Boy, and Hero’s relentless courtroom explanations and denials recall Shaggy’s It Wasn’t Me. Then there’s Jamil’s inexplicable survival after being shot at point-blank range: somehow he rises from the dead like a puffa-jacketed Christ. Still, You Don’t Know Me is pacy and enjoyable, with twist piled upon twist and all-round great performances, including Bukky Bakray (Rocks) as Hero’s sensitive sister. Adewunmi was wasted in the recent disappointing Angela Black, and here he’s able to showcase his skills and charisma. As Hero, he’s engulfed in emotions – love, fear, despair – proving he’s a leading man all the way. The Channel 4 documentary How to Make It on OnlyFans followed former lads’ mag model turned OnlyFans star Alex Sim-Wise as she advised others to, as she put it, “make naughty content online” on the controversial site that makes 90% of its income from sexual content. Among them were Zoe, who wanted to make extra cash indulging foot fetishists, and Emily, who styled herself as Baddie Rabbit. During the making of the documentary, OnlyFans announced a ban on sexual content and then just as abruptly withdraw it. Obviously the libertine sex positive argument was strong here, while counter-arguments (including widespread concerns about underage content providers) were in short supply. Still, this was an illuminating, humanising peek at OnlyFans contributors: Baddie, for one, suffered from everything from low self-esteem to autoimmune hepatitis. While not agreeing with all the views aired, I didn’t stop liking the people. What else I’m watching… Other, Like Me (BBC Four) A documentary about COUM Transmissions, the 1970s art-music collective (Throbbing Gristle, Psychic TV) that became mired in satanic abuse allegations. They don’t make “outsiders” like this any more. Interviewees include the late Genesis P-Orridge and Cosey Fanni Tutti, who in later years accused P-Orridge of abuse. Vienna Blood (BBC Two) Second series of the period crime drama set in the opulent environs of Vienna during the 1900s. When a Hungarian countess is found drowned in her hotel bath, the case must be solved by detective Jürgen Maurer and psychiatrist Matthew Beard. Curb Your Enthusiasm (Sky Comedy) The 11th series of Curb is in fine, turbo-caustic form, with guest stars including Woody Harrelson and Seth Rogen. In the latest episode, our antihero is too idle to queue to vote and Tracey Ullman co-stars as a councillor so abhorrent she’s Larry’s match.Kathryn Hunter, 64, is an actor who has done more than make a name for herself in theatre. In shows for Complicité, Shared Experience and the RSC she has, with physical virtuosity, extended the reach of what theatre can do. She has played great Shakespearean male roles – Lear, Timon of Athens and Richard III – and is now starring in Joel Coen’s film The Tragedy of Macbeth, alongside Denzel Washington as Macbeth and Frances McDormand as Lady Macbeth. Hunter plays all three witches as thrilling, crow-like contortionists with voices that stir, disinter and reverberate. She lives in London with her husband, Marcello Magni, co-founder of Complicité. How did the idea of playing all three witches come about? Joel emailed me – we’ve known each other a long time and he and Fran [the actor Frances McDormand, also Coen’s wife and a producer of the film] have come to see shows I was in. He asked if I’d like to play a witch. It’s been a lifelong dream to work with Joel and Fran, so that was an immediate yes. We started talking about the how – and there were many experiments in my kitchen. I’d think: OK, the witch is a scavenger on the battlefield – she carries dead bodies around. How did that work out in your kitchen? I made impromptu puppets of pillows, and my husband, Marcello, photographed me. Then we met with Joel and Fran in London. My first question was: “Are the witches real or in Macbeth’s mind?” Joel went: “Both.” He talked about crows, was much taken with the play’s bird imagery. He gave me the image of standing stones. Crow… woman… standing stone… these were the images percolating in my psyche. Originally, Joel thought we’d have doubles for the other witches, and we saw lots of small female contortionists. Then one day I said: what if there is one person possessed by another two? You have a twin sister… you could have invited her to audition? We’re very close, but Angela is three inches taller than me and we’re quite different… otherwise that would have been a good idea. Aikaterini Hadjipateras is your real name. You changed your first name initially, then your surname too – why? I was at Rada 40 years ago and the extraordinary principal, Hugh Cruttwell, said: “So Kathryn, do you wish to play the full canon or just Gypsies?” He told me to change my name because in those days there was more of an assumption that if you looked foreign, people might assume you couldn’t speak the language. James Hunter, a dear friend, was one of my first boyfriends. I asked him: “Do you mind if I’m Hunter?” I thought we’d end up together anyway. Unfortunately, shortly afterwards we did separate. Do you see yourself as Greek, American or British? I grew up in New York. My parents were Greek, but when I was 18 months old they emigrated again, to London. My father was in shipping and my mother went into shipping too – which was radical at the time. I’m very much a Londoner. Marcello longs to go back to Italy but I defend London. You suffered life-changing injuries in a car crash while at Rada. Did it made you extra determined to use your body superlatively – as you do – as an actor? Definitely. I remember waking up in intensive care and seeing Hugh Cruttwell at the edge of the bed. He was wearing a white suit so I thought he was an angel. My first question was: “Can I come back, Hugh?” And I did go back to Rada, on crutches, and remember people looking at me and going: Oh dear. I discovered, because of the limitations of the lower body at that time, all the upper body possibilities. I was in Lady Be Good and had to come downstairs, and I remember the cast – Ken Branagh, John Sessions – looking at me with hopeful eyes that said: don’t fall! I’ve always loved being physical. I did ballet as a small girl. Then there was Complicité – and off we went. What was special about Complicité? My first love affair was with Complicité. It was based on [the celebrated French actor] Jacques Lecoq’s idea of understanding how the body tells the story, and about an understanding of the body – and objects – in space. It was also about the story as a collective responsibility: everybody plays everything. We’d all be the outside eye – Annabel Arden, Simon McBurney… It’s fascinating because you know a scene even when it’s performed by someone else. How did you meet your husband, and does a marriage of theatre practitioners ever get too close for comfort? I’m probably one of the luckiest people in the world. We met through Complicité. I found him brilliant and hilarious and we fell in love. He asked me to marry him 15 years into our relationship and I said: “What for?”, and he was a bit disappointed. Then, after we’d been together for about 20 years, I was playing Cleopatra for the RSC and roaming around thinking: what does Cleopatra want? She wants someone she can call her husband. That inspired me… it felt right… I said: “Let’s get married,” and we did, and it was amazing. Anything goes with Marcello – he’s very game. He’s had to watch me being a crow for hours and hours… You’ve played many men long before it became fashionable. Gender is a floating thing. I gravitated towards male roles because men tend to be given more interesting things to do. There was a Complicité show where I was supposed to play a sexy maid – I balked at that. Do you think this stunning Macbeth will pull in young audiences? Denzel Washington takes us deep inside Macbeth. It’s terrifying. He has a new-minted way of speaking the lines as if it were his mother tongue, a strange and beautiful patois we grow to love. And Fran – an extraordinary human being and one of the funniest people alive – is an exceptional Lady Macbeth: you can hear her thoughts, see her feelings, and it tears you apart. It’s so exciting. I hope it will seduce young people into sharing my passion – for Shakespeare. The Tragedy of Macbeth is released in UK cinemas on 26 December and on Apple TV+ on 14 JanuaryThis week my son got his flu booster, which was about as pleasant an experience as it ever is, but now comes freighted with the added pang of political concerns. People don’t read this column for agitprop. Or rather, if they do it’s about my usual bugbears – the demented politics of Paw Patrol, the tyranny of heated plates, my continued exasperation that British people don’t thank their drivers as they exit a bus. But, occasionally, bigger themes do emerge. I speak not of my excoriating attacks on the Irish seasonal calendar or the practice of serving lasagne with coleslaw, but of vaccines – and specifically those who wish to muddy the waters around their efficacy. Like many, I’ve witnessed a small number of acquaintances becoming entrenched in their scepticism about vaccines. Darkly muttered doggerel about micro-chips and new world orders crept in during the pandemic and is now uttered regarding flu, MMR and other jabs. That these take the form of hastily pasted screeds about Bill Gates’s sudden desire to control the mind of Auntie Pauline in South Armagh, is admittedly quite funny. The fact they’re in reaction to a global pandemic, against which vaccines and boosters have been shown to be our best rebuke, is just depressing. The last time I mentioned my son getting his flu jab was August 2019, when the charlatanry of anti-vaxxers seemed a fringe concern, albeit one about which I personally felt extremely agitated. It is striking for me to re-read that article now and see myself referencing ‘herd immunity’, a term I had to specifically look up to make sure I was using it correctly. Six months later it would become household jargon, and a new, more virulent strain of anti-vaxxer would enter the public sphere. My son is a bit of an anti-vaxxer himself, I guess, kicking and screaming, right up until the minute his booster has been administered, at which point he’s provided with stickers for his stoicism and forbearance. He doesn’t like this process and, to be honest, neither do we, but maintaining our child’s immunisations is not merely good for him, it’s good for those around us who can’t receive them, and therefore need the greater protection an inoculated populace provides them. It’s part of the social contract and one I’d be willing to oblige, even if there were no stickers. Luckily there are, which sweetens the deal marvellously. For millions of years, people got sick and died of things that no longer bother us, illnesses to which we became inoculated the hard way. Diseases so removed from our privileged position in the modern world that my son’s favourite pirate cartoons frequently make jokes about things like the black death and bubonic plague, which is a bit weird when you think about it. But comedy is, after all, tragedy plus time. It’s just that, occasionally, time marches backwards, and we should be careful that we don’t indulge the whims of those whose actions will ensure such tragedy stops being funny any more. Get your jabs and tell Auntie Pauline to do the same. It’s not enough for us to ignore the kicking and the screaming, it should be challenged and addressed wherever we find it. If we need to offer a few stickers to sweeten the deal, then so be it. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsMothers and babies are being put at risk as vital health checks and support services remain shut months after lockdown was lifted, health professionals and charities have warned. Face-to-face services for new families stopped when lockdown began in March last year and have not come back in many parts of the country. Now experts fear the spread of the Omicron variant and the reintroduction of some restrictions means the reopening will be delayed further. Missing services include drop-in baby-weighing clinics, tongue-tie clinics, face-to-face breastfeeding support and council-run baby classes and playgroups. Experts have accused the government of failing to prioritise the needs of a generation of babies and their parents, with cost-cutting and a shortage of midwives and health visitors blamed for the closures. Parents told the Observer they have been unable to access in-person support in parts of London, Essex, Sussex, Yorkshire, Berkshire, Tyne and Wear, Warwickshire and Shropshire. Health visitor drop-in clinics are “no longer running” in nearly a third of areas, and around 28% of newborn checks are being carried out via phone or video call, according to the No One Wants to See My Baby report by charities the Parent-Infant Foundation, Home-Start UK and Best Beginnings. Its authors said: “Over a year [since the first lockdown], families told us that they are still struggling to access care, particularly from universal healthcare professionals like GPs and health visitors. They told us how this left them feeling unsupported, isolated and let down.” The Institute of Health Visiting said different interpretations of government guidance meant some areas had brought back full services while others had not, creating a “postcode lottery of support for families”. It questioned official advice that routine checks could continue to be done via video and telephone calls, warning there was no evidence these were “safe or effective”. Executive director Alison Morton said: “Alongside the concerns of parents, there is a growing body of evidence that childhood conditions and disabilities are being missed, and vulnerable babies and young children are being harmed, as they are invisible to services when these assessments are not completed face to face.” Amy Brown, professor of child public health at Swansea University and author of the book Covid Babies, said: “It is astonishing that you can take your baby into a pub but not go to a baby class. You can walk into a pet shop and get your dog weighed but you can’t drop in to the health visitor and ask them to weigh your baby. “I don’t know of anything else in society that hasn’t come back, with or without restrictions… but the fact is that many of these services haven’t come back at all.” After Suzanne Ekpenyong, 40, gave birth to her second child, Malakai, in West Sussex in August, she was told by health visitors she should “look at the baby to see if he’s getting bigger”, instead of trying to get him weighed. “Parents aren’t experts – you have a mother’s instinct if something is wrong but it’s always good to get a professional to check. I am lucky not to have had problems … but I feel there’s a lack of prioritising this type of service that ultimately helps really vulnerable families,” said Ekpenyong, director of virtual assistant company Yes, from Woodford, east London. Brown added: “Cancelling weigh-ins … means parents miss the chance to ask questions and get reassurance, they feel unsupported and feel like no one is looking out for their baby. This all adds to feelings of anxiety and depression.” Postnatal depression and anxiety rates have tripled since the start of the pandemic, she said. Local councils, which run children’s centre services, have raised concerns about the shortage of health visitors, many of whom were redeployed to nursing roles in the first lockdown and have not returned. David Fothergill, chairman of the Local Government Association’s Community Wellbeing Board, said councils were spending more on the under-fives than any other area of public health, despite funding cuts. He added: “Councils have adapted to provide more support online and, while recognising this may not be right for everyone, many parents have found it easier to access what they need.” A Department of Health &amp; Social Care spokesperson said: “The NHS, local authorities and health visitors are working hard to reinstate services to help families get the support they need, and the public health grant will continue to ensure investment is made in … frontline services.”’Tis the season to be jolly, and last week Marieke Navin and her boyfriend were planning to attend three Christmas parties between them. But now, following the rise of the Omicron variant, they are not going to any. “I was looking forward to those parties,” said Navin. “But my priority is protecting Christmas. I don’t want my children to be isolating in their room on Christmas Day, or be unable to visit their dad or my parents. I don’t want my partner’s kids to be unable to come to us on Boxing Day. I don’t want to jeopardise the movement of the children, and I don’t want anyone being poorly over Christmas.” She is among the many thousands of people around the country who are reluctantly changing their plans to “save” Christmas from Covid. Last Wednesday, Sir Patrick Vallance, the UK government’s chief scientific adviser, warned that the Omicron variant of the virus was “spreading very fast” and “rapidly progressing”. Over the past 18 days, since the virus was first reported to the World Health Organization on 24 November, nearly a fifth of the Christmas events booked through the digital events platform HeadBox have been cancelled, with more than half the cancellations occurring in the past week. A further 22% of event organisers have postponed their Christmas parties until the new year, a HeadBox spokesperson said. “There is a desire to protect employees, family and friends in the run-up to Christmas, particularly as so many missed out last year,” she added. Navin, a festival organiser based in Manchester, said her employer did a poll last week and discovered only 10 of her 35 colleagues wanted to attend the work Christmas party this year. “Personally, I didn’t feel comfortable. I would have had to travel there by train and, even though masks are mandatory on public transport again, I estimate only about 40% of people are wearing them.” She is relieved that, following the government’s announcement of new “Plan B” restrictions, she will be able to work from home until Christmas Day – and she is now planning to do all her Christmas shopping online. “I’m trying to ringfence Christmas for my family.” But at the same time, she is unhappy to be spending another December cooped up inside: “It’s another year of not celebrating with friends and family the way you want to. I feel tired that we’re still here – and angry. I think we’ve been let down by the government.” Hearing about the Christmas party at No 10 last year has been infuriating: “It’s disgusting. It makes a mockery of everything that we’re sacrificing, and have sacrificed.” Over in the Hertfordshire town of Ware, French teacher Cathie Little is also feeling heartbroken about her Christmas plans. She and her family were looking forward to spending Christmas Day in her homeland of France with her mother, who lives alone. But following the rapid spread of Omicron around the world, she has cancelled their flights and all their plans. “If we came into contact with someone who tested positive on the flight home, we would have had to isolate – and we couldn’t take that chance.” Being forced to isolate would “ruin” the Christmas holidays for her five-year-old son, she said. “He wouldn’t be able to see his paternal grandparents, which, for him, would be the end of the world. He’s very attached to them, and not being able to see them at Christmas last year was a huge deal for him. It made him very anxious.” Meanwhile, she hasn’t seen her own mother for two years. “She’s going to be alone on Christmas Day, and that makes me feel so sad. I miss France like crazy, and my friends. But this is what we’ve had to do, to protect my son’s Christmas.” Instead of celebrating together in France, she and her mother will Skype on Christmas Day and the family will eat a specially made Christmas log from a local French patisserie. “But it won’t be the same.” In Crouch End, north London, Jessica Bailey has also been cancelling her social plans. She is no longer going to attend her pregnant best friend’s “gender reveal”/Christmas party next Sunday. “That was really tough, because we’re close.” She has also decided not to invite any of her son’s friends over to celebrate his fourth birthday with him next week. “It’s just such a risky time, 10 days before Christmas. I don’t want to put other parents in that awkward situation of having to say no to their child mingling with mine.” Her son has been hospitalised twice this month with RSV, a respiratory illness that children appear to be more susceptible to than usual this year: “It’s been really scary,” she says. She is planning to spend Christmas with her 69-year-old mother and a family friend, who is vulnerable to Covid. “For the sake of our Christmas and, more specifically, just for the sake of our own health, I can’t take the risk of me or my son getting Covid right now. I can’t put us through anything else.”After years of stability, the Office for National Statistics reported that alcohol-specific deaths in 2020 had increased by 19% from 2019, counting 8,974 deaths coded as caused by alcohol misuse, with three in four being from alcoholic liver disease. The national lockdown saw an increase in abstention, but also in heavy drinking. Harm can increase without greater total consumption: the distribution matters, not just the average. Drinking too much alcohol raises the risks of many diseases, so analysts try to estimate total numbers of deaths attributable to alcohol consumption – they modelled about 19,200 alcohol-related deaths in England in 2019, around four times the direct count of number of alcohol-specific registrations. The method requires many assumptions, such as 11% of breast cancer deaths in women over 75 being due to alcohol, and a major recent change in such attributable fractions cut estimated alcohol-related death figures by around 23%. People might like a single number to settle an issue but we cannot count everything directly and analysts may need to construct a range of statistics to improve our understanding. Many tens of thousands of deaths every year are attributed to air pollution, but until an inquest in 2020, it was never given as an official cause of an individual death. Influenza also demonstrates the limitations of counting. Between 2013 and 2020, only around 600 people in England and Wales died with influenza as the direct underlying cause each year. Yet England’s public health agency estimated in 2020 that there were around 15,000 “influenza-attributable deaths” in the 2016-17 season alone. That figure comes from the FluMomo model, which picks out periods with high mortality over a curved seasonal baseline, attributing those deaths to influenza or extreme temperatures. This approach has some weaknesses, including potential overestimation and insufficient corrections for registration delays. In essence, FluMomo tries to estimate how many fewer deaths would occur if flu were eliminated. That just about happened last winter, contributing to a deficit in non-Covid-19 deaths and our continued distancing behaviour means, once again, flu is running at a very low level. That’s currently about the one bit of good news for the NHS. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyRick Yeomans, the Midlands, mobile phone forensics Before I started out in forensics 20 years ago, I served in the military. I was a communications engineer in the army, radios were my domain. After I left, someone suggested I turn to digital forensics. I was a bit of a sceptic at first, but I just didn’t understand what could be done. In my time, I’ve worked in both the private and public sector; within the police and as an independent expert. Nearly everything I do starts with a device – a phone or computer. When prosecuting or defending, I’ll be handed the device usually seized by police officers, or all its data once it has been extracted. I want anything and everything I can get my teeth into, seeking information and clues. I’m looking at all sorts, from the content of messages to locations and metadata. Information comes from Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp… There are call logs and SMS messages, emails, geotags and pictures, too. It’s rare, these days, for any case to not to have digital evidence in play, from terrorism and violent crime, to missing persons and school bullying. It’s no great surprise that data which might be useful can end up deleted. My job is to identify what’s hidden, sometimes starting with backups, whether on the device or online (when it’s legal and authorities have the right to do so). Information is also stored after it’s been removed by a user. There’ll be communication and system logs; thumbnails of images often remain in a database long after the original has been put in the bin. Phones just used to do texts and calls. It’s unrecognisable, really, compared to what they do now. The tools we have at our disposal are good, but we’re constantly playing catchup with the criminal world. The trouble is, even the most basic technology can be used by criminals to their advantage, making my job harder. Much of the information I can glean from mobile devices comes from traces of communication pinging around different corners of the internet. Global criminal networks can avoid this in a very simple way, for instance, by logging into an email account online, writing a message and leaving it in the drafts folder. Someone else can then sign in, read and respond without leaving a trace. That just means I have to work even harder, with data spread across different jurisdictions. I’m certainly careful about how I use my phone and apps, knowing what I do, but I reckon that’s generational. I turned 60 last month, I didn’t grow up sharing my life online. In my line of work, it would seem strange to start. Dr Rosie Everett, the Midlands, forensic ecologist I sit at the interface between forensics and archaeology. I’m an environmental archaeologist who uses minuscule materials found in the natural world as clues, whether to try and solve crimes, or to imagine what landscapes looked like thousands of years ago. Microfossils are my specialism: preserved elements invisible to the naked eye. Specifically, I turn to diatoms – microscopic, single cell algae that grow in wet conditions, from soils to the ocean. Examining them closely at crime scenes and on evidence can help paint a picture, linking both people and objects to places and times. A case often starts with soil: what is it like? Does it have unique properties? Which diatoms are living inside it? There’ll be huge variations, from Scottish highland mulch to urban grit. Once that’s analysed, I look at possible transference – can these diatoms be traced on the suspect’s clothing, personal possessions or a getaway car? There’s endless information hiding in the humble shoe. Usually, these techniques are used to try and solve violent crimes. But I’m also increasingly working on heritage crime, alongside Historic England. People engaging in their own illegal excavations of important archeological sites is a real problem. With little enforcement, much of our history can disappear into thin air. That’s where forensic ecology can help. Take my case from last year involving Beeston Castle, a protected heritage site in Cheshire. In December 2019, five men illegally metal detected in its grounds, taking off with axe heads and other bronze age artefacts. After attempts were made to sell the items, the police got involved. As so often happens, the suspects simply claimed they’d found the haul elsewhere. So, I took soil samples from the castle, and created a profile. Within the axe heads, I found a direct diatom match. Securing convictions from this type of crime is traditionally incredibly hard, but using our techniques, the men were found guilty. My field is still a fairly unknown corner of forensics. Taking evidence to court in a way both judge and jury can understand is often difficult. Generally, people understand the basics of DNA and fingerprints from books, or shows on Netflix. Diatoms? Understandably very few people have a clue. Still, recently, a forensic ecologist has been written into Silent Witness. I’m told she’s based on me. Dr Amoret Whitaker, Winchester, forensic entomologist I studied zoology and always thought I’d end up working with big, cute and furry animals. Somehow, I ended up dedicating my career to the study of fleas and flies. I knew I would the first time I looked at insects through a microscope. Most of us never see them in fine detail, but up close you see how beautiful and fascinating they really are. My PhD was on the decomposition of flesh and what the succession of insects that appear on bodies might tell us. I spent time in Tennessee at the Anthropological Research Facility, otherwise known as the Body Farm. Before I’d even finished writing up my research, I was being called out to do casework. Today, I’m also a lecturer in forensic investigation, too. Blow flies are my focus in forensic work, the little creatures most of us only ever spend time swatting. But in my line of work, they can offer many answers. After death, blow flies are often the first to arrive. The female will lay eggs which hatch into tiny larvae. Then other insects will appear. Deciphering each of these stages can tell us the minimum amount of time since someone died. In the first few days, I can estimate a time of death to within a few hours; I can help rule out whole periods when the death couldn’t have occurred. This helps detectives focus their investigations, calling on all sorts of evidence relevant to that specific time. That’s quite a lot to learn from the humble fly. I chose this path because it seemed interesting. If somebody had told me this would be my career when I was a child, or even 10 years ago, I wouldn’t have believed them. I’m not motivated by putting people behind bars; I just want to find the truth. Yes, my evidence can result in convictions, but what I find may well also indicate innocence as well. Whoever I appear for, I remain totally neutral. I can’t try to support a single theory. I’ll write my analysis, write up a report, and see what’s found. Sometimes I do get affected by what I see. Driving home from a scene, I turn up the radio very loud in the car – the music blasts out, air hits my face with the windows open. It helps me feel alive. Dr Emily Chiang, Birmingham, forensic linguist In forensic linguistics, there’s a tenet we use to describe our work: improving the delivery of justice through language. We’ll look at any criminal or legal context where language is an issue. That means highlighting language barriers in the justice system. It also means catching the bad guys. Authorship analysis is a core part of our work: we try to ascertain who might have written a particular piece of text. A forensic linguist will read the relevant evidence and compare it with known writings of potential suspects. Our job is to ascertain who is most likely to have been responsible for writing it. There are all sorts of characteristics we look for – a basket of potentially useful features. It could be odd spellings, repeatedly used phrases, grammatical constructions. I might tend to say “hi”; where you’d say “hello”. There was an offender on the dark web who was partially identified because he regularly used the unusual greeting “hiyas”. The same goes for all uses of language. A decision, often subconscious, is made with everything we write or say – we call the habitual ones “idiolectal choices”. I’m looking to find the patterns these habits can create, in the hope of identifying authorship. We also do profiling, trying to describe the type of person who might have written something based on these decisions. There are gendered and socio-economic markers, professional and regional ones, too. We look to colloquialisms and influences from other languages. When attempts at extortion are being made – with ransom notes – this can be hugely valuable intelligence. Slang interpretation is becoming an increasingly common area for us, drawing up dictionaries to help juries interpret the meaning of messages later presented as evidence. This can prove integral in proving whether there was intent, or conspiracy to commit a criminal activity. Forensic linguistics has been around in its current form since the 1970s, but it’s the internet presents a whole new arena for us, with potentially vast applications. Anonymity is a real challenge to law enforcement online – you can conceal your face, location, voice… and yet it’s impossible to conceal your language. We also train law enforcement officers who might need to go undercover online, ensuring they’re equipped with the relevant language to sound plausible. This might allow them to infiltrate digital criminal gangs by knowing the relevant lexicon, in turn catching abusers. At times, an officer might also need to jump on to a victim’s device urgently to catch an offender. Helping them communicate believably is key in these “account takeover scenarios”. Of course, criminals have and will catch on. Gloves can be worn to hide fingerprints – no doubt similar attempts will be made online to cover up identifying features of language. It’s no small task and these efforts at subterfuge could well create their own distinctive patterns for us to identify and analyse. It’s all part of the job. Forensic linguistics became a storyline in the final series of Line of Duty. A certain word was repeatedly misspelt, and this offered clues. The exposure was great, but it riled us linguists a little. Officers claimed there was a 95% probability certain messages had been sent by a specific suspect. In real life, we would never claim to be quite so certain. Dr Michelle Miranda, New York, tattoo forensics expert For the most part, I’m a generalist forensic scientist. For much of my career, I’ve taken the crime scene to courtroom approach. That’s a necessity when you work in an NYPD crime lab. You’ve got to use all the traces at your disposal, from fingerprints to the analysis of gunshot residue. I wanted more from my work, so I went back to school to get my doctorate. I left the police, but continued to work through my studies as a medical photographer, and investigator, too. For a while, I even considered a career change into art conservation. I needed to find my own area to explore. While working a job investigating death scenes, there was a case which changed the course of my career. A woman’s body had been found in a park – the only way we could identify her was by a tattoo: a rose, with the name Patricia underneath. Officers used this evidence to help identify the victim. And, sure enough, they secured a conviction for the man who killed her, too. Few people had really considered tattoos in forensics before I started my research properly: not just in using them as a means for identification, but in other ways as well. I’m interested in everything from the chemical makeup of inks, to what can be drawn out from a tattoo’s imagery. The field is very much in its infancy, I’m still assessing the significance of what can be done. Looking at inks themselves is of particular interest to me. If a body is unidentifiable, but a tattoo can be detected, could the ink tell us where or when the body art was done? We have specialist techniques to look at tattoos that have become damaged, infrared photography in particular. The biggest problem I face is that people in the field, from law enforcement to pathologists, don’t even know I exist. Considering tattoos may not even cross their mind. I’d love to see a day where tattoos are considered a key part of investigations. And, obviously, I’d quite like to be that person called to the scene. Dr Mark Spencer, London, forensic botanist My interest in botany predates my living memory. Mum says I’d sit and stare at vegetation as soon as I was old enough to crawl. Alongside people, plants have always been my favourite thing on the planet. I don’t know where it came from, but I was reading degree level textbooks on botany by the age of 10. After completing my PhD, I worked as a habitat surveyor, traipsing around London’s backstreets recording biodiversity and wild plants. Soon, I became a curator at the Natural History Museum. Then one day, out of the blue, I received a phone call: “We’ve got a dead body in a ditch, can you give us a hand?” I jumped on the train, and dived in at the deep end. Sensorially, you just learn on the job. You can’t know if you’ll be able to emotionally and physiologically deal with the experience until you get there. As it happens, I found I could. I help police search for bodies in the natural landscape when there’s a missing person. Often these are cold cases, when someone may have been in situ for years and years. I’m looking for tells in the natural environment of where a body might be. I also get called in once a body is discovered, often helping identify how long the person’s remains may have been there for. The plant life might hold clues as to whether there was a struggle; could someone have made an escape? How the vegetation has grown around the body is full of clues. I also look for trace evidence – fragments of natural materials that could link a suspect to a crime scene or victim. If there’s a body, for instance, I’d make an inventory of all the plants in the area. Later, if we have a suspect or items of evidence, I’ll examine the plant life that might link the two. Botanists often talk about “plant blindness” – how people don’t see vegetation as having a story to tell, but just as lumps of green. I, meanwhile, can look at two identical seeming bushes and draw out distinct details. One might be decades old, another grown rapidly from seed. I can tell if it’s been left to grow, pruned or hacked away at. Observations like these can prove very important. When you’re called into a serious crime scene, you work until you drop. It’s not just the mental efforts that tire me out, but crawling through the mud while it pours with rain. I’m in my mid-50s now; my knees can really hurt. On my last case, I worked 70 hours in six days. When I got home I could barely speak or move. How do I relax? With a glass of wine and an entirely unbelievable zombie film. Murder Most Florid: Inside the Mind of a Forensic Botanist by Mark A Spencer is published by Quadrille, £9.40Another day. Another body under Boris Johnson’s battlebus. Another Tory adviser on the white steps of another Canonbury villa. Another pantomime of regret fabricated from whatever tortured sounds and sad shapes the face can muster. Another bright satellite burning up in Johnson’s doomed orbit. Intended to absorb difficult questions, Allegra Stratton was a five-and-a-half foot human loofah made of chlorinated chicken, 30% full of liquefied facts. Her press secretary role was created in 2020, a firewall between Boris Johnson and the troublesome world of events. This week, for example, she might have shielded him from the unproven suggestion that he had helped to fly 170 asylum-seeking pets out from collapsing Kabul, like the animal-loving politician played by Steve Coogan in the forthcoming Disney+ film Taliban Dolittle. Stratton was even given her own Downing Street press conference hub in which to answer hacks’ pesky queries, at a cost to the taxpayer of £2.6m, a strategy assumed to be more effective than merely hiding the prime minister in a nearby fridge at the first sign of a microphone, a notebook and some semblance of journalistic ability. Bizarrely, the only time the £2.6m speak-space made any impression was this week, a year after its completion, when footage emerged of Stratton on its podium, rehearsing plausible denials of a Covid rule-breaking party in Downing Street last December, and finding the whole thing a wizard wheeze. “Is cheese and wine all right? This is recorded,” she laughs. “This fictional party was a business meeting and it wasn’t socially distanced.” Watching Stratton flail, it’s obvious why her press secretary role was so swiftly canned. Had she been given the job she would have made things even worse. As it happens, she didn’t get the job, and made things even worse anyway, a special kind of genius. Under lockdown, I admit, I went to a party. Or did I? Suddenly I am not so sure. Was it a party after all, or just some people in a place? There was cheese and wine, I think. Does that make it a party? There is cheese in a cheese sandwich and wine in a wine bottle, but that doesn’t mean either is a party. Or does it? Maybe I attended a cheese sandwich? Or climbed into a wine bottle, like a tiny Spanish galleon? Or maybe I went to a business meeting? I met people, certainly, but did I do any business? If there are no people in a room, but there is cheese, does that mean it is a party? Whether it was a party, not a party, a business meeting, a cheese sandwich, or a wine bottle, one thing I am certain of is that the correct procedures were observed. And a man who may have been at the party, or wasn’t if it wasn’t a party after all, will soon be contracted to confirm that. By me. Last month, vaccination checks were at the discretion of venues, and it seemed unlikely that the government would insist on face coverings in theatres. After all, Boris Johnson likes to watch Macbeth mask-free while masked people all around him wonder what he takes away from the tale of an ambitious traitor and his manipulative wife. But by Wednesday night, a massive dead cat was required to distract from a day of denied parties and prioritised pets, so Johnson banged plan B on the kitchen table, alienating backbench Covid sceptics. Given the irrefutable evidence of Boris Johnson’s government’s corruption and callousness, how can those few Tory MPs that appear to have a conscience, such as the new intake that voted against their leader’s attempt to spare Owen Paterson, remain in the disgusting party? They should retire from politics, or join the Liberal Democrats, which is essentially the same thing. Even given everything that has happened this week, there are many diehard Tories, clinging to an inflatable bendy banana marked “Get Brexit Done”, who will still want to vote for the party despite its utter rottenness. After all what’s the alternative? A blandly competent Labour party notably not hell-bent on asset-stripping the country’s infrastructure to line their own pockets? That simply won’t do! But the Tory faithful will require a blood sacrifice to convince them their concerns are being addressed. And maybe this time some doorstep weeping and a symbolic sacking of soon-to-be-forgotten Foreign Office Sirs will not be enough. Fate has handed us the perfect votive offering to assuage Tory anger: Pen Farthing’s Afghan animals. Farthing’s innocent 170 refugee dogs and evacu-cats are now permanently branded by association with Tory negligence and Boris Johnson’s lies, even though the intervention by Johnson’s own personal parliamentary private secretary on the poor beasts’ behalf isn’t definitive evidence of his guilt. But on the corner of Hyde Park, where once stood the bloody tree of Tyburn, let us pile a pyre of faggots. Let banks of seating be laid upon the lush slopes of the magnificent Marble Arch Mound. Newly relieved of her latest government role, Allegra Stratton serves party cheese and party wine as Boris Johnson, and other chief actors in the cavalcade of contempt for the lonely Covid dead of lockdown, take their seats, to watch through their onion tears. Then the lie-stained animals are burned en masse, all 170 of them, on a bonfire lit with flamboyant regret by a vindicated Ant and Dec. And let the smoke from the smouldering bodies be visible, yea, even from the hills of Gog Magog, and serve as a ritual purification of Conservative-soiled Albion, in this valley of dying stars, in this hollow valley, this broken jaw of our lost kingdom. Dates from Stewart’s 2020 tour rescheduled to 2022 are on sale now. He also appears with director Michael Cumming at live screenings of King Rocker, their documentary about Birmingham’s post-punk survivors the Nightingales, at Dalston Rio on 16 December and the Midland Arts Centre on 18 DecemberI met Sean at a gig where we were both performing in the late 80s and we immediately hit it off. We shared a similar sense of humour, and also a sense of outsider status which gave us an added spur to succeed but with a determination to have fun while doing it. The fact that we were able to make people laugh, and make a living from it, felt like we were on a wild adventure that we didn’t want to end. Sean’s early gigs in clubs where he was learning the craft were often rowdy affairs where he honed his skill at dealing with the odd drunk heckler, which developed over the years into an effortless ability to riff on whatever subject came up. In 1993 we took a show to the Edinburgh fringe, which featured a sketch where I hid as “a pie” in a dessert trolley – my head poking through a hole in some plywood, garnished with lettuce – which Sean pushed on to the stage, offering the audience a slice of “pie… fresh off the head”. Filming with Harry Hill, we took the whole caboodle out on to the streets of Edinburgh, where we fell foul of a pub landlady who thought we were trying to sell pie outside her pub. The following year we wrote a show called Rock, where Sean played a faithful roadie to my old rocker character trying to make a comeback. We had a custom smoked-glass stretch shopping trolley made (our shows always seemed to feature trolleys), in which Sean wheeled my character around. The show ended up touring around the country, culminating with a slot on the comedy stage at the Glastonbury festival. Sean would bemoan the fact that he didn’t play an instrument, but for that particular performance he threw himself into learning the bongos. For the same show, we wrote a prog-rock pastiche, The Leg of Time, during which Sean danced around me holding a fake leg with a clock gaffer-taped to it – production levels were quite basic in those days. For all the low-budget larkiness, there was a lot of good writing in Rock and it garnered some favourable reviews, which I think Sean really appreciated. His talent for comic writing really hit its stride in Fifteen Minutes of Misery, a series of shows he wrote and starred in for BBC Radio 4. Its success led to the making of 15 Storeys High, a sitcom he wrote for BBC TV. Sean played a downbeat swimming pool attendant, Vince, who lived in a tower block and was convinced his neighbours were up to all sorts of strange behaviour. It was brilliantly, darkly funny and gave full rein to Sean’s finely tuned ear for absurd dialogue, for his comic invention and well-wrought scripts. During the 90s Sean’s comedy career went from strength to strength, culminating in him winning best live comic at the British Comedy Awards in 2000. We both put in a lot of miles getting to gigs during this time, our friendship forged over many late-night stops in motorway service stations. Sean had that rare knack of truly great comics to be able to take audiences with him on ever more tortuous and often quite dark routes, yet such was the warmth of his personality and easy manner that crowds happily followed along, and his reputation grew. When he took on the job of team captain on 8 Out of 10 Cats for Channel 4, it brought his comedy to a huge audience, and led to him being loved by millions. Sean was a superb writer of comedy, a clever and rigorous practitioner of the art, who saw it as something to be crafted, to be treated almost like poetry. His standup sets were delirious, dizzying journeys down endless rabbit holes, that left you helpless with laughter. Away from the world of TV and entertainment, he was a dedicated and loving family man. He was a great host, an excellent cook, and was never happier than pottering around in the kitchen preparing a fish stew, while dancing to dub reggae. He was a great organiser of events and people generally; family holidays with Sean were always well planned, and always involved his love of good food and a decent bottle of wine. He was as funny off stage as on. I will remember a kind, generous and loyal friend who I loved dearly, and feel a great sadness at his loss. He leaves a wife, Anoushka, and their three children, his sister Kate and his brothers Paul and Pete. And he leaves us all a wonderful comic legacy and – for me and those lucky enough to have known him – some cherished memories and unforgettable nights of laughter.Drug addicts should be allowed to use illicit substances in “supervised injecting facilities” with medical staff on hand to ensure no one dies, health groups are urging ministers. Senior doctors, public health specialists, drug experts and health charities want the government to approve trials of “overdose prevention centres” (OPCs) to cut Britain’s soaring toll of drug deaths. Supporters of the idea say that while letting users consume hard drugs in safe places, watched over by nurses and doctors, is controversial, it reduces fatalities and drug-related crime. Scores of organisations and individuals working in the health and drug fields have signed a statement co-ordinated by the Faculty of Public Health (FPH) calling on ministers to permit the creation of some centres in order to save lives. Drug-related deaths hit a new record of 5,900 in Britain last year. There were 4,561 in England and Wales. Almost half of such poisonings involved opiates, including heroin, and 777 deaths involved cocaine. “Urgent action is needed to tackle the spiralling rates of drug deaths across the UK. Drug deaths are avoidable and it is unacceptable that we see evidence-based actions to prevent harm such as OPCs go unutilised in the UK,” the statement says. “OPCs are healthcare facilities where individuals consume their own drugs supervised by trained staff who can intervene if they overdose.” Signatories include the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges, the Association of Directors of Public Health, charities such as the Hepatitis C Trust and National Aids Trust, and the drug reform campaign group Transform. Professor Maggie Rae, the president of the FPH, said the 6,000 deaths “are lives we can save”, adding: “As health and care professionals, we are guided by the imperative of protecting health and saving lives, and nothing else. Government has a moral duty to take all steps possible to protect health; and to ignore this call and the clear evidence in support of OPCs as a life-saving measure is to accept the continued loss of thousands of lives across the UK.” Drug consumption rooms have been used in many European countries since the emergence of Aids in the 1980s as a way of reducing diseases associated with drug use. The Netherlands has a network of several dozen, Germany has more than 20 and there are others in Spain, Denmark and Switzerland. At most centres, staff give addicts needles to reduce infection risk, offer counselling, encourage users to seek treatment and step in if someone overdoses. The all-party parliamentary group for drug policy reform, a cross-party group of MPs and peers, has also backed the statement. Its chair, the Conservative MP Crispin Blunt, said: “The international evidence is overwhelming that public health and public safety are advanced by the existence of these overdose prevention centres. “There’s a significant reduction in the number of drug deaths, more people become engaged with drug treatment, crime falls, drug problems in an area become less visible – for example, there are fewer needles lying around – and the lives of users and people who live and work in areas that were previously plagued with the consequences of drug abuse are significantly improved.” However, the government made clear it would not permit even a trial of the facilities. “We have no plans to introduce drug consumption rooms and anyone running them would be committing a range of offences, including possession of a controlled drug,” a spokesperson said. They pointed to the 10-year drugs strategy launched last week, which includes a commitment to put £780m into improving access to treatment. Last year, drug worker Peter Krykant established the first drug consumption facility in an ambulance in Glasgow. However, he lost his job and was cautioned by the police as a result of setting up the service. The experience, together with trying to help other traumatised drug users sent him back into drug-taking after 11 years. He has since recovered and remains determined to help addicts, but says “it was easier to get support 20 years ago in Scotland than it is now”.Julianna Peña pulled off one of the biggest upsets in mixed martial arts history to score a second-round submission win over Amanda Nunes and win the UFC bantamweight title at UFC 269 on Saturday. Peña looked to be in trouble in the first round of the Las Vegas co-main event against one of the most dominant champions the sport has ever seen. The 32-year-old American came storming back in round two, though, rocking the pre-fight favourite with combinations and pouring on flurries of punches. Nunes, whose record includes wins over Ronda Rousey, Valentina Shevchenko and Cris Cyborg, looked in trouble before the fight went to the mat, and her five-year reign as champion came to an end at the 3:23 mark. Nunes tapped out of the second round as Peña sank in a rear naked choke, handing the Brazilian her first defeat since September 2014. “I told you, don’t ever doubt me again. Willpower, strength and determination will take you places,” Peña said in a post-fight interview. “You literally have the ability to do anything you want in this life, and I just proved that tonight.” “Amanda has been such a great champion, and she’s done a ton for the sport,” Peña added after ending her opponent’s 12-fight winning streak. “For me to be able to take out arguably the greatest of all time is something that’s still sinking in right now.” In the later main event, Charles Oliveira retained his lightweight title, submitting Dustin Poirier with a standing choke early in the third round of a thrilling battle. Former interim champion Poirier, who scored a pair of wins over Conor McGregor earlier this year to earn the title shot, landed some heavy left hands and downed Oliveira as he won the first round. Oliveira got Poirier on his back early in the second, landing thunderous elbows before securing victory in the next round. “We respect each other a lot,” Oliveira said through a translator. “But I was going to have my arm raised, and that’s what happened. I want to make history. I want to leave a legacy, and I plan to show people that I can.”Priti Patel’s much-trumpeted scheme to allow Afghans to resettle in Britain has been starved of “appropriate resources”, according to officials, as a former senior diplomat voices fears that the UK government appears intent to let the initiative wither away before it has even started. The Afghan Citizens Resettlement Scheme (ACRS) was announced to great fanfare in August as the Taliban took Kabul, but four months on it has still not started. A senior Whitehall source with intimate knowledge of the scheme said it had been delayed because it had not received adequate support for it to launch. Adam Thomson, a former Foreign Office director for Afghanistan, said that, based on his experience, it appeared evident that the scheme to resettle vulnerable Afghans had been a cynical show of political opportunism that was now destined to fail. “It looks like a politically expedient announcement. With the media focus having gone elsewhere, the government has lost political will, lost focus and lost implementation. “It’s a tried and tested technique. You announce something, you look good. Then somehow circumstances prevent you from actually achieving your targets,” said Thomson, who is also a former UK ambassador to Pakistan and Nato”. Since the announcement of the resettlement scheme on 18 August more than 100 days have passed with no apparent tangible progress. Its website has not been updated since 13 September and confirms the programme “is not yet open”. Last night, however, the government issued a statement saying it was committed to the initiative and that the ACRS was “one of the most generous schemes in our country’s history”. Without offering a timeframe, it promised “more details soon” on a scheme which was promoted by ministers as a programme to help women, children and religious minorities at risk of Taliban reprisals. Similar disquiet also surrounds the resources and effectiveness of another government relocation scheme involving Afghanistan – the Afghan Relocations and Assistance Policy (Arap). On Friday, a parliamentary answer revealed that just 84 officials have been assigned to Arap, which was launched in April and conceived to resettle people who worked for the UK in Afghanistan. The same parliamentary response confirmed it had so far received more than 90,000 applications, with more arriving each day – a caseload that suggests each official is dealing with or has processed more than 1,000 applications. When the Home Office was asked how many officials had been assigned to the resettlement scheme, it would not provide a figure. Similarly, no indication of resources relating to the scheme has been provided, although a Whitehall source said if they had wanted to get the scheme up and running quickly they could have recruited volunteers from the civil service. The Whitehall source, who has knowledge of the ACRS, said: “The resettlement scheme was a ticket for people to rebuild their life but it’s just not been resourced appropriately.” Thomson added: “As far as I can tell there’s no cross-Whitehall coordination mechanism that brings together FCDO [the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office], the Home Office and the MoD to actually make sense of Arap and launch ACRS.” A spokesperson for Adam Smith International (ASI), which delivered UK government aid programmes in Afghanistan between 2002 and 2018, said the failure to open the resettlement scheme had compounded eligibility issues with regard to Arap and had left hundreds in grave danger. “Almost none of our former staff have had any update or information about their applications since the evacuation finished. The ACRS scheme is not yet open. This has left hundreds of our staff from UK projects in a desperate situation in Kabul, without hope and without information,” they said. Only about 20 of ASI’s former staff out of more than 230 who applied for resettlement via the Arap scheme have so far been given the chance to relocate to the UK. The government said: “ACRS is one of the most generous schemes in our country’s history and will give up to 20,000 further people at risk a new life in the UK. We are working across government and with partners such as UNHCR [the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees] to design and open the scheme amidst a complex and changing picture. We are committed to working in step with the international community to get this right.”Do years in school make you smarter or do smarter people just stay at school for longer? There’s a strong correlation between our IQ scores and the time we spend in education, so consistent with either possibility. But the implications for education policies are different: if education raises our intelligence we should want more of it than if it just gives us specific skills or knowledge. Research can help answer this puzzle, using experiments to see if extra schooling really does boost cognitive abilities. A great paper pulls together results from 28 studies that did just that. Some papers show how progress varies by years of education, while others investigated the effect of lengthening compulsory schooling in Norway in the 1960s, via tests on young men entering the military. We consistently see that longer education does raise our cognitive abilities: a person’s IQ gains one to five points for each additional year of education. The evidence also suggests these effects aren’t just flashes in the pan: they last throughout our lives. So yes, you might be born with your brain but it needs training to get to its full potential. The welcome conclusion is that our basic cognitive abilities aren’t set in stone by the luck of birth. The more immediately important one, as Covid-related restrictions return, is that ensuring kids don’t miss out on any more education should be a top priority. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgIs Bryony Lavery Philip Pullman’s daemon? Her adaptation of La Belle Sauvage goes to the heart of the first volume of Pullman’s Book of Dust trilogy and, daemon-like, expresses its essence. Clear and swift, it brings an extra bounce of humour to the tangle of speculation and saltiness that makes the novel at once provoking and compelling. “How do you know about the uncertainty principle?” “I live in a pub.” This is only one of the ways in which Nicholas Hytner’s exciting production (co-directed with Emily Burns and James Cousins) gets things right. Pullman’s novel, set before His Dark Materials, with Lyra as a baby being protected by potboy and potgirl Malcolm and Alice, swims between the familiar and the fantastic: it is a rush of climate catastrophe, adventure, alethiometers, Oxford cityscapes, pubescent stirrings and the repressions imposed by an ironclad Christian regime. Its layers, and its twisting between the antique and the futuristic, are suggested here in Paul Arditti’s delicately thrumming sound design and by Luke Halls’s videos and Jon Clark’s lighting, which swirl over and transform Bob Crowley’s sets: placid-looking woodcut scenery seems to splinter and break apart as a great flood (the Bible is never far from Pullman’s agnostic mind) rushes across the stage. Among the speed there is inwardness. The crucial daemons, designed and directed by Barnaby Dixon, are more intimate than spectacular: a lemur coiled round a neck, a snake uncurling across the stage, our hero’s companion shifting (how?) from kingfisher to cat in full view of the audience. Mostly white and mostly small – those belonging to nuns can perch in their wimples – they light up the stage like paper lanterns, though the villain’s nasty snickering hyena flaps on huge and unhinged, like a half-finished craft project. It is an evening of uniformly strong performances. Ella Dacres is bewitching as Alice, graceful, cross and capable. The baddies are persuasively seductive: Ayesha Dharker silky and insinuating – in stilettos that are beginning to look like a shorthand for villainess – and Pip Carter nonchalantly predatory. Crucially, Samuel Creasey makes an astonishing stage debut as the teenage hero: clever and awkward, blurting out his knowledge like a policeman issuing cautions; uningratiating but finally disarming. He is completely truthful: the acting discovery of the year. Days before La Belle Sauvage opened, another puppet-friendly, theologically driven stage adaptation finally reached London. Lolita Chakrabarti’s version of Yann Martel’s Life of Pi, first seen in Sheffield in 2019, had its southward journey delayed by Covid. Now the stalls of Wyndham’s have been especially reconfigured to hold Max Webster’s fine production. Barack Obama congratulated Martel on producing “an elegant proof of God, and the power of storytelling”. The Canadian writer’s tale of life cast away at sea – with beasts and harsh conditions – may be read as fable or fantasy or derring-do tale, but certainly as a celebration of vitality. Early – on both page and stage – is a warning against being sentimental about animals. Stop as soon as you want to cuddle or pat is the message taught to the small boy hero by his zookeeper father, who feeds a much-loved small goat to a Bengal tiger whose name is Richard Parker. The instruction is too spelled out in some clumsy dialogue, but is given force in the puppet animals. These are the marvellous motor of the evening, from the moment Tim Hatley’s plain, bleached set breaks open to show a giraffe rubbernecking through the window of a hospital ward. These creatures – designed by Finn Caldwell with Nick Barnes – have rough edges, an almost provisional look, as if made from driftwood, while seeming infinitely elastic; Caldwell is also the movement director. Manipulated onstage by puppeteers, they move rapidly and fluidly, yet have no soft edges. They are not pets. That adored goat – called Buckingham – is bristling and sprightly; the mighty tiger who kills him ripples along with utter smoothness – somehow conveying an exceptional silence – yet you see also the angular planes of his shoulder blades as he prowls. There is no sweetness, simply accuracy, in the way a rat scuds across a boat and a turtle claws through the waves with cumbersomely arranged limbs. Hiran Abeysekera is the hero and the heart of the action. Quick-eyed, quick-limbed, quick-voiced, he fulfils all the promise he showed in Peter Brook’s The Prisoner three years ago. He is Pi squared. Measure for Measure is a continually startling Shakespeare offering: a play that sends you scurrying to the text to see if a director has added something to underline contemporary relevance. The central encounter – in which Angelo, a temporary ruler and a man of apparently impeccable rectitude, tries to blackmail the novitiate Isabella into bed – has always produced shudders; in a post #MeToo audience it draws gasps: “To whom should I complain? Did I tell this, who would believe me?” Yet at the opening of Blanche McIntyre’s stimulating production, the focus of recognition had shifted again. Angelo has just introduced draconian measures to enforce chastity on his fellow citizens. One rule for him, one for the rest of the country. A disturbing sense of familiarity crept over the stalls. McIntyre has set the play in 1975, regarding this as a time of both social dishevelment and a residual Christian ethos. It’s a switch that gives the evening a cool conviction. The central exchange between Georgia Landers’s full-throated Isabella and Ashley Zhangazha’s laxly entitled Angelo is strong. Unusual doublings-up emphasise the play’s dual morality: Ishia Bennison snarls as a convict and is authoritative as an official. The musical-voiced Eloise Secker is a cool pimp – smoking, handing out her calling card to an audience member – but also plays two of the women who are themselves in effect pimped. Most strikingly, Hattie Ladbury plays the Duke, ambiguous in every way: got up in a headscarf and trenchcoat like a Sloane, but blending easily into her disguise as a priest; commanding, clarion-voiced yet self-doubting. She glides quizzically through a play that begins to look like the Duke’s Dilemma: how did things come to be so unravelled? It is easy to think of the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse as a kind of pomander theatre, sticking any play with its spicy fragrance. In no other space is an audience so warmly enclosed, more swiftly charmed – and as a result more quickly alarmed. In McIntyre’s hands it becomes something different: a structural device rather than an atmospheric enclosure. A working machine. The Duke climbs to the gallery to hide while observing the action beneath. Candelabras are lowered to wrap around a speaker during a soliloquy. Oh – and it’s the 70s: the lighting goes off to signal power cuts. Star ratings (out of five) The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage ★★★★ Life of Pi ★★★★ Measure for Measure ★★★★ The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage is at the Bridge, London, until 26 February Life of Pi is at Wyndham’s, London, until 27 February Measure for Measure is at the Sam Wanamaker playhouse until 15 JanThere is no right way to fire someone, but there is a wrong way to fire 900 people. On Wednesday 1 December, Vishal Garg, the chief executive of Better, an American mortgage provider, convened a Zoom meeting of 900 employees. We don’t know what they expected. Perhaps a Christmas quiz. It wasn’t to be. “I come to you with not great news,” Garg began. “I do not want to do this. The last time I did it, I cried. This time I hope to be stronger.” Everyone was rooting for him. “If you’re on this call,” he continued, “you are part of the unlucky group being laid off. Your employment here is terminated, effective immediately.” Merry Christmas. Don’t let the laptop screen hit your hand on the way down. Garg’s brave message didn’t wash. Employees described the experience as “surreal”. Some found it at odds with Better’s mission statement, which claims “we’re using technology to make [home-ownership] faster and more efficient, and humans to help make it friendly and enjoyable.” Garg was forced to apologise almost at once. “I failed to show the appropriate amount of respect and appreciation for the individuals who were affected and for their contributions to Better,” he said. “I own the decision to do the layoffs but in communicating it I blundered the execution.” Oh well. Third time’s a charm. The main thing is to learn from your mistakes. Garg will know better the next time he has to fire 900 people. Sadly, such a situation is unlikely to arise soon. The apology wasn’t enough. On Friday it was announced that Garg, too, would be taking an extended period of time off, effective immediately. You have to feel for the man. He thought he was doing the honourable thing, especially in light of later reports in which he accused the employees of stealing from the company and only working two hours a day. Firing 900 people online in the privacy of your own company is one thing, but having the story leaked to the media is the kind of thing that could damage a corporate reputation. A mass Zoom sacking is all well and good, but it cannot replicate the intimacy of being sacked by Zoom one on one. But those quick to judge Garg, presumably including the 900 people he fired, should ask themselves how they would have handled it. This ill-conceived event might seem to be evidence we are living in a techno-dystopia, but in fact it is a touching throwback to basic managerial incompetence. It’s not easy, firing 900 people over Zoom. It is difficult enough to look one person in the eye, in person, and tell them their services are no longer needed. The management consultancy industry is based on the fact that only psychopaths enjoy these kinds of difficult conversations. The 2009 film Up in the Air had a comparable premise, which was that if you have to be fired by someone, it might as well be George Clooney. Automation can’t come soon enough. We all like to think that if we found ourselves in such a situation, we would be compassionate and reasonable. Yet whenever technology permits, we embrace laziness and cowardice. Anyone born after 1990 would rather text or email than make a phone call. Why would you speak to someone at the till when the robot checkout is ready and waiting? You might have thought you wanted a flying car, but in reality you crave someone to explain to your husband that he is loading the dishwasher the wrong way. HR is an epicentre of difficult conversations: you’re fired, you’re hired, you’re being rationalised. Technology is rushing to do what humans would rather not, if it’s all the same to you. A sacking robot does not yet exist, but you can bet that engineers are working hard on the prototype. It isn’t only on Zoom, with its possibilities for panopticon whacking, that the changes are being felt. The technology works both ways. If you feel you are being treated like a robot, you are more likely to respond in kind. Applicants to investment banks are learning to hide keywords in the meta-text of their cover letters, to fool the robotic scrapers into giving them an interview. These institutions have also experienced a rush of bisexual applicants: it’s more likely to get you an interview, and it’s hard to disprove. Some interviews are being replaced by robot questioners, with the footage reviewed after the fact. The true purpose of the metaverse is to obviate tricky chats. Soon a robot will post the advertisement, conduct the recruitment process, hire you, manage your grievances and, in time, sack you. You might wonder why you’re still working at all, but the robot will have a charming answer for that, even if Mr Garg doesn’t.Boris Johnson appears to have broken Covid laws, Keir Starmer has said after a picture emerged of the prime minister hosting a quiz for Downing Street staff last Christmas. The Labour leader, who is also a former director of public prosecutions, said it was a “very serious” revelation and “hard to see” how Johnson’s attendance in a room with aides pictured wearing tinsel and a Santa hat was “compliant with the rules”. However, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, dismissed the leaked photo, suggesting he thought it showed the reports of parties held in No 10 in defiance of lockdown and tier restrictions were overhyped. Not all Tory MPs were convinced, though. Steve Baker, a senior Conservative backbencher, said despite assurances from Johnson that no social gatherings were held last year by senior government advisers, it was “pretty obvious now that hasn’t happened”. Amid waning support from Tory MPs and in public opinion polls, the image that will put further pressure on Johnson shows him sitting with staff while not social distancing on 15 December 2020. According to the Sunday Mirror, he joined the quiz halfway through and hosted one of the rounds, thanking staff for their work during the pandemic. While Johnson presented the quiz virtually, No 10 staff reportedly huddled around computers to confer on answers and drank wine and beer. London was in tier 2 at the time, meaning that while working together was permitted, mixing between households for social reasons was banned, including Christmas events. Asked if he thought Johnson had broken the law, Starmer told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show: “It looks as though he was. He must have known that other groups were in other rooms in his own building. “This is very important because he has damaged his authority. He is now so weak, his party is so divided – he can’t deliver the leadership this country needs. “We’ve got a very important vote coming up next week and he can’t even discharge the basic functions of government. He is the worst possible leader at the worst possible time.” Zahawi said Starmer was wrong and accused him of “being political” in his criticism of the prime minister. The education secretary said reported parties in Downing Street and the Department for Education last Christmas would “quite rightly” be investigated by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case. But he added: “My email box is full of people thinking that he was sort of at parties with guests and all sorts of things happening. Actually, they can now make their mind up when they see this picture of the prime minister on a virtual screen, on a Zoom call thanking his team, who are in the building because they have to respond to a national emergency.” But Baker, who is relaunching the pressure group Conservative Way Forward in the new year, said the government needed to comply with both the letter and spirit of the restrictions politicians had imposed on the public. He accused ministers of “creating a miserable dystopia” and warned the Conservatives would “continue to drift into authoritarianism” if further curbs were announced in the run-up to this Christmas.Theatres face a peak Christmas season with bookings down by as much as 50%, while restaurants and other attractions could see mass cancellations, as a result of the government’s new Covid restrictions. The Society of Independent Theatres said regional and smaller theatres would be especially hard hit by “plan B” government restrictions and concerns over the Omicron variant during a period when they generate about a third of their income. High street retailers are also braced for customers to seek protection from the spread of the virus by shopping online for Christmas presents, hitting revenues and plunging many into losses. Official figures on Friday showed economic growth almost stalled in November and several forecasters said the UK was heading into 2022 in a weakened position. Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “It is like Groundhog Day for many businesses. There is going to be downward pressure on consumer confidence and that is going to hit sales. It means the economy is unlikely to grow at all in the last three months of the year and be very weak in the first half of next year.” Business leaders have called on the government to extend VAT relief and reductions in business rates, while the TUC said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, should bring back the furlough scheme and increase sick pay to prevent businesses from going bust. Sunak is known to be watching how businesses cope with restrictions before committing himself to an increase in spending, though a shift to more stringent measures over the next couple of weeks is likely to force his hand. Many business owners have seen revenues hit by rising inflation, a lack of trained staff and falling consumer confidence. Some hospitality firms, especially in London, have resorted to paying signing-on fees for staff, only to be hit later by large numbers of cancellations. Heathrow said passenger numbers were 60% lower in November than before the pandemic and there were “high cancellations” among business travellers concerned about being trapped overseas for Christmas as Omicron spreads. Theatres now have to ask visitors to wear masks but do not have to check for Covid-19 tests or vaccine passports. However, some large venues are already doing so. Jon Gilchrist, executive director of events venue Home in Manchester, said: “More and more venues will move towards a Covid pass system and are set up to do that to further reassure audiences that theatres are a safe environment.” John Plews, chair of the Society of Independent Theatres and artistic director at the Gatehouse in north London, said that even some small theatres were considering asking attendees for a proof of vaccine or a test, although it would be too costly for many. He said the society’s members had seen bookings for Christmas shows hit by between 20% and 50% already because of concern about the Omicron variant and because bigger venues were heavily discounting tickets in order to fill seats. “Passports mean employing extra front-of-house staff,” he said. Gilchrist said the government’s advice to work from home could have an impact on venues, particularly those in central London. But he said bookings currently remained “encouraging” and there was “room for optimism that we can have a good Christmas in the sector”. Jon Morgan, director of government-funded advisory body the Theatres Trust, said: “Over time, working from home means there will be a reluctance to go into town to see a show. It is a nerve-racking time for the industry.” Philip Miller, boss of Adventure Island and Sealife Adventure on Southend seafront, said bookings to see Santa were down by 50%. He said: “It’s like a graveyard. I’m talking to staff about them going home.” “The chancellor is going to have to do something. Hospitality was just getting back on its feet, but if this situation goes on many firms are going to go under.” Flair Gougoulia, owner of a Greek restaurant in Stratford-upon-Avon, said: “These are scary times. Stratford survives on 5-6 million visitors a year from China, America and the rest of Europe and the town was on its knees after Covid hit. “Christmas party bookings are down by up to a half on some days and the situation does not look like improving. Businesses were relying on a good December. What’s happening now is a kick in the teeth.”In an era of environmental awareness and conspicuous displays of sustainability, you might not expect a rise in the number of people with the means and appetite for a £50m floating fortress of solitude. But, in part because of the coronavirus crisis, the superyacht industry is booming – and the number of vessels under construction or on order worldwide has hit a new record. According to figures revealed in the latest edition of Boat International’s Global Order Book, more than 1,200 superyachts are slated to be built – a rise of 25% on last year. “The market’s never been busier,” said Will Christie, a superyacht broker. “And I’ve been in the industry 20 years. A lot of people say they appreciate the safety of being on a yacht during the pandemic. But it’s also because whereas in previous eras the people with enough money were too busy in the office to justify the purchase, these days they can work from anywhere. “I had one client who sent his trading terminals by plane so he could use them onboard – he’d be kitesurfing in the afternoon and then go back to his desk.” Christie said shipyard order books were typically full until 2025 – meaning clients are prepared to pay a premium to take over someone else’s slot if it can be delivered years earlier. He argued that the ability to transport a holiday home to a different location at a moment’s notice was deeply appealing. “Everybody just wants freedom, and ultra-high-net-worth individuals can afford it,” he added. “The ability to escape anywhere is very attractive in the current climate. They think: I don’t need to be stuck in the office, and if you’re worth billions, why should you be?” Critics of the boom in superyachts point to the vastly disproportionate environmental damage produced by the super-rich. “Whether it’s this or private jets or trips to space, they’re just sticking two fingers up at the rest of society,” said Peter Newell, a professor of international relations at Sussex University. “It’s decadent. They’re not comfortable with the constraints that come with accepting collective responsibility for the fate of the planet.” Newell, the lead author of a Rapid Transition Alliance report which called for policymakers to target the “polluter elite” to limit their carbon consumption, said industry claims of moves to a more sustainable model were unconvincing. He called for government action. “You can’t just rely on people’s empathy – it has to be tax and regulation,” he said. “But it is very, very hard with a mobile elite that can move its money and its property around.” Of the 1,200 superyachts on order or under construction, 27 would be more than 100 metres long, the Global Order Book said. The REV Ocean, being built by the Norwegian billionaire Kjell Inge Røkke, will measure 183 metres, making it the biggest in the world. It features a “moon pool” through which a submarine will be deployed for ocean research. Some of the more eye-watering features of existing superyachts include helicopter landing pads, open-air cinemas, and – in the case of the UFC fighter Conor McGregor – a “jousting platform”. The economic anthropologist Richard Wilk, a distinguished professor at Indiana University in the US, said: “Of course, if you add every superyacht together, it’s just a blip on total greenhouse gas production. But it is symbolic – and the global impact of the 2,000-odd billionaires on the planet are very significant. So it’s part of a pattern of overconsumption by the upper crust.” In research with his colleague Beatriz Barros, he found that the average billionaire had a carbon footprint thousands of times that of the average person. The global average footprint of CO2 emitted per person is just under five tonnes, while they estimated that Roman Abramovich – the top polluter according to their list – was responsible for about 33,859 tonnes of carbon emitted in 2018. More than two-thirds of that was the product of his yacht, the 162.5-metre Eclipse. As well as fuel when the vessel is in use, Wilk said, “even when [the owners] are not onboard, they usually have a substantial permanent crew there, using all kinds of relatively inefficient systems. They might call the captain and ask him to take the yacht from the Mediterranean to the Caribbean to meet them. So you can greenwash it, but it doesn’t make much difference.” Sympathy for superyacht owners may not have been enhanced by a recent intervention from Australia’s richest woman, the mining magnate Gina Rinehart. In a video recorded from the deck of her own vessel in front of an emerald sea, she complained that there were not enough spaces to dock superyachts in Queensland. “For instance, we’ve just experienced days of very rough water from the southern Queensland border to the Capricorn Coast,” she said. “Then, when we arrived at the coast not feeling that great after two very rough sleepless nights and a rough day, many yachts were outside the marinas, given the lack of marinas.” Queensland might suffer because overseas superyacht owners would be less likely to visit, she added. “‘These superyachts need marinas too – sadly lacking for vessels over 50 metres. It’s time for more marinas large enough to cater not only for small and medium yachts but larger ones too.”Your typical new block of flats is something like this: corridors and lobbies, often windowless, lead to flats where everything is the minimum required by regulations. There is little wit or thought in the layout or pleasure in individual spaces – just the pursuit of the shortest route to squeezing in the maximum possible accommodation – nor in the stuff of which the building is made. The external walls, whether finished in skinny brickwork or some other cladding material, have a just-stuck-together feeling. There is no sense of substance, just an expedient assemblage of building products, which, if you tap them, will probably sound dull and hollow. You have to trust that these outcomes of opaque technical and regulatory procedures won’t burn or leak or fall off, but you have no particular reason to do so. A House for Artists in Barking, east London, designed by the young architectural practice Apparata, sets out to be the opposite. The journey from street to home is by external stairs and balconies that give you fresh air and views and a sense of space and of connection to the neighbourhood. There is enough space for residents to inhabit balconies with plants and personal objects while still leaving room for circulation. Ceilings are high and the walls to the apartments are mostly glass, which allows light to flood in. Large windows and doors can be folded open in good weather, such that inside and outside spaces flow into each other. There are no lobbies or corridors inside the block’s 12 flats, most of them two-bedroomed, which increases their sense of space. There is some flexibility in their layout, with the possibility of relocating the kitchen and adding or removing a bedroom to accommodate children arriving or growing or moving out, or an elderly relative coming to live. The idea, says Astrid Smitham of Apparata, is to reflect “the diverse configuration of people’s lives today”. Little is wasted. If something is needed for functional reasons, such as a route for escaping from fire, it is also taken as an opportunity for enjoyment. The structure is solid concrete, whose slightly shiny coating stops it streaking in the rain, and whose cement content is reduced with the help of alternative materials, so as to minimise its carbon footprint. It is reassuringly substantial. You can see and feel the weight of the building. The ceilings of the flats are in exposed concrete, too, which helps you know that you are in something built by human beings, out of materials that have a physical presence. This unusual block of flats comes from unusual origins. It is, as the name suggests, for artists, the result of a six-year effort by the arts organisation Create London to provide affordable rented housing, at 65% of the market rate, for creative people. It has been realised in collaboration with the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham. Grayson Perry lent his support, as an “advocate and sounding board”. The aim of the project is not only to provide affordable housing for cash-strapped creatives – whose skills run from printmaking to photography to video art – but also to contribute something to the neighbourhood, to harness a little of artists’ well-known ability to bring a bit of life to a place. The ground floor is a glass-walled community space, where artists can make and exhibit their work, or hold adult education classes or parties or indeed anything that might contribute to the life of the area. (The well-lit flats are also good places to work, but tenants don’t get individual studio spaces.) Nor are the flats conceived only as isolated residential units, but also as parts of the community of the whole block. Residents will be encouraged to take responsibility for its management. On one floor there are double doors in the party walls between flats, soundproofed when closed, which can be opened up to join living rooms into one big collective space. The arrangement of the block, with three flats on each of the four floors above ground level, reached by those shared balconies, encourages communication between the flats. A House for Artists is a work of simple pleasures and straightforward good things. Its design is based on a smart interpretation of the regulations concerning escape from fire; by providing external balconies on both sides of the block, it does away with the need for internal corridors. It also has architectural intelligence. There’s thought in the placing of the joints in the concrete, such that they help create an illusion that the building is made of large masonry blocks, which reinforces the impression of strength. It looks a thing of pillars and beams – basic elements of architecture at least since ancient Egypt. But then, just when it might become too serious for its own good, it lightens the mood with circles and triangles cut into the walls as if it were a child’s toy, with further triangular shapes on the roofline. It manages to speak to the disparate elements of the William Street Quarter, a recent regeneration project that stands next door. This is a bizarre combination of big glum grey blocks, uncannily like the least charming estates of the 1960s, and rows of little pitched-roofed brick houses. A House for Artists, with its triangles and oblongs and its middle-sized scale, has something of both, while being more appealing than either. It’s a perky and punchy building, at once big and small and grand and intimate. It is robust rather than exquisite, severe more than cosy, but still a place to call home. Create London see it as a prototype: now that they have their Barking example they want to pitch the idea elsewhere. Here’s hoping that more like this are built, and not only for creatives. All new housing has something to learn from A House for Artists.When a young family died mysteriously on a trail in California’s Sierra Nevada mountains in August, authorities scoured the area for clues. Maybe there was a gas leak from a nearby mine. Maybe the family drank water that contained toxic algae. In the end, as a new report showed, the answers were more prosaic, if just as tragic: the triple-digit temperatures and tough terrain created a fatal situation. Nearly 80 pages of investigative reports obtained by the San Francisco Chronicle lay out the tragic missteps that led to the death of the young family and hold important lessons about the dangers of hiking in a grueling climate. The family, Ellen Chung, 31, Jonathan Gerrish, 45, along with their one-year-old daughter, Miju, and dog, Oski, set out to hike at the Hites Cove Loop trailhead in a remote area of the Sierra Nevada national forest on 15 August. Their truck was found near the trailhead two days later and crews soon found the bodies of Gerrish and Miju – with Chung’s body a little higher on a hillside. The local sheriff’s office announced in October that the family died of overheating and probably dehydration. “This is an unfortunate and tragic event due to the weather,” Mariposa county sheriff, Jeremy Briese, said at the time. The records show that Gerrish had used the AllTrails app to map out the hike and that he had hiked a portion of the same loop in May 2017. But the temperatures at the time had been much lower and the 2018 Ferguson fire hadn’t yet burned out tree canopy in the area. Grueling mid-day temperatures and a lack of shade had moved locals in recent years to avoid the hike during the summer. But the family was new to the area: they had moved to Mariposa, in the Sierra foothills, during the pandemic and bought numerous properties. Chung was a yoga instructor and graduate student and Gerrish was a Snapchat engineer. According to the report, a US Forest Service volunteer who had hiked the nearly eight-mile loop more than a dozen times told a deputy the family appeared “completely unaware of the dangers”. They carried only a sippy cup and a backpack with a 2.5-liter reservoir for water, the records show. For Wesley Trimble, a communications and creative director with the American Hiking Society, the tragic incident serves as a reminder to be prepared when going hiking, by planning before leaving the house. He advises telling people where you are going and when to expect you back. “People often don’t think about it, but it’s a critical step: telling a neighbor or a family member that you are going to a specific location and that you’ll be in touch when you are back in an area with a cell signal,” Trimble says. And if you don’t return when you expect, give someone specific instructions, like the sheriff’s office for the county where you are hiking, if they don’t hear from you at a specified time. Another way to plan before hitting the trail is to really look at maps and come up with a game plan, including when to turn around based on timing, even if it means not reaching a desired destination. “In the winter time frame, that might mean getting back before it’s dark, and in warm weather it might be looking at the forecast,” says Trimble. The day of the Mariposa family’s hike, the temperatures were in the upper 70s in the morning, but rose to 109 in the afternoon when they were on the trail. That shows it’s important to consult detailed weather predictions, Trimble says – and to check the weather not just with the widget on a smartphone, but with better technology. Noaa has a website that can do pinpoint forecasting on a map, which will give a much better idea of what the forecast is, he says, because geography plays a critical role in weather. Trimble also suggests checking in with locals about a trail – a gear shop or even a tourist office will have insight into local conditions that may not be listed on a trail-mapping app. The American Hiking Society has a list of the ten essential items that everyone should have when heading out for a trek. For hikes during hot weather, it’s essential to haul enough water. “It’s hard to give people a very specific number with water,” says Trimble, though most hiking experts say about 16 ounces or a half liter per hour per person, for moderate temperatures and terrain. “If you are hiking in triple degree temperatures you will need at least a liter of water for every hour you plan to be out,” he says. In addition, for warmer-weather hiking, it’s important to be familiar with the symptoms of heat exhaustion and heat stroke. “You want to be able to pick up on if you or someone is experiencing nausea and headaches and other symptoms, because if you are hiking in hot temperatures it’s a good sign that you are probably starting to get dehydrated,” says Trimble. “Make sure everyone is drinking water consistently – by the time you are thirsty, you are already starting to become dehydrated.”A comet is on a collision course with Earth. The targets in this shrill, desperately unfunny climate change satire directed by Adam McKay are more scattershot. According to stoner PhD student Kate Dibiasky (Jennifer Lawrence) and her professor, Dr Randall Mindy (a self-consciously tic-y Leonardo DiCaprio), the asteroid is the size of Mount Everest and due to hit in six months. The pair try to warn Meryl Streep’s President Orlean about the impending “extinction-level event”, only to find her preoccupied by the midterm elections. They attempt to raise awareness on breakfast TV, but anchors Jack and Brie (Tyler Perry and Cate Blanchett) can’t help but give their bad news a positive spin. The only person with enough money to intervene is tech entrepreneur Peter Isherwell (Mark Rylance), who wants to mine the comet for its “$140tn worth of assets”. Party politics, celebrity gossip and social media memes are swiped at too. It feels cynical, then, when Timothée Chalamet shows up with no real narrative purpose other than to snog Lawrence. As Garry Marshall’s cursed holiday trilogy Valentine’s Day, New Year’s Eve and Mother’s Day has already proved, an ensemble cast stacked with A-listers is no guarantee of a good time. Neither is McKay’s bombastic, shake-you-by-the-shoulders direction. The smug asides plastered on screen, and the hyperactive inserts of nature documentary footage do nothing to raise the film’s real-life stakes. In cinemas now and on Netflix from 24 DecemberFrom her breakthrough role in Secretary, wearing stilettos, a pencil skirt and manacles and attempting to operate a stapler with her chin, to her directorial debut which digs into the messy truths about motherhood, Maggie Gyllenhaal has always been attracted to what she has described as “troubled women. The ones that are a real challenge. They really need me.” It’s a quote that really gets to the heart of what distinguishes Gyllenhaal. An Oscar-nominated actor, and now– with her Elena Ferrante adaptation The Lost Daughter – an award-winning screenwriter and director, she is drawn to the kind of women whose stories don’t usually get told. She delves into the uncomfortable angles and sharp edges of her characters and found her niche by not quite fitting into the mould. The mould – that cookie-cutter starlet formula – was particularly entrenched when Gyllenhaal was starting out in the late 90s. And her beauty – the heart-shaped face dominated by huge ice-blue eyes, the slightly melancholy downward slant to the lips – has always felt as though it was transposed from another time. You could imagine her as a contemporary of Mary Pickford in the era of silent cinema. The industry fretted that she was not conventionally “hot” enough, a criticism that Gyllenhaal brazened out at the time, but which she later conceded was “a hard thing to hear”. And when it wasn’t trying to manoeuvre her into a sexpot persona, Hollywood was instead dismissing her as “quirky” – a description she firmly rejected, stating that: “Describing someone as quirky is a way of erasing them.” Perhaps the fact that Gyllenhaal’s first major role was as Lee, the submissive office worker in Steven Shainberg’s BDSM romance Secretary, added to the industry’s confusion as to where exactly she fitted into the somewhat homogenised mainstream movie landscape. She brought an apple-cheeked sweetness to the film’s transgressive themes, a forceful emotional intelligence which diffused any potential charges of prurience that the picture might have otherwise attracted. Consequently, she threatened to blow a gasket in the Hollywood production line. Director Laurie Collyer, who cast her as an ex-con drug user and mother in the gritty drama Sherrybaby, realised early on that one of Gyllenhaal’s major strengths as an actor was the very thing that set her apart from many of her contemporaries. In an interview to promote the release of the film, she explained: “I think celebrity culture breeds conformity and Maggie is truly nonconformist, truly finding her own way. Even just the way she dresses – I know it sounds really superficial, but it all represents something: she’s her own person.” Gyllenhaal was born into the movie industry, but her upbringing didn’t fit the template of the second-generation Hollywood brat. Born in New York on 16 November 1977, Margalit Ruth Gyllenhaal is the older sister of the actor Jake Gyllenhaal, and the daughter of director Stephen Gyllenhaal (Paris Trout, Family of Spies) and screenwriter and director Naomi Foner Gyllenhaal (Losing Isaiah, Bee Season, Running on Empty). She only discovered that her first name was Margalit – a nod to her mother’s Jewish heritage – rather than Maggie when she asked for her birth certificate in order to take her husband Peter Sarsgaard’s name. She has jokingly described her parents as being somewhere to the left of Trotsky but credited them with engendering in her the political engagement which has been core to her identity. She has always maintained that, “being politically active is incredibly important to me. My parents have been politicised and radical throughout my life – they taught me that I’m a part of a global community and it’s partly my responsibility to fight for what’s right.” Gyllenhaal’s political activities range from driving voters to the polling station in Florida, speaking out in support of the jailed whistleblower Chelsea Manning, and hosting a benefit for Pussy Riot. More controversially, in 2005 she took aim at US foreign policy, suggesting that the United States “is responsible in some way” for the 9/11 terror attacks. Subsequently, a Maggie Gyllenhaal fan-run website had to close comments after it was bombarded with criticism. Gyllenhaal at first doubled down, saying that “not to have the courage to ask these questions is to betray the victims of 9/11”. But later she acknowledged: “I regret what I said, but I think my intentions were good. Neither the red carpet nor an interview about a movie is the right place to talk about my politics.” Another key lesson learned from her parents was that of the vagaries of a movie industry in which “you can be on top of the world and then the next year you can be nowhere. And then, later, you’re interesting again; and then, suddenly, you’re not. I watched that happen to them, and I watched it hurt them. I think I’m a bit armed by having seen that.” It’s a pragmatic approach which has enabled her to be unfazed, though slightly irked, by questions assuming there is a sibling rivalry between her and Jake, whose career took off a few years before hers did with the film Donnie Darko. Gyllenhaal’s insider’s eye view of the way the industry works – she started out in small roles in her father’s films, and appeared as Jake’s sister in Donnie Darko – also facilitated a smart balance in her own choices, weighing high-profile blockbuster-type films, like the Julia Roberts vehicle Mona Lisa Smile and Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, against more daring and challenging independent projects. Notable examples of the latter include Frank, in which Gyllenhaal played a scaldingly ill-tempered musician opposite Michael Fassbender, who was obscured throughout within a papier maché head. And then there was The Kindergarten Teacher, a profoundly uncomfortable portrait of a woman who becomes obsessed with nurturing the poetic talent of one of her six-year-old charges. Gyllenhaal enjoyed sneaking into screenings during the film’s festival run and eavesdropping on the audience’s squirming discomfort. Television also provided Gyllenhaal with meaty opportunities, such as the sex-worker-turned-porn director Candy in The Deuce – she agreed to the role on the condition that she could serve as a producer on the project, giving her input in the writing and editing. She also won a Golden Globe for her performance in the BBC political thriller series The Honourable Woman. What defines her as an actor, according to her friend and Honourable Woman co-star Genevieve O’Reilly, is the fact that “Maggie is naturally and confidently curious. She is unafraid to ask questions. She is a really active listener and has a gentle honesty which provokes thought and conversation.” She adds: “Maggie is someone you lean in to. You can’t help it. I think she has a quiet fire at her core that is at once warm and potent, audacious and fiercely intelligent.” Gyllenhaal brings all this to bear in her superb, sinuous adaptation of The Lost Daughter. There’s an obvious kinship between Gyllenhaal and Ferrante – both are drawn to difficult, unpredictable female characters. And with what now seems to be an act of rare foresight, Ferrante granted permission for the adaptation on the condition that Gyllenhaal, and nobody else, directed it. “She said it has to be me, which I took as a real vote of confidence. I needed that at the time.” The Lost Daughter has already made its mark on the awards circuit, picking up Best Picture, Best Screenplay, the Breakthrough Director award and the Outstanding Performance (for Olivia Colman), at the Gotham Awards. Whether the film will achieve the same success elsewhere is less certain – it is, after all, a portrait of an “unnatural mother” (played by Colman, and as a younger woman, Jessie Buckley) which refuses to condemn her maternal failings. She’s the kind of character that conventional audiences and awards voters are likely to find challenging, ambiguous and a little bit scary. A perfect fit, then, for Maggie Gyllenhaal.It’s not difficult to see why Nikolai Foster has chosen A Chorus Line as Curve’s first post-Covid Christmas show. Set in a rehearsal room, peopled by dancers nervously attending the final audition to become part of the chorus for a Broadway show, the 1975 musical has no flashy costumes, no stunning sets, no standout solo parts. Instead, it offers numerous characters, speaking, singing and dancing the often-harsh realities of their personal and professional lives (based on true stories told by dancers and recorded by Michael Bennett, who conceived, directed and choreographed the original production). Its continual focus-switching, from collective to individual experience, from gritty endurance to exuberant celebration, speaks powerfully to our pandemic-troubled times. Staging and design add impact to the dramaturgical focus-shifts. Against the soaring black walls of Grace Smart’s vast-seeming set, individuals appear small and vulnerable, their bright clothes an emblem of hope against darkness (Edd Lindley’s costumes). At times, individuals dominate the setting – faces, projected in closeup on to the back wall. Even here, though, the dancers are subject to manipulation – the hands holding the camera belong to Zach (Adam Cooper), director of the show, sternly making his selection, or to Larry (Taylor Walker), his impatient assistant. The slight weaknesses of the production show up in an extended exchange between Zach and Cassie (Carly Mercedes Dyer), his former lover, who asserts her right to retreat from the limelight into a chorus of people who are “all wonderful”. Dyer’s performance beautifully balances assurance against self-doubt, but Ellen Kane’s choreography, elsewhere so dazzling, here seems less assured in its relation to the soul-shaking live music (orchestrated by David Shrubsole), while Cooper’s attitude tends to a coolness that smothers a nascent emotional charge. For the closing number, Howard Hudson’s lighting rig takes on a life of its own, dancing above the high-kicking chorus – identical in gold outfits, but each now unique, to our eyes, and all wonderful. A Chorus Line is at Curve, Leicester, until 31 DecemberChildren’s books bounced back in buoyant style in 2021. As bookshops reopened in the spring, children’s books enjoyed an 11% boost in sales against the equivalent period in 2019, according to the Bookseller. Michael Rosen’s own journey of recovery from Covid was movingly documented in Sticky McStickstick (Walker), illustrated by Tony Ross. A move towards greater diversity heralded a rich array of new and emerging talent. Hey, You! by Dapo Adeola (Puffin) took an empowering, celebratory look at growing up black, showcasing the work of 18 black illustrators. Amari and the Night Brothers by BB Alston (Farshore) is first in an outstanding fantasy series following a young black girl and her adventures in the Bureau of Supernatural Affairs. Neurodivergent author Elle McNicoll’s debut, A Kind of Spark (Knights Of), winner of the Waterstones and Blue Peter awards, told the story of an autistic girl campaigning for a memorial of witch trials. The Marcus Rashford Book Club was created to give books to children who need them the most; Rashford’s You Are a Champion, written with journalist Carl Anka, is the year’s bestselling children’s nonfiction book. In September, more than 100 British authors and illustrators signed an open letter urging the UK publishing trade to reduce carbon emissions. The move reflected a trend for children’s books addressing climate change from Hannah Gold’s wonder-filled The Last Bear, illustrated by Levi Pinfold (HarperCollins), to Dara McAnulty’s Wild Child (Macmillan), a glorious journey into nature. The children’s book world also lost two much-loved creators this year. In May, Eric Carle died. Carle’s innovative approach to texture and colour were ahead of his time, as evidenced by his 1969 debut, The Very Hungry Caterpillar, and much more. Jill Murphy died in August. The Worst Witch was an instant success in 1974, inspiring seven further titles. Her prolific picture book output included the Bear and Large Family series, capturing the warmth and chaos of family life in a style that brought her millions of fans the world over. Fiona Noble Picture books In a year that provided plenty to scream and shout about, Barbara Throws a Wobbler (Puffin) felt both fitting and therapeutic. Nadia Shireen’s hilarious tale of a cat having an off-day (sock problems, a dropped ice-cream, you know the sort) charts Barbara’s descent into a huge tantrum, depicted as a raging, raspberry-coloured cloud. The turning point comes when Barbara acknowledges her foul mood – “If I made you, can’t I UN-make you?” – and begins squishing it down until it disappears completely. With illustrations the colour of bright, shiny jelly beans and a witty text that culminates in a genius guide to bad moods (to help people differentiate, say, “a tizzy” from “a huff”), Shireen’s latest gem ought to come on prescription. The masterly A Shelter for Sadness (Templar) by Anne Booth also features a tricky set of feelings depicted in scribbly blob form by David Litchfield, but here we witness a boy building a den for these emotions. Booth was inspired by the words of Holocaust victim Etty Hillesum, who wrote: “Give your sorrow all the space and shelter in yourself that is its due…” and the result is a perfectly pitched, heartfelt meditation about living alongside grief. Plenty of authors memorably celebrated difference this year, including the acclaimed writers and real-life partners Zadie Smith and Nick Laird, whose wonderful Weirdo (Puffin) stars Magenta Fox’s fabulously drawn guinea pig in a judo suit. Martin Stanev’s equally quirky The Planet in a Pickle Jar (Flying Eye) concerns a seemingly boring granny who has secretly been preserving Earth’s wonders in large glass jars for the enjoyment of future generations. Lauren Ace and Jenny Løvlie brought us The Boys (Little Tiger) which, like its award-winning predecessor The Girls, lovingly depicts the bonds between four friends. Author-illustrator duo Mick Jackson and John Broadley returned with another visual treat after 2020’s acclaimed look at nocturnal life, While You’re Sleeping. We’re Going Places (Pavilion) has us swooping, sailing and skating as it explores the many ways we travel through the world and through our lives, from childhood to old age. Broadley’s exquisite pen-and-ink drawings evoke the work of early 20th-century artist and designer Eric Ravilious but with an energy all of their own (regulars at London restaurant Quo Vadis will recognise Broadley’s style; since 2012 he’s provided the illustrations for its menus). Other exceptional nonfiction works came in the form of Flora Delargy’s graphic novel-esque Rescuing Titanic (Wide Eyed), a stunning debut about the supposedly unsinkable liner, and David Olusoga’s Black and British: An Illustrated History (Macmillan). Olusoga’s latest, aimed at children aged nine and over, follows bestselling middle-grade and adult versions of his examination of 1,800 years of black British life and it truly sings in picture book form with the history made even more vivid via a trove of old paintings, maps and photographs combined with bold artwork by Melleny Taylor and Jake Alexander. While not strictly a Christmas book, Richard Jones’s Little Bear (Simon &amp; Schuster) felt really festive with its rich, red cover featuring a white polar bear amid a flurry of tiny golden snowflakes. The palm-size bear found by a boy in his garden is rendered so delicately by Jones that you can almost stroke its soft, fuzzy coat. A warm hug of a hardback, Little Bear is almost guaranteed to get children feeling cosy for Christmas. Should it fail, try giggling away any residual grumpiness with Shireen’s mood-boosting book. That should work whatever the season… Imogen Carter Chapter books Whatever the age bracket, plot drives most children’s fiction. Two of 2021’s most original chapter books were actually top-tier thrillers disguised as “children’s literature”. In Elle McNicoll’s Show Us Who You Are (Knights Of), protagonist Cora (on the autism spectrum) navigates the neurotypical world with occasional frustration; her new friend Adrien (who has ADHD) views everything with an eyebrow raised. His father’s firm, the hugely plausible Pomegranate Technologies, creates holograms of deceased loved ones to help bereaved families. They want Cora to assist in getting their AIs just right. Then Adrien goes missing. This gripping second novel from the award-winning McNicoll asks important questions about what is real and how to remain true to oneself. In Nicola Davies’s career-crowning The Song That Sings Us (Firefly), the Jackie Morris starling on the cover belies the epic battle of mindsets within. An undeclared guerrilla war is raging between city-dwelling technocrats, beset by internal power struggles, and those who resist the extractivist machines. In this globe-spanning tale of high stakes and cross-species comradeship, three siblings come to understand their family history and the energetic field that connects all living beings. In a similar vein, anyone gripped by Piers Torday’s landmark The Last Wild series will find this year’s prequel, The Wild Before (Hachette), essential reading. Just as important as plot is world-building. In Efua Traoré’s immersive Children of the Quicksands (Chicken House), 12-year-old city girl Simi is sent to stay with the grandmother she barely knows in her village, where traditions remain vivid. Deprived of both wifi and explanations, Simi seeks to solve the mystery of her family rupture. The forest and Yoruba legend loom large in this original, dream-like debut that crackles with as much reality as magical realism. Forests full of signs also abounded in Amy Raphael’s debut novel, The Forest of Moon and Sword (Orion/Hachette), in which a resourceful young girl, Art, sets out to save her medicine woman mother, accused of witchcraft. Perhaps this year’s most three-dimensional female protagonist, though, was bored, plucky April, transplanted to a rapidly changing Svalbard by her workaholic scientist father in The Last Bear (HarperCollins). When April encounters an injured polar bear, she cannot ignore his suffering. Author Hannah Gold is careful to keep the bear as wild as possible within the confines of a children’s story and April is quick-witted and possessed of an optimism that frequently nearly backfires; the climate crisis is as much a part of the landscape as Svalbard’s crisp vistas, drawn by the excellent Levi Pinfold. Pictures remain an eloquent part of the reading experience, even in this age range. Two author-illustrators stood out this year. Tim Tilley’s debut novel, Harklights (Usborne), combined classic storytelling with distinctive, atmospheric graphics. Young orphan Wick labours in a match factory workhouse when he discovers a strange infant creature. But where does all the wood for the matches come from? And what of the forest dwellers whose homes are being destroyed? Finally, The False Rose (translated by Peter Graves, Pushkin) by Jakob Wegelius had it all: plot, world-building and detailed drawings of 1920s Lisbon and Glasgow, where this sequel proper to 2014’s The Murderer’s Ape is set. Narrated once again by the human-like ship’s engineer, Sally Jones, this engrossing nautical yarn unfolded as sumptuously as its artwork, recounting in flashback the extraordinary events kicked off by the discovery of a mysterious necklace. Kitty Empire YA books This year, young adult books have enjoyed a profile not seen since the days of Twilight and The Hunger Games thanks to the BookTok phenomenon – a bookish corner of social media app TikTok, where young people post short videos inspired by the books they love. Bestseller lists were soon full of their recommendations, of largely backlist American titles, including Adam Silvera’s They Both Die at the End (Simon &amp; Schuster), E Lockhart’s We Were Liars (Hot Key) and Kalynn Bayron’s Cinderella Is Dead (Bloomsbury). In new publishing, fantasy with strong feminist themes dominated. Raging against the patriarchy in spectacular style is Iron Widow (Rock the Boat), in which Xiran Jay Zhao reimagines the life of China’s only female emperor in a fusion of history and sci-fi action. In Lionheart Girl by Yaba Badoe (Zephyr), Sheba is born into a family of powerful West African witches and must escape the shadow of her dangerous mother; a dark and dazzling coming-of-age novel, rich in atmosphere and magic realism. Caroline O’Donoghue made her young adult debut with All Our Hidden Gifts (Walker), offering a fresh take on teenage witches in a contemporary Irish setting, its authentic view of friendships and relationships proving just as beguiling as the tarot readings and emerging powers. Books inspired by mythology further tapped into this trend, Jessie Burton’s Medusa (Bloomsbury) giving Greek mythology’s ultimate antiheroine the chance to answer back. A young girl cursed by the gods and exiled to an isolated island, Medusa’s is a story of self-discovery and survival. Olivia Lomenech Gill’s hypnotic full-colour art makes this one of the year’s most desirable gift books. Twenty years after Sephy and Callum’s story began in Noughts and Crosses, one of YA’s most loved series came to an emotional and exhilarating close in Malorie Blackman’s Endgame (Penguin), as compelling and timely as ever. Although very different genres, two of 2021’s most striking British debuts were also driven by themes of race and power. Faridah Àbíké-Íyímídé’s smart and moreish high-school thriller Ace of Spades (Usborne) sees the only two black students in an exclusive school team up against an anonymous bully, exposing a sinister campaign of privilege and corruption. The gritty realism of life in Peckham, south London, was spliced with a mind-bending time travel thriller in Femi Fadugba’s cinematic The Upper World (Penguin). Two teenagers race against time itself in an intriguing mix of high-octane action, whip-smart dialogue, physics and philosophy. Alice Oseman proved she was one of the most relevant and relatable voices in teenage fiction, winning the Bookseller’s YA book prize with Loveless (HarperCollins), the wise and witty story of a girl’s self-discovery at university. In May, Heartstopper Volume 4 (Hodder) followed, the latest in the graphic novel series centred on a young gay couple. A joyful, tender look at first love and relationships with an inclusive cast, it will be adapted for TV by Netflix in 2022. For an unmissable festive treat, Juno Dawson’s Stay Another Day (Quercus) follows three siblings heading home to Edinburgh, where their perfect middle-class Christmas is soon threatened by some very big family secrets. Riffing on Christmas romcom themes, it’s a delicious family drama with a gritty contemporary edge. FN • To order any of these books for a special price and support the Guardian and Observer, click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyBirch, Hertfordshire Opened last year, Birch was hitting the zeitgeist when it put pottery, painting and macramé classes at the centre of its offerings. Now it is hosting a festive wreath-making class on 15 December to get you in the mood for Christmas. There are also three restaurants and 140 minimalist, millennial-minded rooms that spread out from the original Victorian mansion. Classes from £25, double rooms from £120, room only £120 as part of a three-night weekend booking, £140 as a single midweek booking, birchcommunity.com Inshriach Estate, Aviemore There are 200 acres of woodland surrounding Wooden Tom’s workshop on this estate in the Cairngorms and he can help you whittle festive baubles, cups and spoons on your holiday. There are four off-grid cabins, each surrounded by more raw material in the form of woods. Courses start at £70, cabins start at £110 with Canopy &amp; Stars, canopyandstars.co.uk The Barrel Store, Cirencester One of Britain’s most aesthetically pleasing hostel opened in 2016 and is part of the New Brewery Arts complex. There are 14 double and family rooms, packed with locally made furniture. The craft centre has more than 200 different courses. The new year brings sessions in enamelling, blockprinting and linocuts, plus portraiture and jewellery. Some courses are family-friendly, and nearly all welcome beginners. The Barrel Store has its own tasteful kitchen but there’s also a café on site. Courses from £50, doubles from £55, room only, thebarrelstore.co.uk Tiny Homes Holidays, Isle of Wight Sustainable crafts are the order of the day at this boutique retreat on the Isle of Wight. Classes are taught by local craftspeople with materials foraged from nearby hedgerows and the coastline. From January onwards you can learn how to make a skep (an ancient beehive made from straw) or create jewellery from sea glass. Guests stay in a collection of highly individual and environmentally friendly cabins near Cowes, with a wood-fired hot tub and barbecues. Sessions start from £45, stays start from £110, tinyhomesholidays.com West Dean, Sussex Britain’s greatest smörgåsbord of craft teaching takes place at this college near Chichester. Short courses include calligraphy, jewellery-making and glass-engraving. Housed in a 19th-century mansion, participants can also stay at West Dean. Courses start at £138. Accommodation from £75pp including breakfast and dinner if not included in the course fees, westdean.org.uk Huntlands Farm, Worcester Complete the two-day upholstery course, run by Lucy Brodie, at Huntlands Farm and you’ll head home with a newly recovered chair or headboard – as well as useful skills in minor repairs. Courses take place in a dedicated barn next to the family’s 15th century farmhouse, while Lucy’s husband Stephen does the cooking using produce from the farm. Accommodation is in self-catering apartments and B&amp;B rooms on the farm. A two-day course costs £200, with B&amp;B rooms from £60pp, huntlandsfarm.co.uk The Farmer’s Arms, Cumbria After being empty for two years, this Lakeland pub on the top of beautiful Crake Valley, on the edge of the Lake District national park, has become part of Grizedale Arts, blending classes and exhibition space with accommodation. The Farmer’s Loft sleeps six people and is filled with work by local craftspeople. The pub – parts of which were built in the 14th century – is back up and running too; Grizedale Arts’ Lawson Park estate provides much of the ingredients for the food menu and the bar stocks local beers and spirits. Three nights from £550, self-catering, lakedistrictfarmersarms.com Woodland Skills Centre, Denbighshire In a clearing near Bodfari, 12 miles south of Rhyl and the coast, this centre has courses in everything from bushcraft to bee-keeping but woodwork is at its heart. Here, aspiring carpenters can learn how to create chairs and stools, how to use a chainsaw safely and – nicely anticipating next summer – how to make their own deckchair. There’s free camping for anyone taking a course with access to showers, cooking facilities and library; there’s also self-catering nearby. Courses start at £60, woodlandskillscentre.uk/accommodation Vinegar Mill Pottery, Hampshire Dave and Lucy Rogers run their popular pottery courses in the pretty village of Milford-on-Sea. Single day courses include using a wheel, while three-day courses bring in spouts, handles, raku firings and glazing. Vinegar Hill has accommodation ranging from a wagon that offers a cosy berth for two, to a large and comfortable house near the seafront that sleeps up to 12. Day courses start at £125, including lunch. Accommodation from £90 in the wagon, including breakfast, vinegarhillpottery.co.uk Archipelago Folk School, Mull Build your own plywood and fibreglass kayak on the island of Mull. There are also courses in two-person canoes – each takes about 50 hours of work to complete. A car is essential, partly because participants stay in nearby cottages but also because they need to be able to take their kayak home. Courses start at £1,600 including materials and tuition but not accommodation, archipelagofolkschool.org/kayak-buildingBicarb provides that important melt-in-the-mouth almost sour flavour. I love short shortbreads that kind of disappear – it’s the bicarb that does that. I use it to dry out meat prior to cooking as it helps make the skin super crisp. I tend to do ½ teaspoon of bicarb to 2 tsp of salt. You rub it all over a joint – or at Christmas, a chicken or a turkey – and leave it in the fridge overnight. Making honeycomb is a fun thing to do at Christmas – although be careful. It’s about taking the caramel to the perfect point; you want the flavour and the amber colour, but there’s a fine line between terracotta and burnt. The problem with caramel is that when you take it off the heat, it continues to cook. You’ve got to keep your eye on it and not be tempted to touch it. You then add the bicarb, it bubbles up, and you pour it into a tray. Honeycomb is good plain, crumbled on a simple vanilla ice-cream, or if I’m going to coat it, I tend to balance it with quite a dark chocolate. Bicarb is great for cleaning too. If on Christmas Day, a pot gets too black (which it normally does in our house as we’ve got an Aga) you can just chuck some in and boil it back up. Florence Knight is head chef at Sessions Arts Club, London EC1Bands and DJs are resorting to inviting huge guest lists to their gigs in order to boost numbers because as many as four in 10 ticket holders are not turning up. When the government announced the roadmap out of lockdown in February, many shows sold out within hours, and the events that happened straight after things opened up were “bananas”, as one promoter described them. But as time has gone on, the live music world has got noticeably quieter. Nights that sold out in an hour are nowhere near full, and the dancefloor is feeling unusually empty. “You always had people that didn’t turn up,” said artist manager Graeme Stewart. “It was around 5% normally, but you’re getting as much as 40% no-shows for some gigs now. It’s an enormous problem, and it’s happening for anything that’s ticketed.” Dublin-based promoter Will Rolfe agrees. He thinks there is a 40% no-show on average in the UK at the moment. “It’s a big issue and it’s having a real knock-on effect,” he explained. Sacha Lord, the co-founder of Parklife festival and night-time economy adviser for Greater Manchester, said even the most popular line-ups are being affected. “We’re seeing a big drop-off, even at really hot, sold-out shows. It’s happening every single night, and it’s affecting all artists.” While Lord puts it down to people being worried about Covid – or actually having it – others say punters are forgetting or simply making other plans. “The first few events were bananas but as time goes on people are not as committed to nights they bought tickets to months in advance,” said Stewart. As a result, he said artists have resorted to making massive guest lists to boost numbers. “Notice how no one’s posting pictures of the crowd? If they did it would be empty.” Shows that had to be moved due to lockdowns and border closures have been particularly badly affected. Ticketing app Dice said almost 30% of gig-goers, from March 2020 onwards, chose to get a refund when this happened and many acts, such as Bicep, Lianne La Havas and James Bay, had to reschedule on multiple occasions. Phil Hutcheon, founder and CEO of Dice, said that even though a lot of tickets are being sold, and the market feels quite buoyant, people are now far more likely to ask for their money back. He said: “People are returning tickets a lot more frequently now than pre-pandemic. The pattern we have seen is that each time a show is moved, the person who bought the ticket is a lot less engaged about attending.” DICE say those tickets are then offered to people via its waiting list feature. Many, however, do not ask for refunds, which makes it hard to gauge how busy it will be. “You cannot message every person to see if they’re still coming, so no one knows what is going to happen. You are still getting money coming in from the tickets, but money is being lost on bar spend and security costs,” said Stewart. Rolfe said this is a particular issue for smaller venues because they are losing money on food and drink, it affects staffing costs and bands are missing out on merchandise sales. “It’s really hurting small venues that are reliant on every person being in the room.” Some genres are faring better than others, but Hutcheon thinks venues are likely to be more wary about who they book. “Electronic music is doing a lot better, clubs are busier, but it’s a lot more expensive to bring a live band from a different city than a DJ or hip-hop artist. Promoters and venues are more cautious now.” Lord said it is not just venues that are struggling: “The knock-on effects of this are phenomenal. It’s decimating the whole industry.” • This article was amended on 17 December 2021 to clarify that the statistic of almost 30% of gig-goers choosing to get a refund relates to the period from March 2020, and to add details about Dice’s waiting list feature.The Oscar-nominated actor Naomie Harris has said a #MeToo incident on one of her recent projects prompted the “immediate” removal of the perpetrator, as she recalled another occasion when she was groped by a “huge star” who faced no censure. Harris, who played Moneypenny in the last three Bond films and was up for an Oscar for her role in Moonlight in 2017, declined to name either of the men allegedly responsible. In an interview with the Mail on Sunday, she recalled an incident she has previously discussed in which “a huge, huge star” put his hand up her skirt during an audition. “What was so shocking about it was the casting director was there and the director, and of course no one said anything because he was – he is – such a huge star. That was my only #MeToo incident, so I felt very lucky given how rife that behaviour was. “Now things have definitely changed: I was on a project where there was a #MeToo incident and there was no hesitation – [the perpetrator] was immediately removed,” she said. Harris’s comments came as Claire Foy, who starred in Netflix drama The Crown, discussed violence against women as she promoted her latest project, A Very British Scandal. She plays the Duchess of Argyll, who was shamed in the 1960s after being secretly photographed giving oral sex to a man who was not her husband. A judge in her divorce case dismissed the duchess as “a completely promiscuous woman”. In an interview with the Sunday Times, Foy said: “Sex is the one thing you can get a woman on. It is a quick way to make a woman subhuman, wrong and weird. It happens in every walk of life.” Foy spoke forcefully about how women are often given the responsibility for their own safety, such as what to wear, or what hand signal to give if they are in danger, rather than the onus being on making men less violent. “Hundreds of women get attacked every single day,” she said. “It makes me so angry. How you can look into making women safe and think about getting more policemen – who women don’t trust – to look after them? We don’t need looking after. We don’t. We need people to stop killing and raping us. That’s all. It’s simple. And it’s awful to say, but that’s men. It’s time to say: ‘You sort that out. What are you going to do?’” She added: “It’s like saying that lots of dogs are killing cats, so let’s lock cats up and let dogs loose. It doesn’t make any sense. Women basically just get lumped with the emotional burden and responsibility of everything.”Schneeflocken Marzipankuchen – marzipan snowflake cake This cake takes its inspiration from a Linzer biscuit. Two almondy cake halves sandwiched together with a raspberry centre. Raspberry jam has become the conserve of choice in a modern Linzer biscuit but the Linzer tart (of which the biscuits are a descendant) was originally filled with tart blackcurrant jam. To be honest, so long as the jam has some punch to it I don’t think it matters which one you choose. I’ve used damson, sour cherry and redcurrant jelly as well as the aforementioned, but strawberry and apricot would be too sweet. Rather than ice this, I’ve played around with paper-cut snowflakes as icing sugar templates and the results are beautifully festive; a doily, too, works just as well. Serves 6 unsalted butter 100g, at room temperature caster sugar 75g eggs 2, separated, whites whisked to stiff peaks marzipan 100g, grated plain flour 75g ground almonds 25g ground cinnamon 1 tsp baking powder 1 tsp raspberry jam 4 tbsp icing sugar for dusting Heat the oven to 160C fan/gas mark 4 and grease and line 2 x 20cm round cake tins. Put the butter and sugar into a large bowl and beat with a hand-held electric whisk until light and fluffy. Add the egg yolks and whisk again until combined. Add the grated marzipan, flour, ground almonds, cinnamon and baking powder, then stir until well mixed. Fold the whisked egg whites into the batter, then divide the mixture evenly between the two cake tins and smooth the tops with a spatula. Bake in the centre of the oven for about 20 minutes until golden brown and springy to the touch. Turn the cakes out on to a wire rack to cool. Once cool, put one cake on to a plate, spoon the jam on top and spread it out evenly. Place the second cake on top. Cut out a round piece of paper just larger than the cake. Fold it into four and cut an intricate snowflake design out of it. Unfold the piece of paper and lay it on top of the cake. Dust the top with icing sugar before carefully removing the paper. You should be left with a beautiful delicate snowflake on top of your cake. Stored in an airtight container, this cake will keep well for up to 3 days. Spekulatius – spiced almond biscuits These biscuits are traditional Advent sweet treats in both the Netherlands, where they are usually eaten around 6 December (St Nikolaus day), and in Germany, where they are eaten throughout the whole run-up to Christmas. Usually they’re decorated with images relating to Nikolaus, and more often than not have windmills depicted on them. You can also buy special wooden rolling pins with pictured squares carved into them specifically for rolling this dough out at home. I don’t have one of these and I certainly don’t have the patience to create the intricate decoration it would involve without using one. Instead I use pretty cutters (I think snowflakes work best) to cut out festive shapes. Usually almond Spekulatius have a flaked almond base, but I’ve switched things up and adorned mine with them on top instead. These snappy (by this I mean crunchy and good to snap) biscuits are best eaten alongside a black coffee and are also brilliant crushed into a powder and mixed with melted butter to create a Christmas cheesecake or chocolate torte base. Makes about 30 plain flour 150g, plus extra for dusting rye flour 50g bicarbonate of soda ½ tsp ground cinnamon 1½ tsp ground cloves ¼ tsp grated nutmeg ¼ tsp caster sugar 120g fine sea salt a pinch unsalted butter 125g, at room temperature egg 1, beaten milk for brushing flaked almonds 50g, for decorating Put all the dry ingredients into a large mixing bowl and stir with a wooden spoon. Add the butter and mix it into the flour using your fingertips until it has the consistency of fine breadcrumbs. Add the egg and bring everything together into a dough with your hands. (Alternatively, simply put all the ingredients into the bowl of an electric free-standing mixer fitted with a paddle attachment and mix until an even dough is formed.) Heat the oven to 170C fan/gas mark 5 and line 2 large baking sheets with non-stick baking parchment. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface to a 3mm thickness. Cut out shapes with your cookie cutter and gently transfer them on to the prepared baking sheets, leaving 1cm between each to allow for spreading. Reroll the dough offcuts into more biscuits. Brush the tops with milk, then sprinkle some flaked almonds on to each one, pressing them down gently to ensure they stick. Bake in the oven for 10-12 minutes until golden all over. Allow to cool on the sheets for a minute before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely. They will store well in an airtight container for up to 4 weeks. Schweizer Spitzen – Swiss peaks A celebratory chocolate that looks showstoppingly good yet is a cinch to make. In Germany, Kirschwasser, a double-distilled morello cherry brandy, is often used with chocolate, most famously in a Schwarzwälder Kirschtorte, and these little Swiss peaks are no exception – sometimes I also sit a sour cherry at the bottom of the foil case before piping the chocolate in. Makes about 30 double cream 100ml dark chocolate (50% cocoa solids) 200g, broken into pieces unsalted butter or coconut oil 30g Kirschwasser or cherry brandy 1 tbsp Heat the cream in a saucepan over a medium heat, stirring from time to time to avoid it scorching on the bottom. Take it off the heat just before it comes to a boil. Add the chocolate and butter or coconut oil, and stir with a wooden spoon until both are dissolved. Mix in the Kirschwasser and beat for a minute until smooth and glossy. Refrigerate for 45 minutes so it stiffens up slightly. Lay out small foil chocolate cases on a baking sheet. Give the mixture a good stir through again, then spoon it into a piping bag fitted with a 1cm star-shaped nozzle. Pipe the mixture, with a swirling motion, into the foil cases, lifting the nozzle up at the very end to create a peak. Stored in an airtight container, these will keep well for 2 weeks. They don’t need to be refrigerated but I think they’re particularly good when a little cold, so I like to refrigerate them 15 minutes before serving. Christbrot – Christmas bread with dried fruit Christbrot is very similar to a Weihnachtsstollen (Christmas stollen), but lighter in texture, and is best eaten freshly baked without needing time to mature. This is one of the reasons why a Christbrot is more popular to bake at home than a Stollen each year. It isn’t hard to make Christbrot but the method involves a triple rise, so you’ll need to set a morning or afternoon aside if you choose to make it. Makes 1 loaf (serves about 6) mixed peel 75g raisins 50g currants 50g dark rum 1 tbsp plain flour 300g, plus extra for dusting caster sugar 40g fine sea salt ½ tsp lemon finely grated zest of ½ orange finely grated zest of ½ unsalted butter 50g, melted egg 1 fresh yeast 18g, or 9g of dried whole milk 70ml, tepid flaked almonds 50g, to coat unsalted butter 50g, melted vanilla sugar 40g (available online, or see note below) icing sugar 40g Put the mixed peel, raisins and currants into a bowl, pour over the rum and set aside to infuse while you prepare the dough. Put the flour, sugar, salt and citrus zests into a large bowl and mix together with a wooden spoon, then add the melted butter and egg. Crumble the yeast (or sprinkle if using dried) into the tepid milk and stir to dissolve. Pour the yeasted milk into the flour mixture and, using your hands, bring the ingredients together into a rough dough. Tip the dough on to a floured surface and knead for about 10 minutes until it becomes more elastic. Form it into a ball and nestle it into the bottom of the bowl. Cover the bowl with a tea towel and set aside in a warm spot to rise for 1-3 hours until almost doubled in size. (Alternatively, put the flour, sugar, salt and citrus zests into the bowl of a free-standing electric mixer fitted with a dough hook. Add the butter and egg. Pour in the yeasted milk and knead for 5 minutes until the dough is elastic. Cover the bowl and set aside, as above.) Knock the dough back with your fist and add the almonds and boozy dried fruit (along with any liquid). Knead the fruit and nuts through for a few minutes until evenly incorporated. Form the dough into a ball and return it to the bowl. Cover with the tea towel and set aside in a warm spot for about 20 minutes for a short second rise. Form the dough into a round loaf shape and place it on a baking sheet lined with non-stick baking parchment. Cover with a tea towel and leave somewhere warm to rise for a final 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 170C fan/gas mark 5. Bake in the oven for 35-40 minutes until brown all over and cooked through, checking after 25 minutes; if it is getting too brown cover it with a piece of foil for the remainder of the baking time. Transfer to a wire rack and brush with the melted butter repeatedly until all the butter is used up. Sprinkle with the vanilla sugar, then sift over the icing sugar. This is best eaten within a couple of hours after it’s baked. Or you can wrap it in foil and store in an airtight tin; it will keep for up to 3 days, after which it is still fine to toast for a further 2 days. Note: Vanilla sugar is very easy to make yourself. Pop a split vanilla pod into a jar of caster sugar and letting it infuse for a couple of days, or alternatively blitz half a vanilla pod with a small bag of caster sugar in a food processor for an instant version. At a push you can just use caster sugar, which will still be sweet and melt into the warm dough, but it won’t have the vanilla notes. Glücksbringer – lucky charms These little biscuits are full of new year’s luck – shaped like coins for prosperity, full of gold from the egg yolk and decorated with a “lucky” mushroom – you’re bound to have a good year ahead if you eat one. Makes about 35 plain flour 150g fine sea salt a pinch unsalted butter 80g, at room temperature icing sugar 50g, plus extra for dusting and icing egg yolks 2 vanilla extract ½ tsp milk for brushing flaked almonds to decorate glacé cherries halved, to decorate Heat the oven to 170C fan/gas mark 5. Line 2 large baking sheets with non-stick baking parchment. Put the flour, salt and butter in a mixing bowl and, using your fingertips, work the butter into the flour until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Add the icing sugar and mix it through. Now add the egg yolks and vanilla extract and bring everything together into a dough with your hands. Knead for a few minutes. Dust the work surface with icing sugar and roll the dough out to a 3mm thickness. Using a fluted cookie cutter, cut out circles and place on the prepared baking sheets, leaving 1cm between each. Reroll all the dough offcuts into more biscuits. Brush the top of each with milk and place 1 flaked almond on the biscuit with a point in the centre. Bake for 8-10 minutes until golden brown. Let the biscuits cool on the sheet for a minute before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely. Lay a glacé cherry half on the centre end of each almond to create a mushroom top. Mix 1 tablespoon of icing sugar with a couple of drops of water to create a thick paste. Use the prong of a fork or a cocktail stick to dip into the icing. Now dot the iced prong on to the glacé cherry to create little white spots on the red “mushroom”. Walnuß marzipan – chocolate-coated walnut marzipan These little sweets came about one autumn when we found the ground on our usual path to school scattered with walnuts. After dropping the boys off I rushed home, scooping up as many nuts along the way as I could carry. Back in the kitchen all sorts of walnut creations took place; this one I wrote down in my notebook for Christmas. The flavours come from a German-Polish-border biscuit that Helga, our late German neighbour in Wales, used to put on her bunter teller. I asked her one year for the recipe, but she was reluctant to pass it on. The biscuit base was spread with apricot jam, a layer of marzipan next, followed by half a walnut crown all wrapped up in a glaze of vodka icing. In one bite-sized biscuit, they swept me directly to cold snowy cobbled streets with people’s breath hanging in clouds under the glow of street lamps. There was just something about them that seemed so old-fashioned that was hard to put my finger on – the vodka somehow brought a mysterious feeling of cold into your mouth. Makes about 20 squares walnuts 200g, or walnut pieces icing sugar 75g, sifted vodka 1-2 tbsp dark chocolate 180g coconut oil ½ tsp flaky sea salt to sprinkle on top Place the walnuts in a food processor and blitz for about 2 minutes until finely ground, then scrape down the sides of the processor and blitz again for a couple of minutes until the oils are released from the nuts and the mixture clumps together. Add the icing sugar along with 1 tablespoon of vodka and blitz again until a smooth paste forms. You may need to add a bit more vodka depending on how fresh the nuts are. Form the marzipan into a rectangle 1cm deep and refrigerate for 30 minutes. Put the chocolate and coconut oil into a heatproof bowl and place the bowl over a small saucepan with 1cm of water in the bottom. Turn the heat on low and wait for the chocolate to melt. Once it starts melting, stir so that the coconut oil is evenly dispersed. Take off the heat once the chocolate is glossy and fluid. Line a baking sheet with non-stick baking parchment. Cut the marzipan into 1cm squares and, using a fork held horizontally with the tines pointing upwards to balance the marzipan on, dip each square carefully into the chocolate, so that it is completely covered. Lift gently onto the baking paper and continue until all squares are covered. Sprinkle each square with a little flaky sea salt and allow to set before boxing up. Stored in an airtight container, these keep well for up to a week. Flammkuchen – German ‘pizza’ Flammkuchen, often dubbed “German pizza”, is a very thin and crisp piece of dough topped with soured cream, onions and Schinken (cured ham). It originates from the German/French border region of Alsace – traditionally baked in a wood oven, it was invented by bakers to test the temperature of their ovens; if the oven was hot enough for bread, the Flammkuchen would only take a minute to cook. The dough is actually very similar to a strudel dough or rough filo (just flour, oil and water) and is incredibly easy to make. It’s important when making this at home to heat the baking sheet up in the oven first as this ensures a crisp base, or if you have a pizza stone that’s even better. I’ve given some suggestions for my favourite alternative flavour combinations below the recipe, but really anything goes for the dough. Makes 2 (serves 2 as a main or 4-6 as a snack) For the base plain flour 200g, plus extra for dusting rapeseed oil 3 tbsp water 80ml fine sea salt a pinch For the topping soured cream or creme fraiche 150ml onion 1 small, finely diced brown mushrooms 150g, finely sliced flaky sea salt rapeseed oil for drizzling fresh thyme leaves ½ tbsp Heat the oven to 200C fan/gas mark 7. Place 2 large baking sheets in the oven to heat. To make the dough, put all of the ingredients into a large bowl and mix using your hands. Knead for a couple of minutes until a supple, silky dough is formed. Divide the dough in half. On a floured surface, roll each half out as thinly as possible. So long as it fits on the baking sheet it doesn’t matter what shape it is, although I aim for a rough oval. Take the sheets out of the oven and lay the dough on top; this can be a little fiddly – I use a pizza shovel to do this but a large flat spatula or a hand supporting the underside centre of the dough while you move it also works. Working quickly, spread the soured cream evenly across each piece of dough and scatter the onion and mushrooms over the top. Sprinkle with sea salt and drizzle with a little rapeseed oil. Bake for 15-18 minutes until the edges are crisp and the Flammkuchen is starting to burnish on top. Sprinkle with thyme, slice into portions and serve immediately. VARIATIONS Schinken – replace the mushrooms with 200g finely diced Schinken or streaky bacon. Goat’s cheese and honey – switch the mushrooms for 200g goat’s cheese. Drizzle 1 tbsp honey on each portion, and sprinkle with thyme and some snipped chives before serving. Pesto and tomato – add 2 tbsp pesto to the soured cream and switch the mushrooms for 180g cherry tomatoes (halved). Add a handful of rocket at the end instead of the thyme. Red pepper and black olive – add ½ tsp sweet paprika to the soured cream. Switch the mushrooms for a finely sliced red pepper. Slice a handful of black olives in half and scatter them over both Flammkuchen. Add some fresh basil once it’s out of the oven. Recipes from Advent: Festive German Bakes to Celebrate the Coming of Christmas by Anja Dunk (Quadrille, £25). To order a copy for £21.75 go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyOn a farm in rural Iceland, Pétur (Björn Hlynur Haraldsson) is visiting his brother, Ingvar (Hilmir Snær Guðnason). Expecting lunch with Ingvar and his wife, Maria (Noomi Rapace), he’s perplexed by a third guest at the table. “What the fuck is this?” he asks. Audiences might well ask the same throughout Icelandic film-maker Valdimar Jóhannsson’s fun, freaky debut feature. In the first act, hot hipster couple Ingvar and Maria deliver a lamb. A cut to their awestruck faces tells us that this creature is … different. They name her Ada and declare her a blessing. Jóhannsson’s film is not quite a horror, though it flirts with the genre’s motifs. There is the constant sense of danger lurking in the frostbitten depths of the nearby lake, or just behind the postcard-perfect mountain that looms over their home. Maria has creepy dreams of curly-horned rams with sinister, glowing eyes; the ewe that gave birth to Ada waits stubbornly outside her bedroom window. Inside, Maria swaddles the lamb in a blanket, cooing and singing her to sleep. In one adorable scene the pair bathe together. When Ada disappears, she becomes feral with fear and maternal rage. A yellow cable-knit cardigan becomes a harrowing talisman, not unlike the red raincoat in Nicolas Roeg’s Don’t Look Now. Jóhannsson teases the possibility of a monster, but waits to reveal his hand. When he does, there’s more than a touch of gallows humour. I laughed out loud at his audacity, and had nightmares later.The government has brought in new rules for the arms trade that experts fear will make it easier to ignore human rights concerns when deciding whether to allow international sales of UK-made weapons. The revised Strategic Export Licensing Criteria could also make it harder for critics to challenge any deal in court, warned Martin Butcher, policy adviser on conflict and arms for Oxfam, who said the changes “would reduce accountability and transparency and will lead to more UK arms being used to commit war crimes and other abuses.” The secretary of state for international trade, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, introduced the revised criteria for licensing arms sales in a written statement to parliament on Wednesday. Ministers now appear to have more discretion to allow sales. One new provision allows exports if a minister decides there is only a “theoretical” risk that a buyer would break rules about the use of weapons. Under the new rules “[the government] will not refuse a licence on the grounds of a purely theoretical risk of a breach of one or more of those criteria”, Trevelyan’s statement said. This means that export licences could be issued to governments implicated in serious abuse, Butcher said. “This gives a lot of wriggle room and lessens transparency over arms licensing,” he said. “In the context of arms sales to Saudi being used in Yemen, this means that if the minister believes there is only a theoretical risk of arms being used to target civilian infrastructure or residential areas, they will issue the licence.” Even under previous tighter export-control rules, two-thirds of countries classified as “not free” because of their dire record on human rights and civil liberties received weapons licensed by the UK government over the past decade. Between 2011 and 2020, the UK licensed £16.8bn of arms to countries criticised by the US-funded human rights group Freedom House. Of the 53 countries castigated for a poor record on political and human rights on the group’s list, the UK sold arms and military equipment to 39. The UK government has already admitted that a Saudi-led coalition has attacked Yemen using weapons made by British companies. The UK supplied more than half of combat aircraft used by the kingdom for its bombing raids, in a campaign that has faced accusations of serious human rights abuses. The changes also appear to allow the government to decide whether it should take sanctions, embargoes and other restrictions into account when making decisions about handing out licences. “The new criteria allow government ministers to weigh up different factors and if, ‘overall’, they think a transfer should go ahead, they can ignore factors which should be used to deny a transfer,” Butcher said. The new rules seem to be modelled in part on the US arms-licensing stance, and will allow the country to put political or strategic decisions ahead of concerns about violating international humanitarian law, he added. “This is a radically different approach to the past criteria … it seems that if the UK government’s allies are in a conflict, this will be taken into account when considering licences.” The Department for International Trade said that the “UK takes its export control responsibilities very seriously” and the changes “in no way represent a weakening in the UK’s export control regime”. MP Alyn Smith, who represents Stirling for the SNP, said: “The UK arms export regime wasn’t much cop to begin with, given the dubious regimes around the world it already somehow justifies exports to, but these changes will weaken it even further. Worse still is the sneaky way they have tried to bounce it under everyone’s radar while so much of the political class are distracted by the shambles of a government.”People have been admitted to hospital with the Omicron variant in Britain, a government minister has confirmed, as a senior public health adviser said further curbs may be needed. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said he could confirm there were “cases in hospital with Omicron”. “We’ve been able to test people who are in hospital over the past two weeks, and so there is a lag to hospitalisation,” he told Trevor Phillips on Sky News. Speaking to the BBC, Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser of the UK Health Security Agency, said hospitals were diagnosing Omicron in an increasing number of people coming into emergency departments and that the numbers in hospital were expected to increase. No deaths have been reported so far from Omicron, although it is just over two weeks since the variant was first detected in the UK, and there is normally a time lag of three to four weeks between infection and death, should that happen. “I think it’s too early to make any assumption at this point in time,” Hopkins said. Hopkins said it was “inevitable that we’re going to see a big wave of infections” but that it was not yet clear how many of these cases would be severe. The reports follow a warning on Saturday from leading scientists that a failure to impose tougher Covid restrictions could lead to a further 25,000 to 75,000 deaths – or 175,000 to 492,000 hospital admissions – over the next five months. The researchers, based at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, predicted that a massive wave of infections was likely to sweep the nation in January. A major unknown is the extent to which vaccines will protect against more serious disease. Hopkins said further restrictions could be needed to protect the NHS but that it would take another two weeks to know whether the UK was heading into a more optimistic scenario in which Omicron causes milder illness, or the more extreme end of projections. “The challenge is there’s a big difference between 2,000 and 10,000 admissions a day,” she said. Asked whether there were plans to vaccinate children aged five to 11, Zahawi, the former vaccines minister, added: “There is no plan at the moment to vaccinate primary school children for the reason that the Joint Committee on Vaccination [and Immunisation] is still looking at the evidence as to what level of protection it would offer those.” He added: “The most important thing is to boost the most vulnerable – that is absolutely the priority.”A flatbed rail wagon speeding through south-west Russia last week carried an ill omen for negotiations to avert a larger war with Ukraine. On board was a Buk-M1, the kind of medium-range surface-to-air missile system that became notorious in 2014 after a missile fired from territory controlled by Russian proxies in eastern Ukraine shot down a Malaysian airliner, killing all 298 people aboard. If Russia goes to war in Ukraine, it still needs to take a number of steps: establishing fuel supply lines, opening field hospitals and deploying air-defence systems such as the Buk that would protect its heavy weaponry and troops near the front. Even as Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin were sitting down to talks meant to end the crisis, Russia was inching closer to being ready to launch a full-scale ground invasion of its neighbour. “These data allow us to conclude that despite the negotiations between Biden and Putin, the concentration of Russian troops in the areas bordering the territory controlled by the Ukrainian authorities continues,” wrote the Conflict Intelligence Team (CIT) – an online research group that has used social media, railway schedules and other data to reveal details of Russia’s military buildup on the border. Putin may still decide not to launch an invasion, as he leaves troops near the front as leverage for negotiations. But Russian and western analysts are predicting that this military buildup – the second one this year – portends a series of future crises over Ukraine as Putin seeks to reverse its trajectory towards the west. “Even if Putin gets something from the west, serious talks or discussions about guarantees – will that be enough for Putin?” said Tatiana Stanovaya, founder of the political analysis firm R.Politik. “We are witnessing the dawn of a new geopolitical adventurism from Russia.” Despite the Putin-Biden talks, the crisis is growing deeper. On Thursday, Russia’s FSB said it had intercepted a Ukrainian ship in the Sea of Azov near Crimea for failing to obey orders. A day later, Russia closed nearly 70% of the Sea of Azov, a shared body of water also used by Ukraine, for firing drills. Then there is the escalating rhetoric. Deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov has said Russia and the US may be hurtling towards a repeat of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. And Putin said that the situation in eastern Ukraine “looked like genocide” in a recent meeting, raising fears he could seek a pretext to send his troops into the country. With its military threat on the table, Russia’s foreign ministry released its list of demands for how to end the crisis on Friday. Chief among them was for Nato to “officially disavow the decision of the 2008 Bucharest Nato summit that ‘Ukraine and Georgia will become Nato members’”. Putin has spent the last two decades trying to fight Nato expansion, but the possible accession of Ukraine into the military alliance has always touched deeper emotions, and in part motivated him to order the annexation of Crimea and provoke a war in eastern Ukraine that has killed more than 14,000 people. “I told them: please don’t touch Ukraine or there’s going to be a problem,” said Fyodor Lukyanov, an influential Russian foreign policy analyst, of his discussions with western colleagues about Nato’s enlargement in the 2000s. “There is a real red line. Right or wrong … this kind of engagement with Ukraine on security and military affairs – that is seen here as absolutely unacceptable.” Lukyanov said Putin saw it as his “duty as president” not to leave the “Ukrainian problem” – meaning its trajectory towards the west – for the next Russian leader. The US has sought to persuade Russia that Ukraine would not join the alliance any time soon, but on Friday Moscow demanded a more formal declaration. That was a non-starter, Nato head Jens Stoltenberg said within hours of the demand being made public. “Nato’s relationship with Ukraine is going to be decided by the 30 Nato allies and Ukraine – no one else,” he said during a press conference with Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz. In Ukraine, support for joining Nato has jumped considerably in recent years as the country has sought protection from an increasingly aggressive Russia. And for the nations on Nato’s eastern flank, allowing Russia to dictate the alliance’s policy on Ukraine is seen as the first step down a slippery slope towards recognising a Russian sphere of influence. “History shows that pledges of neutrality by Ukraine or any other country in the region do nothing to abate Putin’s appetite; rather, they feed it,” wrote Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, in an article published by Foreign Affairs on Friday. “The best way to respond to such ultimatums is to ignore them altogether.” There are doubts whether Russia really wants to strike any deal at all. Analysts noted that despite Moscow building up its forces for months, Russian diplomats had not prepared any formal documents or even formulated the country’s demands until last week. And the idea of mustering nearly 100,000 troops within striking distance of the Ukrainian border (the US has said that Russia could increase that number to 175,000 by the end of January) just to hold talks with Biden has struck western observers as overkill. That brings us back to the Buk, which, as CIT noted, had its numbers crudely painted over in an effort to prevent identification. Russia employed similar tactics during its clandestine invasion of Ukraine in 2014. The clock is ticking. Putin could pull back, but it would be embarrassing to do so without a solid win in hand. And Russia’s demands look impossible to fulfil for the west: “Putin thinks that if Biden wants, he can move mountains, he can convince allies and convince Kyiv [to make concessions],” said Stanovaya. “This problem could lead Putin to demand the impossible and push the stakes so high that everything ends in war.”Down the ages there has been no shortage of central bankers intent on squeezing inflation out of the system, but Paul Volcker is in a class of his own. Appointed by Jimmy Carter in 1979 when the US annual inflation rate was well into double digits, Volcker administered brutal shock treatment to the world’s biggest economy, at one point pushing official interest rates above 20%. Fans of the 6ft 7in (2.04m) chairman of the Federal Reserve continue to be in awe of his single-minded approach to price stability. Volcker is the inflation hawks’ hawk. Judged by its own lights, the strategy worked. Inflation peaked in 1980, and was one of the reasons Carter lost the presidency to Ronald Reagan that year, but then started to fall rapidly as sky-high interest rates led to business failures and mass job losses. The US inflation rate is currently 6.8%, its highest for 39 years, but in 1982 it was coming down not going up. Inevitably, comparisons have been drawn between Volcker’s no-nonsense approach to inflation and that of the current Fed chairman, Jerome Powell. Official interest rates in the US have been pegged at close to zero since the start of the pandemic almost two years ago, even though the economy is likely to grow by about 6% this year and unemployment has been falling fast. Powell is a Republican but many in his own party think the removal of the stimulus provided by the Fed in early 2020 is long overdue. It is about time, according to his critics, he started to emulate Volcker since otherwise US inflation will continue to spiral higher. The jury’s out on that because while the Omicron strain of Covid-19 will add to supply bottlenecks and so push up the price of goods, it has already led to a fall in the cost of crude oil, which will mean Americans have to pay less to fill up at the pumps. As things stand, it looks as if the headline rate of US inflation might have peaked but the core rate – which excludes energy and food – is likely to remain stubbornly high. Even so, Powell is not remotely considering becoming Volcker redux – and nor could he do so without triggering a monumental financial crisis, not just in the US but in the rest of the developed world and in emerging economies as well. Volcker was a big man in every sense of the word but his get-tough approach to tackling inflation had some unfortunate side-effects, of which four are worth mentioning here. For a start, as anybody who listens to the music of Bruce Springsteen from the early 1980s can testify, bringing inflation down so quickly had a devastating impact on America’s manufacturing sector. Many communities in the Mid-West were one-company towns and they were hollowed out when those business closed or moved their operations overseas to countries with cheaper labour costs. All sorts of problems – physical and mental – resulted from this de-industrialisation. Political problems too, because without the wipeout of industry in Ohio and Pennsylvania Donald Trump would never have made it to the White House. Some of the American companies that survived Volcker’s monetarism moved their operations south to Mexico, but many others outsourced across the Pacific to China, where the economic reform programme under Deng Xiaoping was just getting under way. It could be argued that it was only a matter of time before China emerged as a manufacturing superpower but there is no doubt Volckerism gave Beijing a helping hand. Few among the American policy establishment would have imagined four decades ago that China would have moved so rapidly from low-cost manufacturing to a position where it is a rival to the US in hi-tech sectors such as artificial intelligence. Nobody sees China as a backwater these days, and the economic threat it poses to a century-long US hegemony is a cause of growing geopolitical tension. The third side-effect of crushing US inflation in the early 1980s was the Latin American debt crisis. Countries that borrowed heavily in dollars from US banks in the late 1970s found the loans unpayable when American interest rates rocketed and the global recession that resulted choked off their exports. Many developing countries are in an analogous position today: they have borrowed in dollars at the low interest rates that have prevailed since the global financial crisis and have used future export earnings as collateral. The International Monetary Fund says up to 40 of the world’s lowest-income countries are either in debt distress or at risk of it, so a Volcker-like increase in interest would be ruinous for them. Last, but not least, the Volcker era altered the balance of the US economy, making industry weaker and finance stronger. From the late 1970s and early 80s onwards, the driving force behind the American economy has not been its still-significant manufacturing sector but its banks. As the economy has become increasingly “financialised” so Wall Street has ceased to be a conduit for providing capital to growing businesses but instead has come to serve nobody but itself. Keynes once said the job was unlikely to be well done if speculation was the primary focus of financial markets, and his words have never been truer. Financialisation has gone so far in the US that the Federal Reserve now cannot take the sort of action Volcker deployed 40 years ago because it would lead to a crash just as severe – and perhaps worse – than that of 1929. Powell is therefore trapped. He has to respond slowly and carefully or risk a full-blown sell-off. Wall Street has the whip hand these days, not the Federal Reserve. And for that, despite his reputation, Volcker is partly to blame.Getting to Canada from the UK in August 2020 was a faff, as you might expect mid-pandemic. There was lots of stress – tests and isolation, rules, regulations and forms. I was doing the preparations at my mum’s. She could see I was getting upset and insisted on taking over, assuming I was being pathetic. Within five minutes, she had lost it as well. Emotions were high in the days before I flew. This wasn’t just a holiday, but my chance – amid such uncertainty and sadness – to spend precious time with Julian, my only son. He’s the best and most significant thing that has ever happened to me. He was also very much an unexpected surprise. I had a short relationship with his mum; we parted ways on great terms. Then one day out of the blue I got a call from North Korea, where she was working. She was pregnant. I was based in England, and she lived in Canada. We were both medical emergency aid workers at the time and had met while responding to a cyclone in Burma. It was always going to be complicated, but we decided to make it work. She was incredibly generous. It would have been easy for her to never even have told me what had happened, but instead she made every effort to include me; to let me be a father. I moved to North America for much of his early childhood, a compromise of sorts – first to Toronto, New York next. He lives in Calgary with his mum, little brother and stepdad. He calls both of us “Dad”, which is occasionally confusing but always lovely. It meant I could be with him in Canada in five hours, while also being not too far from my life back in the UK. When he was 10, I returned to London. From then, we’d see each other during holidays. He’d come to stay, and I’d go and visit. It’s not the way I might have chosen to be a parent. But it’s the way life happened. I love him the same and don’t take my responsibility as a father any less seriously. It’s just that by virtue of our situation, I’m not always in the room. We could easily have created a dynamic where, as a father, I was considered a failure. All of us made sure to mitigate this. I’m Dad. He just has another dad, too. One is more present, both love him the same. Still, it’s strange how judgmental many people are about our type of parent-child relationship. I’ve had close friends say that I’m not really his dad, that I don’t know what it’s like to be a parent. I’m predisposed, therefore, to being slightly defensive about our relationship, and before seeing him last summer there had been a bigger gap than usual. Thankfully, I made it to Canada. Normally, I’d have a month or more with my son, but we made the most of our two short weeks together. I rented a cottage and my little brother and his wife came, too. It was amazing. Once we arrived, we were totally isolated. We could have no visitors. It was totally undiluted family time. I taught him to play poker. We built a radio-controlled car. With no distractions, we talked about the big stuff – the dangers of the internet, plans for the future, his greatest dreams. It was magical. Lots of people hate airports when long-distance relationships are involved. But heading there last August felt different. Until then, we’d always had a day circled in the calendar where we’d see each other again. The tickets might not always have been booked, but the dates were firmly in my diary. This time, there was no “see you at Easter” or “next time it’ll be spring” as we said our farewells. Having no end to our separation in sight was awful. There he was heading off to be a teenager, embarking on the next stage of his life’s journey – the bits of childhood you remember. It was hard saying goodbye, not knowing how or when I might see him again. There was a woman at Calgary airport, just past security, who had an emotional-therapy dog. I went to say hello, and broke down completely, clinging on to this poor animal as I bawled like a baby. I apologised afterwards, and the kind woman told me it happens all the time and not to worry. Christmas 2020 was a disaster. Mine was by no means the greatest tragedy. On Christmas Eve, I called Julian. We chatted for three hours, telling stories and messing about. It was one of those rare moments where we were both in the right mood, caught at the right time, and found ourselves connecting. At the end, I closed my laptop lid and crumbled. I felt so sorry for myself and I felt alone. I asked myself: what use am I to him? I thought a lot about my approach to parenting. I never wanted Julian to feel I wasn’t permanently present out of some deficiency of love. It would be easy, I’m sure, for him to have told himself a certain story: that if Dad really cared, he’d have moved in, or at least next door. That bleeds into my own thinking, too: am I just a terrible father? Of course, in reality, that wouldn’t have been the sensible option. His mum is happily married to a lovely man, for a start. Us trying to forge a relationship would never have been sensible and I’m still convinced it was the right decision. He has grown up in a loving family with a secure and stable home. Instead, I was always proactive in telling him, explicitly, that I love him. That I’m there for him. That I think about him all of the time. These might sound like obvious things to say, but reinforcing them regularly felt right. Every time I get off the plane, I’m genuinely excited to spend time with him. When we are together, there’s a temptation to do everything: heavy parenting. It’s easy to find yourself desperate to manufacture memories, to squeeze too much in. At first, that’s what I tried to do. He’d come to London and I’d arrange an endless list of activities. Then one time, after a few days he turned to me, exhausted, and said: “Dad, can we just have breakfast?” It was a learning curve for me to realise we could just spend time together. That it’ll be more special, more real, if we did normal father-son things. Ensuring my relatives were a presence in his life was also key. I didn’t want him to see me as a figure detached from his family, our family. My parents are his grandparents. He knows his cousins, uncles and aunts. I’m certainly not perfect. Picking up the phone to an eight-year-old boy? I found that challenging. Time zones made it difficult and he wasn’t that interested in chitchat. Ideally I’d call at the same time every night. I know his mum and other dad do so much work. Some I can appreciate, plenty I’ll never know about. There’s a division of labour, but a division of joy as well. For every complicated and difficult moment I miss, I’m absent from special things – big or small – I’m gutted to not be present for. I felt that a lot last Christmas. In August 2021, I returned to Canada. I’d worried a lot. In the run-up to seeing him, I prepared myself to have this big conversation about the previous festive season. To tell him how much he meant to me and how desperate I’d been to see him. That I hoped it hadn’t upset him too deeply. How could I make it up to him? When I brought it up, he looked at me, baffled. What are you on about, he replied, I saw you at Christmas. The boy had forgotten all of it. It was such a relief. While I felt sadness and guilt, he’d moved on entirely. And while he’d changed a lot – growing both mature and tall, a new wardrobe – our bond was just as powerful. We had the perfect month together. This gets to the heart, I think, of how that year apart changed the way I think. For a long time I wanted, deep down, for my son to think about and miss me. That’s what I grappled with last Christmas. Now? I’m content if I don’t cross his mind at all until we next speak or meet again, as long as he knows I care, and that he’s happy. I used to worry that I was a redundant dad, but I don’t think that’s true. The reality I’ve come to accept is that your child will grow up. A parent’s ability to be there is always limited. It’s useful to have a moment as a parent where you can do so little you’re forced to sit back and question what – at its core – your role is. For me, that has happened a whole lot earlier. I am a slightly distant dad, but Julian knows I’m here: a permanent presence, with unconditional love, forever cheering for him. And I can do that anywhere. Of course, he needs a lot more, too. It’s just for now, he gets that elsewhere – from two people who do it a whole lot better than I could. This Christmas, I’ll find the thought quite comforting. Xand van Tulleken is in Operation Ouch! Live at the Lyric Theatre until 16 January (operationouchlive.com) As told to Michael SegalovThe US describes its newly announced diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics, backed by Britain and other western countries, as a protest against China’s “egregious human rights abuses and atrocities in Xinjiang”, where the Chinese Communist party (CCP) is accused of genocide, as well as its evisceration of Hong Kong’s democracy. Yet a separate, lurking worry informs Washington’s action: that China may turn the games into a propaganda extravaganza, showcasing its growing strength to a global audience. Think Gladiator, and then think Xi Jinping, China’s authoritarian president, acting like a latter-day Roman emperor exercising power over life and death. It’s not a fanciful image. An independent tribunal’s report last week described the ghastly reality facing thousands of Uyghurs who suffer “acts of unconscionable cruelty, depravity and inhumanity”, including torture and organised gang rapes, in Xinjiang’s concentration camps. As the world’s athletes get a thumbs up to perform at the “people’s games”, Emperor Xi gives his uncounted, unseen victims a callous thumbs down. It’s difficult to regard Xi – with his unassailable dictatorial powers, his techno-fascist surveillance state that stifles dissent and oppresses minorities, and his aggressively expansionist foreign policy – as anything other than a totalitarian control freak with imperial fantasies. Empires, especially Britain’s, get a bad press nowadays. Their close association with colonialism, racism, slavery and other evils is reason enough. But the assumption that such abuses have been banished ignores what is happening in today’s world, right under our noses. Imperialism, in all its awful forms, still poses a threat. But it is no longer the imperialism of the west, rightly execrated and self-condemned. Today’s threat emanates from the east. Just as objectionable, and potentially more dangerous, it’s the prospect of a totalitarian 21st-century Chinese global empire. Historically speaking, empire-building relies on three factors, or projections. First come overseas trade networks or hubs, via maritime links and land corridors. Following close behind comes the establishment of overseas military bases to secure and defend these new interests, with or without local consent. Last, nascent empires establish an (often delusional) narrative, or “mission statement”, to justify their activities. British imperialists claimed to be a civilising force, bringing law and Christianity to the great unwashed. The postwar American empire was, supposedly, all about championing democracy. Almost as if it had made a study, the CCP is following this western imperialist handbook to the letter – with one important caveat. Beijing does not fight distant foreign wars to sustain its dominance, as the US did in Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan and Britain did all over the world. Not yet, anyway. The first phase of China’s new imperial age is already in train. Xi’s ambitious belt and road investment and infrastructure initiative (BRI) touches 60 countries. China is the world’s largest trading nation and largest exporter, with $2.6tn worth of exports in 2019. The CCP’s focus is meanwhile shifting to empire phase two: military bases. US media reported last week that the port city of Bata in Equatorial Guinea could become China’s first Atlantic seaboard naval base – potentially putting warships and submarines within striking distance of America’s east coast. In what could serve as a case study of Chinese neo-imperial strategy, Beijing offered billions in loans to Equatorial Guinea’s corrupt dictator, whom the US in contrast accuses of serious human rights abuses. In such ways are alliances forged and empires built. China already has a naval base in Djibouti, in the Horn of Africa. It is said to be considering an island airbase in Kiribati that could in theory threaten Hawaii. Meanwhile, it continues to militarise atolls in the South China Sea. A Pentagon report last month predicted China will build a string of military bases girdling the world, including in the Arctic. CCP “target” countries include Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, the United Arab Emirates, Kenya and Angola, it said. US concerns about Chinese inroads in Central America centre on Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua. Nor is Europe immune to CCP power projection: witness the worries over Huawei, espionage, and the Piraeus port “gateway to Europe” scheme. Xi makes no bones about his aim to achieve global ascendancy, remake the international order in China’s image, and dominate emerging 21st-century technologies, such as artificial intelligence, advanced computing, information management and the weaponisation of space. At the same time he spins a softer message, the sort of comforting narrative predatory imperial powers prefer. China is no threat, he says. Rather, we are your benevolent friends, partners for global prosperity. Last week, marking Joe Biden’s “summit for democracy”, to which it was not invited, Beijing even claimed, absurdly, to be the only truly functional democracy and an example to others. In a speech in July marking the party’s centenary, Xi offered a less reassuring insight into his combative ideas. Imperial might is right, he suggested. Where Britannia once bobbed about, now China rules the waves. “We have never bullied, oppressed, or subjugated the people of any other country, and we never will. By the same token we will never allow anyone to bully, oppress or subjugate [China],” he said. “Anyone who tries will find themselves on a collision course with a steel wall forged by 1.4 billion people.” By key measures – the number of overseas bases, alliances, military strike-power – America still greatly outstrips China’s regime; likewise in terms of respect for human values and rights. Xi’s BRI ambitions are meeting increased pushback. But too often, the west appears unsure how to handle China’s challenge. The partial Olympics boycott smacks of weakness. After two centuries on imperialism’s receiving end, the Chinese empire strikes back. Trouble is, Xi’s vision of future global dominion is centrally controlled, collectively oppressive, individually crushing totalitarianism. He promises only misery for the masses.Clifford wasn’t always big. It’s the colossal love of his new owner, 12-year-old Emily Elizabeth (Darby Camp of Big Little Lies) that transforms the red Andrex puppy with velvet CGI fur from the size of a child’s slipper into a cuddly, 10ft giant. “It’s New York, no one will notice,” insists Jack Whitehall’s irresponsible Uncle Casey in this benign live-action adaptation of Norman Bridwell’s popular picture books. Whitehall adopts an American accent, only to break into his natural voice to annoying comic effect. Emily Elizabeth’s private school classmates nickname her “food stamps”; the underlying class commentary is awkwardly executed. The film is best when it sticks to children’s caper mode, jostled along by gentle toilet humour, bad-tempered barnyard animals and a scene of two kids driving a van across Manhattan.It’s tempting to see a Hollywood trajectory, a yuletide miracle, in Sir Matthew Bourne’s life. As a teenager, almost every night, he would take the bus down to London’s West End to hang around at stage doors to collect autographs from the stars. Four or five decades on he can look back on a string of shows that have seen his own name in lights as probably the most famous and innovative choreographer and dance impresario of his generation. To prove the happy ending, having once crossed his fingers and made a wish for Barbra Streisand’s signature, he’s now on her Christmas card list. (“We get one every year,” he says, “‘From Barbra and Jim.’”) Bourne grew up in a rented house in Walthamstow on the outer edge of north-east London and the number 38 bus into town would take him along Islington High Street. He’d look out from the top deck and think: “This is where I’ll live one day” – without the first idea of how he’d get there. Fast forward again and he now lives in the Georgian suburb in a house in which the choral arrangement for Hark! The Herald Angels Sing was written. It’s a wonderful life. We meet in his favourite local brasserie, Bellanger, for brunch on a chilly Saturday. There’s a proper Manhattan clamour and clatter to the place, a big echoey room in which, at noon, everyone seems to be taking off hats and coats while enthusiastically greeting old mates. Bourne has been a regular here for five years. He and his long-term partner, Arthur Pita, also a choreographer (and formerly one of the swans in Bourne’s celebrated all-male Swan Lake) like it partly because it is not just dog-friendly but positively dog-loving. They bring their Russian toy terrier Ferdinand (named after the bull in the Disney story, who preferred flowers and poetry to fighting), and he sits and watches the north London world go by while waiters tempt him with filtered water and homemade biscuits. As Bourne orders a big plate of eggs florentine and a coffee, the waiter reminds him that he was also here last night. He has a rare day off from visits to his acclaimed new touring show, The Midnight Bell, which he wrote and devised based on the Hangover Square novels of Patrick Hamilton and 1930s Soho – as well as intensive rehearsals for The Nutcracker down in Plymouth. Bourne first reimagined The Nutcracker in a more contemporary setting 30 years ago. It’s been a decade since his company, New Adventures in Dance, put it on so there’s a proper excitement to it again. “For most dance companies,” he says, “it’s the annual fixture that brings in the money. They have to do it every year, and they all start to hate it. We’re lucky to have lots of Christmas shows that we do. So for most of our dancers in it, it’s very new to them, the music is even unfamiliar.” Also, of course there‘s still the undeniable thrill and relief of being back in the studio after the long months of isolation and lockdown. Bourne made a poignant little film while the theatres were closed of some of his dancers performing at home or in their gardens their parts in his staging of The Red Shoes, which was in the middle of a sold-out run when the pandemic started. As a company they’ve fared better than most, he says, because they have only a small number of full-time staff and – fortunately – no permanent building. “But it’s been awful for the dancers. Their career is often quite short and these are precious years, lost.” Many have found the return quite tough, psychologically. “We’ve encountered a lot of lack of confidence,” Bourne says. Dancers are used to daily repetition, constantly fine-tuning the muscle memory that goes with performance, the lay-off has interrupted that. Bourne recalls how, when he first started working as a choreographer and stopped dancing regularly himself, he completely lost his nerve about being on stage again, even in minor roles. “As soon as you stop,” he says, “you realise what a big deal it is to go and stand in front of people and say: ‘I’m good enough for you to watch. Look at me. I’m worth your money.’” On a selfish level, however, he says, he quite enjoyed the downtime of the break, a unique interval in a schedule that has taken him all across the country and the globe for 30 years. While the theatres were closed he finished The Midnight Bell, worked on renovating a flat he and Pita have bought in Brighton, and also he says, no stranger to nostalgia, catalogued all of his autograph collection from years ago. That addiction began when his mum took him to see Dame Edith Evans and Friends, the actress’s final outing at the Theatre Royal Haymarket in 1974, when he was 13. “It happened to be the opening night, and all these famous people were there. Mrs Bridges from Upstairs Downstairs, for one, I remember.” After that he was hooked on first nights, premieres. “I got Charlie Chaplin, Fred Astaire, Bette Davis face to face,” he says. Among the collection were signatures that surprised him. “Three Freddie Mercurys, for example, that I’ve got no memory of getting.” Looking back, the autograph habit was, he understands, a way of wanting to connect with a world that seemed out of reach. But it was also a kind of education in new plays, new actors. He saw everything. “Now of course, if you were thinking of a career in the arts you might think about what college to go to.” His parents fed his passion. His mum was a secretary and his dad worked at Thames Water; they spent all their spare money on theatre tickets. “We were always singing at home; my dad thought he was Frank Sinatra. But West End musicals, never opera or dance.” The first ballet Bourne saw was Swan Lake when he was 18, at Sadler’s Wells; he was captivated, he says, not by the beauty of it but the weirdness and eccentricity. He taught himself to dance at home. “My first ever dance class was my audition for dance college when I was 21,” he says. He’d come out three years before, but never really to his parents. “It just became apparent,” he says, “and they were always welcoming to my friends. That was a charmed existence, compared to some stories.” With savings from his first job filing at the BBC he went to New York, stayed at the Y – “in that golden moment before Aids” – saw Angela Lansbury in Sweeney Todd, got Andy Warhol’s autograph, and then went to the west coast and did the bus tours of Hollywood homes. It was Bourne’s landmark Swan Lake that gave him an entry into that world full time. He took the production to LA and was the hottest ticket in town. All the stars came backstage afterwards. “I remember Warren Beatty insisting I call him any time,” he says. “I was invited to Barbra Streisand’s house for lunch [hence the Christmas card]…” His great fear after that was that he would be a one-hit wonder, defined by Swan Lake. His answer to that was to never stop creating. He has over the years been tempted to choreograph three passion projects from his childhood – Mary Poppins, Oliver!, My Fair Lady – for others. But he has always returned to his regular company. “The important thing for me has been to form a team of people to work with,” he says. “In New Adventures, there are people who have been with me for 30 years. And that’s why the work gets better, I think. There’s so much shorthand that you don’t have if you start from scratch all the time, though it gets hard to find something original as you get older.” The other thought that crept into his mind during the enforced period of rest was that familiar assessment of where he was up to in life. His parents died a decade ago and since then he has worked to create an alternative family. “I’m 62 in January,” he says, “and beginning to think: ‘Do I want to keep touring and so on?’” He is aware his role has changed, too, in rehearsals: in Plymouth he obviously can no longer get up and demonstrate what he wants from The Nutcracker, as he could when he first devised it. But even as he’s explaining this to me, finishing up a post-brunch beer, I can sense the process has lost none of its original adventure for him. As he well knows, what better balletic drama is there than to dream of a future and to wake up each morning and remember it came true? Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! is at Sadler’s Wells until 30 January followed by a UK tour; new-adventures.netThe chances of Libya staging its first presidential elections on the long-planned-for date of 24 December appear close to collapse after the body overseeing the vote said it was unable to announce the the approved candidates because of continued legal doubts. With the elections less than a fortnight away and virtually no time for campaigning, a postponement would represent a bitter blow to the international community’s hopes of reuniting the deeply divided country. Foreign powers will also fear the overall momentum towards democracy could dissipate. In the short term they will have to agree whether or not the interim government continues in order to fill the political vacuum and prevent a return to civil war. A series of court rulings have overturned the Libyan electoral commission’s decisions to block high-profile figures including Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the son of the former dictator, from standing for the presidency. The interim prime minister, Abdul Hamid Dbeibah and warlord Khalifa Haftar, the head of the self-styled Libyan National Army, have meanwhile been approved by the commission, a decision that has since been appealed against by other parties. It said in a statement on Saturday it said could not announce the names of the approved candidates out of the nearly 100 that have applied because it was “keen to exhaust all means of litigation to ensure its decisions comply with issued judgments”. Rival factions have accused each other of intimidating or bribing judicial officials to secure the reinstatement of their candidates, and the commission is looking to see if the decisions were valid. In the case of Dbeibah, he had pledged as a condition of becoming interim PM that he would not stand for election but has since argued in court that this was a moral pledge with no legal force. Saif Gaddafi was convicted in absentia in 2015 on war crimes charges for his part in fighting the revolution that toppled his father, Muammar Gaddafi. He denies wrongdoing. The presence of tens of thousands of foreign fighters, mercenaries and indigenous militia make the country a tinderbox, and there are fears an election conducted with disputed candidates would only lead to a result that was not recognised. In a sign of the tensions over foreign forces, France is pressing the EU to agree on Monday to impose sanctions on the Russian private military contractor Wagner Group, which it says operates in Libya and the Sahel. Moscow denies Wagner is linked to the Russian state and has said it would retaliate against EU sanctions placed on its citizens. The international community’s ability to demand the Libyan political class stick to the 24 December election date, which was first agreed in February, has been hampered by the appointment of a UN special envoy, Ján Kubiš, who resigned three weeks before the elections after less than a year in the post. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, has since appointed Stephanie Williams, a forceful former UN deputy special envoy, to act as his special adviser. Russia vetoed her appointment as a full envoy, but she has deep knowledge of Libya and last year displayed a willingness to confront those in the political class opposed to elections. The UN mission issued a statement urging all sides not to reverse the gains made, pointing to the registration of nearly 3 million voters, the successful distribution of voter cards and the applications of large numbers of candidates for the presidency and parliament as signs of deep popular support for elections. The US ambassador to Libya, Richard Norland, said “refusing to go to the elections and mobilising to obstruct will only place the fate and future of the country at the mercy of those inside Libya and their external backers who prefer bullet power over ballot power”.This thoughtful documentary about Arthur Ashe, the first African American man to win Wimbledon in 1975, understands that representation is only one step towards equality. Born and raised in the segregated south, Ashe infiltrated the “lilywhite institute of top-tier tennis” just as the civil rights movement was gaining momentum. Yet for years he kept his head down, and felt guilty for it. The film charts his fraught political awakening, from protesting against apartheid to becoming an Aids activist, before his death from the disease in 1993. With his giant serve, sharp intellect and famously cool head, Ashe was pitted against more outspoken black athletes, such as Muhammad Ali. “We’re thought of as all brawn and no brains – I like to challenge that myth,” the young tennis player once said. Archive film is juxtaposed with contemporary footage of today’s sports star activists, including Naomi Osaka and Colin Kaepernick – a potent reminder of how expectations have since shifted.Creatures of Dust and Dreams is the first of Sarah Lianne Lewis’s works to be performed by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales since she was named as their composer affiliate a year ago. In this 10-minute piece, given its premiere by the orchestra under the baton of Finnegan Downie Dear, Lewis sought to reflect on the intrinsic frailty of the individual against their potential for gaining strength by reaching out to others. Conceived in 2019, pre-Covid, Lewis nevertheless recognised its resonance with the fears and uncertainties of the pandemic experience. Quarter-tones lent a brash edge to the buoyancy of the opening, with clarinet multiphonics adding to the abrasive element and an ongoing sense of unease, all of which contrasted wildly with the more straightforward melodic lines and far-from-dissonant harmonies. The initial playfulness and the musical material’s tendency to meander and periodically peter out – albeit perhaps redolent of the insubstantiality of dream – meant that the work didn’t quite carry the philosophical weightiness that Lewis intended. Nevertheless, her assurance in handling the textures was more than evident. The revelation of this concert was John Woolrich’s Viola Concerto, written in 1992 and first performed two years later. Constructed as a cycle of songs without words, steeped in the melancholy of leave-taking yet at the same time consolatory, each of its seven parts contains the briefest of references to music from the past – Mozart, Beethoven, Monteverdi and Wagner – allusive, elusive, redemptive. Soloist Timothy Ridout gave a performance of exceptional eloquence and maturity, and Downie Dear ensured that the players, both in their accompaniment and in the expansive orchestral sections, matched Ridout in sensitivity. The sheer beauty of it all was mesmerising and, by the end, profoundly moving. After such emotion, Ravel’s ballet music Ma mère l’Oye (Mother Goose) and its fairytale figures came as suitably festive light relief. Downie Dear balanced the score’s moments of languid delicacy with the more vibrant characterisations that, being Ravel, never become remotely pantomimic. Available on BBC Sounds until 7 JanuaryBeing a director was so secondary to who Roger was as a man in the world. He was just such a grounding, warm, extraordinary presence. I say this with affection, but some directors make it known that they’ve just walked into the room. Roger wasn’t like that. He didn’t need to be needed. He didn’t have an ego. He just wanted to be part of a team – creating little families, little families of people working together. I had known Roger for a long time before we worked together on a film – Blackbird, in 2019. We’d worked together once before, in 2005, on an American Express commercial. A few years prior to that, The Mother [his 2003 film with Daniel Craig and Anne Reid] had completely taken my breath away. It was so natural, so crushingly real. It felt like the first time in a long time that any of us had seen actors in a film appearing not be “acting” at all. That was one of Roger’s most impressive skills: his capacity to get actors to just be. To just be and not act. We’d spent years trying to work on something else together beyond that commercial, but for logistical reasons things never worked out. Then, eventually, Blackbird came along [a drama about a family gathering around a mother for her last weekend before she dies]. It wasn’t long after my own mother had died, and I hadn’t gone back to work yet, I was in the throes of grief. Roger was so kind. I remember him phoning me: “You don’t have to go anywhere, we can shoot it in seven weeks and it will all be done. We can shoot it when it works for you, when you are ready.” We ended up filming it – and I’m not joking – four minutes’ walk from where I live. On set, I felt Roger constantly kept an eye on me, because he could tell that the tiniest thing might trigger me. There were so many similarities between the film’s narrative and the loss I was dealing with. I felt very cared for. Roger was a thick safety net, a warm security blanket. Quite literally a shoulder to lean on, to cry on. But I always got the sense that he did that for all the actors he cared about. It certainly wasn’t just me. Over the years, if ever there was a moment when I might need a bit of guidance – if I was struggling to find my rhythm with a director or another actor who perhaps worked in a different way to me – I’d always phone Rog. I’d say, “Rog, help! I know you’ll know exactly what I can say to this person, AND how to say it. What do you think I should do? What should I say?” and he would pause… Sometimes he’d say, “OK. Let me think for five minutes and I’ll call you back.” Then he would take his five minutes and always call back and give me his proper, calm suggestions. Roger put everyone else first. On set, he would be so egoless. He would always be sitting in the quietest corner he could find, on an impossibly tiny box or stool watching the monitor intently, diligently making notes, and I’d think, “God, don’t you have a proper chair?” But no, he didn’t care. He was the master of no fuss. He would sit and scribble scribble scribble with his glasses teetering on his rosy face. He was also open to all ideas at all times, even if they were shit. He would go, “Oh, that’s interesting, yeah, OK, let’s try it.” Our film, Blackbird, came and went at the box office, but Roger didn’t think, “Oh that’s a shame, fuck, I wish it had done more business”. He was deeply proud of it and the work we had all done. He made it clear how much he cherished the time that we’d all spent together, the bonds we’d formed and how that time transformed us all. We all got matching tattoos at the end of filming; we met up at the house where Susan Sarandon was staying and had the small blackbird symbol that was printed at the top of the call sheet tattooed on to our bodies. I’m looking at mine now on the inside of my right wrist. Finally working on a film with Rog will remain one of my most – if not the most – treasured experiences I’ve ever had. Roger really listened and he really talked to people, whoever they were. One day my teenage son had been on set for a brief visit, which happens very rarely because I don’t tend to have my children on film sets. He and Roger had a big conversation about The Merchant of Venice, which my son happened to be doing at school. I just couldn’t believe that Roger had the mental capacity to be able to separate himself from our work and give time to my son, who was only 14. And it wasn’t because he was my kid. I know that it could have been anyone’s son or daughter. It was always family first for Roger too, and that’s really exceptional. Some directors will say, “Oh, yeah, I know the juggle, I get it,” but actually, not many of them really do because most of them are able to up sticks or leave their family for weeks on end. Not Roger. He had young daughters and he never wanted to be away from them or take them out of school. He loved the day to day business of being a dad. I keep looking back over my last text exchanges with him, and actually, it’s just all pictures of him with his girls. Those are the last exchanges that we had, just about the children: his children, my children. What meals we’d been cooking recently. He mentioned a delicious wine he’d come across. When we last spoke, he was delighted with The Duke, the film he’d done with Jim Broadbent and Helen Mirren. He’d had a lovely time, and was creatively in a really good place and feeling extremely fulfilled. I still can’t believe he’s dead. None of us can. The other day, I was talking to another actor and we were saying that it feels like nothing quite works without Roger here. None of it quite works without the safety net. The security blanket. The shoulder to lean on. We all miss him so much.Christmas doesn’t bring out the sanity in me. I like total immersion. I practically stud myself with cloves. No cereal packet goes undecorated. Punchlines like Frankincense Sinatra abound. I go all out for Christmas both in theory and in practice. The Christmas tree’s branches become my autobiography, crammed with ornaments dating back 40 years. I shop with the belief that good presents transform people’s lives. Emotions come at me in rapid currents: half the year’s turnover of feelings in 10 days. If I don’t have at least tonsillitis on Boxing Day – sharp scissors at the back of the throat – there is the sense I haven’t tried. When I was little and fretful and a bit forlorn, Christmas came to my rescue without fail. It wasn’t the world as it was but the world as it should be: the colour of things turned to the highest setting, shimmering with promise and possibilities. There were rewards for good deeds and hard times, gifts that would lighten and safeguard the future, mountains of food, on white plates with green dragons, with overeating – my weakness then – a requirement, not a crime. Chocolate money and tangerines for breakfast; pudding served with the heavenly quartet of brandy butter, cream, custard and ice-cream. My mother was a single parent to five children. Our circumstances were straitened in ordinary times. But at Christmas her best friend, Anne, and her husband intervened, taking us in and filling us up to the brim. There were towers of presents taller than I was. Donkeys called Sir Isaac and Josephine. I felt like the people on the Quality Street tin. I was so happy, the comfort and joy remaining in my system for months and months… When it comes to Christmas I’m feudal in my loyalty. I won’t hear a word against it and when people talk it down I feel a spur to violence. Yet as each year passes I can’t always achieve the heights I crave. I want the sharp frenzy of old that is one part sherbet, two parts falling in love and three parts having your stitches removed; but the feeling I get is closer to winning the red-wine vinegar in the school tombola. I give Christmas my all. I wind the banisters with spruce and red satin. I make three kinds of stuffing and at least four sauces. I plant tubs of paperwhites, dust the mantel with fake snow, convince myself that stilton and fruitcake make a sensible sandwich, design a placement for the parcels in the stockings creating wild crescendos interspersed with sensible lulls. I pour capfuls of pine essence into the bath, emerging invigorated with queasy Hulk-hued limbs. I watch Meet Me in St Louis and On the Town on a loop, trying to lasso the perfect mood as I wrap. I’m not complaining, it’s my honour to do these things. And yet the mood can be harder to pin down than a cloud. It comes when it wants. Sometimes it doesn’t come at all. I don’t need Christmas to rescue me any more – perhaps that’s the problem. I’m no longer a huddle of needs to be scooped. The result is there’s a measure of estrangement between me and Christmas now. We’ll never be to each other what we once were. Sometimes I feel like a chapter in an earnest (s)elf-help volume, entitled Women Who Love Christmas Too Much. Some years I feel Christmas itself rolling its eyes at me, embarrassed by the lengths to which I routinely go. “She won’t be told,” it shakes its head. Perhaps elves at the University of Alaska like to research strange cases: “She needs to dial it down,” do they conclude, pointy-chinned? “I mean, who is she actually doing it for?” But in my mind Christmas’s allure and glamour are irresistible. Christmas shimmers into view like a 1970s stunt motorcyclist, fresh from soaring over 22 buses, and ambles over with toothy grin and beseeching eyes, shaking out its curls, and I know I should resist, my resolve is high and all I need to do is turn away politely, because I’m not going to put myself through it again this year. I’ll embrace a low-key approach and cut corners and simply aim for warm soft jolly calm. But before I know it I’m up in the small hours, melting Fox’s glacier fruits in a double boiler to make stained glass windows for the gingerbread house. Forget all your nonsense and just think of little children, people chide me, but I’m not the only person who finds the season unwieldy. I know citizens of six years old who feel mournful that Christmas doesn’t make them feel as it did when they were four. How to let none of this infect the Christmas dinner? Christmas cooking can bring out the worst in us, certainly. A friend came into the kitchen and asked her brother-in-law what she could do to help. “I’ll tell you what you can do, you can fuck off,” he said. It’s good to keep the cascades of emotion out of the saucepans. No one wants their parsnip puree garnished with regret, or sorrows in blankets or wry potatoes. Jokes help, of course, they always do. Katharine Hepburn said of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers that he gave her class and she gave him sex appeal, and I’ve sometimes wondered whether the same could be said of chestnuts with sprouts. (It’s a stretch.) The danger with Christmas cooking is the stakes are so high. Food and love are inextricably linked, but never more so than at Christmas time. It’s the top-heavy equations that tip people over. We all know a good square meal has the power to raise the spirits immeasurably. By natural extension it’s hard not to believe that a spectacular Christmas dinner might just reward and compensate the family for all the difficulties of the passing year. This is doubly true this Christmas when so many of us couldn’t be together last time. Christmas as medicine, salve and suite of medals seems more necessary than ever. It doesn’t help that we look to Christmas to measure how we’re doing. It marks a reckoning of the family’s successes and strengths, its compassion and compatibility, its basic fitness as an institution. How does it treat its weakest members? How quickly can its conflicts be resolved? And most painful of all, how do we bear the fact that not everyone is still with us? The misery of the empty chairs. It’s natural to want to pour a bit of Mum out for everyone with the gravy, but where’s the recipe for that? And we’re seeking profound consolation from bread sauce and red cabbage? In that case it had better be exceptional. Before you know it you’re not cooking so much as offering yourself as sacrifice. And yet, the provision of a splendid Christmas dinner in tough times is always a heroic act. Single people who allocated themselves all the trimmings last year, when Christmas was cancelled, had good cause for pride. It stood for something. Hope, I think. Even if it felt like rearranging yule logs on the deck of the Titanic. In my latest novel Loved and Missed a devoted mother invites her estranged daughter over for lunch on 25 December, but the daughter will only agree to a walk. The mother wants a park with swans and a bandstand – it’s Christmas! – but the daughter suggests a littered roadside strip of green. Undeterred by the dearth of cheer the mother holds her nerve and unpacks the Christmas dinner on a park bench, why not? “I got my courage up and spread three red-checked dishcloths on the old bench, placed some gold paper plates in a triangle, unwrapped the turkey sandwiches I had made, the meat half white, half brown, still warm, the butter glistening. I had chestnut stuffing wrapped in foil and I crumbled it over the meat, smeared on cranberry sauce from a coffee jar with the back of a spoon. I set down a paper cup full of sprouts on the bench. My hand was shaking. “Christmas vitamins,” I mumbled wryly, but they looked slightly fraudulent, as though they might have been pretending … I had a box of six crackers with robins on them in a carrier and I laid two next to each plate. I had forgotten the paper napkins with the holly sprigs. I propped a tall red candle in an eggcup and lit the wick, sheltering it with the curve of my hand, the flame hot on my fingers until the fucking wind blew it out.” No one says anything. Almost nothing is eaten. The meal almost takes on notes of a sacrament. When I have fears that Christmas will undo me I sometimes reread James Joyce’s short story The Dead. It captures the power a meal has to redress things, almost as though a big white cloth might be spread over difficulties, not to hide them, but as a way of asserting the value of harmony, order and plenty, whatever harsh or sad things may come after or before. The idea that things can be both strict and lavish appeals to me hugely – a good spread should call out to be captured in oils. In Joyce’s magnificent tale, the fat brown goose sits at one end of the table and at the other “on a bed of creased paper strewn with sprigs of parsley lay a great ham … peppered over with crust crumbs, a neat paper frill round its shin and beside this was a round of spiced beef. Between these rival ends ran parallel lines of side-dishes: two little minsters of jelly, red and yellow; a shallow dish full of blocks of blancmange and red jam…” I love the seriousness of this table. It is rare to see a feast that is as dignified as a fast. After the great pudding, a whole subsidiary course of “raisins and almonds and figs and apples and oranges and chocolates and sweets” follows. I always think a festive meal should have a series of false endings as though the table itself keeps calling out, “Encore!” The first Christmas dinner I cooked was when I was 28, newly married, and a grown-up life had landed on my head. I had 18 to cook for and new saucepans in descending sizes, but the whole day was cauterised by two strains of sadness: one brother in prison, the other in hospital. I felt the pressure mounting; streams of anxious calculations. It was clear to me that if only my roast potatoes were crisp enough, golden enough, fluffy enough, they would take the pain away for everyone. The funny thing was, they did a little bit. Loved and Missed by Susie Boyt is published by Little, Brown (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.comAlicia Keys’s eighth album – the follow-up to 2020’s guest-heavy Alicia – is a strange beast. A 26-track double album, the first side includes a suite of songs, (billed as Originals) that showcase a more stripped-back, piano-based sound, while the Unlocked side features beefed up, hip-hop-leaning reworkings co-produced by Mike Will Made It. It’s an intriguing concept that, when it works, offers a glimpse into an artist’s creative process, but when it doesn’t, feels like hedge-betting. Highlights include Old Memories, morphed from a jazzy standard into side two’s dancefloor goliath, and the original version of Daffodils, which pairs piano, delicate electronics and a lullaby melody to soothing effect. The ebullient, career-high Love When You Call My Name, meanwhile, works perfectly in both iterations. Unfortunately, on some of Unlocked, the songs are contorted into ungainly shapes. Only You’s smoky subtlety is hijacked by crass dance beats, while the controlled drama of the original Nat King Cole is lost thanks to a slurred guest verse from Lil Wayne. There’s enough across both albums to keep fans happy, and that soulful voice is still a thing of wonder, but Keys has a strange hotchpotch feel to it.Over the course of his long career – he was a master draughtsman at 12 – the Japanese genius Hokusai (1760-1849) was so prolific it seems absurd that the west knows him mainly for a single work, The Great Wave. His many thousands of images were treasured throughout Japan. For sale as cheap prints – the Wave originally cost no more than a double serving of noodles – and in bestselling volumes in city bookshops, they reached every corner of the nation through travelling libraries. One of these volumes was to be an encyclopedia, with the flamboyant title The Great Picture Book of Everything. But for some unknown reason the book was never published. Hokusai made 103 drawings for it, known to scholars but out of sight in the private collection of a French jeweller until his death in 1942. Whereupon they disappeared, all but forgotten until 2019, when Timothy Clark of the British Museum heard word of them at an auction and managed to secure them for the nation. This magnificent exhibition, jammed since it opened earlier this autumn, is the first time they have ever been shown in public. The first thing you see is the box in which these fragile drawings were preserved: a tiny house for such greatness. But the proportions are exact, for these drawings are no bigger than postcards. Black and white, in pen and ink, each is so densely detailed as to be encyclopedic in itself. Hokusai can’t draw so much as a cat without including an exquisitely detailed branch of hibiscus, then adding another cat for a bristling encounter. His drawing of a camel incorporates an orangutan crouched intently on its back, a shrewd black fox and a raccoon-dog flying off into the white space that remains. The world is both real and mythical. It is possible that Hokusai encountered a camel, and his image is charmingly accurate. But Japanese people were not allowed to travel, in his day, passing their whole lives in national lockdown. Like Dürer before him, Hokusai drew a rhinoceros without ever having seen one, but his is an appealingly antic critter with three horns, fur and a curious tortoise-shell lid. The encyclopedia was to be for children as well as adults. India and China were among its themes. Hokusai’s drawing of an Indian holy man is almost a mirror of his Japanese equal, but with rather less hair, both of them sashaying like elegant geishas. He drew a Mongolian warrior with a mild and weary wisdom in his ageing face – always such humane insights – and a Siamese traveller meticulously examining a length of fluttering silk. Whatever the foreigners of other nations might have looked like, they always acquire delicacy, wit and beauty through the art of Hokusai. There are many myths of origin. Three men brew the very first rice wine, with a Heath Robinson contraption involving pumps, presses and cantilevered poles upon which they balance to comical effect. Paper is invented by the Japanese, in a long vat of mulch; then the printing press; and then, fittingly, the fine black ink with which all three advances are depicted on this single sheet. This is all clear and precise, no matter how fanciful. Elsewhere you need the title (inscribed in Japanese on each drawing) to grasp what is going on in certain scenes. Two smiling men brandish what appear to be fizzing fireworks on long sticks in a rainstorm. This is the title: “Using the marrow of a red leopard, the Emperor Wu designed torches that remained lit even in torrential rain.” Radical, revolutionary, dynamic: Hokusai’s graphic notations startle every time. Rain strafes the page in needle-fine lines, sometimes crisscrossing, sometimes broken, its arrival upon some invisible surface described in a spatter of dots. Lightning flashes outwards in white spokes from a central disc, always blank, that reads like the moment of a nuclear explosion. Eyes are a staggering grammar of commas, hyphens, cedillas and full stops, minutely inflected to describe each individual face. Nature is stunningly personified. Waterfalls surge both upwards and downwards, their bubbles like foaming cherry blossom. Clouds are formed like rocks, in turn like blossom, in turn like frothing brine. You see presages of the famous wave everywhere (it was yet to come), flexing its pictorial claws, scattering foam that resembles snowfall, thickets of leaves and even a legendary Chinese rock in one dragon-slaying melodrama. Hokusai’s sense of humour is everywhere apparent, particularly in games of hide-and-seek for the eye. Spot the big bear under this waterfall (made up of miniature great waves). Find the moon among the shifting branches. A massive yet gentle elephant is tenderly cared for by two young attendants, but one of them is half-hidden behind the behemoth’s sheer bulk. Hokusai was almost 70 when he proposed this project to his publishers. He had suffered a stroke, the death of two wives, poverty and the intransigence of his grandson, whose debts he was forced to pay. Destitution beckoned. Yet even under these circumstances his vision never fails (nor his eyesight) and his imagination soars. The most beautiful image here shows a Taoist master ascending a ladder of clouds to pluck a pale moon from the twilight sky. It might be an emblematic self-portrait. Hokusai’s drawings are extremely rare. The creation of his woodcuts required the sacrifice of his drawings. The page would be laid over a wooden block; the carver would cut directly through the lines; the original image was thus destroyed. Sad as it is to think that The Great Picture Book of Everything was never published, and that Hokusai made no money, it is less of a loss when you consider the drawings reprieved before us now, revealing his first thoughts and gestures, in this captivating show. Hokusai: The Great Picture Book of Everything is at the British Museum, London, until 30 January 2022A Spanish bishop has been formally stripped of his powers and prohibited from administering the sacraments four months after he abandoned his clerical career to marry a “dynamic and transgressive” erotic novelist. Xavier Novell i Gomà, who became Spain’s youngest bishop at 41 when he was appointed to the Catalan municipality of Solsona in 2010, is reported to have backed and participated in so-called conversion therapies for gay people, and has been criticised for supporting regional independence. But the bishop, now 52, found himself under increased national scrutiny at the end of August when it emerged that he had resigned from his post on what he termed “strictly personal grounds”. It soon emerged that Novell had abandoned his vocation because he had fallen in love with Silvia Caballol, a clinical psychologist who became a novelist in 2015. At the time, the bishop apparently told his friends: “I’ve fallen in love with a woman, for the first time in my life, and I want to do things right.” In a statement released on Saturday, the Spanish Episcopal Conference said Novell had automatically forfeited his powers after marrying Caballol in a civil ceremony last month. “As is public and well known, Monsignor Xavier Novell i Gomà, bishop emeritus of Solsona, contracted civil marriage with Doña Silvia Caballol y Clemente in Súria, Barcelona province, on 22 November,” it said. The statement added that Novell was now forbidden under canon law from “exercising any of the rights and duties inherent to the episcopal office”, and warned that “other possible consequences” could follow. “This means that although Monsignor Xavier Novell i Gomà retains his title as bishop, he cannot undertake any of the functions that relate to that title. Accordingly, he is forbidden to administer the sacraments or engage in any teaching activity, whether public or private.” Caballol’s publisher, Lacre, describes the writer as “a dynamic and transgressive author who’s made her mark on the thorny world of literature by turning all our moral and ethical questions upside down”. According to the Lacre website, her Amnesia trilogy is about “the logical against the illogical, the rational against the irrational, good against evil, and madness against sanity.” Novell, who has a degree in agricultural engineering and who was ordained in 1997, is now reported to be working for a company that extracts and sells pig semen.The word contempt, I learned last week, is derived from the Latin contemptus, meaning scorn. My 2008 edition of the Oxford English dictionary defines it as “the feeling that someone or something is worthless or beyond consideration”; a more recent article in the magazine Psychology Today says that “empathy and contempt are polar opposites”, and warned that the latter always has a catastrophic effect on human relationships. I was researching the word because of its increasingly regular use in headlines relating to the prime minister. Last Thursday, a column in the Financial Times was titled “Carelessness and contempt are at the root of every Boris Johnson crisis”. Over the previous few weeks, a writer in the Daily Telegraph has scolded Johnson for his “contempt for business”, while the Economist has accused him of treating “checks and balances with contempt”. Johnson has also been accused of having contempt for NHS staff, former coalmining communities, his fellow MPs and the population of Wales: it is rare that a week goes past without some or other story about this element of his personality and politics, and the C-word being used. There are two elements to all this: one is Johnson’s Trumpish disdain for some of the most basic components of our democracy – the rule of law, scrutiny of the executive, an independent BBC (which he is now lashing out at yet again). The other is bound up with the prime minister’s apparently dim and disrespectful view of his fellow human beings – which, as revelations about Downing Street parties pile up, is now at the heart of our politics. The latest story, broken by the Sunday Mirror, has its own specific details: Johnson on a computer screen, merrily asking quiz questions while his staff “huddled by computers”, “knocking back fizz, wine and beer” in defiance of restrictions on social mixing. But one very familiar element is present and correct: whatever privations the rest of us were enduring, says one source, “the PM turned a blind eye. He seemed totally comfortable with gatherings.” This kind of contempt is there in Johnson’s serial untruths: lying, after all, often implies disdain for whoever the liar thinks can be misled. It is part of his strident ambition, and apparent habit of contemptuously using people and causes for his own ends. His Peppa Pig speech at the CBI was a case study in contempt for an audience. It is impossible, moreover, to separate this behavioural contempt from the disregard Johnson shows for conventions and institutions, because they ultimately boil down to the same thing, captured in the cliche of rules being for the little people. Remember what a teacher at Eton wrote to his father in 1982: “Boris sometimes seems affronted when criticised for what amounts to a gross failure of responsibility … I think he honestly believes that it is churlish of us not to regard him as an exception, one who should be free of the network of obligation which binds everyone else.” A justified retort, of course, would be that this is the exact mindset that Eton is designed to produce – but even in that context, Johnson seemed to be in a league of his own. In ordinary times, a prime minister like that would be problematic enough. But in the midst of the apparently unending Covid crisis, the impression of arrogance and impunity that seems to have spread from Johnson to his aides and cabinet colleagues now feels actively dangerous. As evidenced by the government responding to the spread of the Omicron variant with what it calls plan B, people are still being told to follow unprecedented rules and guidelines; and a more stringent plan C may soon follow. If politics and power were the right way up, those at the top would at least do an impression of being serious and consistent in order to rein in any irresponsible parts of the population. But in England, we seem to have ended up with the exact opposite: a dutiful public boggling at a clique at the top who are, to coin a currently ubiquitous phrase, “taking us for fools”: shallow, reckless, and apparently contemptuous of the sacrifices people are still making, which will soon enter their third year. Even now, with Labour suddenly pulling ahead in the polls and speculation mounting about Thursday’s byelection in Shropshire, do Johnson’s colleagues really understand how toxic this is becoming? The idea of the government smugly ignoring rules and obligations that apply to the rest of us is surely starting to define perceptions of much more than Covid restrictions. What, for example, of “levelling up”? The prime minister’s broken promises about the future of high speed rail have been widely portrayed as a fatal blow to the credibility of the whole idea. So far, the most visible aspects of the policy have centred on haughtily insisting that places compete for relatively trifling amounts of money; when the delayed levelling-up white paper finally appears, it will reportedly include plans to create US-style “governors” of English counties, but no new spending commitments. The “red wall”, it is safe to say, is not yet aflame with excitement. For all the hype surrounding levelling up, the absence of any emotional connection with, or serious plans for, the places the government says it wants to help is striking. Once again, the overwhelming impression is of contempt and condescension, and people being blithely offered something Johnson has no serious intention of delivering. Worse still, as proved by the national insurance hike, the end of the universal credit uplift and his regressive plans for funding social care, things that he actually has done will make lives in so-called “left behind” places even harder. As governments often do, Johnson and his colleagues doubtless thought such moves would cause momentary upset before settling into irrelevance. The problem with the “taking us for fools” narrative is that it provides a catch-all context into which these things – along with the controversies about Tory MPs’ second jobs – snugly fit. There are presumably people in the cabinet – let alone on the Tory backbenches – who are starting to yearn for a style of government that might be more serious, substantial and mindful of the lives of ordinary voters. Their problem, perhaps, is that once their party decided to once again draw its top brass from the alumni of English public schools, the die was cast. David Cameron had his own version of the politics of contempt: what else was austerity? Like Johnson, he had a habit of saying whatever he thought would either get him out of trouble, or bring him more votes. Once he had left office, his work for the defunct finance outfit Greensill Capital suggested someone only too happy to wring money out of advantages that 99% of us could only dream about. But Johnson is surely something else again: so arrogant and thoughtless that he sometimes seems almost amoral. I recently read Sad Little Men, the writer Richard Beard’s eloquent book about private schools and the kind of leaders they produce, which shines light on Cameron and Johnson via his own story of an elite education. In his experience, contempt for the lower orders began with the idea that “everyone else was less special and often stupid”, and blurred into indifference: “We saw from car windows the petrol stations and primary schools and Bovis homes in which less privileged lives played themselves out, but the hopes and dreams of these people didn’t meaningfully exist for us, nor their disappointments and pain.” The story of a public enduring the worst effects of the pandemic while Downing Street partied on gives those words an awful potency: somewhere in that sentence, in fact, lies one explanation for both the mess this government is in, and the mire the rest of us have been dragged into. John Harris is a Guardian columnistBeing the member of the Monkees dubbed “the Smart One” was not an unqualified blessing for Michael Nesmith, who has died aged 78 of heart failure. As the songwriterly intellectual of the hugely successful 1960s pop group, he was deeply frustrated by the shallowness of teen idoldom. Throughout the run of the Monkees’ 1966–68 television series, he agitated for a larger role in the writing and playing of their music – which was largely made by more skilled session players and writers – while agonising over the very nature of pop bands. To hear him tell it, he had thought he was signing up to be a musician in a real group, only to find himself an actor playing one. It threw the introspective Texan, whose visual trademarks were a woollen hat and muttonchop sideburns, into a spin. “What constitutes a critical path for a band? What defines the band? What makes it turn into a band?” he asked an interviewer – questions that probably never troubled his more phlegmatic co-Monkees, Davy Jones, Peter Tork and Micky Dolenz. Receiving no satisfactory answers, in 1970 Nesmith bought himself out of the remaining three years of his contract and plunged into a solo career that showed him to be not just the smart Monkee but the prescient one. Nesmith was in the vanguard of two major cultural developments, country-rock and the music video, and also turned out to have an eye for groundbreaking media projects. There was the 1977 album, From a Radio Engine to the Photon Wing, whose songs were written as mini-film scripts – predating the idea of the “visual album” by decades – while The Prison (1975), a novel with a companion “soundtrack” album, was an early example of a multimedia release. He was also farsighted enough to buy the master tapes of his solo albums from RCA Records, allowing him to profit when he reissued them through his own company. Later he was among the first to buy up licences to various films and TV series, profitably releasing them as home videos. Along the way he established the Council on Ideas, a brains trust that convened biannually to discuss the problems of the day, from overpopulation to lack of respect for cultural diversity. Eventually he even made peace with his Monkee past, occasionally joining the others on tours and new albums from 1996 onward. Born in Houston, Texas, he was the only child of Warren Nesmith, an automobile parts clerk, and Bette (nee McMurray). His father was serving overseas during the second world war when Michael was born, and his parents divorced soon after Warren returned. Bette and son moved to Dallas, where Michael had a “dirt poor, just miserable” childhood, with his mother struggling to make ends meet as a bank secretary. He was in his early teens when she created a correction fluid that painted over typing errors – the first of its type – and began selling it to other secretaries. She paid Michael $1 an hour to bottle it in their garage, but the business quickly outgrew her expectations. By the time she was bought out by Gillette for $47.5m in 1979, her product, known as Liquid Paper, was selling 25m bottles a year. At her death in 1980, Michael inherited half her fortune. The money came in handy. He had paid $450,000 to break his Monkees contract, and immediately afterwards had founded a well-reviewed but commercially unsuccessful country group, the First National Band (the name was a play on First National Bank, a characteristically sardonic bit of humour). There was more expenditure in 1974, when he set up Pacific Arts Productions, a multi-tentacled outfit that distributed videos, financed films (including the culty Repo Man and Tapeheads) and released Nesmith’s music. The title of his 1972 solo album, And the Hits Just Keep on Comin’, told its own story: his record company at the time was jostling him to make poppier material, but Nesmith carried on as he was, producing just one minor hit single, 1970’s lamentful Joanne, after which he never reached the Top 40 again. A career in the arts had been his only aim since his days at Thomas Jefferson high school in Dallas, where he was an indifferent student but never missed choir or drama classes. In his final year he left to join the US Air Force, and when he was discharged after 14 unhappy months, moved to San Antonio to attend college, where he met his future wife, Phyllis Barbour. Inspired by both Bob Dylan and Texas’s country and western radio stations, he was writing songs by then, and also playing them at small gigs, Phyllis occasionally singing with him. His first single, Wanderin’/ Well, Well, Well, released on a San Antonio label around 1963, was raw, Woody Guthrie-esque folk, but he saw his future in the hipper music scene of Los Angeles, and moved there in 1964. Another single, The New Recruit, recorded as “Michael Blessing”, did nothing much, but while working as “hootmaster” – master of ceremonies – at the Troubadour club, he did a set of his own songs one night (including Different Drum, later a hit for Linda Ronstadt) and was offered a publishing deal. His career was sidetracked, though, when his publisher’s assistant urged him to audition for a television pilot about a wacky rock band. Nesmith’s sarcastic screen test was singular enough to get him a job he was not even sure he wanted: though many Monkees songs are now considered classics, he did not like the music, and, despite managing to get a couple of his own songs on to every album, he chafed at being forced to operate within the group’s manufactured parameters. In 1967, arguing with the musical supervisor Don Kirshner about not being allowed to play on their records, he punched a hole through the wall of a hotel room. The following year, to distract himself from “this [Monkees] monster”, he released his first solo album, the all-instrumental oddity The Wichita Train Whistle Sings. His departure from the Monkees was quickly followed by the launch of The First National Band, a circle of country-loving musician friends who moved to the forefront of what became country rock. For decades, however, Nesmith’s boyband past kept them from receiving the same recognition as fellow travellers Gram Parsons and the Byrds. Later in the 70s he made an early music video, for the song Rio. Intrigued by the potential of adding a visual storyline to a song, he then developed a video series called PopClips. It ran for 56 episodes on the Nickelodeon channel, and was the forerunner of MTV. Nesmith went on to make an hour-long comedy-and-music clip, Elephant Parts, that won a Grammy award in the new best video category in 1982. Nesmith matured into a magisterial, philosophical figure – “Nesmith aims to express the Infinite,” proclaimed his Facebook page – who was known to fans as Papa Nez. In later life he wrote two novels and issued a memoir, Infinite Tuesday (2017), which barely mentioned the Monkees. He continued to tour regularly; in 2018, while on the road as a duo with Dolenz, he suffered heart failure and underwent a quadruple bypass. Eight months later, seemingly unscathed, he was back on tour with his own group. He was performing as recently as last month with Dolenz, on a Monkees “farewell tour”. Nesmith’s marriage to Phyllis, with whom he had three children, ended in divorce in 1975. He was married to Kathryn Bild from 1976 until 1988, and to Victoria Kennedy between 2000 and 2011; both of those marriages also ended in divorce. He is survived by his children from his first marriage, Christian, Jonathan and Jessica; by a son, Jason, with the photographer Nurit Wilde, and two grandchildren. • Robert Michael Nesmith, musician, born 30 December 1942; died 10 December 2021Anne Rice, the bestselling author of Interview With the Vampire, has died at the age of 80. The gothic novelist’s son, Christopher Rice, said in a statement on Sunday morning that Rice had “passed away due to complications resulting from a stroke”, adding: “The immensity of our family’s grief cannot be overstated.” Rice wrote more than 30 books but was best known for her debut novel, Interview With the Vampire, which introduced the world to the saga of the vampire Lestat and moved from 18th-century Louisiana through the next 200 years. Published in 1976, it was made into a film in 1994 starring Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt and Kirsten Dunst. Audrey Niffenegger described it as Rice’s “masterpiece”. Rice wrote a further 12 novels in the Vampire Chronicles series, and was dismissive of the sparkly, vegetarian version of vampires made popular in Stephenie Meyer’s Twilight series, saying she felt “sorry for vampires that sparkle in the sun” and that Lestat “would never hurt immortals who choose to spend eternity going to high school over and over again in a small town”. The horror legend Ramsey Campbell said Rice wrote “in the great tradition of the gothic, both thematically and in her prose”. “I would argue it’s a specifically female lineage that stretches from the classical gothics but in particular from Mary Shelley, in its humanisation of the monster and the way it accords him a thoroughly literate voice,” Campbell said. The bestselling horror author Sarah Pinborough, whose Behind Her Eyes was recently adapted for Netflix, praised how Rice had transformed the genre. “I have had a fascination with vampires since early childhood and when I found Rice’s work I absolutely loved how she took that genre and created such a vivid world and characters within it and, more importantly, made them feel so contemporary and relevant,” she said. Rice was also known for her erotic fiction Sleeping Beauty series, and for novels about the life of Christ and about angels, written after she returned to her childhood faith of Catholicism in 1998 after decades of atheism. Rice said at the time that she “consecrated her writing entirely to Christ, vowing to write for Him or about Him”. But she later “quit” Christianity, writing on her Facebook page: “In the name of Christ, I refuse to be anti-gay. I refuse to be anti-feminist. I refuse to be anti-artificial birth control. I refuse to be anti-Democrat. I refuse to be anti-secular humanism. I refuse to be anti-science. I refuse to be anti-life. In the name of Christ, I quit Christianity and being Christian. Amen.” Rice’s husband, the poet Stan Rice, died in 2002. As well as Christopher, the couple had a daughter, Michele, who died of leukaemia in 1972 at the age of six. Rice started writing in the years after Michele’s death, telling the Guardian in 2010: “It was really a desperate attempt to be somebody. I looked around after my daughter’s death and realised I was nobody and nothing. I wasn’t even a mother any more. I had nothing.” Interview With the Vampire was published in 1976, and Christopher, who is also a writer, was born two years later. He said his mother “taught me to defy genre boundaries and surrender to my obsessive passions”. He said: “In her final hours, I sat beside her hospital bed in awe of her accomplishments and her courage, awash in memories of a life that took us from the fog-laced hills of the San Francisco Bay area to the magical streets of New Orleans to the twinkling vistas of southern California. “As she kissed Anne goodbye, her younger sister Karen said: ‘What a ride you took us on, kid.’ I think we can all agree. Let us take comfort in the shared hope that Anne is now experiencing first-hand the glorious answers to many great spiritual and cosmic questions, the quest for which defined her life and career.” He said a public celebration of Rice’s life would be held next year in New Orleans, where the author was born and raised.Dozens remained unaccounted for on Sunday as rescuers worked overnight searching for survivors after what could be the longest tornado in US history left a trail of destruction from Arkansas to Kentucky, part of a vast storm front that it is feared may have killed at least 100 people. Kentucky governor Andy Beshear said the path of devastation was about 227 miles (365km) long, which, if confirmed, would surpass the 218-mile Tri-State tornado in 1925, which killed at least 695 people and destroyed 15,000 houses across Missouri, Illinois and Indiana. Temperatures were below freezing in the night in Mayfield, Kentucky, a small city largely leveled by winds estimated at up to 200mph. Survivors rushed to gather their families and find shelter, while a damaged water tower meant no running water for the devastated community as of early Sunday. Friday night’s storm was all the more unusual because it came in December, when colder weather normally limits tornadoes, said Victor Gensini, an extreme weather researcher at Northern Illinois University. On Saturday, at least five central and southern US states reported deaths after what president Joe Biden said was “likely to be one of the largest tornado outbreaks in our history”, with an estimated 22 tornadoes touching down. Hardest hit was Kentucky, where Beshear said a death toll of more than 70 “may in fact exceed 100 before the day is done”. “The level of devastation is unlike anything that I have ever seen,” he said. Many of the deaths came in a candle factory in Mayfield, where about 110 employees were working the night shift when a tornado roared through, destroying the building. Jeremy Creason, emergency services chief for the city of 10,000, described how rescuers had to, at times, “crawl over casualties to get to live victims”. Beshear said: “I pray that there will be another rescue. I pray that there will be another one or two.” Elsewhere, the death toll from multiple tornadoes included six people in Illinois, where an Amazon depot was hit; four in Tennessee; two in Arkansas, where a nursing home was destroyed; and two in Missouri. Biden has approved a state of emergency declaration in Kentucky, adding federal resources to boost the state’s activation of more than 180 national guard members as well as state police. The state also is using armories as places of refuge for those in need of shelter. “I promise you, whatever is needed – whatever is needed – the federal government is going to find a way to provide it,” Biden said, adding that he would visit the affected areas once it was clear he was “not going to get in the way of the rescue and recovery”. Asked if he thought the intensity of the storms was related to climate crisis, Biden said: “All I know is that the intensity of the weather across the board has some impact as a consequence of the warming of the planet. The specific impact on these specific storms, I can’t say at this point.” In Mayfield, which is now under curfew, Sarah Burgess, a trooper with the Kentucky state police, said of the candle factory that “the entire building is essentially leveled”. The city’s mayor, Kathy Stewart O’Nan, said: “It looks as if a bomb has dropped on it. We hope there are still rescues to be made. We fear that it is now just recovery.” Burgess said it could take a day and potentially longer to remove all the rubble. Creason added the rescue efforts had been complicated by tornado damage to the main fire station and emergency services hub. Beshear urged people to stay off the roads to ease the routes for emergency crews, and to consider donating blood, saying: “We were already pretty short with Covid out there. We’re going to have a lot of deaths, but we are also going to have a lot of injuries.” He also released details of a relief fund to help those affected. ‘I did not think I was going to make it’ Kyanna Parsons-Perez, an employee at the candle factory, said she felt the building was making them “rock from one side to the other” right before it collapsed on her and her co-workers. She was freed after being trapped for at least two hours under 5ft (1.5 metres) of rubble. She told NBC news it was “absolutely the most terrifying” event she had ever experienced. “I did not think I was going to make it at all.” In Illinois, six people were killed in the collapse of the Amazon warehouse in Edwardsville, with another injured worker airlifted to a hospital, fire chief James Whiteford said. Investigators searched the rubble throughout the day for additional victims. Whiteford said 45 people had survived, but authorities were uncertain Saturday evening whether anyone was still unaccounted for, as workers were in the midst of a shift change when the centre was struck by the tornado at about 8.30pm Friday. Jeff Bezos said on Saturday night that he was “heartbroken” by the news and offered support to those affected. The Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, which has been trying to organise workers at an Amazon facility in Alabama, criticised the company for keeping the Illinois site open during a weather emergency.Trying on clothes without stepping into a changing room, seeing your menu choices in 3D, viewing an art gallery’s contents outdoors and, of course, catching a Pokémon. This is the world of augmented reality, and one of its key players announced further additions last week. The owner of Snapchat, the app that offers those quirky animal-face selfies, will give developers the ability to transform any local landscape or building. A user could scan Big Ben so it can be turned into a wobbly landmark when seen through a phone, or even put the Matrix in their living room. While Mark Zuckerberg talks about an alternative world in the metaverse, the likes of Snapchat are getting on with transforming this one. “I think we’re starting to see some real fun around being able to play with the power to manipulate, change and edit our physical environments,” says Bobby Murphy, a co-founder and the chief technology officer of Snap. For all the excited talk about the metaverse – the concept of a virtual world populated by digital representations, or avatars, of ourselves – augmented reality (AR) has been in our lives for years. AR is where a digital layer is put over reality, normally via your phone – although Snap recently unveiled whizzy spectacles that allow a similar experience. Think Pokémon Go, where players leave their living rooms to capture the characters outdoors, or Snapchat’s cartoon cat selfies. The next step for AR, and where it starts to bump into woolly notions of the metaverse, is glasses that put a digital overlay on the world – as well as allowing users to film what they see (while igniting a whole load of privacy concerns). This year Snap unveiled spectacles with a proper AR overlay. However, these glasses are for a select few developers only and not for public sale, and have clear shortcomings such as a 30-minute battery life. Glasses are where analysts see AR really taking off. Leo Gebbie, an AR expert at the research firm CCS Insight, sees a future where AR glasses screen street directions straight on to a pedestrian’s lenses. “Rather than looking down at your smartphone … you’ll have a nice display in front of you that simply says ‘you are going to turn left again and then get on the bus that comes around the corner’. That’ll all be provided to you in real time rather than requiring you to have to interrupt your phone to do that,” says Gebbie. He has tried the prototype Snap spectacles and says they have an “impressive” AR display but are “fairly heavy”, don’t look like normal glasses, and the battery life is too short. For AR glasses to really work, he says, they need to be lightweight, fashionable and clear various technical hurdles. CCS Insight forecasts that 71m virtual and augmented reality devices will be sold in 2025, with a market value of $22bn (£16.7bn), compared with 11m devices this year. As soon as the right glasses come along, a wave of products will arrive, in the same way that the advent of the iPhone in 2007 unleashed the app economy, says Giorgio Tarraf, the technology intelligence director at the trend forecasting business L’Atelier BNP Paribas. “Once we have the right device that can instil trust and comfort, that’s when the entire ecosystem of applications is going to emerge, just like the smartphone when the iPhone came out,” he says. Snapchat has 306 million daily users, who between them play with the company’s “lenses” – the layers of augmented reality that they can view through their phones – more than 6bn times a day. Snapchat, via its 250,000 lens creators, now offers 2.5m different AR lenses. New features unveiled at Snap’s annual lens fest last week – a virtual gathering of lens developers, or “creators” – included “world mesh” software that allows developers to scan the geometry of a room and put sophisticated AR overlays, such as the scrolling green characters from the Matrix, on to the room. It is also offering its “landmarker” product – which allows lens creators to impose images on buildings and landscapes – to more developers. Previously, Snap had to do the initial 3D scan that a developer then built upon, as it did with Big Ben, but now any developer can do the initial scan with an iPhone. The climate crisis is also becoming a feature of AR. Other lenses released by Snap this year include viewing how London’s Design Museum will be affected by extreme weather, and peering into the intricate ecosystem of the Great Barrier Reef. As with many technological advances, Murphy says the aim is for people not to notice that they are taking part in an AR environment. “The way that we try to build our technology and design our experiences is almost in a way that we don’t want any members of our community to really even be aware of the depths of the technology that they’re using,” he says. “It’s a much more embedded part of our culture than people realise.”A stone’s throw from the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, in the National Gallery, you can see what the old Flemish painters made of the story of the holy family’s flight into Egypt. Here, with John Eliot Gardiner’s Monteverdi Choir and Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique giving their first concert in their new home venue, you could hear Berlioz’s take on it. L’Enfance du Christ is full of Berlioz’s characteristic moodswings and grand, colourful gestures: it’s an oratorio that sounds as though it desperately wants to be an opera, perfect for the characterful period winds and brass of Gardiner’s orchestra and for the top-flight cast of soloists he had assembled here. Michael Spyres’s glowing Narrator, Ann Hallenberg’s beatific Mary and Lionel Lhote’s desperate yet noble Joseph – it would have been good to hear more of all three, but Berlioz doesn’t put the spotlight squarely on any one soloist. The smaller roles were taken by singers from the choir; Alexander Ashworth made especially vivid work of the Ishmaelite who takes the family in. Only William Thomas’s Herod came across as less than authoritative, looking a little wooden as he sang Herod’s wakeful monologue, however cavernous and velvety his voice. But perhaps that’s not so inappropriate for the troubled ruler Berlioz paints so keenly in the orchestra. The violins imitated the phrases of his aria so fervently that you almost felt sorry for him. The way the choir sang the Shepherds’ Farewell made it feel almost like a shared oration in this church setting, and angels, sung by the Trinity Boys Choir from somewhere beyond the balcony, made their spine-tingling effect. When it came to the musical entertainment that’s laid on for the holy family at their new home, Gardiner sat down and just let the trio get on with it – and it was beautifully, energetically played by the flautists Gareth Davies and David Westcombe and harpist Gwyneth Wentink. The concert was being filmed, which was unobtrusive until near the end, when on a couple of occasions Gardiner restarted sections immediately after a smudged entry. Was it to get these perfect for the final edit? It was barely noticeable – but how are we to experience a performance entirely in the moment if the conductor demonstrably isn’t doing so?Care home bosses have called the first wave of government payouts intended to halt an exodus of workers “derisory”, after it emerged some operators had received grants of just £60 a person before tax. The government has offered amounts from a “retention and recruitment” fund launched by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, that equate to £150 and £155 a worker in some counties and £60 in Norfolk, where one angry manager said it was barely enough to “buy a few boxes of Celebrations”. “It’s a joke and an insult,” said Raj Sehgal, who runs four care homes in Norfolk. “How are you supposed to retain people for £60 and that is before tax. I am just so angry. It is a slap in the face for every care worker that has worked throughout the pandemic.” He said he was planning to top up the payments to about £200 himself. The sums emerged as councils began distributing cash from the £162.5m fund announced by the government in October, by which time an estimated 60,000 care staff had quit in the previous six months, some joining employers such as Amazon which has been offering £3,000 signing bonuses. Half of local authorities in England had to respond to a care home closure or bankruptcy in the last six months, according to survey results published in November by the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services. In response to the growing staffing crisis, the government announced a further £300m of retention money on Friday, which Vic Rayner, the chief executive of the National Care Forum, described as “extremely welcome”. But she added: “It is imperative that the funding gets straight to the frontline in order that each and every care worker feels the benefit of this immediately.” Announcing the additional cash to pay for bonuses and bring forward planned pay rises for care staff, fund overtime and staff banks, Javid said: “This new funding will support our incredible workforce by recruiting new staff and rewarding those who have done so much during this pandemic.” In Scotland and Wales, the governments have offered care workers £500 bonuses. Jo Land, the chief executive of the Avenues Group which employs 1,700 staff in homes for people with learning disabilities across south-east England and Shropshire, has so far been offered the equivalent of £150 a worker by Surrey county council. “I think the amount is derisory,” she said. “These are people working at the frontline for the best part of two years. We are losing staff to Amazon, supermarkets and the NHS.” She said £150 – or about £102 for a full-time worker after tax and national insurance contributions – would not stop anyone filling out an application form now for a better-paid job. Operators expect staff will have to pay tax and national insurance on the bonus and that they will have to pay employers’ national insurance and pension contributions, increasing the strain on already stretched finances. A spokesperson for the Future Social Care Coalition, which is campaigning for a better deal for workers, said: “Anything is better than nothing for the hundreds of thousands of dedicated care workers who are on the government’s minimum wage and never got a bonus last Christmas. But when compared to bonuses being paid in Wales and Scotland and after 21 months of dedicated work it is clear that care and support workers are being shortchanged.” Norfolk county council’s executive director of adult social services, James Bullion, said it decided to channel 75% of the workforce grant it received so far to home care providers because of the acute shortages. They are so far receiving £245 each while each care home will receive £1,600, which if divided among a large staff can work out at £60 or less.Med: a Cookbook Claudia Roden (Ebury, £28) More than 50 years after her groundbreaking, genre-defining A Book of Middle Eastern Food, Claudia Roden has produced another triumph that this time travels around the Mediterranean. The most revered of living food writers (by me at least) has relaxed. The recipes are simple and of course immaculate, the writing is effortless. Read and cook from it often. AJ Buy it for adding to your Claudia Roden collection Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com A Cook’s Book Nigel Slater (4th Estate, £30) Subtitled The Essential Nigel Slater, this is 500 pages of new and revisited recipes, interwoven with writing that evokes a life’s work. Of course the words are as comforting as the dishes – there’s a definitive roast chicken with roast potatoes and roasting juice. If you were to only have one Nigel Slater cookbook in your life, this is the one. AJ Buy it for reading aloud to yourself in the kitchen Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Ottolenghi Test Kitchen: Shelf Love Noor Murad &amp; Yotam Ottolenghi (Ebury, £25) In 2020, most of us finally turned to that “one shelf in the pantry”, the one full of overlooked ingredients, and tried to make a meal. The shelves of Yotam Ottolenghi and his test kitchen team, led by Noor Murad, may have been better equipped than most, but in this guide to making the most of what you have, it’s inspiration that shines, rather than reliance on fancy ingredients. HO Buy it for the tamarind mung beans with turmeric oil; the coconut dream cake people go (coco)nuts for Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com The Arabesque Table Reem Kassis (Phaidon, £24.95) The follow-up to her acclaimed debut The Palestinian Table sees US-based writer Reem Kassis deep in research, tracking the food of Arab cultures across countries, communities and history. Structuring the book by ingredients allows her to explore how traditional dishes evolve depending on what was available, and how new, cross-cultural recipes are born of modern tastes, particularly evident in her desserts. HO Buy it for the many interesting seasonal fatteh – salads based on crisp pitta Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Vietnamese: Simple Vietnamese Food to Cook at Home Uyen Luu (Hardie Grant, £22) “The heart of Vietnamese cooking is … adapting to what is available,” writes Uyen Luu, who moved from Vietnam to London aged five and who has spent years recreating the food of her childhood with western ingredients. Hence the courgette flowers, Jerusalem artichokes and figs that crop up in her brilliant second cookbook, which highlights the simplicity behind Vietnam’s complex flavours. KF Buy it for a novice cook keen to expand their repertoire Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Chasing Smoke: Cooking Over Fire Around the Levant Sarit Packer and Itamar Srulovich (Pavilion, £26) Itamar Srulovich of Honey &amp; Co dreamed of owning a barbecue restaurant long before he and his wife Sarit Packer finally opened their own – Honey &amp; Smoke in central London. Their years of dedicated research across the Middle East spill over into this joyful book, which pays as much attention to grilling vegetables as to meat and fish. Helpfully, each recipe gives instructions for cooking without a barbecue. KF Buy it for first-time grillers as well as fire-mad dads Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Sicilia Ben Tish (Bloomsbury, £26) In his previous cookbook Moorish, Ben Tish – who runs the acclaimed restaurant Norma in central London – celebrated the north African flavours found in southern European cuisines. Now, in his evocative book on Sicily, he’s quick to locate Arab influences in a dish of sardines stuffed with almonds, anchovies, sultanas and preserved lemons, or arancini yellowed with saffron. His recipes inspired by this great culinary tradition are irresistible. KF Buy it for anyone craving a bit of kitchen sunshine Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Ripe Figs: Recipes and Stories from the Eastern Mediterranean Yasmin Khan (Bloomsbury, £26) Recipes can travel with us as well as nourish. In her third book, Yasmin Khan intersperses her takes on classic eastern Mediterranean dishes with personal recollections, musings on the meaning of home and borders, as well as the stories of immigrants, those who chose to make their homes in new lands, and those who had little choice. HO Buy it for veiled rice, a Turkish wedding dish Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Eating to Extinction: The World’s Rarest Foods and Why We Need to Save Them Dan Saladino (Jonathan Cape, £25) The Food Programme’s Saladino investigates endangered foods, whether that’s hong zui numoi, red rice grown in Sichuan, or murnong, a root foraged by Indigenous Australians. His journalist’s nose for a story lifts the book beyond the academic – the chapter on the middle white pig is a compelling strand of human/animal history that zooms from the neolithic era to 2019’s swine fever outbreak. MT-H Buy it for anyone interested in the importance of food diversity. Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Sugar, I Love You Ravneet Gill (Pavilion, £20) Junior Bake Off judge and chef Ravneet Gill has come into her own with this bright and unabashed celebration of sugar. Recipes for “mistake” cake, apple and rosemary tarte tatin, and crunchy chocolate sandwich biscuits are interspersed with snips of useful advice and stories of the kitchens and people that shaped her, including her grandmother. MT-H Buy it for LPC (Lazy Person’s Cake) Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com An A-Z of Pasta Rachel Roddy (Fig Tree, £25) The alphabetic format could so easily have been a gimmick, but in Rachel Roddy’s hands it becomes an inviting and generous way to celebrate the great Italian union of flour and water (or eggs), with all its attendant sauces. Carefully chosen recipes mingle with personal stories, expert tips and forays into gastronomic history, bolstering Roddy’s claim that, “pasta shapes are edible hubs of information”. KF Buy it for the Italophile in your life Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Taste: My Life Through Food Stanley Tucci (Fig Tree, £20) The actor Stanley Tucci is a famously charming man and in Taste, his belly-led memoir, he has written an utterly charming book. Happily, it is short on actorly anecdote and long on tips and recipes for the rustic pasta dishes that he grew up with as an Italian American in upstate New York, as well as the stories that underpin them. JR Buy it for pasta lovers Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Bourdain: In Stories Laurie Woolever (Bloomsbury, £20) It’s almost impossible to conceive of the past 20 years of food renaissance without Anthony Bourdain’s brilliant writing and documentary making. Woolever collaborated on his books, was his lieutenant during the later years of his life and since his death in 2018 has compiled the stories of 90 of his friends, colleagues and family. This unique oral history builds to a comprehensive portrait and an important emotional and psychological biography. TH Buy it for a wannabe chef or writer Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com First Put on Your Apron Sally Clarke (Sally Clarke Ltd, £30) A culinary letter from the chef to her son Samuel and a manual for learning to cook and stand on your own feet in the kitchen. A book of food rules to live by: kitchen rules, shopping rules, simple rules such as how to crush garlic, even how to wash up. All recipes are rated according to the level of confidence needed to accomplish it well. AJ Buy it for someone about to leave home Chefs at Home Various (Jon Croft Editions, £26) Top chefs share family recipes, many of which sustained them and their loved ones during lockdown. The Ramsays were apparently keen on chicken schnitzel while Paul Ainsworth’s simple cod piperade was his way of helping out local suppliers. All royalties go to Hospitality Action, which supports workers in the industry in need of a helping hand. GG Buy it for dishes top chefs cook for themselves, as well as the cause Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Sea &amp; Shore: Recipes and Stories from a Kitchen in Cornwall Emily Scott (Hardie Grant, £26) Scott has had quite a year, cooking for world leaders at the G7 summit – Boris, Biden and co had roast turbot – opening an acclaimed new restaurant in Watergate Bay and publishing her first cookbook. Enthralled by Cornish landscape and its produce – there’s a section on beach cooking – Scott leads you through the seasons, her emphasis on ingredients over frippery lending itself to the home cook. GG Buy it for a kitchen companion to the the recent TV shows about the county Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com The Modern Preserver’s Kitchen Kylee Newton (Quadrille, £22) In her second book, New Zealander Kylee Newton presents inventive ways to use up your “condiment ghost town”; that uneaten chutney, or half jar of gherkins at the back of your fridge. Sauerkraut becomes a topping for celeriac and apple soup; tomato chilli jam a marinade for chicken wings; marmalade adds a sweet-bitter edge to steak and mushroom pie. MT-H Buy it for the Kiwi burger – with pickled beetroot and a fried egg Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Crave Ed Smith (Quadrille, £25) The word “crave” can carry the whiff of junk food devoured in times of stress or sadness. Ed Smith reframes it as the food our body – for any number of reasons – needs and wants. His introduction outlines six main “flavour profiles” we crave, including fresh and fragrant, chilli and heat, cheesy and creamy – and why. These flavour profiles become colour-coded chapters, their recipes precision engineered to hit their mark. Think three citrus salad; sriracha and lemon linguine with chilli pangrattato; cheesy polenta. CF Buy it for the cook who craves order in the kitchen Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com The Sweet Roasting Tin: One Tin Cakes, Cookies &amp; Bakes Rukmini Iyer (Square Peg, £18.99) Rukmini Iyer’s mantra is “minimum effort, maximum return”. The fifth book in her Roasting Tin series, is true to form; the recipes – such as the chocolate salted caramel muffins – are delicious yet unfussy with minimal washing up. Helpfully, at the start of each chapter Iyer sets out a simple template that can be adjusted for the gluten-free, diabetic and vegan. Delicious, and accessible. MT-H Buy it for beginner bakers Order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Chewing the Fat: Tasting Notes from a Greedy Life Jay Rayner (Guardian Faber, £6.99) “The subject of what we eat is not just about how things taste,” writes Jay Rayner in his book of collected Happy Eater columns for OFM, where he demonstrates how wide-ranging food writing can be – from the role of food in post-conflict societies to cooking alone in an increasingly atomised Britain. But there’s plenty here to whet the appetite, beginning with his contention that it’s often the messiest, least Instagram-friendly dishes that satisfy most. KF Buy it for the most opinionated food lover in your life Order your copy at guardianbookshop.comAt its best, Christmas is a mix of new discoveries and cherished traditions. Holiday drinks should also create a balance between surprises and memories. Thankfully, you don’t need pricey or arcane ingredients to craft these seasonal celebratory toasts. Bright side (pictured above) The challenge with non-alcoholic drinks is to make them as bold and assertive as spirited ones. Chillies and ginger provide a heat that parallels that experience (a device frequently employed by 18th- and 19th-century spirits counterfeiters). Makes 1 glass fresh chilli 1 lime ½ salt sugar a pinch non-alcoholic spirit or kombucha 50ml fresh lime juice 25ml ginger 1 thumb, chopped simple syrup 25ml Rub a cut piece of chilli once around the rim of a chilled cocktail glass, then rub it with a cut lime. Dip the rim into a shallow plate of salt with a pinch of sugar mixed in. Combine the non-alcoholic spirit, lime juice, ginger and simple syrup in an ice-filled cocktail shaker. Shake, then strain into your glass. Garnish with a fresh piece of cut chilli placed on the rim. Winter spritz Spritzes aren’t just for the warmer months. This is perfect for a sparkling winter evening. Makes 1 glass red wine 50ml sparkling wine 50ml sparkling water 50ml ruby port 25ml Combine the ingredients in an ice-filled wine goblet. Stir gently. Garnish with an orange twist and, optionally, a cinnamon stick. Mulled gin and juice Packets of mulling spices are available everywhere at this time of year. They save you rifling through the spice cabinet. Pour a bottle of gin into a wide-mouth jar. Add a sachet of mulling spices. Leave overnight, then remove the sachet the next day. Makes 1 glass spiced gin 50ml cloudy apple juice 100ml apple 1 slice, or 1 piece of lemon peel grenadine 5-10ml, or pomegranate molasses (optional) Combine ingredients in an ice-filled highball or rocks glass. Stir, then garnish with an apple slice or a lemon twist. You can add grenadine or pomegranate molasses for a seasonal hue. Instant eggnog Eggnog has virtually the same ingredients as ice-cream – egg yolks, whipping cream, milk and sugar. Legendary bartender Harry Craddock worked this out in the 1920s at the American Bar at the Savoy, when he created the white cargo, blending equal parts gin and vanilla bean ice-cream. He garnished this frosty masterpiece with a grated nutmeg. For Christmas, try this classic with a dark rum or a scotch whisky. Makes 1 glass good vanilla ice-cream 50ml aged rum 50ml, or whisky (or whiskey) nutmeg Combine the ice-cream and the spirit in an empty cocktail shaker. Shake without ice. Pour into a chilled cocktail glass and grate nutmeg over the top. Negroni punch The negroni has passed the martini when it comes to gin drink sales in the UK. Its flavour profile works well for this delicious punch. Serves 6 gin 100ml (use cranberry juice for a lower-alcohol serve) bitter aperitif such as Campari 100ml sweet vermouth 200ml chilled espresso 50ml chilled prosecco 350ml Combine all ingredients in a punchbowl or large pitcher with ice. Stir lightly. Garnish with orange slices, star anise, cinnamon sticks, long orange and lemon twists, and fresh cranberries. Serve in punch cups. Vegan white Russian Coffee liqueur is effortless to make at home. Combine a cup of strong coffee or a few espressos with an equal measure of sugar to make a coffee syrup. Combine a measure of the resulting syrup with an equal measure of vodka or gin – plus a splash of cognac if you like. That’s it! The last one we made took 12 minutes from inspiration to first sip. Makes 1 glass coffee liqueur 25ml vodka 25ml oat milk 50ml (look for a barista edition or similarly creamy one) Combine all the ingredients in an ice-filled cocktail shaker. Shake, then strain into a chilled cocktail glass. Hot G&amp;Tea While gin and tonics are normally relegated to warmer weather, tonic syrup is now available in many shops and makes it possible to take the classic in new directions. Makes 1 glass boiling water 100-125ml winter spice or cranberry tea 1 bag tonic syrup 25ml (available online) gin 50ml Combine the water and tea in a mug and brew as normal. Add the tonic syrup and gin. Garnish with an orange or lemon twist, if you like. OFM Jared Brown and Anistatia Miller are drinks consultants at MixellanyAm I missing out on any great Christmas traditions by just going presents-lunch-telly-coma? Emily Janacek, Swindon Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply Being a miserable so-and-so and grumbling about Christmas is my favourite tradition. Really sets the day off well. CliveEBroom Pork pie for breakfast. richleeds0 Chocolate Orange for breakfast. HedgehogTea Bloody mary for breakfast. mikecee Half a tin of Quality Street for breakfast. Spacehopper … washed down with Lagavulin single malt, of course. retreat33 We have panettone, smoked salmon and buck’s fizz. Several years ago my uncle contributed crepes to Christmas breakfast and that is now a permanent tradition as well.anglebiscuit Salmon and scrambled egg on toast for breakfast, with the beverage of your choice. kglowe In the Black Fens (now Cambridgeshire fenland), Christmas breakfast is traditionally pork pie and beetroot (known as “red beet” there). This was so universal during my childhood that I assumed everybody in Britain had it. GeofCox We always had hot sausage rolls for breakfast on Christmas morning when I was a child. Christmas wouldn’t be the same without them. Sapmagoo Spending the day at Crisis, the only Christmas tradition worth a damn. Shadowcaptain How about the original traditional Christmas activity – going to church? Most churches are extra welcoming to newcomers on Christmas Day, and there will be carols galore! There’s a website called achurchnearyou.com to help you find services. River66 We do Christmas Day parkrun – most events will do one. I volunteer along with my daughter, and my husband and son run. Then we get home for brandy-laced tea, hot toast and presents. Dinner in the late afternoon rather than lunchtime, though..LeBearPolar This is pretty well known, but if you live near the coast, go into the sea ( where it is safe and there are people around). It will shake out the cobwebs and make the rest of the day’s indulgence feel all the more deserved. washoutx My mum goes round the garden in the middle of Christmas Day making a list of everything that is flowering. JenPaws In a house with no children, make a substantial donation to charity. Enjoy a quiet, reflective day and contemplate the true, spiritual meaning of the season. Jayceeyoukay I know of a few families whose pre-Christmas lunch row seems to be an essential part of the festivities, especially when drinking starts early. timbo42 Add nothing – if it becomes a tradition it only adds to the stress and leads to expectation and is a short step to resentment. BermudaRhomboid2 A variation on buck’s fizz – prosecco with pomegranate juice. Been indulging in this for quite a few years as I am the one relegated to the kitchen to peel and prepare vegetables for Christmas dinner. SeepyTea My new tradition is to let my daughter and son-in-law cook while I enjoy a couple of G&amp;Ts. Payback time. I recommend it. Sayingmypeace Posting from rural Quebec, family réveillon starts after midnight mass on Christmas Eve. So technically Christmas Day. Big supper of tourtière (a meat pie made of minced pork, beef and venison from the deer you shot in hunting season), home-baked beans, home-canned pickles and mashed spuds. Then you open the presents. At some point everyone goes to bed, passes out or goes home. Valleygurl I have a tradition of weeping hysterically around the 19 December when it all gets too much for me. lilactime The Muppet Christmas Carol. Without that, it’s nothing. biggus56 Dancing round the Christmas tree. hettisa Sing The Red Flag at three o’clock. DenryMachin Read a Christmas novel. Preferably something short and easy, set in 1950 with plenty of kitsch descriptions of snow, carol singing and gentle conversation. My preference is a Christmas murder mystery. As a bonus, you can fantasise about what to do with any troublesome guests. ID47096653 Read or watch A Child’s Christmas in Wales by Dylan Thomas – it really captures the spirit of Christmas. huskygirl Maybe try a short walk between dinner and telly? Fresh air can stave off the coma, tire the kids nicely and make you feel uber-virtuous in spite of having ingested 3,000 calories and a bucket of booze. Merry Christmas! Steph Bradshaw, Liverpool Pin the moustache on the Queen is a popular pastime for us. Stick ’taches (bought or homemade) on the TV before the speech starts and pause the action the moment HMQ appears. Closest to the regal upper lip wins. Then either watch or turn off as you prefer, before enjoying Christmas lunch. EdBondWestbourne We always play Snapdragon – picking sultanas out of a dish of lit brandy and eating them while still alight. With supervision, even preteens can play: it is referenced in Alice Through the Looking Glass and is played by children in one of Agatha Christie’s stories. Dmcg1753 Can I recommend a tradition we dreamed up a few years ago/ Have I Got Cheese for You! involves everyone bringing – anonymously – an exotic or weird cheese to the table and we mark them out of 10. Extra points for most pungent/most delicious/stupidest name or most like cat food. Beverley Taylor, Wanstead My favourite non-standard tradition is the Christmas pickle. On Christmas Eve, a special green pickle ornament is hung on the tree somewhere and then, while going through stockings and warming up for present-opening, the kids and adults search for the green pickle ornament in the green foliage. Whoever finds the pickle first gets the pickle present, something silly (think white elephant) that has been wrapped for the purpose ahead of time, usually with pickle-themed wrapping paper. Carson Hill In homage to the original Yule held on the solstice, my children and I started a tradition. As this time of year is about moving from the dark to the light, we each write down on a piece of paper all the shitty things from the past year and aspects of ourselves we want to let go of. The pieces of paper are then burned as we share and welcome in our hopes for the year ahead. It’s like pressing a “reset” button and is surprisingly emotional and cathartic. Jo Thompson, Lincolnshire We play poker. Youngest son has to explain the rules every year and we play for real money which suddenly energises even the most bored teens. Worth buying a proper poker set – an ace present. fishingnet Quality time with one’s beloved on the hearth rug in front of the fire. Not recommended if children or family are present. Winkynuke My family’s long-held Christmas tradition is playing the Hunger Games with our dogs. All discarded wrapping paper/gift packaging is thrown into a big pile in the middle of the living room floor. Dog biscuits are hidden among the wrapping paper/in gift boxes etc and the dogs are released. It’s a race for each dog to find the most biscuits before the other one. At least one dog will get its head stuck in a box during the course of the game. badgergirl24 Decide to live in Spain. You will avoid 95% of the hype, the tawdry commercial garbage that surrounds a “traditional” British Christmas, which is mainly imported from the US. It is a national holiday, of course, and family gatherings are common, but Spanish families tend to live closer together than is the case in Britain, so that is nothing particularly special. No Noddy Holder in the shops from the middle of November, no Queen’s speech and no The Sound of Music on the TV. No massive anxiety attacks and no newspaper articles like this. Fallowfield I wake up at 5am. Have a cold shower and flagellate myself for half an hour, while I think of St Bob Geldof and the starving millions in Africa. Did the message get through and do they know it’s Christmas now, I wonder. After donning a hair shirt, I break my fast with muesli and water. I then go for a brisk walk to the parish church and reflect on the generations buried in the churchyard. Do they know it’s Christmas, I wonder. Once home I listen to Carols from King’s on the radio as I prepare my Christmas lunch. This year it will be nut roast. A small glass of sherry and a moderate portion of food and I feel replete and very privileged. I then listen to a podcast of the collected wit and wisdom of Boris Johnson, it’s very good! Naturally, I stand to attention to watch the Queen’s speech on BBC television. I might then relax with a Baileys (I’ve had it for three years!) and a Rich Tea biscuit. After reading the Bible and thinking did Jesus know it was Christmas, I go to bed with a mug of cocoa and read some light Trollope. JakeArden“I’m not just trying to make things up. I genuinely believe that if we’d taken our chances better, and handled that first innings better, we could be sat here in a very different position.” It would be easy to disparage Joe Root’s post-defeat comments as obvious and not useful, but the England captain’s press conference was one of his stronger displays. Root’s media appearances can often be limp, conciliatory towards nothing in particular, couching each defeat in terms of lessons that England need to learn while leading a team that never learns them. In the Carl Rackemann Indoor Centre beneath the Gabba, next to the nets and the workout equipment, Root was exercised, punchy, obviously deeply frustrated with that opening Ashes loss. He dismissed the criticism that he was wrong to bat first, and fairly so. Hindsight punditry is a hollow pursuit. Making an opponent bat last is almost always the best option, and getting through some tricky batting hours on day one is routinely the price required. The fact that England failed to do so does not mean they were wrong to try. Root could not have known that the Australians would be spared the same conditions by the arrival of rain, nor that the following days would be sunny and fair when the forecast suggested otherwise. He would have been as frustrated with his own duck in that first innings as he was frustrated that nobody but Dawid Malan could contribute alongside him in the second. As for the angst about leaving out Stuart Broad, bowling selections don’t mean much when you are all out for 147 first up. Broad monstered Australia’s opener David Warner in England in 2019, but he spent five Tests bowling to Warner in Australia in 2017-18 and didn’t get him once. Warner made 441 runs that series averaging 63. As Root pointed out, his bowlers this time created chances, but his team dropped catches, missed run-outs, and overstepped the front line. Where he was most staunch was in refusing to concede that England’s tour would now fall away. Defeats at the Gabba led to scorelines of 5-0 in 2006-07, 5-0 in 2013-14, and 4-0 in 2017-18, an overall scoreline of 15-3 in the last four Australian Ashes series. Having played in the last two of those series defeats, Root said he was as conscious of the trend as he was determined to make sure that it would not repeat. Words are only words, but there is reason to believe that the current Australian team can be tackled. This is not a collection of proven champions in the manner of teams past. Warner will enter the Adelaide Test hampered by bruised ribs from a blow while batting. Steve Smith didn’t make a score in Brisbane. Marcus Harris, Travis Head and Alex Carey are all left-handers susceptible to nicking the ball. Cameron Green is young and yet to produce an influential Test innings. Start well, and pressure can be applied. While England have Broad and Jimmy Anderson to return to the team, having already got well under way on bowler rotation, Australia rely heavily on the main pace trio of Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood, and captain Patrick Cummins. Hazlewood is likely to miss Adelaide with a minor muscle strain. Of the squad replacements, Michael Neser has never played a Test while Jhye Richardson played two, nearly three years ago. The principal problem for England on recent tours has been letting mid-tier players produce dominant performances in a manner far above their more modest overall achievements. The brothers Shaun and Mitchell Marsh made bulk runs in the previous Australian Ashes, wicketkeeper Brad Haddin did the same in the one before that - the most runs ever in a series by a player outside the top six. Head has already produced the first such display with his attacking 152 that was the decisive innings in the first Test. Here is where England must tighten the screws until the thread squeaks. Which is not to say that Australia can’t boss the series from here. The quality is there for it to pan out that way, and the script of the Brisbane Test hit all of the right cues to set it up. England’s batting is weak and the fielding from those batters is just as bad. There are multiple players in England’s top six who would be recording negative scores in indoor cricket. There is an indoor centre in Toowoomba that also used to bear Carl Rackemann’s name – best to give that one a wide berth. But if some of those players can dredge up some resistance, the case for a walkover transpiring is not so clear. These teams are closer than they look, but one has the comforts of home and the other is travelling on a tour that can become a mobile siege. A few more England players need to capture the frustration, the determination, the unusual steeliness that their captain showed after the match following his usual steel out in the middle. Bring that to Adelaide, and there lies the chance of making the old story change.Five hundred years or so ago a significant number of people thought the world was flat. In 500 years’ time, which current scientific theories will be relegated to the same level as the flat Earth theory is now? Richard Cutsforth, Chichester Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.Services that look after the elderly and disabled at home are facing the worst crisis in memory, operators have warned, with hours of unmet care in England increasing more than fivefold since May to 1.5m. Vital visits to look after people with dementia and other disabilities are being denied amid rising demand – including families concerned about sending their loved ones to care homes during the pandemic – and staff shortages triggered by low pay and Brexit. About half of domiciliary care providers are no longer able to take on new requests for help, according to the Homecare Association, and 85% of operators believe the situation is the hardest it has ever been. The charity Age UK has warned of the emergence of “care deserts”, a term more often applied to US healthcare shortages. The crisis threatens the welfare of some of the country’s most vulnerable people and puts pressure on NHS beds, as people who could be cared for in the community end up in hospital. Families told the Guardian that people feel imprisoned if carers are not available to take them outside, while their health is harmed because they forget to eat, drink and take medicine properly and on time. “Our strategy seems to be to neglect people in the community until they are in crisis, then blue-light them into hospital,” said Jane Townson, the chief executive of the Homecare Association. “Then it is the devil’s own job to get them out again because of a lack of capacity.” The Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (Adass) found that in the three months to the end of April, 286,000 hours of home care could not be delivered. By the end of October that number stood at more than 1.5m hours. Councils have managed to increase the number of hours delivered by 20% over that period, but it has not been close to enough. “These are not numbers. These are people’s lives,” said Stephen Chandler, the president of Adass. “Every single one is a person who is missing out on vital support that enables them to live their lives. The government must take immediate steps to ensure that everyone gets the care and support they need this winter.” Margaret McCann, an 81-year-old with dementia living alone in Brighton, is among those caught in the crisis. In June she stopped eating, and forgot to drink and take medication, and a crisis care team from Age UK stepped in temporarily until, her family hoped, a homecare package from the local council could be arranged. Six months later the only professional care she receives is from the crisis team, which was supposed to stop after six weeks. “She has dementia and lives on her own, which is a massive worry,” said her daughter Sally McCann, who has a full-time job and a son aged 17. “She is basically on her own and is losing all her social contact. It breaks my heart. The emphasis is on keeping everyone at home, but they will just deteriorate unless there is help.” On a short visit last week, Margaret, who remains spritely at times, held hands with her carer Trevor Thew and told him: “I’m nearly 82, you know.” “What’s your secret?” he asked. “I’ve forgotten,” she said. “I’ll tell you next time you come.” Brighton and Hove city council said it has seen a fivefold increase in demand in the last year, with families increasingly reluctant to send loved ones into care homes. Brexit has hit providers’ attempts to find enough staff, it said. “Social care services, including home care, desperately need more government funding quickly if we are going to continue to fully meet the needs of our residents,” said Sue Shanks, the chair of the council’s health and wellbeing board. In Salford, Charlie Pelham, 86, who is in a wheelchair after four spells in hospital this year, and Eric Griffiths, 57, who is registered deaf and blind, said they both need homecare packages but that these have either been unavailable or unsuitable, leaving them to fend for themselves. “Imagine me being blind, pushing a wheelchair,” said Griffiths. “I was crashing into bus stops and tipping him out into the road because I couldn’t see what I was doing … I get Charlie ready, and I’m doing all the shopping by myself, doing all the cooking and the cleaning. It’s really hard. But what can you do; it’s got to be done.” John Merry, of Salford city council, said: “There are challenges with the number of care workers. This is a national issue not unique to Salford, and we are working hard to bring in more service providers so there is enough resilience and capacity in care supply.” In Leicestershire, Deirdre Thomas, 68, helps look after her mother, Jean, but has been looking for evening care for six months. “She is 99 and pretty wobbly,” she said. “My heart is in my mouth. I am so terrified she will fall over, an ambulance won’t come and I will never see her again.” Urgent action is required “to even keep the system viable”, said Caroline Abrahams, the charity director of Age UK. “For older and disabled people the consequences of this crisis in care can be severe,” she said. The Department of Health and Social Care said: “Care homes and homecare providers are benefiting from hundreds of millions of pounds of investment in the social care workforce, including through a dedicated recruitment and retention fund … Covid-19 pressures are continuously kept under review and the need for further support will be assessed as we go through the winter period.”Residents of the Pacific territory of New Caledonia have voted overwhelmingly to remain part of France in a referendum boycotted by pro-independence groups. In the third referendum on the matter, the decision to stay within the French republic was carried by 96.49% to 3.51%, but a turnout of just over 40% suggested the indigenous Kanak people have not given up on dreams of independence. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said after the result that the territory would remain French and hailed it as a resounding confirmation of France’s role in the Indo-Pacific, but announced negotiations on the territory’s future status. “A period of transition is beginning. Free from the binary choice of yes or no, we must now build a common project, while recognising and respecting the dignity of everyone,” he said. The pro-independence Kanak and Socialist Liberation Front (FLNKS) had called for indigenous Kanaks not to participate in the vote, arguing that Covid – which has disproportionately affected Kanak and Pasifika communities – had made pro-independence campaigning impossible, as entire villages observe customary mourning rites. Participation figures clearly indicate that the call to boycott was heeded, and they were particularly low in independence-supporting indigenous areas, where security forces maintained checkpoints at many polling stations and queues were sparse. In the Belep Islands, where the population is entirely Kanak, no one went to vote. At a polling station in the territory’s capital, Nouméa, for relocated Belep Islanders to vote, just six out of a registered 200 people did so. “It’s very simple,” said Roland Berlo, 58, at the polling station. “The Kanak people were asked not to vote, and the slogan was followed. We did not vote because we are in mourning. The Kanak people are very united, in the north, in the south, in the islands. It has always been so.” Queues outside polling booths were by contrast long in the predominantly white and wealthy southern districts of Nouméa after polling opened at 7am on Sunday. “I did not go to vote and I will not today,” said Bernard Christian, 40, a Kanak inhabitant of Mont-Dore, a town close to Nouméa. “I will not vote, in sign of solidarity with all the Kanak community and because the indigenous people have a right to independence.” Many of the people of Saint-Louis, a predominantly Kanak village, agreed. “Here in my village everyone respects the boycott and we are more preoccupied by the cyclone coming on Monday than by the vote,” said Adolphe Wamytan, a Saint-Louis resident. “I hope everybody will respect the non-violence call, because we don’t want to give the French militaries the opportunity to demonstrate their power of repression. This referendum does not resolve anything: we the indigenous people will have to be there and united for what’s next and the negotiations to come, we’ll never give up the idea of independence.” It was the third referendum on whether New Caledonia should become independent from France. In 2018, 43% voted for independence, and in 2020 this rose to 47%, and the participation rate was more than 85%. Fears were raised of violence after the latest vote, and over the past month 2,000 French military officers had arrived in New Caledonia, along with armoured vehicles and military equipment. On election day the sale of alcohol was prohibited, as well as the sale of retail fuel, and the transport of ammunition and arms – such as guns traditionally used for hunting and machetes for chopping wood and coconuts – was also forbidden. Sonia Backès, a pro-France campaigner, hailed the result as a “great victory”, adding: “We are French, we will remain it and it is not negotiable.” FLNKS leaders argued before the vote that the result would be questionable if there was no full participation of Kanaks, and called for it to be delayed, but France refused. “It is simply impossible for us to campaign and organise this referendum because of all the mourning that we are undergoing,” said Johanyto Wamytan, a Kanak and pro-independence activist for the Union Calédonienne party. “The custom of mourning is really crucial for the Kanak people. It is a time when the chiefs of clans can meet for several weeks to renew alliances and keep the custom alive. The tomb is closed and finished only after a year. I lost a very important cousin during this crisis. We could not do the custom. When I go to people to talk about the referendum as a politician, they refuse to receive me.” Other Pacific leaders had backed calls for the vote to be delayed, including the Pacific Elders’ Voice, a group of former presidents and prime ministers of Pacific nations, who wrote to Macron urging him “to respect the wishes of indigenous leaders in New Caledonia who have called for the deferral of the third independence referendum due to a spike in Covid-related deaths.” A delegation made up of three Kanak leaders left for New York on Tuesday to express this opposition to the UN general assembly. The French minister of overseas territories, Sébastien Lecornu, who arrived in the archipelago on Friday, said the Nouméa agreement – the text that specifies the process of decolonisation – “comes to an end” and that Monday would mark the start of a “transition period” towards a new status for the territory. “The first political lesson is that the territory is still as divided, block against block, and we have now the duty to get out of this binary situation,” he said.Pontus Jansson is wanted by Leicester, Newcastle and Everton in January after they were alerted to the Brentford captain’s contract situation. Jansson’s current Brentford deal expires at the end of the season and with the 30-year-old Sweden defender’s outstanding performances this season having helped to guide the newly promoted side to a mid-table position, it is understood that has not gone unnoticed by Brentford’s Premier League rivals. Everton and Leicester are both keen to strengthen their defences, while Newcastle manager Eddie Howe is also desperate to reinforce his squad having also shown an interest in Burnley’s James Tarkowski, another whose contract expires at the end of the season. if he were to leave in January Brentford would be likely to demand a hefty fee for Jansson, who has started all 16 of their Premier League matches this season and scored the equaliser in their stoppage-time comeback victory over Watford on Friday night. He was signed from Leeds in July 2019 for an undisclosed fee after falling out with their manager, Marcelo Bielsa. Before the meeting with his former side on 5 December, which ended in a 2-2 draw, Jansson described Brentford as “a smaller club than the other clubs I have played for”. “Malmö is a massive club, and then I went to Italy to Torino, which is also a big, big club, and Leeds, crazy big club. You couldn’t almost walk into the city because everyone is a Leeds fan,” he added. “And then you move here to a smaller club. I feel the difference now that we are in the Premier League, the interest in this club is much bigger than what it was in the Championship.”In one of Tel Aviv’s most affluent neighbourhoods, a collection of ramshackle one-storey homes with rusting roofs known as Givat Amal Bet still sits in the shadow of the high-rise towers looming above. Israel’s economic centre has recently been named the world’s most expensive city to live in, overtaking Paris and Singapore in the 2021 rankings compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). As the Mediterranean city’s reputation as a global tech hub continues to attract foreign investment, however, and prices for goods and services soar as Israel’s economy makes a strong recovery from the pandemic, locals fear the widening gap between rich and poor is pushing out working-class residents and creating damaging new social divisions. Tel Aviv’s status as the world’s most expensive metropolis, up from fifth last year, is in large part a result of global inflation and supply chain issues caused by Covid-19 shutdowns. The shekel has gone from strength to strength thanks to the weakened dollar, Israel’s large current account surplus, and foreign direct investment in the tech sector that is expected to reach $30bn (£22.7bn) by the end of the year. Givat Amal Bet is the starkest example of the area’s changing demographics. During the 1947-48 war surrounding the creation of the Israeli state, the residents of the Palestinian village of al-Jammasin al-Gharbi, which once stood there, fled to avoid the fighting. Newly arrived Jewish refugees and migrants from around the Middle East and north Africa, known as mizrahim, were asked to settle in their place as a buffer against the Arab armies. The displaced Palestinians were later denied the right to return, so the mizrahim stayed and named their new home Givat Amal Bet. Unlike other villages that were absorbed into the municipality as Tel Aviv grew, however, the 40 or so working-class families living there were never allowed to purchase the land on which their homes were built. Despite paying city taxes, they have had irregular access to services such as water and electricity and were banned from altering or upgrading their homes. The community is still fighting a decades-long legal battle for compensation with development companies, the state and the Tel Aviv municipality, but the last of the neighbourhood’s residents were forcibly evicted from their homes last month. “When my parents came from Damascus we were asked to settle here to help the state,” said Yossi Cohen, 68, who in November was dragged by police out of the house in which he was born. Israel’s first prime minister, David Ben-Gurion, had “promised that we would be rewarded, that we would keep our homes”, he said. But during the eviction, most of the contents of his house were dumped outside, and a fence now stops anyone from going in. “We have fought discrimination from the Ashkenazi [Jews of European heritage] our whole lives. We live on some of the most expensive land in Tel Aviv, so they try force us off, the same way they do with the Arabs.” Two high-rise towers have been built on the edge of Givat Amal Bet since 2005. Three more are planned to meet the demand for office space and luxury apartments. The EIU’s assessment of Tel Aviv’s affordability doesn’t even factor in surging local property prices and the shortage of purchasable land, said Asaf Mualem, the owner of the real estate company Menivim Israel. “In the last two years our prices have become double what you see on shows like Selling Sunset in Los Angeles. We are talking 65,000 shekels [£16,000] per square metre,” he said. The foreign investment is coming from the tech sector, the Jewish diaspora in France and the US and a new influx of money from the UAE, Mualem said: the wealthy Gulf state, along with Bahrain, Morocco and Sudan, signed US-brokered peace agreements with Israel in 2020. ‘Even rich local people are getting priced out, and it’s not going to stop. I think prices will go up another 30% before the bubble bursts,” he said. Gentrification is a problem in cities across the world, but Israel’s recent political paralysis has compounded Tel Aviv’s housing crisis. No public housing has been built in the last two years, even though 30,000 people are on waiting lists. “Israel was founded as a socialist state, but we have abandoned those principles. I do more of a job finding vulnerable people places to live than the entire housing ministry,” said local activist, Riki Kohan Benlulu. “They started selling off public housing in the 80s, which is when the gap started growing. Safety nets are the price of civilisation. Now it’s like going to hospital, but instead of giving you medicine, they make you sick.” Standing outside his former home in Givat Amal Bet, Cohen was not sure what the future holds for the neighbourhood or the residents’ association’s battle for compensation. “We have a saying in Hebrew, we talk about a land that eats its inhabitants. Well, the ones up there, they’re the ones who feed on us,” he said, pointing at the tower developments.Here’s Louise Taylor’s report. Vilde Bøe Risa, the goalscorer and player of the match, speaks. The keeper made a load of good saves but finally I got the goal. This was an important game for us and we have a busy week coming up. We just to need to work harder because this is how we want to play. Live table: that moves United up to fifth, and West Ham are currently beating Everton. Brighton’s good run is coming to its end. And perhaps United have found a way to win. They eventually took the chances they created all game with Ladd and Boa Risa both scoring fine goals. 90+4 min: Brighton pinned back, with little chance of finding the goal that could ignite this match. 90+2 min: Hannah Blundell holds the ball in the corner, on the instruction of her manager. 90+1 min: A rather unnecessary five minutes added on. There have been a couple of knocks but this game is done. Trust me on this. 90 min: United finishing the game as they have played most of it, on the attack. Toone forces a fine save from the excellent Walsh. 88 min: Another Victoria Williams foul, but not much of one, as Toone goes down. The free-kick, taken by Toone, leads to Ladd smashing over the bar. 87 min: Toone swing at the ball as it breaks in the Brighton box, but her shot is blocked. 86 min: Brighton sub: off goes Brazil, and on comes Symonds. 85 min: United sub: off goes Russo, who had a good game and on comes Thomas. Victoria Williams meanwhile puts in one of those characteristic blocks to halt Dalton. 83 min: Connolly takes a free-kick for Brighton that doesn’t beat the first defender. The use of the dead ball has been a tad under par from Hope Powell’s team. 82 min: United sub, on comes Galton for scorer Boe Risa. 80 min: And with that, Williams picks up the game’s first booking, smashing into Russo. That was a tired challenge. 79 min: Williams continues to limp around, but she’s not one for turning it in. And what would Brighton’s defence be without her? 77 min: Williams took a hell of a whack from that Zelem smasher, and goes down. Hers has been a performance of real bravery. 75 min: United queuing up to shoot after a corner, with Walsh making a couple of saves, with Zelem pinging in one of them. Brighton struggling to get out of their area. 74 min: Russo makes a neat turn and shoots. United continue to push for another but Williams comes across to block. She’s been outstanding. 72 min: Brighton sub, on comes Robinson for Bance, who made her debut today. 71 min: Brighton go down the other end and force another save from Earps, who has a good game when called upon. Batlle’s pass from the right flank and Boe Risa steals in to convert from close range. A nice finish and her first ever goal for United. 68 min: It’s pretty bitty, this game. And with a busy week ahead for both teams, it does seem as energy is being conserved. 66 min: Mary Earps excellent again as Le Tissier’s cross is aimed into the heart of the United goalmouth. Earps climbs highest and most bravely. 65 min: United need to keep their concentration themselves; as their manager said in pre-match, that’s what’s kept them back this season. 63 min: Chance for United to launch a free-kick into the Brighton box. It’s well cleared. Brighton are good at defending the aerial ball. Their concentration has broken only once, for the goal. 61 min: A break in play as Earps is attended to. That save came at a cost for the England keeper. 59 min: Oof, a Brighton chance, and a bruising one. Le Tissier hits it in, Williams chases in and Earps comes across to claim the ball. That’s very brave. 58 min: United playing the ball around and the Brighton attackers are trying their best to push up and press. They do seem a little tired. And a sub is made Kerkdijk is removed, and on comes Bowman, a midfielder, to become a defensive stand-in. 56 min: More United pressure. Brighton spill the ball, and Boa Risa’s shot is saved, and then the ball comes to Toome who smashes it high and not so handsome. 54 min: United chance! Staniforth lays up Boa Risa, who smashes a low shot that Walsh saves well. United continuing to create chances where Brighton are failing to do so. 53 min: Long throw launched by Le Tissier, and there’s a claim for a handball off United’s Williams but nothing doing there. 52 min: Kerkdijk looks to be OK to continue. It’s been an occasionally bruising encounter, this one. 51 min: Kerkdijk is down for Brighton, she took a bit of a knock in a battle with Toone. 49 min: It’s a slowish start, with Brighton still yet to force their way into the match. Toome loops a ball into the Brighton box, and it’s hacked away. Toome has been impressive once more. 47 min: United start the half as they ended it, they are on the attack. Carter is expected to provide the out-ball for Brighton’s attack. 46 min: We are back under way and there’s been a sub made by Brighton. Off goes Gibbons and on comes Danielle Carter. The pressure finally told for United who dominated, and Brighton’s defending finally gave way. There’s been two minutes added on. Batlle slots the ball across goal, and Ladd, with a neat piece of improv deflects the ball home. Brighton’s previous good work undone by lax defending of a set piece. 45 min: United launch it long to the right, and then Staniforth pulls up. A hamstring? It looks like it, and she is limping. Or did she take a kick to the heel? 43 min: United really dominating possession, and Stanifoth loops the ball to the back post, and Toone shoots, but only straight at Walsh. 41 min: Brighton defending well but don’t have anyone up front to relieve the pressure when it’s cleared. 39 min: Zelem has a dig from distance and it spinnakers wide. United lacking quality in attack here. So many chances to make a breakthrough, none of it taken so far. 38 min: More United pressure, and they look to be queueing up to score, while Brighton are back deep in numbers. 36 min: Long shot from Boa Risa, and she wallops the ball at goal. Walsh, freshly recovered, makes a low save. She’s been far busier than Mary Earps. 34 min: Hope Powell has a Sam Allardyce/Phil Brown-style headset on, and is urging her team on. 32 min: Brighton free-kick, and Gibbons will take again from the left-hand side. It briefly threatens to drift into the goal, only to waft behind. Another wasteful set piece. 30 min: A break in play as Brighton keeper Walsh is down injured. It looks to be a problem with her foot. Hope Powell uses the time to get out her tactics board. 28 min: It’s all United but Brighton remain well-organised in defence, and even go on the break, with a chance for Ellie Brazil to speed forward, but she runs out of support. 25 min: Great chance for Boa Risa, as she escapes down the right. She’s sent a bit too wide and forces another save from Walsh. United knocking on the door far more firmly. 23 min: Staniforth with just the Brighton goalie to beat? Nope, an offside. It was pretty close. 21 min: Brighton launch a free-kick into the United box, and it’s launched back out. Russo is baulked as he attempts to hold it up, then sets up a chance that Brighton’s Williams, who has been excellent, comes across to block. 19 min: Russo smashes a shot over. Building United pressure? No, it goes down the other end. Le Tissier loops in a ball begging to be hit but there’s nobody quite close enough. 18 min: United try a slow buildup. Brighton are well organised but Staniforth and Toone make inroads. The ball comes back out to Ladd, who has a swing but she doesn’t quite catch it with enough venom. 16 min: Gibbons forces a corner for Brighton. They wanted a handball but that would have been harsh on the United defender. Gibbons takes it herself and Millie Turner clear. The rebound is hoofed into the icy streets of Crawley. 14 min: Aside from that Boe Rise double chance, it’s been short of clear chances. A few potshots flying in. 11 min: There is a minute’s applause for Izzy Humphrey, the 10-year-old who died this year, and was named fan of the season last season. Some information here. 9 min: Ella Toone, such a star for England, gets the ball out to the left, scampering on, and her pass into the middle is hacked clear. 7 min: Katie Zelem, typically, is in the thick of things for United. Both teams struggling to maintain possession for any length of time or to be able to supply the killer pass. 5 min: A United mistake lets in Brighton and Ellie Brazil escapes down the flank, only to loop her pass into the grateful arms of Mary Earps. 4 min: A spell of decent Brighton possession, with Marc Skinner asking his team to win the ball back. 2 min: Early chance for United. The ball comes in from the left and Boe Rise gets two bites of the cherry, but Brighton goalie Megan Walsh makes two smart saves. United may fancy they should have scored that. 1 min: The knee is taken and away we go with United taking the kick-off. They exert some early pressure. Real warmth between Hope Powell and Marc Skinner ahead of the match. Great read on Hope Powell here. Today is Rainbow Laces. The players take to the field and it’s a raucous crowd that greets them. Lots of old-school Manchester United fans singing lustily and cheering all the players mentioned in the lineups. Old-school indeed. The United manager Marc Skinner speaks. It’s three points, if we win we go level with Brighton. It’s a big game in that respect. We have to do everything in our power to control the game. We are almost live in Crawley. The United players are on the South Coast. Some pre-match reading, a big shock yesterday. And Suzanne Wrack on Clapton’s women’s team. Some quotes from Hope Powell, again courtesy of Brighton’s website. We lost our last two games before the international break and then a lot of players went away on international duty which was really good experience for them. But we’ve had a bit of time to recover since then. Against Reading in our last game, I thought we played quite well, especially in the second half. It will be good to get going again. We know United pose a real threat, but we’ll go into the game with some confidence. Some stats, courtesy of the Brighton website: Following their 1-0 win over United in April, Albion are looking to win consecutive FA WSL matches against them for the first time. Albion have won seven of their last nine home FA Women’s Super League matches (L2), keeping five clean sheets. United are winless in four FA WSL matches (D3 L1) – before this run, they had never gone more than two games without a win in the WSL. What a season it’s been for Hope Powell’s Brighton. While the likes of Manchester City and Manchester United have languished, Brighton have stepped into the gap, and can close the gap on second-placed Chelsea if they beat United today. United are coming off an FA Cup defeat to Leicester and being well beaten by Arsenal in the WSL. United have three matches in seven days coming up, while Brighton are hoping to revive themselves after losing to Reading last time out. They similarly have a busy week ahead, but it all starts here. Kick-off is at 12.30pm. Join me.Introducing criminal sanctions for tech executives in the online safety bill could be copied by non-democratic regimes, the industry has claimed before an influential report this week. A joint committee of MPs and peers scrutinising the bill will publish its findings on Tuesday after the culture secretary promised to accelerate provisions for criminal liability for senior managers. Nadine Dorries said it was “nonsense” that tech firms would be given a two-year grace period before criminal accountability is introduced. Instead, liability would be brought in within three to six months of the bill becoming law, she said. In an example of the industry counter-offensive, the British trade body techUK said criminal sanctions could provide a “pretext” for non-democratic regimes to introduce punitive measures based on the legislation. Antony Walker, the deputy chief executive of techUK, said: “There are examples around the world in non-democratic regimes where threats to senior executives have been used as a way to force companies in a way that suits a particular government. The UK has an opportunity to set an example whereby we don’t provide those pretexts for other regimes to simply say: ‘Well if the UK does it, that’s the gold standard. We’re going to do it too but then apply a somewhat different standard.’” Twitter has issued a similar warning. Speaking to the joint committee in October, the social media company’s director of public policy strategy, Nick Pickles, said “hostage laws” – so called because they could be used to get at companies by pressuring staff members – could be adopted by illiberal regimes. In its submission to the committee, Google said the criminal sanctions threat would encourage directors to remove content “at scale” rather than risk falling foul of the act. Dorries told the committee that failure to tackle harmful algorithms – which tailor an internet user’s experience and could steer them down content “rabbit holes” – could result in charges being brought against executives. “Remove your harmful algorithms today and you will not be subjected – named individuals – to criminal liability and prosecution.” Under the bill, senior managers face a fine or up to two years in jail if they fail to comply with “information requests” from Ofcom, the communications watchdog that will oversee it. According to the draft bill, a criminal offence will be committed if an executive fails to comply with an information request from Ofcom, or if the response is materially false or encrypted. Supporters of the bill believe the clauses are broad enough to force tech companies to follow the act closely. However, lawyers at Harbottle &amp; Lewis said the government memo on the deferred powers was focused on information offences and they did not “see anything in the memo that suggests liability could extend to other breaches of the act”. Dorries has said she will look at the committee’s recommendations “very seriously”, with several issues under debate including bringing fraudulent adverts under the scope of the bill and introducing tougher child protection measures such as stringent age verification. The online safety bill applies to companies that host user-generated content, covering services from social media networks to video sharing sites. It places a duty of care on those companies to protect users from harmful content, or face substantial fines levied by Ofcom. The duty of care is split into three parts: preventing the proliferation of illegal content and activity such as child abuse images, terrorist material and hate crimes such as racial abuse; ensuring children are not exposed to harmful or inappropriate content; and, for tech firms such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, ensuring adults are protected from legal but harmful content. The latter content category is to be defined by the culture secretary, after consultation with Ofcom, and then scrutinised by parliament before being enacted in secondary legislation. A spokesperson for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport said: “We are bringing in proportionate regulation for tech companies to give them a legal duty to keep their customers safe, as firms have in other sectors. It is vital that the most senior tech bosses take their new responsibilities seriously, and our bill will underline that.”In the early 1980s, an advert for the job of Katharine’s personal assistant was posted on the noticeboard at the Observer. I was working in promotions and I wanted it so much because I just loved her, I was a huge fan. Like everyone who read her column, I felt I already knew her – she was so bold and fearless, frank and funny, writing about current issues in her very personal way. When she got my job application, she rang me and asked me to come and have a chat. It was the strangest interview. Not a word about whether I could type or do shorthand. It was: “Do you want a cigarette? Is there a man in your life?” We chatted, she dispensed lots of advice, then she just gave me the job – and I loved it and I loved her. She truly cared about her readers. She received a hefty postbag of letters every week and she replied to every single one of them. She used to dictate her replies into a Dictaphone and I would type them up. Because people felt they knew her they would write to her about all sorts of things. We heard from a women who had undergone a botched gynaecological procedure. Katharine sent her to her own gynaecologist to have it put right and paid for it. She was so generous. Another time, a young couple wrote to her depressed about how they did not have enough money to ever have any fun. She paid them a surprise visit with armfuls of presents. They kept in touch and she went to their wedding. Katharine’s husband, the thriller writer Gavin Lyall, would read her column every week before she filed it and she would either be in tears or OK, depending on his reaction. She just doted on him – he was everything to her. She had a vulnerable and insecure side you would not have guessed at from reading her columns. As well as Gavin, she adored her sons. Jake was good looking, the apple of her eye; Bernard was her rock. And later on she loved being a grandmother too. She worked mainly from home, but every Wednesday morning, she would come into the paper for the editorial conference. I was never allowed in but I know she held her own among the men – and it was mostly men – in the room. At lunchtime, she loved going to the Coach and Horses pub around the corner from St Andrew’s Hill [home of the Observer until the late 1980s] with everyone else. She wasn’t grand at all; she was popular and she was great fun. Gin and tonic was her favourite tipple, although later in life she preferred whisky. And she was very sociable, adored going out to book launches, drinks parties, dinners – anything and everything. She couldn’t stop herself. Gavin used to say she would climb over hot ploughshares to go to a party. She wasn’t just my boss: we were close. We used to go to lunch at Le Meridien in Piccadilly. We talked about clothes and liked the same books. She took me to the theatre and we went to Paris together once to visit [former Observer women’s page editor] Suzanne Lowry. It wasn’t a great trip. Katharine got her purse stolen and fell over and hurt her leg. But generally we had great times together. She was heartbroken when her column was phased out in 1996. But then she got the job as agony aunt at Saga, which she loved. I helped her reply to the letters. And I helped her again when she came back to the Observer to write for the magazine for a while before she got Alzheimer’s. I never really stopped working for Katharine right up to the day she died, almost. She would always call me if she ever needed anything doing, like research or difficult phone calls. If I had to choose three things I loved about her, I would say she was generous to a fault – she remembered me in her will – she was funny and incredibly clever. She was the stuff heroines are made of. Usually, when you work for someone, you get to know them so well that you’re aware of all the bad things about them as well as the good. With her, that didn’t happen. My opinion of her simply went up and up. She was just a great woman.Two weeks out from the Christmas break, and across the US the annual note from school PTAs reaches parents: it is time to recognise this year’s efforts by teachers through contributions to the holiday fund. It’s a solicitation that goes out every year, but this year the wording is particular. The past 12 months have been terrible, period, but particularly terrible for those working in schools. Please dig deep, we are advised; these are uniquely difficult times. It’s not only a whip-round but an invitation for thanks and praise that, in these endless, waning days of the pandemic, seems to belong to an earlier time. If we were frightened in 2020, there was also a sense of readjustment, much discussed, about what we owed to one another. There was a warm glow of mutual responsibility. Those taken for granted were lauded and rewarded. In New York, food delivery apps introduced a button for a 40% tip, and teachers and doctors were heroes. Nothing lasts, of course, but the collective sense of a near-death experience meant that – as many thought in the heat of the moment – some version of this gratitude would. It didn’t, obviously. Over the past year, gratuities winnowed back to 20% and griping about school schedules resurfaced. What’s curious, perhaps, isn’t the return to business as usual, but a decisive swing from valorising certain groups to effectively demonising them. Last month, in some school districts in the US, school closures were announced not as responses to rising Covid numbers, but to accommodate teacher burnout. Detroit public schools decided that, until the end of the year, they would close their classrooms every Friday and revert to online learning. In Florida, the school holidays were extended. Seemingly on a dime, the mantra “teachers are great” flipped to “teachers don’t want to work”. People were furious. Part of this dynamic is just basic energy flow. It’s a feature of burnout that while one’s own is deeply felt and definitely real, other people are mostly faking it. The state of burnout erodes tolerance. To nurse one’s own bruised system relies on everyone else’s being up and running. No one has the bandwidth to accommodate the needs of others, particularly if they make one’s own life more difficult. There’s a question of association, too, perhaps. For a lot of people, school functionality is the single biggest barometer of where we are in the pandemic. Part-closures, teacher burnout, even solicitations for gratitude interfere with the sense that we are on the other side of this thing. No one wants to be reminded of the awful days of 2020, when our kids sat frozen for hours on Zoom. At every stage of the pandemic, there has been a second world war analogy waiting unhappily in the wings, and in this case it’s Churchill being voted out of office in 1945. According to the teaching unions in the US, reverting to a partly remote learning schedule is an effort to keep teachers from resigning. “What you hear from teachers is that it’s been too much,” Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, told the New York Times. “And they’re trying the best that they can.” It’s an appeal to reason that will get precisely nowhere with parents forced to scramble for childcare if their kids’ school suddenly shuts every Friday. Even without the practical implications of partial school closures – or indefinite mask mandates when all school-age kids in the US are vaccine-eligible – there is an emotional need served by pivoting to trashing those one latterly admired. A friend referred to it as “the pendulum of hate”, and I suppose if nothing else it’s a swing that falsely implies movement where there might actually be none. These people, once great, have now become tiresome, clinging to how things were when the rest of us have moved on. It’s not the pandemic itself holding us back, but the more absorbable problem of truculent teachers and inflexible unions – a question of perception, not reality. At this point, all that stands between us and the world as it was in 2019 is apparently a large dose of common sense and the exhortation to buck up. To think otherwise – to consider that we’re all in the same boat, burnt out, fed up and incapable of returning to anything – is simply too dismal a possibility to allow. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistThe Japanese composer Ichiko Aoba’s seventh record, the first to be released outside her country, offers a timely hidden door to another, quieter world. Drawing on her experience as a soundtracker of theatre productions and video games such as The Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening, Windswept Adan finds Aoba moving beyond the simple voice-and-guitar arrangements of her previous releases to create, in collaboration with Taro Umebayashi, AKA Milk, a psych-folk sci-fi story set on Adan, a fictional island based on the Ryukyu archipelago. From Prologue, with its deep drone, wash of waves and circling, priestessly choral voices to the closing Adan no Shima no Tanjyosai and its sparsely plucked guitar and elegiac strings and flute, the album casts a still, soothing spell. Anyone charmed by the deep delicacy of Nick Drake, Joanna Newsom or Isobel Campbell’s the Gentle Waves will find many byways to wander, from the graceful Easter Lily, in which slow kalimba and guitar arpeggios build twinkling layers that shift subtly, revealing shadows, to Hagupit, an eerier, ghostlier thing with a keening melody. It’s a remarkable feat of musical world-building that will pull you back to Adan’s shores again and again.Michael Cullen is nearing the end of his 2,000-mile Giving Back Tour to support groups that have helped him over the years. Better known as Speedo Mick because he wears only a pair of swimming trunks, Cullen is walking around the UK and Ireland to raise money for causes close to his heart such as homelessness, disadvantaged children and mental health. The weather has not been kind in recent weeks. He has had to battle storms Arwen and Barra in his journey across the north of England, and was almost swept out to sea in Morecambe. “I’ve been in the Outer Hebrides, I’ve been in Scotland in -6C, and none of it beat me to put my clothes on – but it was Morecambe that put all the doubts in my mind,” Cullen said. “I nearly got blown off the seafront at Morecambe – me and [a statue of] Eric Morecambe nearly got blown away, it was that powerful and strong.” On Friday’s walk a rainbow, to match his multi-coloured scarf, provided a metaphor of hope for the lifelong Everton supporter, who has previously struggled with addiction, spent time on the streets and had mental health issues. His swimming cap has been replaced by a deerstalker and he runs to ensure he keeps warm in the worst conditions. Cullen has been spurred on by people who join him for legs of the walk and well-wishers at the side of the road, in addition to messages of support from the likes of Wayne Rooney. “A big funeral procession is going past and they all have their windows open, all beeping, all smiling, on a day when they are going to bury a loved one,” Cullen said as he walked near Chorley on Friday. “This is the power of these knickers. I know it sounds bizarre but it gives people relief, just a few moments to stop thinking about any worries. The best part of this is to see the smiles and laughing in the cars – it fills my world with joy.” The tour, which has taken Cullen from Stornoway in Scotland to Portsmouth via Donegal, will conclude in his home city of Liverpool next week. Cullen is well known for his fundraising, previously walking from Liverpool to Lyon, among other efforts. He has raised £126,760 during his current walk and given out £193,000 to 83 small charities across the UK and Ireland along the way from money previously donated. “I’ve been homeless, I’ve struggled with my mental health and addiction. I got the support I needed over 19 years ago. I am 19 years clean and sober, I’ve got my self-respect and dignity back … well I don’t know about my dignity,” Cullen said. “I’ve got my family and a roof over my head, I’ve got my life back and I am able to do this stuff. This is a dream come true. “I am trying to let people know that there is a way out. You can find the door. I couldn’t find the door … and I tried to take my life a couple times in those 20 years of addiction. I never had any hope. This is what the story is about, it’s about hope. Hope lives in the darkest places; you don’t think it’s there but it is.”Fully vaccinated people in England who have had contact with someone with Covid-19 should take a rapid lateral flow test every day for seven days, in an effort to slow the spread of the virus, the Department of Health and Social Care has said. The new directive, which will take effect from Tuesday, comes after a significant rise in Omicron cases, the DHSC said. It applies whether or not the contact is with someone with the more transmissible variant and applies from the day they are notified as being a contact. People are advised to get a box of seven lateral flow tests free of charge from NHS test and trace either through pharmacies, schools or home delivery by ordering online, and then report their results. Unvaccinated adults must continue to self-isolate for 10 days if they have contact with someone with Covid-19. All contacts of suspected Omicron cases are currently required to self-isolate for 10 days, but fears have been voiced about public willingness to comply with government directives, not least given the furore surrounding Downing Street Christmas parties, where rules were allegedly flouted last year. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the change to the guidance, announced on Sunday, was “a more proportionate and more practical measure to limit the impact on people’s day-to-day lives while helping to reduce the spread of Omicron”. The DHSC said the testing would also help it to understand “how and where the virus is spreading”. Javid has said Omicron cases could exceed 1 million by the end of the month, which, when their contacts are added, could require several million lateral flow tests to be made available to the public. As the NHS faces up to a surge of hospital admissions as a result of Omicron, the changes should help limit workforce absences through self-isolation. These previously afflicted health and social care – as well as other sectors – before rules were relaxed for people who were double-vaccinated. NHS staff were not exempt from the recently introduced requirement to self-isolate in the event of contact with an Omicron case. Under the latest guidance, anyone whose rapid test comes back positive or who develops Covid symptoms is still advised to self-isolate and take a PCR test to verify the result. People who record a negative lateral flow test after having been identified as a contact of someone with Covid are advised to still take precautions, namely to limit close contact with other people outside their household, especially in crowded or enclosed spaces and with anyone who is more vulnerable. They are also advised to follow existing government guidance on wearing a face covering and working from home where possible. The requirement for daily lateral flow testing applies to all fully vaccinated adults as well as to people aged between five and 18 and a half, regardless of their vaccination status. Under-fives are exempt. Dr Jenny Harries, the head of the UK Health Security Agency, said: “If you are identified as a contact of someone with Covid-19, taking a rapid daily test – and only needing to isolate if it is positive – will help reduce the spread of the virus and minimise its impact on our everyday lives over the coming weeks and months. Rapid tests are freely available in pharmacies and online.” She also urged people to have boosters and those who had not had any doses “to get vaccinated as soon as possible”. The changes are guidance only, but the government intends to keep the situation under review as to whether they should be enshrined in law.Goldman Sachs will start training apprentices directly on its London trading floor for the first time next year, feeding into wider efforts to boost social mobility across the UK’s financial sector. The programme, which is part of an apprenticeship scheme launched in partnership with Queen Mary University of London, will combine paid on-the-job training with study over four years, offering students a chance to gain hands-on experience in a sector still struggling to attract candidates from less-affluent backgrounds. The programme, which opens for recruitment on Monday, comes nearly a year after the Treasury and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy launched an independent taskforce to address a lack of socioeconomic diversity across financial and professional services, after research found that just under half of senior City roles were held by white men who attended an independent or selective state school. A 2019 study by KPMG also found that 41% of people working in finance across the UK had parents in the same sector, far higher than the national average of 12%, raising concerns about a lack of access to City roles for less-privileged students. “As an industry, we are still not doing a good enough job at appealing to students from a more diverse socioeconomic background,” Daniel Freckleton, a managing director in global markets at Goldman Sachs, said. “There is of course an interplay between socio-economic background and ethnic minorities, so working to improve social mobility in our recruitment process is likely to have knock-on benefits to our racial diversity too,” he added. Freckleton is one of the few black managing directors on the the bank’s London trading floor. He is the main sponsor of the apprenticeship scheme. While some banks have launched apprenticeship schemes in the UK, most have been focused on back-office roles. Goldman’s programme is believed to be one of the first schemes aimed at bringing trainees directly on to the trading floor of an investment bank. The Goldman scheme will start by selecting 10 candidates to start the scheme in September 2022, with an opportunity to increase its cohort in following years. Students will earn a “competitive” annual salary alongside their studies and will be eligible for a bonus, helping avoid student debt, by working five days a week on the trading floor. They will also study at Queen Mary’s school of economics and finance for two one-week “teaching sprints” per semester. The academic programme will consist of lectures and assessments, covering topics ranging from asset pricing to machine learning. Goldman will pay for relocation and equipment such as books and laptops as needed, to help students who might otherwise struggle to cover the costs of formal training. Candidates will also be eligible for a full-time role at Goldman at the end of their course. Recruitment is open to students from all educational backgrounds, but will be broadly aimed at people coming from state education. “We want to attract the brightest and best students from as diverse a talent pool as possible – that’s diversity of socio-economic background as much as anything else,” Freckleton said. “Unfortunately, we’re currently missing out on a lot of this talent, either because students are put off by the traditional recruitment process, the financial barriers of university study, or simply because they are not aware of the kinds of jobs that Goldman has to offer them.” • This article was amended on 17 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly suggested that Goldman Sachs’ trading floor apprenticeship was the first such scheme in the UK.Saturday Night Live returns from a short hiatus with A Holiday Message from Dr Anthony Fauci (Kate McKinnon), who relays the latest informing about Covid-19 to the public. He attempts to calm worries about the new Omicron variant – “if you had a vaccine and a booster … unclench” – before, like last year, turning the stage over to “nerds trying their best” from the CDC, who act out common scenarios relating to the pandemic. These include a guy being banished from society for attempting to eat at a restaurant without his vaccination card, a horny, but worried airplane passenger hitting on game flight attendant, and a mall Santa who no longer allows children to sit on his lap because “thanks to the vaccine, my testicles have ballooned in size”. This is followed by appearances from a series of public disgraces, including “unemployed brothers” Andrew (Pete Davidson) and Chris Cuomo (Andrew Dismukes), Congressional gun nutjobs Lauren Boebert (Chloe Fineman) and Marjorie Taylor Greene (Cecily Strong), and “weirdo with the beardo” Ted Cruz, who gets the last laugh on the recently deceased Bob Dole for having once said “no one likes me”. The season thus far has seen an overall uptick in the quality of the cold opens, most of which is owed to the new cast members being given the spotlight. Unfortunately, this dire offering sees the show returning to several wells that have long run dry. The smug, unfunny Fauci caricature does nothing but serve to remind viewers that McKinnon is still pulling a paycheck from the show, while the recycling of the utterly forgettable CDC playlets sketch from last December points to how lazy the writers can be. Billie Eilish pulls double duty as host and musical guest. Dressed in a massively poofy Christmas dress that makes her look like “Mrs. Claus going to the club,” the 19-year-old singer-songwriter talks about her signature fashion style (“The real reason I wore big, oversized clothes … is because I was actually two kids stacked on top of each other trying to sneak into an R-rated movie”), her childhood dreams of acting, which were dashed by her mother (who she brings out for a pointless cameo), and the difficulties that come with with being famous at a young age (she uses this to get a solid dig in at Colin Jost, showing off his uber-nerdy high school picture). In the first sketch, a married couple (Melissa Villaseñor, Alex Moffat) look over all the Christmas cards they’ve received from family and friends, such as their “super white, super Christian neighbor”, “cousin who’s made pregnancy their entire personality,” “well-off, middle-aged gay couple your wife is friends with…and gross, little old dog you can’t believe is still alive.” Miley Cyrus shows up briefly, playing herself, and her ease at live comedy makes a sharp contrast with Eilish (playing a bitchy high school frenemy), who comes off noticeably stilted. In what is arguably the low point of the season, we follow a smartphone scroll through some of TikTok’s most popular videos of late, which feature would-be self-defense gurus, doofy fit checks and sad thirst traps, various conspiracy theories and idiotic punditry, twerking nurses and more. The actual visual construction on display is impressive, but this nothing more an overlong regurgitation of viral content everyone’s already sick of. That Saturday Night Live thinks merely referencing these TikToks counts as comedy speaks not only to how utterly uninspired the show has become, but how far behind the cultural curve it is. Frankly, it’s pathetic. That said, uninspired is still preferable to irritating, something which is made very clear by the following sketch. Two hopelessly square, white children’s pageant directors (Eilish and Heidi Gardner) attempt to put a hip-hop spin on their nativity pageant, loudly directing their cast to strut, twerk and work a candy cane stripper pole. Eilish throws herself into her performance, but her southern dialect is all over the map. Gardner, meanwhile, is the most annoying she’s ever been. By the 50th time they’re screaming the word “Pimp Walk!” you’ll be begging for the commercial break. Then Eilish is about to sit down with her family for Christmas dinner, when she spies her elderly neighbor across the street spending the holiday (seemingly) alone. The two women start a correspondence through their windows using notepads, which leads to Eilish inviting the woman over. Things take an unsettling turn when the neighbor reveals herself to be a psychotic racist who is currently committing Munchausen by proxy on her grown son (Mikey Day) and is almost certainly responsible for the murder of her late husband. It’s a darkly clever spin on holiday treacle, but, like every sketch preceding it, it drags on well past the point of amusement. On Weekend Update, Michael Che invites Punkie Johnson to the desk. She starts off talking about her family’s holiday rules (the most important being: “the oldest person must always make the potato salad because they have LIVED … they know the secret ingredient isn’t eggs and paprika, it’s pain!”) before pivoting to her own desire to be a mother one day – but only to a gay daughter (“My family motto gonna be: if I’m smashing hoes, then everybody smashing hoes in this house!”). She’s followed by fellow sophomore cast member Dismukes, who shows up wearing tiger stripe face paint for his new animal segment. Things go off the rails immediately when, instead of predicting the outcome of an upcoming football game, his psychic pet octopus Bongo tells him “You will die in seven days”. Dismukes’s devastated, but dignified acceptance of his impending doom is the highlight of the episode. Next, Eilish plays chanteuse Leslie D. She performs a jazzy number called The Night I Met Santa, in which she bungles an attempted flirtation with Kris Kringle by telling him he has nice teeth, doing finger guns, and calling him a virgin. Eilish is at her most natural in song mode, although surprisingly, it’s Kenan Thompson, playing Santa, who gets the biggest applause after hitting an impressive high note. This is followed by a thematically similar pre-filmed segment in which a lonely Kyle Mooney awkwardly attempts to celebrate the holidays with his fellow cast members, only to continually weird them out. He finds some solace in a brief meeting with Eilish, before terrifying her by indulging his violently unhinged fantasies about kidnapping Day. Eilish then appears alongside McKinnon as dead-eyed front desk girls in a commercial for Business Garden Inn &amp; Suites &amp; Hotel Room Inn. It’s a lazy (if accurate) rundown of the common amenities found in faceless, mid-budget hotels, such as “tiny soap in plastic”, “band-aid colored blanket”, “short glass wearing oval hat” and “wet egg”. Eilish and McKinnon make the already interminable sketch drag on even longer by constantly breaking. At least Eilish’s brother Finneas – making his second appearance of the night – acquits himself better during his short walk-on as Trevor, a sleazy “bellhop/valet/night manager/in-house doctor”. The first part of this episode was as bad as the show has been all year, although things slightly improved during the back half. When it comes to live comedy, Eilish is no Miley Cyrus, but at least she balanced things out with two strong musical performances. The writing, on the other hand, was a total bust, with almost every sketch revolving around instantly tired one-note jokes. Worst of all was McKinnon return to the spotlight, her utterly grating performance throughout only serving as a reminder at how much of an albatross she’s become to the show (when she shows up, that is). Hopefully, next week’s episode – the last of 2021 – will see a massive improvement in quality. After viewing tonight’s offering, that would be a Christmas miracle.Bahrain: March An enthralling duel between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen at the season-opener hints at the controversy and drama that lies ahead. Verstappen starts on pole at the Bahrain International Circuit and a gripping strategic fight ensues in which Hamilton and Mercedes take the lead. Later running fresher tyres, Red Bull’s man hits back to pass Hamilton on lap 53, but leaves the track in doing so, and is immediately obliged to give the place back. Hamilton nurses his older tyres home, clinging on to win what he calls a “great battle”. Emilia-Romagna: April The scale of Hamilton’s task in defending his world title becomes clear at Imola when Verstappen bullies his way into the lead, from third on the grid with the Briton on pole, at the start of a rain-soaked race in Italy. Verstappen capitalises on his boldness to win the season’s second race. Hamilton later spins off and drops to sixth but has a stroke of fortune when a red flag allows him to repair and regroup – and fights back for a gutsy, potentially crucial second. Spain: May Another aggressive, high-risk overtaking manoeuvre from Verstappen at the start presents Hamilton with a choice: hold his ground and almost certainly crash out along with his rival, or cede the racing line and live to fight another lap. The Mercedes man opts for the more measured approach, seeing his pole-position advantage disappear within seconds. But Mercedes’s daring two-stop strategy allied to Hamilton’s relentless skill eventually pays off handsomely. He recovers from 21 seconds down to beat Verstappen into second place at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya. Great Britain: July A significant blow struck by Hamilton at Silverstone, and a day that attitudes harden between the drivers and teams. The pair clash on the first lap and Verstappen is sent careering into the barriers at 180mph after Hamilton tries to force his way down the inside at Copse, touching his adversary’s right rear wheel. Verstappen is taken to hospital for checks while Hamilton makes light of a 10-second penalty to triumph. The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, accuses the Briton of “dirty driving”. Italy: September Hamilton emerges from a pitstop fractionally ahead of Verstappen and fights for position into a chicane at Monza. Verstappen refuses to yield and in the resulting crash the Dutchman’s car hops into the air and lands on the Mercedes. “That’s what you get when you don’t leave enough space,” Verstappen claims on the radio seconds after the crash. It seems the halo saves Hamilton’s life, and he later expresses disappointment that Verstappen fails to check if he is OK. “It was good fun until now,” says Toto Wolff of Mercedes. Saudi Arabia: December The overriding memory of an insanely chaotic grand prix at the Jeddah Corniche Circuit will be the collision on lap 38, Hamilton’s Mercedes clipping the back of Verstappen’s Red Bull. Verstappen is instructed to let Hamilton pass following the pair’s coming-together two laps earlier with Hamilton pushing for the lead. The Dutchman slows dramatically and Hamilton, failing to realise his rival’s intention, cannot avoid a relatively minor collision. “He brake-tested me!” Hamilton yells on team radio, as a furious row breaks out in the pit lane.Manchester United will have felt a little closer to Europe on Sunday but it had nothing to do with their temporary proximity to the Channel. After four Women’s Super League games without a win, Marc Skinner’s side had looked in peril of becoming marooned in mid-table and were desperately in need of this restorative, and thoroughly convincing, victory in West Sussex. Hope Powell’s Brighton had kicked off in third place but only the excellence of Victoria Williams at centre‑half and Megan Walsh in goal prevented United, and their Norway international Vilde Bøe Risa in particular, from scoring a hatful of goals. “We should have been three or four up at half-time,” said Skinner, whose team join Brighton on 15 points. “This was a dominant performance which has been coming for a while and I’m proud of everyone. We were much more like the Manchester United team we want to develop; I loved the aggression from us. We showed what we can be - and Risa was magnificent.” Even so, his players made something of a slow-burn start, with Walsh seemingly hell-bent on helping them extend their winless run. Brighton’s goalkeeper proved extremely busy, making four first-half saves from Risa alone before Hayley Ladd’s half-volley finally eluded her. Ladd’s goal arrived in first-half stoppage time and originated from a well-worked short-corner routine, driven low across the box. For once, the otherwise outstanding Williams was confounded by a set piece concluded by Ladd’s first-time connection with Ona Batlle’s pass. Powell’s key defender had excelled, protecting Walsh admirably but she and her teammates were outwitted by a manoeuvre evidently well-rehearsed on the training ground and designed to render their aerial prowess academic. Brighton’s dismay at falling behind after working so hard was only exacerbated by their lack of threat from open play. Powell’s team had barely ventured into United’s box as they struggled to retain possession. It all seemed a reflection of the enduring lack of creativity and improvisational ability which continues to inhibit a supremely well-organised side reliant on dead-ball routines for almost half their WSL goals. Perhaps attempting to rectify this imbalance, Powell replaced Felicity Gibbons with Danielle Carter at half-time but it was Williams who, early in the second period, came closest to scoring for the home side. After advancing to look for any fallout from a lofted free-kick, she appeared set to force the dropping ball over the line only to be denied by an extremely brave smothering save on the part of Skinner’s England goalkeeper, Mary Earps. At the other end Walsh continued to thwart Risa until the 69th minute when the attacking midfielder volleyed Alessia Russo’s superb right-wing cross beyond her adversary, with the ball brushing the inside of a post en route to the back of the net. It was the Norwegian’s first WSL goal since joining United last summer but is unlikely to be her last. To their credit, Brighton refused to fold and Earps saved well from Ellie Brazil after Carter – who showed off a few pleasingly inventive touches – undid Skinner’s defence. United though were generally in control and, had she not sent a late shot whizzing wastefully wide, Ella Toone would surely have increased their margin of victory. “It was an important win for us,” said Risa, after collecting the player of the match award. “We needed to win to be closer to the top of the league so I’m glad to have got my first WSL goal. “I was a bit afraid it wouldn’t come today as I had a lot of chances, some big ones, so it was a special moment. It’s been a perfect afternoon. This is how we want to play; it’s just the start for us.”Britain’s most senior police leaders are considering making a public admission that their forces are institutionally racist, the Guardian has learned. High-level discussions began on Thursday and come as their special adviser on race says the declaration is needed if promises of radical reform are to be believed by black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities. More discussions will be held in January, and a decision from police chiefs is expected in February. Policing has been engulfed in a race crisis with a series of controversies over stop and search and use of force, leaving black people’s confidence lower than white people’s. Police chiefs have admitted this damages their legitimacy and ability to fight crime. The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) appointed the barrister Abimbola Johnson to chair an independent board to scrutinise a promised suite of reforms. A new plan to make policing anti-racist is promised and Johnson said institutional racism had to be admitted. “The plan needs to accept institutional racism, if it is to be anti-racist,” she said. “If the idea is to win the trust of black communities, policing needs to start by acknowledging both the historical and current manifestations of racism in policing.” Policing was first officially labelled as institutionally racist in the 1999 Macpherson report on failings that let the racist killers of the black student Stephen Lawrence escape justice for so long. The ranks of officers are still disproportionately white, with a smaller proportion of ethnic minority officers in policing than in the general population. Last year the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, denied policing was institutionally racist, telling MPs it was “not a label I find helpful”. She said: “I don’t think we’re collectively failing. I don’t think [racism] is a massive systemic problem, I don’t think it’s institutionalised, and more to the point I think we have come such a very, very, very long way.” Johnson said: “Reluctance to admit institutional racism comes from emphasising the comfort of the wrong people over the experience of black people. For this programme to work, it needs the police to have conversations that are uncomfortable for them.” Sir William Macpherson defined institutional racism as: “The collective failure of an organisation to provide an appropriate and professional service to people because of their colour, culture or ethnic origin. It can be seen or detected in processes, attitudes and behaviour which amount to discrimination through unwitting prejudice, ignorance, thoughtlessness and racist stereotyping which disadvantage minority ethnic people.” The chiefs of the 43 local forces in England and Wales are split on the issue. Some feel the term labels them all as racist, and is an unwarranted insult given the big improvements they believe have been made since the 1999 Macpherson report. One senior source at the talks on Thursday said the chiefs were trying to reach an agreement. “Some are worried about sending out a message that nothing has changed since Macpherson.” Another said: “There are polarised views. The discussions were considered and reflective.” Sir Dave Thompson, the NPCC vice-chair, said they would consider whether to accept that the forces they lead were institutionally racist. “We will look at how we use the language of discrimination and racism with chief constables so that we acknowledge the scale of the challenge that we see to communities, while being able to account for the actions we intend to take,” he said. Thompson, the chief constable of the West Midlands force, added: “Policing is not free of bias, discrimination and racism. We accept that this is not simply a case of individuals but also about the policies and practices of policing. I am very clear there will be institutional racism issues in policing. There will also be systemic racism, structural racism and also racial disparities that are not due to racism in policing because we police an unequal society. “There is a concern, set out in the [government’s] commission on race disparity report that the term institutional racism can be too casually used as an explanatory term for all disparity or discrimination. This is why the application of this term requires careful thought.” Ethnic minority police officers make up 7% of the ranks, compared with 14% of the population. BAME officers are twice as likely to be dismissed as their white counterparts. Among the public, black people are more likely to be stopped for suspected drugs offences but are less likely to use them. Recent official figures showed the equivalent of one-fifth of male ethnic minority people aged 15-19 were stopped in a single year, with black people seven times more likely to be stopped. Andy George, the president of the National Black Police Association, said promises were no longer enough and institutional racism needed to be admitted. “A problem can never be truly tackled if it is not clearly identified and it is unclear how their plan could deliver actions to something policing does not truly believe is real,” he said. The race crisis that has gripped policing led to thousands of people taking to the streets across the UK in support of Black Lives Matter, triggered by the murder of George Floyd by a police officer in the US in May 2020.Despite Barcelona’s fall from grace, this will probably not be enough to induce feelings of panic at the Nou Camp. West Ham supporters, anticipating the prospect of a prize scalp in the Europa League, chorused: “Barcelona, we’re coming for you.” Forget Barcelona, however, West Ham may rue their inability to beat Burnley. For a side with a genuine chance of a top-four finish, this felt a case of two points being dropped. Sean Dyche’s bland team put the stale into the stalemate while David Moyes cut an increasingly frustrated figure, irritated at his side’s inability to forge a breakthrough. “Last season we had a near-perfect record against the teams below us,” noted Moyes but while West Ham have flagship wins over Liverpool and Chelsea, a failure to beat Brentford, Brighton and now Burnley threatens to cost a club with lofty aspirations. Under other circumstances, a first top-flight clean sheet at Turf Moor since 1928 might have felt more of an achievement for a team burdened by defensive injuries, especially as Lukasz Fabianski only had to field one, tame attempt on target. If a couple of terrific saves by Nick Pope and some defiant defending secured Burnley’s shutout, in itself a rarity for them this season, West Ham offered too little excitement. It was as though their reserves of inspiration were exhausted against Chelsea last week. Declan Rice appeared the lone exception. “Declan was the one who raised the level, took the fight to Burnley and at one point looked as if he was going to waltz through everyone and score,” said Moyes. Rice made a series of driving runs and threatened a winner with a spectacular late shot. The watching Steven Gerrard may have recognised the sight of a midfielder capable of grabbing a game by the scruff of its neck. Another spectator was given much to consider. Gareth Southgate has omitted Pope from recent England squads, but the goalkeeper reacted brilliantly to keep out Issa Diop’s header, courtesy of Jarrod Bowen’s free-kick. If that showed the speed of his reactions, Pope illustrated his athleticism by parrying Saïd Benrahma’s header. Include an injury-time save from Bowen and a painful occasion for him, having been bloodied by Craig Dawson’s boot, was a triumphant one. “The top-level keeper that he is, he will be pleased but they are saves you would fancy him to make,” said Dyche; after Pope’s mistake led to Newcastle’s winner last week, normal service was resumed. But West Ham occupied Pope too rarely. “We scored three goals against Chelsea last week but we couldn’t get any,” said Moyes. “We just didn’t have the quality in the final third.” Fresh from his freakish winner against Chelsea, Arthur Masuaku almost scored in more deliberate fashion, connecting sweetly with a volley that went just wide. In the second half, Benrahma and Michail Antonio fired wide from distance but the striker has now gone eight games without a goal. Goal droughts are more common among the Burnley players, however. They were poor in possession, lacking fluency or creativity. “I would take the point and the clean sheet,” said the pragmatist in Dyche, but Burnley have now gone three games without a goal. They have a solitary win in 15 and the Championship is starting to loom large. Relying on Maxwel Cornet to score wonder goals rarely felt a sustainable formula, even before injury ruled him out here; Dyche will monitor bulletins about the Ivorian’s fitness for Wednesday’s potentially crucial game with Watford. Minus the wild card, he chose a midfield who lack a goal between them this season, so there was an added importance to defenders’ efforts from set pieces and James Tarkowski leapt highest to meet Dwight McNeil’s corner but headed over. Meanwhile, Jay Rodriguez looped a header wide and had a half-volley deflected wide by Dawson, leaving the striker with a solitary goal in his last 46 league games. The lone flashpoint revolved around Dawson. Burnley were reprieved when McNeil tripped Dawson in the box. Referee Graham Scott did not award the penalty; the greater surprise was that Jonathan Moss, the VAR, did not either. “This weekend we have seen more soft penalty kicks given in the Premier League than all season so I think if those ones were given, I would expect this to be given,” said Moyes, who nevertheless prefers a higher bar for the awarding of spot kicks. Perhaps Moss concluded that Dawson sought the contact; perhaps he simply deemed that officiating Manchester City v Wolves gave him enough experience of awarding contentious penalties for one weekend.I’ll leave you with Dave Hytner’s report from the King Power Stadium. Thanks for your company and emails, bye! Burnley 0-0 West Ham Next up A perfect afternoon for Leicester, who jump to eighth in the table after thrashing Newcastle. That’s their highest position this season, and West Ham’s draw at Burnley means they are only six points off fourth place. Youri Tielemans scored twice but the star was James Maddison, who made the first three goals and scored the fourth. When he plays like that, with such creativity and charisma, he is irresistible. (And yes, he probably did dive for the penalty in the first half.) 90+1 min There will be three minutes of added time. 90 min Saint-Maximin, who has given everything today, is booked for a lunge at Daka. 88 min The brilliant James Maddison walks off to a standing ovation and a big hug from Brendan Rodgers. He is replaced by the 20-year-old debutant Kasey McAtter. 87 min Maddison and Tielemans will get the headlines, and quite right too, but Patson Daka has had another fine game. He scored one, made one and played a part in Tielemans’ second as well. Schmeichel’s long goalkick was only partially cleared, with Leicester winning possession 40 yards from goal. Maddison picked up the loose ball, played a slick wall pass with Daka and slammed the ball past Dubravka with his left foot. If ever a man deserved a goal. 85 min Saint-Maximin beats four players before Daka makes an important tackle in the area. Newcastle bring on Matt Ritchie for Jonjo Shelvey. 83 min The moment Tielemans scored he turned to acknowledge Maddison, and then pointed to the back of Maddison’s shirt while embracing him in front of the Leicester fans. It’s been a difficult year for Maddison but he’s ending it in style. Thomas started it by winning the ball near the halfway line. He pushed it down the left to Daka, who charged into the area and hit a fast cross towards Maddison. He controlled a difficult ball immaculately, opening his body in the process, and slipped it outside to Tielemans. The rest was inevitable: Tielemans took a touch and lifted the ball confidently over Dubravka. That’s just a lovely goal. Another gorgeous team goal from Leicester! 81 min A win was the most important thing for Leicester today, but after recent events Brendan Rodgers would love a clean sheet as well. 78 min: Schmeichel clears off the line! Timothy Castagne almost scored an absurd own goal. He overhit a backpass from around 35 yards that went past Schmeichel, who scampered back and stretched to clear the ball with the outside of his right foot. 78 min The corner is played short, crossed and headed away by Joelinton. 77 min Dewsbury-Hall wins a corner for Leicester, who look very comfortable despite Newcastle’s greater possession. 74 min Dubravka charges out of his goal to beat Daka to Albrighton’s through ball. 72 min In the other game it’s still Burnley 0-0 West Ham. Who knew. 71 min A Leicester change: Marc Albrighton replaces Harvey Barnes, who had a quiet game apart from his assist for the second goal. 70 min Manquillo is booked for a foul on Harvey Barmes. 69 min Murphy’s fast low cross is kicked away by Schmeichel at the near post. Shelvey meets the clearance with a sweet volley from 25 yards that hits Ndidi and goes behind for a corner. 68 min This is a decent spell for Newcastle, probably their best of the match. 65 min Saint-Maximin shoots straight at Schmeichel from distance. It was well struck but too close to the keeper. Saint-Maximin is the only Newcastle attacker who has looked remotely threatening. 64 min Soyuncu is booked for an, a-hem, overzealous tackle on Wilson. 62 min A double change for Newcastle: Ryan Fraser and Jacob Murphy replace Jamal Lewis and Miguel Almiron. 62 min Shelvey flattens Maddison with a stray forearm. VAR have a look but decide not to take it any further. 60 min It’s well worth looking up that Daka goal. Maddison’s flick, which took five players out of the game, was delightful. In fact it was vaguely reminiscent of Eric Cantona’s famous pass to Denis Irwin in the first Premier League season. 59 min At the other end, Willock whistles just over from the edge of the D. Schmeichel had it covered and pulled his hand away when he realised it clearing the bar. That was a beautifully worked goal, a reminder the Leicester we have all enjoyed so much in the last few years. Maddison stripped the Newcastle defence naked with a deliciously imaginative flick that put Barnes through on goal. He drew Dubravka and then squared the ball to give Daka an open goal. Patson Daka makes it two! 53 min Newcastle’s first shot on target: it was Joelinton, from the edge of the area, with the left peg, and Schmeichel saved comfortably. 52 min Nothing much happening at the start of the second half. Both teams have really struggled to get going in attack. 48 min Barnes shoots wide from 20 yards. 47 min Since you asked, it was Burnley 0-0 West Ham at half-time. 46 min Peep peep! Newcastle begin the second half. We’ve just seen multiple replays of the penalty decision. It’s really tricky - Maddison was clearly looking for it, and was happy to jump into Lascelles’ leg, but there is a legitimate argument that it wasn’t a clear and obvious error. Ach, I haven’t a clue any more. I’d love a referee to one day give a penalty and book a player for simulation at the same time, as they’re not mutually exclusive. “Is anyone surprised that Leicester were awarded such a tame penalty?” sniffs Rick Harris. “They are, after all, a big club aren’t they? City, Liverpool, Chelsea and United all had early Santa gifts yesterday so why not the Foxes?” Behave yourself. Half-time reading Peep peep! Leicester lead through Youri Tielemans’ emphatic penalty, awarded controversially for a challenge by Jamaal Lascelles on James Maddison. Neither side created much, though Allan Saint-Maximin was as compelling as ever. See you in 10 minutes for the second half. 45+2 min Saint-Maximin is taken out just outside the area on the left. Play continues through Willock, whose cross finds Manquillo in space beyond the far post. His driven cross is blocked. 45+1 min Two minutes of added time. 45 min Apart from a few power surges from the wonderful Allan Saint-Maximin, Newcastle have been disappointing in attack. 44 min: Great defending from Tielemans! When a set piece isn’t properly cleared, Saint-Maximin twists past two defenders on the right side of the area and stands up a beautiful cross to the far post. Tielemans, under considerable pressure, does very well to get to the ball first and head it behind for a corner. 41 min The more I see the penalty decision, the less convinced I am. But once it was given on the field, it was always unlikely to be overturned. Youri Tielemans scores majestically, sweeping the ball high to his left. Dubravka went the wrong way. 37 min: PENALTY TO LEICESTER! Lascelles is penalised for a lazy tackle on Maddison just inside the area. It’s a peedie bit soft - Lascelles dangled a leg and Maddison made the most of it - but I can’t see this being overturned. 33 min Joelinton marches forward and plays a one-two with Almiron on the edge of the area, but the return ball is overhit. 31 min Shelvey’s free-kick is headed away by Soumare. This hasn’t been the greatest game so far. 27 min Lewis, who has just been booked, is penalised for a shove on Maddison. For a moment I thought he was going to park his tank on Raul Jimenez’s lawn by getting a second yellow, but Peter Bankes decided a word was sufficient. 24 min The resulting free-kick, taken by Maddison, skims the head of Wilson and flashes across goal. Ndidi reacts smartly to head it across the six-yard box, and Dubravka changes direction smartly to flap the ball away. I don’t think Ndidi’s header was going in anyway. 23 min Saint-Maximin has a shot blocked by Thomas after a typically thrilling run. Leicester break and Lewis is booked for a foul on Daka. 21 min Thomas slides a pass through the inside-left channel for Dewsbury-Hall, who wins a corner off Shelvey. Maddison swings it deep and Dubravka claims comfortably. 19 min Leicester must have had at least 70 per cent of the possession. It’s all a bit ponderous, though, and so far Martin Dubravka has had nothing much to do. 16 min Maddison whips the free-kick onto the roof of the net. Decent effort though it was, it never really looked like dipping under the bar. 15 min Barnes is shoved over by Willock 20 yards from goal. The free-kick is slightly to the left of centre, perfect for James Maddison. 13 min Castagne’s cross is put behind by Lewis for a Leicester corner. It’s played short to Dewsbury-Hall, whose near-post cross is cleared by a combination of Joelinton and Shelvey. 11 min Timothy Cantstandya is booked for cynically pulling back Saint-Maximin. 10 min Leicester look nervous, especially when their defensive players are on the ball, and Newcastle are pressing aggressively as a result. 8 min The resulting corner is punched away unconvincingly by Schmeichel. It drops to Schar*, eight yards out, and he cracks a volley that is crucially blocked by Thomas. * I think 7 min Excellent pressing from Wilson, who wins the ball off Ndidi 30 yards from goal. He moves into the area, with Ndidi at his back, and hammers a cross-shot that is headed behind by Soyuncu. 6 min Soumare replaces Evans. He’ll go into midfield, with Wilfred Ndidi dropping into the defence. 5 min Boubakary Soumare is getting ready to replace Evans. Leicester have had desperate luck with injuries this season, particularly in defence. 4 min Evans goes down off the ball with what looks like a hamstring injury. Newcastle play on, as is their right, and Almiron rattles a shot into the side netting from a tight angle. 1 min Peep peep! Leicester kick off from right to left. “Are you in the UK permitted to have an American liveblog the games?” asks Joe Harvey. “We can watch all of them. I’m curious what the rules are- I think there are actually some weird ones in the US where you couldn’t do what gorilla cricket does.” I think we are, though I wouldn’t bet my last sliver of dignity on it. I’m pretty sure the American office have done some Saturday 3pm games in the past, but I work remotely, and as a freelancer, so I’m a bit out of the loop. Eddie Howe’s pre-match thoughts “We desperately needed that win [over Burnley], and winning just lifts you instantly. There’s been a different feeling around the club, but we still went back to work and I think we’ve had a really good week in training. Hopefully that shows today.” Brendan Rodgers’ pre-match thoughts “It’s been a challenging season for us with the number of players out and the challenge of European football. It has been difficult, but we have a fantastic bunch of players who are very focussed and honest. “Our defensive record in the last two seasons has been very good. This season it’s been a big challenge for us, and having limited coaching time makes it that bit more difficult. But we have to overcome that, and hopefully that starts today. “It’s huge [to have Youri Tielemans back]. He’s a top player and it’s great to have him back. It’s not just his ability; his view of the game really helps other players as well.” There’s another 2pm Premier League game: Burnley v West Ham at Turf Moor. We don’t have a liveblog for that, as it’s not being televised in the UK and we at the Guardian are law-abiding citizens most of the time, but we will have goal updates. Leicester make two changes from the defeat in Naples. Luke Thomas replaces Ryan Bertrand at left-back, and Patson Daka is in for the rested Jamie Vardy. Both Bertrand and Vardy are on the bench. Newcastle are unchanged, next. Leicester (4-2-3-1) Schmeichel; Castagne, Evans, Soyuncu, Thomas; Tielemans, Ndidi; Maddison, Dewsbury-Hall, Barnes; Daka. Substitutes: Ward, Bertrand, Ricardo, Nelson, Albrighton, Soumare, McAteer, Brunt, Vardy. Newcastle (4-2-3-1) Dubravka; Manquillo, Schar, Lascelles, Lewis; Shelvey, Willock; Almiron, Joelinton, Saint-Maximin; Wilson. Substitutes: Darlow, Ritchie, Hayden, Hendrick, Krafth, Fernandez, Fraser, Murphy, Gayle. Referee Peter Bankes. We’ve all heard the stat. In the last two seasons Leicester spent 567 days in the top four, more than any other team, yet failed to qualify for the Champions League. They’ve solved the problem this season, though this wasn’t the solution they had in mind. Leicester’s highest position in 2021-22 is ninth, and they start today’s game at Newcastle in 11th place. They are also out of the Europa League, and many have reached for the facile cliché that Brendan Rodgers has taken Leicester as far as he can. It’s not fair, it’s not remotely fair, but Rodgers is smart enough to recognise the volatility of modern life, never mind modern football. Liverpool sacked him 18 months after he almost won the league; Leicester sacked Claudio Ranieri nine months after he actually won it. It’s only seven months since Leicester won the FA Cup on a glorious day at Wembley, yet clouds are gathering. They’ve had rotten luck with injuries, this season and last, and there’s an argument that Rodgers is being punished for his stoicism: had he complained as often as other Premier League managers, he would probably have received more sympathy for their ragged performances this season. He didn’t and he hasn’t, and as a result he has crept up to fourth place on the list of doom: the page with the odds on the next Premier League manager to leave their job. Three of Leicester’s next five league games are against Spurs, Liverpool and Manchester City, and they also play Liverpool in the EFL Cup quarter-final. In short, Rodgers could really do with a win today. There is probably less pressure on Newcastle, even though they are 19th in the table. Their next four games – Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United – are close to freebies, with any points a bonus. (It wouldn’t shock be a complete shock if they beat Leicester or United, as they’ve been playing pretty well of late, but it’s not essential.) Last weekend’s vital win over Burnley means they are unlikely to be cut adrift before the fixtures get easier - and the transfer window opens - in the new year. For Eddie Howe, that will be the real quiz. Kick off 2pm.UK government proposals to overhaul gambling legislation have been delayed until spring, the Guardian understands, prompting a warning from campaigners that the postponement could lead to more suffering and even suicide. The Conservative party pledged to review gambling laws in its 2019 general election manifesto, in response to mounting concern among politicians, campaigners and civil society groups about the way the £14bn-a-year industry is regulated. A white paper was initially expected before the end of last year, before being bumped into 2021. Several sources told the Guardian that a second delay is now almost inevitable, meaning government is now unlikely to publish its proposals until after a separate decision, due in February 2022, on who will win the next 10-year licence to run the National Lottery. Liz Ritchie co-founded the charity Gambling With Lives with husband Charles after their son Jack took his own life, having become addicted to gambling at school. She pointed to research suggesting strong links between gambling and suicide. “Every day at least one person takes their life because of gambling,” she said, as the group launched a campaign demanding that a regulatory investigation into every case of suicide where gambling is a factor. “Every delay means more families shattered,” said Ritchie. “When will the government act?” Labour MP Carolyn Harris, who chairs a cross-party group examining gambling-related harm, said the review process had “gone on for long enough”. “The government made a commitment to reform our gambling laws in 2019. Two years later they are still deliberating while the online industry is weakly regulated, reaps vast profits and people continue to be harmed.” The delay is partly down to a ministerial reshuffle that involved John Whittingdale, who was widely perceived as friendly towards the gambling industry, making way for Chris Philp. Speaking at an event last week, Philp said the white paper would be published “in the coming months”. He indicated that he was considering a tough crackdown, including strict affordability checks to prevent addicts and vulnerable people falling into financial ruin. Philp is thought to have got to grips with his new brief quickly but the change of personnel within the Department of Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) is among the reasons for the delay. A key factor is the ongoing competition to win a 10-year licence to operate the National Lottery, with Camelot facing stiff competition that could cost it the monopoly it has held since the lottery’s inception in 1994. The Gambling Commission, which regulates both the lottery and the wider gambling industry, is running the lottery licence competition and is due to announce its decision in February, after extending the process for six months. A source familiar with the situation said that the National Lottery decision was likely to be announced first, clearing the way for the gambling white paper after that. The DCMS declined to comment. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.The wine aisle of a supermarket in Twickenham has a section labelled “Rest of the world”. Often the only bottles in it are Surrey Gold, from a vineyard near Dorking, about 20 miles away. To be fair, Dorking is outside the M25. Gerrard Raven Teddington, London • Domestic science classes for Jen Fitton (Letters, 10 December) may have encouraged her to cook, but a look back at my 1960s school notes revealed that we made toad in the hole, rock cakes, scones and victoria sponge in successive weeks – helping to foster a lifelong fondness for unhealthy stodge. Maggie Owen London • We are told that Rome’s residents are being urged to cut down on wrapping paper this Christmas (Report, 11 December). An excellent alternative is to use the centre-page spread of photographs in the Guardian. Start saving from August and you are guaranteed enough wrapping paper – free, used, entertaining. Stacked under the tree they look awesome. Rob Benzie Tavistock, Devon • Codeword reverts to its usual size; Suguru returns (11 December). Christmas comes early to this household. Guy Sowerby Nottingham • John Huntley objects to “pre-recorded” (Letters, 10 December). The one I don’t understand is a “live recording”, often used on BBC Radio 3. You can listen to a live performance on the radio or a recorded one, but you can’t record something that isn’t live. Michael Bulley Chalon-sur-Saône, France • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Mary, Queen of Scots was not the only one who used a complicated “letterlocking” process to conceal the contents (Mary, Queen of Scots ‘locked’ final letter using paper-folding, research finds, 10 December). My mum, now aged 98 and the mother of eight children, used to write notes for us to give to our teachers excusing sickness absences and folded them in a way that we could not open or see what she had written. We thought it was either to save the cost of eight envelopes, as invariably we passed our illnesses to each other, or that she was telling the teacher that really there was not much wrong with us. Andrew Keeley Warrington, Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.How depressing to read that “Labour has begun to campaign more in earnest” in North Shropshire (Key question on Tory MPs’ minds: is Boris Johnson still a winner?, 9 December). Opposition party activists may find it difficult to go against the grain, but most opposition voters, I would suggest, are not currently primarily Labour or Lib Dem or Green, nor that bothered by party divisions. What we are, and maybe more strongly united than ever in being so, is against this Conservative government. The key question for voters in North Shropshire is not “Do you want Labour to win?” but “Do you want the Conservatives to lose?” If their answer to that is yes, then it’s in the country’s interest, and in democracy’s interest, to support the Lib Dems in making that happen. While Labour activists may have felt unable to advise people to vote Lib Dem, the previously low-key canvassing was speaking volumes. If Labour is serious about getting the Tories out, then please don’t make people feel guilty about, at the very least, getting Boris Johnson out. Achieving that would be a win – including for Labour. Helen Johnson Sedbergh, Cumbria • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The proposed slavery memorial of a bronze statue with a budget of £4m in London’s Hyde Park has stalled (Letters, 6 December). Government funding has been refused for this design, little other funding is available and the planning permission has lapsed. A more logical location than Hyde Park for such a memorial is the Canning Graving Docks outside the International Slavery Museum in Liverpool. The Canning Graving Docks were central to the slave trade, repairing and fettling hundreds of slave ships for their voyages of death, and misery for those who survived the journey and generations of their descendants. The site is currently the subject of a “waterfront transformation project”, ideas for which are being sought, and the selected design consortium includes David Adjaye, the black British architect of the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington. There could be no more appropriate creator or overseer of a national slavery memorial in this location, which lies between Royal Albert Dock and the Three Graces, and which already has a government commitment of initial finance. A memorial would not only commemorate those who suffered through the slavery that Prince Charles has called this “appalling atrocity” that stains our history, but should remind us of its contemporary consequences and help us to navigate a better future. Roland Hill Stockport, Greater Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Well said, Rachel Clarke (Talk of a No 10 Christmas party is an insult to the thousands who have died of Covid, 8 December). Her wholly justifiable anger, based on her frontline experience of caring for her patients, encapsulates, I suspect, the fury and frustrations of many. Once he has completed his investigations into “partygate”, the cabinet secretary might usefully place a copy of Ms Clarke’s article alongside the agenda for future cabinet meetings, if only to remind participants that government is a serious business with serious consequences, ideally conducted by serious professionals rather than the current bunch of self-serving, irresponsible amateurs. Phil Murray Linlithgow, West Lothian • With the number of the new Omicron cases likely to rise exponentially, and stringent national measures needed, one thing is sure – the rightwing Covid recovery group of Tory MPs will vote against them (Javid advised to take ‘stringent’ Covid measures within a week, leak reveals, 10 December). Their argument will inevitably focus on the impact of such measures as masks in pubs or stricter isolation requirements on the economy, and by voting against the proposals they give yet more encouragement, as if any more was needed after the Downing Street party fiasco, to a UK public keener than ever to disobey. I have yet to hear a counter argument that details what effect a wave of hospitalisations – up to 10,000 a day – would have on the economy (Report, 10 December). As there is very little data on the severity of disease caused by Omicron, the only sensible approach has to be preventative and cautious. Tory backbenchers might be willing to play politics with the lives of the British people, but making a new strain of a deadly virus a political football is downright despicable. The sixth richest economy in the world can easily afford to subsidise hospitality venues in trouble, but it cannot afford risking a variant that evades the population’s built-up immunity running rife. Bernie Evans Liverpool • It’s ironic that just about the only sensible anti-Covid measures our prime minister is contemplating – further controls to combat the spread of the virus – are prompting the biggest rebellion so far among his backbenchers (Report, 9 December). Damned if you do, damned if you don’t. Tom Uprichard London • From this week, if my mates and I want to go and watch our football team we will need a Covid passport and we will need to wear a mask in the ground (Report, 8 December). We will also need to wear a mask if we use public transport to get there – but we can spend several hours in a pub beforehand, mingling and talking without any restrictions. That’s OK then. Allan Brown Peterborough • We used to go to the cinema about twice a month, but haven’t been now for almost two years. The thought of sitting near an unvaccinated, unmasked person who may have pre-symptomatic Covid is a continuing deterrent. What damage to the economy are those “freedom” warriors in parliament doing if thousands of people like us won’t spend our money going out and about? We’d love to see the new West Side Story so glowingly reviewed by Peter Bradshaw, and we just might if the cinema asks for vaccine passports and masks now. Sue Humphries York • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.First there was the party at the Oslo restaurant that resulted in 80 out of 111 guests catching Covid, mostly the Omicron variant, despite being double vaccinated and having tested negative before attending. Then came the seven German tourists who all travelled together to South Africa and caught Omicron despite having received a booster. Over the last few days, anecdotal reports have suggested an increasing number of Omicron outbreaks at social gatherings in the UK, too. The broadcaster Victoria Derbyshire tweeted that her brother caught Covid three or four weeks after receiving his booster jab after a night out with “a load of mates” on 3 December. All were vaccinated and 17 out of 21 tested positive, she said. Although official data has yet to confirm the trend, concerns are mounting about the impact of increased transmissibility, including among fully vaccinated people, even if most are reporting relatively mild symptoms. “Certainly, compared to the Delta variant, we’re seeing more of these multiple infection events,” said Tim Spector, a professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London, who runs the Zoe Covid symptom app. “Delta didn’t seem to affect everyone at an event – just one out of six vaccinated people might get ill then.” Now, it could be a majority. Omicron also seems to come on very quickly, “because the transmission time is very short”, said Spector. That’s why he is advising anyone attending a social gathering to do a rapid lateral flow test (LFT) “a few hours before leaving the house”, rather than relying on one from the day before or earlier. On Sunday the education secretary, Nadim Zahawi, said there were now Omicron cases in UK hospitals and warned that the new strain was “so infectious that it will dominate and exponentially grow”. On Friday the Zoe app launched a survey asking people to share their Omicron experiences. Early responses suggest that Omicron seems to be able to evade vaccine protection in some people, as borne out by UKHSA data released the same day. “People are saying: ‘We went to this event and nearly all of us are testing positive, and we’re waiting to find out if this is Omicron,’” said Spector. Many people only learn they have Omicron several days after receiving a positive PCR test. That’s because not all samples are being sequenced for the variant and because only a third of labs in England are capable of telling people immediately if they have it, said Spector. “The problem is that only about a third of the country would know immediately if it’s Omicron or not, and only a sample are being tested. So depending on where you live, the risk of having a PCR test that comes back and immediately says this is probable Omicron is going to vary, and it’s actually lower in the south and London than it is in the north of England.” Most labs don’t yet have the technical capabilities to detect the gene “dropout” associated with Omicron, he explained, adding: “It’s not about whether it [is a] good or bad lab, it’s just what they were set up to do.” One person contacted the Guardian to say they went on a weekend away with four friends and all four later tested positive for Covid. They had received their booster and the other three had been double jabbed. Two days after their PCR results came back, two received a text from NHS England saying: “Following our previous guidance, we have identified that you may have the Omicron variant of Covid-19.” The text instructed them to tell everyone in their household to self-isolate, regardless of their vaccination status or age. The person who had been boosted said: “None of us have been really ill. Me the lightest – the heaviest did a day in bed. No one has been really ill. We have all had worse colds.” One Zoe contributor said 16 out of 18 people at a 60th birthday party in Somerset tested PCR positive for Omicron. All were vaccinated, some with boosters, and had a negative LFT 24 hours beforehand. Their symptoms were mild, Spector said: sore throats, nausea, slight temperatures and headaches. No one needed a doctor. He said he was advising people to stay at home if they have cold-like symptoms. “Avoid large gatherings and split your groups up into smaller ones where you can control the environment and get everyone to test that day. “Make sure that no one attending that party has cold-like symptoms, or hasn’t had cold-like symptoms the past three or four days, and on the way to the event make sure that you’re wearing a high-quality mask on crowded public transport, which people are not doing.” • The main image on this article was changed on 15 December 2021 in line with Guardian picture guidance.How Leicester City, mired in sluggish Premier League form, reeling from the disappointment of their Europa League exit at Napoli on Thursday and with their squad buffeted by Covid positives and general illness, needed something to lift them. James Maddison provided it. The playmaker had already won the 37th-minute penalty from which Youri Tielemans gave them the lead – a little dubiously, it should be said – when he made a pre-assist of such quality that it not only shredded Newcastle’s backline but broke their collective spirit. Addressing a short pass from Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall in the inside-left channel, midway up the Newcastle half, Maddison had seen the run of Harvey Barnes and made the calculations. With the outside of his right boot he sculpted a first-time ball that set his teammate racing clear. Barnes squared to Patson Daka, who was in for the rested Jamie Vardy, and he did the rest. Maddison was not finished, not by a long shot. He took a low cross from Daka after Luke Thomas had won the ball high up before ushering in Tielemans for 3-0 and there was still time to get himself on the scoresheet. The Newcastle support refused to be cowed into silence but their team was broken and it was too easy for Leicester. The substitute Marc Albrighton won the ball off Joelinton and found Maddison, who swapped passes with Daka, ran around Fabian Schär and shot into the far corner. For Brendan Rodgers there was the bonus of a first clean sheet in the league since the opening weekend of the season and for him and his team, it felt like a trick of the mind that they had laboured for much of the first half. Maddison would depart to a standing ovation when he was substituted on 88 minutes, plus a bear hug from Rodgers. Newcastle won their first game of the league season last weekend – at home against Burnley – and this had felt like an opportunity for them, before matches against Liverpool and the Manchester clubs. They failed to take it, flattering to deceive up front despite the best efforts of Allan Saint-Maximin – their final decisions repeatedly poor – before capitulating in alarming fashion. The scoreline was harsh on Newcastle, given their efforts in the first half and, if the turning point was easy to locate, it was a source of bitter frustration for their manager, Eddie Howe. The penalty followed a clumsy attempt by Newcastle to play out from the back. Jonjo Shelvey – put into trouble by Jamaal Lascelles – took a heavy touch, with Tielemans pressing and nicking the ball towards Maddison, who was too quick for Lascelles. It felt soft in real time, Lascelles lunging in but quickly checking out of the challenge; Maddison looking for the contact, feeling it and going down. The impression was only confirmed by the replays. If the referee, Peter Bankes, had not made the decision, it seemed unlikely that VAR would have intervened. On the other hand, it was one of those that was never going to be overruled by the technology, even though Howe argued Bankes ought to have consulted the pitchside monitor. Tielemans’ conversion was high and unstoppable. “When you see the penalty in detail [on replays], you see the player is going over before contact is made,” Howe said. “It’s not a penalty.” Before kick-off, only three clubs had conceded more league goals than Leicester this season, one of them being Newcastle, and it had felt like being a battle of the dodgy defences. Initially, it was Newcastle who asked the questions and it was certainly not a part of Rodgers’ script to lose Jonny Evans to a hamstring injury in the sixth minute. The manager was forced to drop the defensive midfielder, Wilfred Ndidi, back as a makeshift centre-half. The prognosis on Evans was “not good,” according to Rodgers. Leicester had been nervous at the outset, giving the ball away cheaply and inviting Newcastle to settle. There were flickers from the visitors in the opening quarter although nothing clear-cut, and it was possible to wonder whether they would show the needed cutting edge. Leicester measured their first-half threat in set pieces. Maddison curled a free-kick just over while Ndidi’s header from another Maddison free-kick extended Martin Dubravka. The effort did look to be going just past the far post. Newcastle’s best bet was Saint-Maximin, who has that priceless ability to make things happen in tight spaces. But it was Maddison who made the difference, his pass that sparked the clinching second goal a thing of wonder. Daka’s somersaulting celebration was as extravagant as the tap-in was simple. Newcastle’s only second-half moment came when Timothy Castagne erred with a back pass, failing to spot that Kasper Schmeichel was away from his goal. Schmeichel tore back to scrape off his line and it was the prompt for Leicester to turn the screw.Mercedes’ two appeals against the result have both been dismissed – there are other legal avenues that could be pursued, but for tonight at least, Max Verstappen has been confirmed as the new world champion. Here’s the report and all the reaction: Righto my friends, that is (not remotely) that. At some point, we’ll find out the results of Mercedes’ appeal. But in the meantime, thanks all for your company and comments - sorry I couldn’t use them all – throughout this ridiculous, ludicrous, unparalleled season. Whatever you make of the final shake-up – and let me say again, I’m dubious at best – we can still marvel at the drive, determination and downright brilliance of Max Verstappen, the new driver champion, Christian Horner, Lewis Hamilton and Toto Wolff. I’ll leave you with Giles Richards’ race report. Next season should be alright! Ta-ra! “I’ve seen a couple of emails in now about how all F1 fans will feel sick at how this played out,” says Sean Duffy. “I’d argue that most people who tuned in for this race as a one-off casual for the drama probably enjoyed this and thought it was a fantastic end to a world championship. The two best drivers racing head to head on the last lap. What more could you ask for? One driver raced better than the other and is now the champion. F1 is dying, maybe a few of the folks tuning in this afternoon will tune in next season. Watching Hamilton win behind a safety car would have switched them right off.” I do wonder if this was Masi’s rationale, and if it was – a massive if – I understand it. But the integrity of the sport, words that feel as ridiculous to write about F1 as they do football, cricket, boxing, tennis and all the others – needs to come above everything. It does feel a bit like they hollered “Next goal wins!” with Hamilton 352-0 up, which works better in the playground than in elite-level sport. But I’ll be reserving judgment until we know all there is to know. “Dear Brits, please stop whining,” emails Perter Jensen. “Just to give a little perspective to all the Brits whining about the result: last week, when both drivers went outside the track, only Verstappen was penalised. Last week, when Verstappen tried to give back the lead and Hamilton drove his car into the back of Verstappen’s, Verstappen was penalised. This week, when only Hamilton went outside the tracks and decided not give back the lead, nobody was penalised. So please just stop!” Christian Horner: “That just about sums up this year, I think ... I think I called it on the commentary, that it was going to need something from the racing Gods in the last 10 laps ... you know, thank you, Nicholas Latifi, for that safety car. “And I have to say, with the stewards, we felt hard done by early in the race, they did great to get the race going again. It’s been an insane competition and for Max to win the world championship it’s not just about here, it’s about a whole year. And I have to say look, all credit to Lewis, he’s been a phenomenal opponent all year, he’s a great world champion, and that’s what makes it even more valid, you know, to win this. “We were screaming at him [Masi]: “Let them race.” That’s what we’ve been talking about all these years: let them race. This championship came down to the last lap, and a great strategy call, to make that pitstop and take that set of softs. And then it was all down to Max, you know, to make it happen.” Re: the lapped cars overtaking and Wolff disagreeing: “Yeah of course he [Toto] will obviously do that. It’s unheard of to leave the cars unlapped and you could see they wanted to get the race going again. But they don’t need to catch up the back of the paddock, so they made absolutely the right call. Difficult circumstances for the stewards, we were all putting pressure on them, but they called it right. But I’m just so proud of Max, so proud of the team, for what we’ve been through this year, what we’ve achieved, against some great opponents. “I’ve lost my voice, because I was screaming from turn five all the way down that back straight. You know, he got the job done into five, and then you know, coming back on the straight with the slipstream, you think ... but you just knew that Max was not going to give it up. He’d come so far this year. And you know, to close it out, see him cross the line, see him become the world champion for us after all these years, an amazing feeling. Where does it rank with Vettel titles? “It’s right up there with the first one, we won the first one here, and then because of the quality of the opponents that we’ve had this year - because they’ve pushed us so hard, and we’ve fought to hard. You know, the last 10 laps, I was working out: “What am I going to say to Max, what am I going to say to the guys, to pick them up?” “And then a stroke of good fortune for us with the safety car, and we made it work. And it’s not just about this race, it’s about the whole year.” More Verstappen: “It’s unbelievable, I mean ... throughout the whole race I kept fighting, and then of course that opportunity in the last lap ... it’s incredible ... it’s insane, it’s insane ... I mean, I don’t know what to say, these guys on my team, and of course Honda as well, they deserve it ... I love them so much and I really, really enjoy working with them already since 2016 and this year has been incredible. “Yes, finally, a bit of luck for me ... it’s insane ... I also want to say a big thank you to Checo ... he was driving his heart out as well today, it was great teamwork, and he’s an amazing teammate. “To my team, I think they know I love them ... and I hope we can do this for 10, 15 years together. There’s no reason to change, I want to stay with them for the rest of my life. I hope they love me. But yeah, it’s insane, I’m so happy. “Also Christian, but also Helmut, trusting me to be in the team in 2016. Our goal was to win this championship and now we have done that.” And Hamilton: “Firstly big congratulations to Max and his team .. I think we did an amazing job this year ... my team, everyone back at the factory, all the men and women we have here, who worked so hard all year. It’s been the most difficult of seasons and I’m so proud of them so grateful to be part of the journey with them ... “We gave it everything, this last part of the season, we gave it absolutely everything, we never gave up, and that’s the most important thing. “Of course, I’ve been feeling good, great in the car this past couple of months, particularly at the end. “If I’m honest, you know, we’re still in the pandemic and I just wish everyone to stay safe and have a good Christmas with their families ... and yeah, we’ll see about next year.” Here, and once again courtesy of my colleague Luke McLaughlin, are some quotations in full: Verstappen on the podium: “The national anthem. You one day hope they play yours. And then when you stand here and they tell you you’re the world champion, it’s something incredible. “Especially also my dad and the special moment we had here. All the things come back through your mind - travel, all the years you spend together travelling for that goal. And we’re here, together, and everything comes together in the last lap. Insane. These people, my whole team, my friends, my best family friends, the people who I grew up with go-karting, the ones who pushed me to where I am today. They were all here, most of them were here ... it’s just insane ... I lost my voice, but I don’t know it just sounds amazing, honestly. “It’s incredible to see all this orange there, but all over the world they’ve supported me ... and I hope I can do this for a very long time of course with the support of my great fans. “I think of course I was nervous for today but on the other hand it’s just another race when you want to do well. The outcome can determine whether you’re first or second. Throughout the whole race I just tried to keep pushing. Tried to keep believing, even if it didn’t look like it, and sometimes miracles happen. “Lewis is an amazing driver, an amazing competitor, he made it really, really hard for us, of course the two teams went against each other and we had some tough times but I think that’s all part of the sport, and its emotion ... everyone wants to win and it could have gone either way today. “Of course, next year we’ll come back and try it all over again.” “First of all - what an amazing athlete 7x champion Hamilton is, and what a gentleman,” emails Joris van Wijk. “Understand that a very large part of your readership is unhappy with the last call from Masi. But Toto’s complaint (and that of most of your readers) boils down to that it’s unfair Lewis has to defend his title in active racing, rather than finish behind the SC. And a lot of times this season, Mercedes / Hamilton were lucky with how calls went (Even this race itself: Lewis going off limits and gaining advantage and not getting punished the same way Max did in last week’s race). But Mercedes / Hamilton don’t have a God-given right to win the title, they have to take it to the finish line. Asking the FIA to deliver the title to Hamilton on a silver plate is a bridge too far. Red Bull did not cause the SC situation, and went all in by going to softs, so in the end won it on tactics. It’s like Masi response to Wolff when he was screaming his complaints: ‘Toto - it’s called car racing’. Hamilton should do the honorable thing and have Toto pull his protests.” Again, I see both sides, and cited what Masi said myself. However, the rules have to come before the car racing bit, i think – and whether those were correctly applied is something we don’t yet know (in my opinion). Ultimately, in any sport, you see officials make errors. You almost never see the result overturned, because those errors are part of it. Of course, it’s rare to see the outcome of a season essentially reversed on a single matter of interpretation, though Hamilton and Red Bull might also reflect – as they should – that brilliant though they’ve been, if they’d done better at the start of the year, what happened today wouldn’t have mattered. Writing about sport – and watching it as a fan – I never ever blame the officials for an outcome, because whoever suffers from a call has time, whether before, after or both, to render it irrelevant. That doesn’t mean I agree with Masi, I don’t think I do, just that his involvement was not the only operative factor in Verstappen winning the driver championship. Mercedes won’t be commenting further until all this is resolved, but ultimately their problem might be one of remedy. Let’s say they can prove Masi made an error and didn’t apply the rules: are they really going to take the trophy off Verstappen? That seems extremel unlikely. “‘Finally, a bit of luck ... for me’, declares man who was allowed to win an F1 race by driving behind the safety car for a couple of laps with no one allowed to overtake him.” says Hugh Molloy. My response here is also very yes but – sportsmen are different to the rest of us, and their appraisal of events differs to ours. I’m not sure it’s possible to compete at elite level, especially not if you do something dangerous, while seeing things from the perpsective of anyone but yourself. More reading for you... In my mind, I keep coming back to what Masi told Wolff: “It’s a motor race, we went car racing.” My response is very “Yes, but.” “I defy anyone who truly loves motor racing not to feel sick to their stomach watching that last lap unfold,” emails Tom Keil. “What makes all sports special is that the competitors (whether individuals or teams) compete under the same set of rules – and the best then rise to the top. It’s what makes doping in athletics, cycling and any other out and out physical sport so awful, as it gives some competitors an uneven advantage. Today we saw the worst kind of doping, the rule book torn up to ensure a manufactured finish. By removing the level playing field, rewriting the rules, unlapping some cars and not others, the FIA tried to ensure that F1 had its Hollywood ending to the season. I hope that once the dust settles and the court cases reach their conclusions, today’s result is expunged from the record book.” I guess, ultimately, Hamilton and Mercedes seem like collateral damage in an attempt to give the season and the sport a big finish. I’m not certain it was the right call in either aspect - a contrived finish isn’t necessarily a big finish, nor is it necessarily good for the season or sport – and it’s not what I wanted to see. But I do see why it happened, and part of me sees it as very F1 to manufacture a spectacular, if artificial ending, given the locations of the season’s last three races: Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi. Verstappen (Red Bull) 395.5 Hamilton (Mercedes) 387.5 Bottas (Mercedes) 226 Perez (Red Bull) 190 Sainz (Red Bull) 164.5 Norris (McLaren) Leclerc (Ferrari) 159 Ricciardo (McLaren) 115 Gasly (AlphaTauri) 110 Alonso (Alpine) 81 David Croft tells us that as far as he knows, Mercedes have launched two protests. I guess we’ll see what happens, but unless it ends up in court - and even then – I can’t see a way things change. As I type that, Sky tell us that Mercedes are checking the rules before making a statement. If they can prove that they weren’t applied, then perhaps they can get the result reversed, but I’d be staggered if the error was clear enough for that and even more staggered if the authorities would feel culpable enough to act. On which point, still nothing from Toto Wolff, who might be seeking counsel and advice, and might also want to abide by a rule we could all deploy: don’t give steam-powered opinion. I’m not sure how long it’ll be before he’s calm enough to speak, but I can see why that time isn’t now. Just wading through my inbox – thanks for all your messages – and, I must say, there’s not a great deal of support for Michael Masi’s call. I feel you all and I’m leaning that way too, but I see why things worked out differently. Does it sound reasonable to wonder if, in the little time he had to make a decision, Masi put (his conception of) the sport over the race? Ah man, we see Anthony Hamilton sharing a hug with Jos Verstappen. I’ve gone again. “This was Lewis’s title,” says Jenny Bach. “He was winning and without such a decision from Masi would have got to the end in first place. He has been robbed. Verstappen was gifted this win and the safety car incident should be investigated. Lewis was by far the better driver in the better car. The Red Bull couldn’t get near him. You are a true gent Lewis and have been a joy to watch all season.” I’m not trying to fence-sit here, but I do see both sides. I feel like perhaps Masi decided the sport needed the big finish, but until we see a full explanation of what went on and why, it’s hard to completely sure. Ahahaha! “Don’t call me Toto,” Horner responds when accidentally called by the wrong name. “Don’t call me Toto.” The needle between the two principals has been amazing; it’s nice to see handshakes at the end, but while it happening, it’s a ruck. “Don’t call me Toto.” I’ve just realised that for the last hour, I’ve been sat on the very final fibre of my chair and that my back is knacking. I absolutely love it. Sport! Gosh, I’d almost forgotten about the turn seven incident, which Rosberg notes all the champions in the broadcasting team thought went against Verstappen when it shouldn’t have done. Horner is brilliantly unarsed. We watch Horner, now wearing his Verstappen champion t-shirt, watching the final lap and he’s actually calmer than I envisaged – which isn’t to say he was remotely calm. But we all know exactly what he’s invested in this season – every possible piece of humanity he has to give, he’s dredged out of himself, taking pressure, applying pressure, and here’s Geri Horner saying how proud of him she is. He notes that when things go badly, you take the pressure home, and she says that he says this is the most gruelling season he’s ever experienced. Horner says he and his team were screaming at Masi. “Let them race!” and he congratulates the decision to make that second stop – presumably his. He thinks the stewards called the restart right, he’s lost his voice because he was screaming, but he knew Verstappen wouldn’t give it up, and seeing him cross the line after all these years was an amazing feeling. He praises the quality of his opponent, and that he was wondering what he was going to say to Verstappen and his team to get them going again. But then something went for them. Verstappen (Red Bull) Hamilton (Mercedes) Sainz Jr (Ferrari) Tsunoda (AlphaTauri) Gasly (AlphaTauri) Bottas (Mercedes) Norris (McLaren) Alonso (Alpine) Ocon (Alpine) Leclerc (Ferrari) Vettel (Aston Martin) Ricciardo (McLaren) Stroll (Aston Martin) Schumacher (Haas) Perez (Red Bull) Did not finish: Latifi, Giovinazzi, Russell, Rakkonen, Mazepin. Balm for your aching, over-stimulated eyes: And breathe. Here’s Giles Richards’ report on the ridiculousness. Imagine the state of his fingertips! Oh man, here’s Jos Verstappen. Hold on to your snot-rags. He says he’s very proud, and knows it was the safety car that made it happen but also praises Red Bull’s strategy. “Max was the driver this year,” he declares, noting that it’s in his son’s DNA to keep fighting. During the race he walked away because he didn’t believe it anymore, but came back for the last lap. I sear I can see pride swimming out of my screen and suffusing the box-room in which I’m sat. I’m absolutely gone, and I hope youse all are too. SPORT! Verstappen tells Jenson Button that “It’s insane”. As a kid, he wanted to be a driver, you hear the anthem “and hope one day they play yours”. He thanks his dad, his team, his family, his friends, his best family friends, all the people who pushed him – almost all of them are here today. He thanks the incredible Dutch support – there’s a helluva lot of orange in the stands – and during the race he just tried to keep pushing even though it looked unlikely, “and sometimes miracles happen”. He praises Hamilton as a great driver and competitor, saying they had issues but that’s what happens, and he’s looking forward to doing it again. It’s time to shpritz bubbles, and Hamilton does his best to get involved, even taking a swig. But, well, you know. Sometimes, all you can say is that at the end of the day, it is what it is. This is one such occasion. Kelly Piquet, Verstappen’s partner, also has tears in her eyes, and Versatappen lifts the trophy, shaking it roughly by the neck. Horner then takes his constructor’s trophy, does likewise, while in commentary and, no doubt, in millions of homes around the world, we’re wondering why some cars were allowed to overtake but not others. Anthem time. Verstappen has the Dutch tricolour draped over his shoulders and the camera zooms in on his dad, who’s more or less avoiding crying, doing a better job of it than me if I’m being real. I should be clear, I don’t have a preference , but I have every dog in every fight when it comes to parents and their kids. Amazing, incredible, beautiful. “It’s a motor race, we went car racing,” Michael Masi told Toto Wolff, and it not difficult to understand why he made the call that he did. I’m not going to lie, I found it bit artificial – sport, like life, doesn’t come with endings wrapped in a pretty bow. But I can’t argue with the work and moxie of Horner and Verstappen, just as I can’t with that of Wolff and Hamilton. We see Hamilton with his dad, and Verstappen with his. Imagine the pride of those two men; well we can’t, but imagine our inability to imagine it. I think my eyeballs are sweating, oh my days. Hamilton has to compose, starting by congratulating Verstappen and his team. He thanks his own team on a great job, is proud of them and to be part of the journey with them. They never gave up, which is the most important thing, he reckons, he’s been feeling great in the car the past couple of months, reminds us that we’re still in the middle of pandemic and urges everyone to stay and have a good Christmas, ending with “We’ll see about next year.” Essentially, he says all the things he needs to say, but it doesn’t take much imagination to consider what he really wants to say, or how he’s really feeling. I didn’t get time to note before Verstappen started talking, that the two of them shared an embrace. What a pair of absolute people. He also thanked the work of Sergio Perez, who he said was an amazing teammate. “It’s unbelievable!” says Verstappen. “Finally, a bit of luck ... for me.” He also says that it’s incredible, that his tea know he loves them, and he hopes he can keep doing this for 10-15 years. He’s got no reason ever to change, he loves them, and he’s crying. WHAT A MOMENT! The beauty of sport, apart from the actual sport, is the opportunity to watch people experience the moments of their lives, right in front of your eyes. Verstappen is so full of emotion, enjoying the congratulations of the other drivers, and we get our first shot of Hamilton, stood with his back to us. I wonder if there’s a kind of liberation - he did all he could, and in the end was done by circumstance. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Also, feel free to give a push to any of our features from earlier in the week pre-race. I wonder if we’ve heard the end of this – the unlapping situation seemed a very strange call – and I’m wondering if the need, both sporting and business, to have a finish to the season, overrode the detail in the rule book. You’ve got to hand it to Horner, he tried absolutely everything to make that happen. He needed some help, of course, but he guaranteed that he was in position to benefit from it. Horner is crying, Mercedes do not know what to do. we have just seen as staggering an end to a sporting event as there’s ever been! People running, dancing, crying, bouncing, kissing, cavorting everywhere. Other people just desolate, dumbstruck, decimated. SPORT! This is the miracle that Christian Horner prayed for! “Max Verstappen, you are the champion! The world champion!” Horner shrieks! “Aaaaaarrrrggghhhhh!” replied Verstappen! What a moment! “I love you!” Verstappen says. “I love you!” Verstappen replies and what on earth are we seeing. Horner tells Verstappen he needed the rub, and he got it! The safety car does it, and what a win, what an end to one of most outrageous sporting season ever! we have not heard the end of this! Lap 58/58 THIS IS RABID WILD INSANE BEHAVIOUR! Hamilton has a hack, Verstappen shuts the door! WHO SAW THIS COMING! IT IS GOING TO BE MAX VERSTAPPEN! Lap 58/58 Hamilton flies around the corner and Verstappen takes him out! ARE YOU KDDING ME! Lap 57/58 HERE WE EXPLETIVE GO! Lap 57/58 Goodness me, what an end this is! What an unfathomable season this has been, as the safety cars goes and Hamilton ploughs on! Back markers are now allowed to overtake the safety car! Hamilton and Verstappen are side by side! Lap 56/58 “It’s classic,” Horner tells Verstappen on the no overtaking point. “I’m not surprised,” Verstappen responds. I can see why they’re unhappy, but I can’t quite see what the alternative it. If lapped cars are allowed to overtake, there’ll be no race left. “We only need one racing lap,” Horner tells the race organiser. Lap 56/58 It’s still not clear if we’re going to get a racing lap once the safety car disappears, while Perez comes into the pits – that’s the end of his day. Lapped cars won’t be able to overtake, which means plenty of cars between Hamilton and Verstappen. That should be enough for an eighth world title! Lap 56/58 Hamilton sounds a little flappy now, noting that the safety car isn’t going at full pelt – he needs it to, so he can get heat into his tyres. Lap 55/58 Latifi spun – perhaps his brakes locked - and clattered into the side wall. The field will bunch, lapped cars will be sent through, and we’re still not clear if there’ll be more racing. “Is he right behind me?” asks Hamilton, who’s told that he soon will be once we get going again, but only if we get going again. He’s also reassured that had he pitted, he’d have lost track position. Lap 54/58 Verstappen pits to get on softs, in case he has the chance to put Hamilton under! Just when everything looked done, another hail Mary! Hamilton leads, while the safety folk try and clear the debris; I’m not sure we’ll get any racing laps by the time things are good to go. Lap 54/58 Will Verstappen have time and scope to put Hamilton under pressure?! Lap 53/58 It’s easy to talk about Mercedes’ car, and Horner is right to point it out. But just as crucial here is Hamilton’s sheer genius and, equally, his ability to deploy it when he really needs it. Lap 52/58 I guess the question now is whether Verstappen will ever get a better chance to bring it home. Ultimately, every time Hamilton’s been put under pressure so intense he had to act, he’s turned into Laurence Olivier. Lap 51/58 Verstappen has led more laps than any other driver in any season, ever, but it’s not going to matter. Lap 50/58 Does Hamilton have a tyre situation? He might’ve run over some spiky kerbs and his lead is down to 11s or so, but he’ll need them to go Mansell 86 on him to avoid kriching home. Lap 49/58 “The pace the Mercedes is too strong today,” admits Horner. He says Verstappen is driving his heart out, but they now need a miracle. Again, the excellent David Croft pushes him on turn seven – did if affect the outcome? – but he bravely acknowledges that his opponents just have the faster car. Lap 48/58 Hamilton eases through the back markers, and as we come up to 10 to go, it looks over. “Escaped to the TV department with 14 laps to go,” returns Adam Pope. “Don’t know if I can stay here till the end of the race, wife wants to look at glasses: it’s looking tight...” I’m sure she’ll understand. Does she enjoy history, because rest assured, this is it. Lap 47/58 Norris is up into fifth now, which would give him fifth place overall; as Ryan Giggs would say, he’d’ve took that. Hamilton leads by 13.267s, and the speed he’s extracting from tyres more knackered than a new parent, is low-key rabid. Lap 46/58 Red Bull are, I think, out of ideas. Lap 45/58 It’s getting to a point for Verstappen. He just isn’t taking the chunks out of Hamilton that he needs to to win, and unless something untoward happens, he’ll have to go again next term. Barring catastrophe, Hamilton will soon be the most successful and perhaps the greatest driver of all-time! I know! Imagine! Lap 44/58 Hamilton has the back markers in front of him, which won’t help – Leclerc, Ricciardo, Ocon, Alonso and Gasly are fighting for points too. Verstappen will also have to get by them, but his extra pace should make it easier for him. Lap 43/58 Fifteen laps to go, and Pirelli reckon their hards are good for 50 laps, but we’ve seen greater degradation in the race than in qualifying. Hamilton leads by 13.840s, and over the last five laps, Verstappen has been 0.6s faster; are his tyres now falling off at the same rate as Hamilton’s? Lap 42/58 The gap is 14.052s, and it’s not closing quickly enough for Verstappen. But the work Hamilton’s putting into them won’t be good for their health, so it might be that they cost him the time he’s putting in now later on... Lap 41/58 Hamilton is coming back. He’ll be worried he didn’t pit when the virtual safety car came out, but he didn’t want to sacrifice track position and that’s understandable. Whoever loses will have regrets, and even if that’s Hamilton, it won’t be clear whether doing whatever he didn’t do would’ve changed things. Aaaaarrrggghhhh! “For the first time in well over a long time I am watching the Grand Prix here with the windows open in balmy Okinawa,” says Rich Tunaley. “Last time I watched may well have been when Auntie used the Chain in its first run of that as its opening track. Hamilton is obviously unworldly. Here’s to him winning this. Truly incredible.” Lap 40/58 Hamilton leads by 15.605s, telling his team he won’t be able to keep this pace up for the duration. In comms, they think he’s got enough to gold it down ... but only if his tyres don’t degrade in a serious way. Lap 39/58 OH MY DAYS! Verstappen took 0.8 out of Hamilton on that most recent lap, so I guess the question is whether the ability to do that will fade as the tyres age, or if the concurrent fading of Hamilton’s will balance that. Hold on people, because this is going to the last fibre of the wire and I can barely feel my fingers, so who knows how these two kings are feeling! Lap 38/58 Hamilton now leads by 17.614s, and has to hang in there for 20 laps; can he take 0.8 a lap out of the leader? Out of nowhere, that virtual safety car has made things close! Lap 37/58 Verstappen, though, has no option but to come in – he hasn’t got the pace to catch Hamilton as is, he needs some racing chicanery, and the virtual safety car-situation means he gets a cheap pit. He’s on hards, and we hear Wolff ask the race organiser not to put out a safety car – a classic Alex Ferguson trying to sway the officials kind of move. Lap 36/58 “I am grateful I am not in Horner’s shoes,” emails Edwin Innih Imoesi. “Des he pit Max or does he stay put?” If he does nothing, Verstappen loses, but what’s this? Govinazzi has spun and is blocking the track, so out comes the virtual safety car. That takes time out of the race for Hamilton, who naturally opts to keep going... Lap 35/58 Lando Norris’ parents will probably have to content themselves with yesterday’s P3 effort; he’s now seventh, trying to struggle back following a horrible start to the race. Lap 34/58 No movement on Verstappen’s second stop, but surely it’s coming because what else can Red Bull do? The lead is 5.441s now, every lap increasing the work that’ll be necessary to filch the title. Lap 33/58 Bottas is now down in ninth, and trying to pass Leclerc, sees the door slammed in his Chevy Chase. Hamilton leads by 5.016s. Lap 32/58 Hamilton’s lead creeps towards five seconds as the natural light drops and the scene looks ever-more colourful and intense – though let’s be real with ourselves about what makes it possible and why it’s so. Lap 31/58 Hamilton adds a further 0.3s to his lead, but Red Bull know that if they pit well, Verstappen will come out ahead of Bottas ... who pits now. That’s a decent gap in which to try something, but whether the new tyres are enough to close a gap of around 24s, or a gap of four seconds and whatever Hamilton’s putative pit takes, remains to be seen - at best. Lap 30/58 Hamilton sets a fastest lap to take his lead above four seconds, so I imagine he’s been told about the impending second stop and to put his foot down. Lap 29/58 After as ludicrous a start as we can have anticipated, things have settled, and Red Bull need to try something, anything. And right as I type that, we learn that they’re considering a second pit; I wonder if Hamilton will have to do likewise? The lead is 3.824s. Lap 28/58 Ach, as Barry Davies would say - that’s a shame. But what a career! Lap 27/58 Raikkonen’s brakes let him down, the rear axel locked, and he clattered into the side. Meantime, Hamilton increases his lead to 3.737s, but Bottas is 20s behind Verstappen, so not sure he’ll be able to help his teammate. Lap 26/58 Raikkonen’s front wing is damaged; can he make it to the pit so he can complete his final race? Lap 25/58 “Maybe an interesting thought,” returns Steve Ditchburn. “Red Bull have shown that you can use your second driver to slow down the opposition so why don’t Mercedes get Bottas to wedge himself between Hamilton and Verstappen and do the same, if only for half a lap. It could make a difference of a few seconds.” Yup, if Bottas can get in front of Verstappen it’s over. Lap 24/58 Hamilton leads, followed by Verstappen, Bottas, Perez, Alonso, Gasly, Sainz, Norris, Leclerc, Tsnoda, Ocon, Ricciardo, Latifi, Russell, Giovinazzi, Vettel, Stroll, Raikkonen, Schumacher. Lap 23/58 Hamilton is stretching away again, 2.446s ahead, and it’s hard to see a way for Verstappen now the lad he’s chasing sets a fastest lap. Lap 22/58 “Absolute animal,” says the Red Bull radio of Perez, who did a phenomenal job there. “I’m a Hamilton fan so I may be biased,” admits Joe Balfour, “but where could Lewis go? Max went in too hard, Lewis couldn’t turn left without hitting him. If he stops, he gets hit from behind. Max knew what he was doing, just didn’t expect Lewis to take the route he did. Should Lewis have slowed right up to allow Max back in? Maybe, but the distance between the two after Lewis got back onto the track and Max came out of the corner was massive and then reduced. So maybe that’s why Lewis was regarded as giving the spaces back? Was hoping for a full on race, but I don’t think Hamilton did anything wrong. Good luck keeping up.” I’m not sure Hamilton had to go off, and I don’t think he gave back what he took off. But as I keep saying, I see both sides, so maybe status quo is the best solution Lap 21/58 This is terrific stuff from Perez, holding Hamilton up, and the gap from Hamilton to Verstappen is now 1.241s! He’s hauled his mate back into the race, and though Hamilton finally barrels by, the gap that was over six seconds is now 1.3s! HAVE A LOOK! Lap 20/58 Hamilton has taken roughly four seconds off Perez, so it probably won’t be long before he’s passed. And the gap is disappearing in chunks now, down to 0.403, while Sainz pits so Verstappen is now in third. And there it is, Hamilton goes by Perez, but Perez saves up energy from his battery to boust right back past with DRS! what a job he’s doing for his mate! Lap 19/58 “Stuck on sofa outside ladies changing rooms, (my wife is here , I’m not a weirdo), pleads Adam Pope, “with marginal WiFi signal. Your feed is the only thing stopping me from dying slowly from the inside at the moment.” That’s why we’re here! Lap 18/58 Sainz has helped Hamilton out here, sticking in front of Verstappen, while Perez is doing likewise for Verstappen, now 5.579s in front of Hamilton. Lap 17/58 On the turn seven shenaniga, Mercedes reckon Verstappen forced Hamilton off. Though they didn’t touch, that’s because Hamilton took evasive action, is how they see it. Again, I’m not sure: I see both sides, but Verstappen has been unfortunate. Lap 16/58 Verstappen will be wanting Perez to try and slow Hamilton down; presumably he’ll just stay out there as long as possible, trying to do a job for his teammate. Verstappen is closing on Sainz, and before long he’ll be back directly behind Hamilton. Lap 15/58 Now Hamilton pits, so Perez leads the race and here comes Hamilton! He comes out second, trailing by 11.513s, with Verstappen five or so seconds and two places behind him. Lap 14/58 Verstappen pits! That should be his sole stop of the race and where’s he going to come out? He’s fifth, perhaps as a consequence, Leclerc drives off and loses a place to Tsunoda! Meantime, Verstappen passes Norris, and now trails by 27.525s. Lap 13/58 Verstappen will have to pit soon – that’ll be the next major event, and his tyres are already giving him aggravation, the consequence of a locked-tyre error yesterday, when he didn’t even need to be out there. That’s the thing with sport, it’s often won in the details, and the details often amount to thinking clearly at all times. Lap 12/58 Hamilton is lapping a second faster now, leading by 4.686s, and it’s really hard to see a way for Verstappen now. Unless Hamilton makes a serious error, or his car fails him, or something strange happens behind them that means a safety car is necessary, this feels like it’s did. Lap 11/58 “Seems to me that Max only stayed on the track because he actually hit Lewis and used his car to stop leaving the track.,” emails Steve Ditchburn. “However, I really don’t think that Lewis gave back what he gained. One might say that Max set the standard for this sort of behaviour so just maybe he deserved the outcome.” I know what you mean, but you’ve got to treat each case on its merits and Verstappen definitely had the arse-end of that. But the reality is that it was marginal, so it’s hard to bitch too much about the call, whatever it was. Though of course we’ll enjoy the efforts made. Lap 10/58 Pirelli reckon Verstappen’s tyres, supplied by them, work for about 15 laps. But Red Bull will be able to use Perez, in third, to try and hold up Hamilton when he comes out of the pits Lap 9/58 If Verstappen has to pit first, he’ll have a problem because the field is pretty close together, so he’ll get stuck in traffic if that’s soon. Hamilton’s mediums seem to have more pace than his softs too, which is to say that Red Bull are in shtuck. Lap 8/58 Jenson Button doesn’t understand the regulations, noting that in Brazil both men went off the track while here, Veratappen stayed on. Who thought this was going to be simple? Meantime, Hamilton leads by 2.309s, and pPerez by 5.593s. Lap 7/58 More from the stewards, who think Hamilton handed back what he took and Verstappen forced the position. I’m still not sure – I’m leaning towards Horner’s view, but Rosberg thinks Verstappen lunged, though he does also think the distance was’t returned. Lap 6/58 Horner is as delighted as you’d expect. He’s “a little bit shocked” and “not best pleased”, saying it’s not like Brazil, when Verstappen escaped, and a “total lack of consistency”. David Croft presses him, saying the drivers were told to stay within the white lines, Verstappen did that, and now he “has to do it the hard way”. Lap 5/58 Hamilton leads by 1.904s, followed by Verstappen, Perez, Sainz, Norris, Leclerc, Tsunoda, Bottas, Ocon, Ricciardo. That’s our top 10, for all that it matters. Lap 4/58 I doubt we’ve heard the last of this, and the stewards must’ve thought that Verstappen forced Hamilton off the track. I don’t know, it looked to me like he outpaced him on the straight, took the apex, and held it. In the meantime, Hamilton leads by about 1.6s. Lap 3/58 Red Bull aren’t happy, but in the eyes of the stewards, Hamilton slowed down enough to return the extra metres he gave when taking the escape road. That seems a reach to me, I must say. Lap 2/58 Hamilton leads by a second and a bit, but that moment at turn seven will surely be the subject of an investigation: did Hamilton cut the corner? What happened was Verstappen tried to take him on the straight, he went off onto the escape road, thereby coming back in front! Lap 1/58 Hamilton is still in front, and might the definitive blow have already been landed?! But excuse me while I interrupt myself! There’s a coming-together, of course there is, I think Verstappen lunges, goes in front, and Hamilton goes off the track, but is now back in front! OH MY DAYS! Lap 1/58 Hamilton gets a flyer and he leads into turn one! Ah, Mazepin has corona, so he’s not with us today... The cars get back to their parking bays. Here - we - go! In comms, they reckon Red Bull would choose Hamilton’s mediums now if they could, and that the softs should get Verstappen into turn one first, but he might be in trouble thereafter. A safety car, though, would probably work to his advantage. Right, here comes the formation lap! How are we feeling people? Goodness me! This is something! One additional line from that Wolff interview that I alluded to and that my colleague Luke McLaughlin sends me in full (thanks!): “Lewis is the best to know how to position the car so he doesn’t end up with mayhem in turn one.” We shall see... “Was Toto Wolff implying that Verstappen will be looking back at Hamilton, to see Hamilton looking back at him, to see him looking back at Hamilton?” wonders Matt Dony, invoking one of my all-time favourite lyrics from a rare album that demands to be listened to mitchila ad sof, from beginning to end, every single time (feel free to suggest others). “Hope they stay safe from harm.” One thing of which we can be sure: if you hurt what’s theirs, they’ll sure as hell retaliate. Nico reckons the medium tyre will give Hamilton the boost he needs to get in front early, and he’s backing him to stay in front. But let’s be real: as almost ever, William Goldman has right: “Nobody knows anything.” “Massive attack!” says Toto Wolff when asked how his team plan to go after it. He says Hamilton knows what to do and because it’s not a street circuit, hopes for less mayhem. “Whoever win merits the win,” he says, and if it’s not his lot, “it’s not the end of the day but it’s very upsetting”. Hamilton checks his phone one last time, tells the group chat they’re idiots, then Bottas comes over and tells him he can do it. Norris tells Sky he’s in a weird position, stuck behind the two leads, and he’ll be sensible; he thinks Verstappen will win, and if he can’t get a podium finish hopes they’ll be happy with his P3 from yesterday. Anthem time. We’re nearly there! Kimi’s there with his wife and kids sharing the moment. He’ll always have 2007, but he’s been so much more than that, adding charisma, calm and class to the sport for a generation. “I will miss Kimi Raikkonen so much,” says Kurt Perleberg. “F1 will be never the same after today. Bwoah forever.” Yup, what a career! Stormzy is on the grid, and when grabbed by Martin Brundle, he instinctively takes the mic. He’s asked whose head is going to wear the crown – pick that segue out, to borrow Rob Smyth’s lovely phrase – and he tries to imagine the feeling of a hundred thousand people in the studio watching him record. Of course, Patrice Evra then snatches the mic to remind us that he loves this game, then Stormzy walks off with it because why wouldn’t he. Great stuff. Christian Horner tries to affect calm, saying he’s pumped, the team have done a great job and Max has been “mighty” all year. They’re going to do what they always do, try and enjoy it, and they’re not giving up either championship, hoping Perez can also get involved. “Didn’t the contest nearly go horribly wrong in the summer,” emails Andrew Benton, “when Verstappen’s wheel went over the top of Lewis’ cockpit, his life being saved by the new protrusion thingy? We should be grateful that the two of them are still here for this final bout of the series!” Yes, that did happen, and indeed it’s great that we’re all present and correct. Usain Bolt and Chris Gayle are enjoying themselves on the grid. Bolt has Hamilton to win and is going to try and find him now to give him some wisdom – he says he’ll be looking forward to showing how he can perform, a feeling that very few people in the world can comprehend. “I have almost no interest in F1,” says Matt Dony, “but you would have to be a special kind of joyless to not be intrigued by this race. I can’t wait to see what happens and how it happens, and I don’t even know why. I will admit, though, that back in the day when he was a young upstart, I often wrote Hamilton off as an arrogant muppet. I regret that, now. He has proven himself a Good Egg, and I respect him enormously. I enjoy Verstappen’s pantomime villain energy, but I do hope Lewis pulls something special out of the bag.” Yup, I feel you. I’m not going to lie, I was diverted by Hamilton’s tax situation, but he’s shown himself to be an absolute hero who both defines his sport and transcends it. “Here we are then,” tweets Guy Hornsby, “finally a season for the ages after so many dominant Merc years. I love Lewis, but even he’d have wanted more of a challenge. I really hope we don’t get a clip, puncture, limp to the pits and all over. Head says Max, heart says Lewis. Yikes.” It’s a funny thing about sport that some of the best ever are best remembered for the ones they lost – Muhammad Ali 1971, Australia 2005, Roger Federer 2008. But otherwise, it’s tricky – you’d probably prefer to be Verstappen, given he’s in pole, but Hamilton’s car is quicker. And, of course, the big unknown is whether the changes to the circuit will make overtaking easier. And here’s how the Guardian saw it... Those of us old enough will be remembering the 1986 Australian Grand Prix, when Nigel Mansell began the final race as favourite to take the title. It didn’t quite work out that way. Nico Rosberg reckons Hamilton will be listening to Tupac, and both men will be trying to be fully present in the moment. And thinking about it, the ability to do that is an underrated aspect of elite-level sport: how do you clear your mind of everything but the task at hand, to perform to your maximum? Tyres: Verstappen will start on softs, Hamilton on mediums. On that point, Verstappen’s confrontational style of racing has forced Hamilton to adapt his own. It’s not enough to be fastest now – and worth noting that yesterday, Verstappen said if he had the Mercedes car he’d be champions already – you also have to be *bravest/most reckless/most desperate/most enterprising. *delete according to bent. Sky show us VT of our protagonists giving interviews, the difference between them Verstappen’s naked aggression. He tells the people of the Netherlands to get the telly on because he’s going to win, while Hamilton cedes that the two aren’t mates but surmises that his rival “seems like a nice chap”. I wonder if he rehearsed that. Max Verstappen (Red Bull) Lewis Hamilton (Mercedes) Lando Norris (McLaren) Sergio Pérez (Red Bull) Carlos Sainz (Ferrari) Valtteri Bottas (Mercedes) Charles Leclrec (Ferrari) Yuki Tsunoda (AlphaTauri) Esteban Ocon (Alpine) Daniel Ricciardo (McLaren) Fernando Alonso (Alpine) Pierre Gasly (AlphaTauri) Lance Stroll (Aston Martin) Antonio Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) Sebastian Vettel (Aston Martin) Nicholas Latifi (Williams) George Russell (Williams) Kimi Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) Mick Schumacher (Haas) Nikita Mazepin (Hass) In such circumstance, it feels almost trite to tell you where we’re at but let’s do it: Max Verstappen, bidding to become the Netherlands’ first champion, leads the driver standings because he’s won more races than Lewis Hamilton, bidding to go in front opf Michael Schumacher as the, er, most-winningest champion of all-time. Which is to say both have 369.5 points but Verstappen has nine victories to Hamilton’s eight, meaning if neither finish, Verstappen takes the title. Otherwise, it’s a straight race between the two, and whoever wins wins. OH MY DAYS! AAARGGHGHLNKLLKNOINOINS! I know it’s my job to come up with something better than that so I’m going to try in a sec, but really, we watch sport party for those moments that defeat language; that defeat not only language, but the involuntary outbursts of indecipherable shock and glee that make sport sport. Except those involuntary outbursts seem to have lasted nine months, throughout what is probably the most thrilling, compelling F1 season of all-time. Charles Dickens filed his novels on a weekly basis for publishing in a literary magazine, somehow managing to sustain action, intrigue, drama and suspense for the duration; I say somehow, because that he pulled it off is astonishing, not because we don’t know what made it work: a cast of uniquely fascinating yet believable characters, whose chemistry defies science – and art – and of whom we still cannot get enough. Decades from now, we’ll still be marvelling at the brio of Max Verstappen, the aggression of Christian Horner, the poise of Toto Wolff and the everything of Lewis Hamilton. Without them, and without the precise and specific way in which they agitate one another, it’s just a race. With them, it’s something a whole lot more, and however this shakes out, just like David Copperfield, Bill Sykes, Esther Summerson and Philip Pirrip, the four of them are enshrined in the annals of humanity for the rest of time. Lights out: 5pm local, 1pm GMTThe Australian government is on track to deliver deficits totalling nearly $240bn over four years, an estimated improvement of $100bn since the last budget, a respected economic forecaster says. With the government due to publish a budget update on Thursday, Deloitte Access Economics has released its own predictions for an improved bottom line, arguing the economy has been recovering much faster than Treasury assumed seven months ago. Deloitte says the rapid uptake of vaccines will deliver a “more reliable” economic recovery – but warns that the budget will remain under pressure because government spending on aged care, disability and mental health is still “in catch up mode”. With the government preparing for an election by May, and with both major parties already stepping up their campaigning, this week’s budget update will set the scene for a battle on competing economic visions. The government has brought forward next year’s budget to March, apparently to allow it to deliver a major economic statement before officially launching an election campaign, but Scott Morrison retains the option of going to the governor general any time after the summer break. The budget delivered in May this year estimated an underlying cash deficit of $106.6bn in 2021-22, followed by years of red ink including a shortfall of $57bn in 2024-25. Those four years of deficits added up to $342bn. Deloitte, in a new forecast released on Sunday night, predicted deficits totalling $239bn over the same four-year period – on the proviso that the Omicron variant “doesn’t send many Australians back into lockdown for lengthy spell”. “Our latest assessment is that Thursday’s budget update will reveal lower cash underlying deficits to the tune of $103bn,” said the Deloitte Access Economics partner Chris Richardson. “That’s remarkable, given everything that’s gone wrong in the seven months since the budget was released, including Delta’s dawn, iron ore’s collapse, and multi-billion dollar rescue packages.” Deloitte argued that the economy had been recovering faster than Treasury previously assumed. “Even when Delta locked down half the population, the damage to the economy was just a fraction of that in mid-2020,” it said in a statement. “Given that the best way to repair the budget is to repair the economy, that combination of resilience and recovery is helping the budget get its mojo back.” Australia’s surge in vaccinations since early August was “really good news for both the economy and the budget”, according to Deloitte’s analysis, because it indicated the country’s “path from here on is safer and more reliable than that of less vaccinated nations”. The upbeat assessment also reflects a difference between Deloitte and Treasury on a key economic indicator. Deloitte said Treasury’s budget-time assumptions “saw the nominal economy travelling at crawl speed across an unusually long period of time”. While Treasury predicted national income growing at an annual average rate of just 2.8% across the six years between Covid arriving in 2019-20 and the end of 2024-25, Deloitte puts this measure at 4.2%. Richardson said the budget recovery was “remarkable” but “not enough”. “A range of commissions and reports indicate that Australia government spending is still in catch up mode for aged care, disability and mental health,” Richardson said. “And at the same time the world has become more dangerous for Australia, so Defence costs have some catch up ahead too. That says the budget will be under pressure for some years to come.” Richardson said if voters heard “costly promises from politicians in the months ahead” they should treat them with “considerable caution”. The government has attempted to put economic recovery at the centre of its re-election pitch. On Sunday, while announcing that booster shots would be available after five months, the health minister, Greg Hunt, said the Coalition knew “how to give people the best chance at the life of their choice”. He argued Labor would have “no control of the budget”. But the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, argues Covid has “shone a cold, unflinching light on some hard truths about our economy and its vulnerabilities”. At a campaign-style rally last weekend, Albanese pledged to deliver a “stronger, fairer and broader economic recovery” with a focus on secure, well-paid jobs. He said re-electing the Morrison government would ensure “a second decade of stagnant wages that don’t keep up with rising bills”.At the end of a second year of interrupted schooling thanks to the Covid-19 pandemic, Victorian teachers are circumspect. “Last year, we got away with it,” says Melissa*, a primary school teacher in the northern suburbs of Melbourne. “Everyone was quite worried about the kids, so we really worked hard to make sure they didn’t fall behind. I destroyed myself; the parents, for the most part, pushed themselves as hard as they could. This year, there was a lot of fatigue.” By the time the Delta outbreak hit in June and New South Wales and Victoria went into lockdown, the “novelty” of remote learning had worn off. When students returned to school in October, the effects of 18 months of broken and remote schooling had compounded, Melissa says. “Almost none of my students have moved from where they were in the middle of the year,” Melissa says of the children she teaches in grades prep, one and two. “Nobody can tell the time, nobody can do fractions, nobody can spell anything and nobody can write. If there’s one thing they won’t do for their parents, it’s write. They’ve had two years on and off of just not being taught spelling.” Melissa is not alone in such observations. The preliminary Naplan results released in August were trumpeted by the Victorian government as evidence that the state’s students had defied the interruptions of the pandemic on their schooling. Teachers and researchers alike are awaiting the forthcoming release of the more granular data this month. But there is scepticism that those detailed results will tell the whole story, especially as – since the tests were performed in May – they will not encompass the most recent extended lockdowns in NSW and Victoria, which, anecdotally, were some of the hardest. And they cannot measure the level of social understanding or personal growth in students, or show the overlapping of family circumstances, socioeconomic conditions, social status and temperament that contribute to how individual children learn. Tim* teaches in a Catholic primary school in Melbourne’s south-east. He says he’s worried most about his incoming grade twos. “Overall the remote learning plan was good, but in some places kids were more disadvantaged – where English is their second language, where the kids didn’t have laptops or the internet, or they had dual-income families working essential worker jobs and their parents were not able to support them with remote learning – that was very difficult,” Tim says. While the children’s learning suffered, he says, more concerning is the fact they have had two deeply formative years without the intensive socialisation of school. “When we came back to school after the last lockdown, the kids couldn’t interact with each other properly,” Tim says. “They didn’t know how to take turns, or how to have respectful interactions. They’d been online for so long they had trouble focusing on real people. They might have said things they didn’t mean while online that they wouldn’t have said to someone’s face.” Tim and Melissa both say that their young students needed intensive social and emotional learning activities when they returned to the physical classroom, as they grappled with the behavioural expectations that came from learning and interacting with other people in the same physical environment. Malcolm Elliot, president of the Australian Primary Principals Association, tells Guardian Australia that this is something primary teachers are seeing across the board in places where remote schooling was prolonged. “We’ve seen plenty of examples of children who have gone backwards in their socialisation. Where they had made progress in learning how to collaborate, work with others, and be in the school environment, this has declined. There’s a period of catch-up certainly needed there,” Elliot says. Older children with more capacity for self-direction seemed to better cope with online learning than younger children, but Elliot warns that this depends a lot on highly variable individual circumstances. “Many students have been in circumstances that have been far from ideal in lockdown periods. Students experiencing disadvantages have become no less disadvantaged during the pandemic,” Elliot says. “The circumstances between people vary markedly. There are children in our community, and we have to open our eyes to this, for whom school is their safe place and their home is not a safe place. They will have experienced setbacks in their learning. Some students, particularly socially, will go backwards.” Lessons from remote learning John Hattie, emeritus laureate professor at Melbourne Graduate School of Education, says the key lesson from Covid schooling so far is “don’t presume”. “Every kid deserves to be evaluated and assessed on their own merits,” Hattie says. “Don’t presume that certain categories of kids did better or worse. So-called gifted kids, for example, overly depend on their teacher – they are often very compliant and reliant on their teacher. They suffered in Covid too.” Hattie says we ought to be asking why, from the data made available so far, remote learning appeared to work so well in so many cases. It would be a mistake, though, to presume it worked for all children. “I’m not Pollyanna in believing that Covid was brilliant; it wasn’t. But there’s no question for the majority of kids, though, the key issue [with remote schooling] was [its effect on] friendships. So I’m not going to ever advocate for distance learning, but I do think that a lot of the stuff we learned from Covid should be applied going forward.” Critically, Hattie says, schools shouldn’t be too hasty to return to old habits. “There’s a massive move to rush back to the old normal. Most children know how to play that game, but there’s a large percentage of children who aren’t well-served by the old normal. What an incredible opportunity to learn from Covid about what makes a difference to those children.” Catching up for lost classroom time The Victorian government has provided money for tutoring to help catch up any students that have fallen behind, which has been gratefully received by schools. It shakes down to an allocation of about $15-$18k per school, though, which means the programs can only target a small cohort or subject. Elliot seeks to reassure parents who might feel responsible for their child’s learning gaps due to their circumstances during lockdown. “Parents shouldn’t feel like they’ve done anything wrong, provided they’ve been kind and thoughtful and loving towards their kids during this time. Any deficit in learning can be repaired and may not take as long as we think.” Still, teachers aren’t expecting smooth sailing ahead. “I don’t know how long it will take to catch kids up because it depends on how interrupted next year is and that depends on Covid,” says Melissa. “In a normal year, really going for it, six months and I think they’d be fine. But that would assume a normal year where everyone’s not tired and families are stable. Everyone planned for a normal year this year and then it didn’t happen. I don’t feel like I can look ahead to a normal year.” * Names have been changed for privacy reasonsAfter a Gold Coast man who bludgeoned his teenage girlfriend to death escaped a murder charge by arguing he had been provoked by her tales of infidelity, the Queensland government decided to step in. “Other than in exceptional or extreme cases you can’t rely on words, or conduct that consists substantially of words,” the state’s then attorney general, Cameron Dick, said in 2011. “We need a change to the law … just because you say something it doesn’t mean that you should be killed.” A decade later, another Queensland man, Arona Peniamina, also convinced a jury his spouse’s suspected infidelity had provoked him into ending her life in a jealous rage. The government’s reforms had not prevented him from successfully arguing he was guilty of manslaughter, rather than murder, because he had been provoked. As had occurred more than a decade earlier, convincing a jury he had been provoked meant Peniamina would therefore be subjected to a lesser sentence. As the Queensland supreme court judge Peter Davis noted, Peniamina had spent the days leading up to his wife’s death investigating her contact with another man. Peniamina’s case led to more questions about how the Queensland justice system was failing women, and another review of the law as it relates to the use of provocation as a defence in murder cases. Peniamina successfully argued that the suspicion of infidelity provoked him to start assaulting his wife, Sandra Peniamina, and that he was further provoked when she picked up a knife to defend herself. “There are instances where this would help those who were provoked and were protecting themselves,” Sandra’s sister, Carnetra Potter, who is now looking after the couple’s four young sons, told the Courier Mail. “But it in this case did not work in our favour. I believe the [law] should be looked at as a whole.” The attorney general, Shannon Fentiman, agreed, saying the wide-ranging work being done by the state’s women’s safety and justice taskforce would include an examination of the defence of provocation in domestic, family and sexual violence cases. The taskforce did not respond to a request for comment about when the review could be completed. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Queensland remains one of the few Australian jurisdictions which allows a partial defence of provocation, allowing the crime of murder to be reduced to manslaughter. As the New South Wales court of criminal appeal justice Anthony Johnson said in April, the partial defence “has attracted criticism”, leading to review and reform during the past two decades. It had been abolished in Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia and most recently in South Australia, Johnson said. The ACT and Northern Territory have restricted the use of provocation as a defence but not abolished it entirely. Johnson’s comments were made as he denied the leave to appeal application of Warren Francis Rogers, who attempted to argue “extreme provocation” was a factor when he used a pillow to smother his wife of 40 years, Anne Rogers, to death. As he later explained to his son-in-law, Rogers killed her after a fight started because of he was upset by a non-sexual relationship she had with another man. “I’m not a bad person, I just snapped, you know?” Rogers said. “I just snapped … she pushed me too far.” While Rogers’ application was rejected, and NSW does not allow the partial defence of provocation, its unique model is considered problematic by some experts. The NSW laws, enacted in 2014, include a partial defence of “extreme provocation”. The laws were designed to significantly reduce the number of cases under which provocation could be argued, but leave it open as a defence for cases that met a four-staged test, to ensure that victims of prolonged family violence, for example, could use it as a defence should they kill their abusive spouse. Provocation can be considered in sentencing if a person is found guilty of murder. “The government is satisfied that the bill strikes a careful and appropriate balance between restricting the defence and leaving it available for victims of extreme provocation, including victims of long-term abuse who kill their abuser,” the then NSW attorney general, Brad Hazzard, said in introducing the bill. A select committee was established in parliament to examine the laws after the case of Chamanjot Singh, who stood trial for murder after cutting his wife’s throat. Singh claimed during his trial that his wife, Manpreet Kaur, provoked him by telling him she had never loved him and was in love with someone else, and threatening him with deportation. He said he lost self-control and should not be found guilty of murder but of manslaughter, and the jury agreed. Abolish the defence completely In her 2017 research, Dr Kate Fitz-Gibbon, an associate professor at Monash University, found that in the decade before the reforms were introduced, there were 20 convictions finalised in the NSW supreme court for manslaughter by reason of provocation. The majority of these cases involved intimate partner homicide motivated by relationship separation or infidelity, she found. Fitz-Gibbon found that the NSW reforms would eliminate many of these scenarios of what she called “jealous man provocation”. She told Guardian Australia that the Peniamina case was a clear reminder of why the partial defence should be scrapped, as, by its nature, it operated “to facilitate victim blaming narratives”. “We have seen time and time again throughout Australian criminal law history that the partial defence has been successfully utilised by men who have killed their female intimate partners to avoid full accountability for their lethal actions. “It would be naive to think that the abolition of the partial defence of provocation is the entire solution. “We must continue to challenge cultures within our legal system that allow for the proliferation of gendered narratives whereby women are ultimately blamed for their own deaths.” She said that some Australian jurisdictions were currently progressing reforms that would better ensure men who committed fatal intimate partner violence they are held to account. But that did not mean that such offences should be subject to mandatory sentences, as these measures meant men who often raise provocation to mitigate their sentences. “The partial defence of provocation must be abolished in every Australian state and territory, it has no place in our legal system.”Upgrades to the Newell Highway near Goondiwindi on the Queensland and New South Wales border are changing the way water flows across the flood plain and impacting farms and ecosystems, residents and experts say. Pete Mailler, a farmer from Boggabilla, says his property experienced a record flood height from Whalan Creek on one side last week – and “equally extraordinarily” there was no flooding on the other side. He says this is because the works at Newell Highway have raised the flood height and the speed of the flow east of the highway, while disrupting overland flooding to the west. The upgrade between Mungle Back Creek to Boggabilla, jointly funded by the Australian and NSW governments, was officially opened on 13 April this year with the aim of improving the flood immunity of the highway corridor. But in an open letter to Goondiwindi regional council, Mailler wrote that while the highway upgrades “may be excellent for keeping the highway open, they are inadequate in terms of managing the function of the flood plain and the safety of its townspeople”. Mailler said that the rainfall event was not big enough to cause the magnitude of the flow that peaked on Saturday, indicating there was inadequate capacity in the causeways, culverts and bridges to clear the natural flooding due to the raising of the highway. Prof Martin Thoms, a river science expert at the University of New England, said the highway upgrade between Goondiwindi and Whalan Creek would most likely have changed the hydrology of the flood plain. “Any change to the distribution and flow of water in those flood channels would be of a major concern to local landholders,” Thoms said. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter “The border rivers area has a very important flood plain ecosystem. If you interfere with flooding, it not only has an impact on agriculture, but a massive effect on local ecosystems.” Thoms said the impact would not only be felt by farmers, but also the natural flood plain vegetation and animals, including native Murray cod and catfish, which depend on the natural flooding of the flood plain. He said there had not been sufficiently detailed hydraulic studies of the border rivers area to allay the worries of local landholders. Prof Jamie Pittock, from the Australian National University’s Fenner School of Environment and Society, said “embankments for transport infrastructure elsewhere in the Murray Darling Basin have been shown to exacerbate flood risk”. A Transport for NSW spokesperson said the department “carried out extensive hydrology studies as part of the planning process to assess the upgrade’s impacts”. “The upgrade involved the realignment of the Newell Highway, including new drains that were designed to be in the same locations as before the realignment to maintain water flow from one side of the highway to the other,” the spokeperson said. “The upgrade was designed to achieve zero increase in flood levels on surrounding properties, unless otherwise agreed with affected landowners.” Thoms said even if the drains were designed to be in the same locations as before, the raising of the height of the highway would likely still have an impact. The flood modelling in the project’s submissions report acknowledged hydrological impacts in isolated locations on a small number of private properties near the highway. Mailler said “the Roads and Maritime Service have decided … the net impact over the flood plain is negligible, but individually people will have to pay for that. That’s a gross injustice”. Glen Smith, chairman of the organisation Border Rivers Food and Fibre, said the most recent flooding event was different to previous floods, in which equal amounts of water come from the Macintyre and Dumaresq rivers. “This flood all the water came from the Dumaresq,” Smith said. “I have no doubt the road would have had some kind of impact. They all do.” Mailler said people east of the highway were more likely to get more flooding and people west of the highway were more likely to get less – and both would have an impact. “If you stop the beneficial flooding on parts of the plain, [that] has significant impact on the ecology. What grows and how it grows.” He said farmers sustain short-term crop losses after a flood event, but flooding underpins higher productivity in the long-term because it recharges the soil with moisture, sediments and nutrients. “If we haven’t had the flood to fill the soil profile and dams, it predisposes us to drought conditions much faster.” Lawrence Springborg, the mayor of the Goondiwindi region, said the council conducts a review after any major flood. “This includes looking at possible impacts related to infrastructure changes.”I guess the joke’s on me because I still watch it, but I don’t find Succession as compelling as everyone else seems to. The plot goes nowhere, the interpersonal relationships coast along at the same level of sociopathy, and the whole thing feels like being beaten over the head with a big hammer labelled: “Get this – power corrupts!” Yeah, yeah, I know. We all know. The only reason I don’t find the Second Gilded Age label compelling for our time period is that it has connotations of sublime luxury, whereas the current world seems suffused with a depressing sense of drab crapness. Gold just isn’t the appropriate textural signifier of our ugly, tasteless post-postmodernity. I have similar aesthetic problems with using the word “nepotism” to describe what happens in Succession, even though it’s accurate. Nepotism comes from the Italian for nephew, nipote, and originated with medieval popes who elevated their nephews to the cardinalate. Why, I asked myself, did popes care so much about their nephews? Well, at least sometimes because they were “““nephews”””, that is, illegitimate sons. A grubby practice, but one I picture happening within the brocade-strewn, oil-painted, marble-ceilinged context of pre-Enlightenment Vatican splendour. A grand, sacrilegious form of corruption. Compare this to the adult Roy children, dressed like mid-tier real estate agents, slinging uncool compound swear words (“He’s a slime badger!”) at each other in a grey corporate boardroom with low-pile polyester carpeting, while their grizzled old psychopath dad rolls his eyes and wonders where he went wrong. It’s just not the same; it’s degraded, ugly, crap. The label “nepotism” marks a boundary between acceptable and unacceptable forms of favouritism. At the acceptable end, we could think of things like using some money to buy your child a birthday present while other children don’t have enough food to eat. (Unless you’re Peter Singer, in which case that’s right out). We generally accept that family relationships create a set of duties by which the parent is bound to maximise the child’s health, wellbeing and future prospects; if a parent doesn’t do that, we consider them a deadbeat or a failure. When do family duties turn into nepotism? Well, somewhere between the birthday gift scenario and Waystar Royco. Precisely where? When preferencing your own child over another affects the common good. The power of compound interest combined with nepotism produces economic inequality, a material harm; rampant nepotism causes lowered trust in authority and social structures, because it undercuts the value of legal equality. This second harm is a purely modern one. In pre-industrial societies, the bonds and duties of family were how economic and political activity was organised. Nobody would think it immoral for the local artisanal chair maker to take his sons as apprentices into the chair-making business — in fact it would be weird if he didn’t. Only the cracking-apart and reorganising of those economic kinship structures produced a world in which the common charge of nepotism even makes sense. It’s instructive that the original perpetrators were popes, not merchants or kings, because religious authority could be compromised by petty worldliness in a way business and politics couldn’t. Making your illegitimate son a cardinal somewhat cheapens the divinely-instantiated structure characteristic of the church, doesn’t it? Your Holiness, are you absolutely sure it was God who inspired you to appoint the kid you had with a servant girl to a position in the ecclesiastical hierarchy? In more recent times, nepotism is apt to manifest as embedded patronage matrices of mates. The most powerful of these, the ones embedded in government, put on a big show of respect for “the electorate” out the front, but you don’t have to peer very far round the back to see that the revolving door is never still. I think there really is a difference in kind between institutionalised “jobs for the boys” networks and the type of friend-favouring everyday people might do in helping someone they know score an interview or a role. The powerful are motivated by just that — securing and maintaining their own control. It’s not just high-value altruism when a politician stacks an authority with their allies, it’s quid pro quo. See enough of this and you feel like you’re being told one long aristocrats joke where the punchline is “Democracy!” Nepotism is a thoroughly attested human pastime, it’s meritocracy that is weird – the idea that an individual person can be severed from their familial context, evaluated against an objective set of standards, and assigned a societal position on that basis – is freaky and new. To be honest I’m not that into meritocracy either. Sure, I enjoy the fruits of the economic rationalisation process the same as everyone else, but there’s a part of me that is very attracted to the idea of simply being given a track in life. If we could somehow combine that with an egalitarian distribution of material resources, I’d be into it. Nobody gets to be the Queen because your mum was the Queen, but maybe it wouldn’t be so bad if I’d been inducted into my dad’s vocation (playing bass in extremely niche 1980s post punk bands – cool, right?). The problem with nepotism as depicted in Succession isn’t really the nepotism per se; it’s how emotionally hideous and alienated everyone is. On one hand we have a small group of genetically affiliated incompetents depicted with more power than the president, but on the other hand, they’re all extremely unhappy! It’s like an advertisement for bloodless, liberal meritocracy. Sounds great! Just give me a second to bite down into this cyanide capsule. The original nipotes, though, make nepotism look pretty groovy. Your father loves you and wants you to be happy, you get to be a cardinal, everyone still believes in a loving God, and your chamberpot is probably inlaid with Italian malachite. I think there’s something nice there to be re-appropriated, even if nobody wants the wholesale reconstruction of the First Estate. Eleanor Robertson is a writer based in SydneyCookbooks are my go-to gift. It’s a medium I know and horde for my own use, so instinctively it’s a love I want to share. I was always told “it’s the thought that counts”, and going that extra distance at this time of year adds that extra halo effect. Where to shop Shopping local and independent is a mantra for some. The plight of the indie bookseller is a precarious one and Christmas can be, as with other small retailers, a lifeline. Spare a thought for culinary booksellers – such as Books for Cooks, based at Queen Victoria Market in Melbourne – who also sell online. They can be niche treasure troves – yes, you’ll likely find that latest big-name release, but also books long out of print, or even an antiquarian selection for those wanting to mine the de rigeur dishes of the 19th century. If you’ve time on your hands and a thirst for op-shops, dive into a less curated selection in search of a preloved classic, or a gift that just didn’t land with its recipient last year. I’ve uncovered everything from original Elizabeth David paperbacks, and Len Deighton’s Observer cookstrips classics the Action Cookbook and Ou Est Le Garlic, to as-new modern must-haves like Yotam Ottolenghi and Sami Tamimi’s Jerusalem in charity shops. Writing cookbooks isn’t a sure thing financially. Increasingly you’ll find authors selling direct via their website or Instagram page. Buying this way is a win for you, as you’ll most likely land a signed copy and maybe some merch, while for them it’s a bigger margin. What to choose Making a good choice is knowing your recipient. I like to be bold with choices and open new culinary pathways to friends and family. Say, a veggie deep-dive like Alice Zaslavsky’s In Praise of Veg for the open-minded yet committed meat eater who thinks veg always takes second billing; or, conversely, Meat: The Ultimate Companion by Anthony Puharich and Libby Travers for a lapsed vegetarian. Early in my relationship with my now wife I tested the theory, buying her a copy of Fergus Henderson’s The Whole Beast. She had spent decades as a vegetarian but was tentatively exploring an omnivorous diet. It still has pride of place among a sprawling cookbook collection. Think beyond recipes The line between books and magazines is blurring, like most media these days, with increasing numbers of mooks, high-end quarterlies and journals. These are spaces where new voices or little-heard perspectives can be found, and a subscription or bundle can be the gift that keeps on giving. Look to publications like Colournary, founded to “amplify the voices of First Nations, Black and People of Colour through the lens of food and culture”, and publishers like Somekind Press, whose lo-fi paperback approach has resulted in a catalogue of page-turners from many of Australia’s most exciting venues, like Pipit, Tom McHugo’s, Ester and Lankan Filling Station. Further mining that rich vein of talent, Cartilage produces recipe card journals with $10 of the $15 cost going back to the venue – a venture that was borne out of a will to help the hospitality industry during Covid, and could have legs beyond it. For food lovers, it’s worth thinking beyond recipe books. A work of narrative non-fiction that outlines real issues can be a refreshing contrast to the gloss of lifestyle-led picture books. I’m thinking Richard Flanagan with Toxic, Matthew Evans with Soil and Gabrielle Chan and Why You Should Give a F*ck About Farming. And don’t be too literal And finally, call me the cookbook Grinch but with only a few exceptions (namely Nigel Slater’s The Christmas Chronicles) festive themed books should be avoided, especially if you live in Australia. Why? Ultimately, their destiny is to be flicked through and left untouched until next Christmas. The shops are shut, you’ve planned your seasons’ eating, and all too often the fare is more northern hemisphere appropriate than something that pairs with white wine in the sun.Boys are running in rows of three down the court. Legs, shouts, the smack of bouncing balls. As one boy passes to another, the third fans out to take the next pass, then he leaps and dunks. Some boys are already in flight and soaring towards the basket when they take the ball, almost delicately, then slam it through the hoop. On the side a man in a blue tracksuit watches intently, but not so much that he fails to see a boy trying to slip unnoticed into the gym, a hard thing to do when you are 200cm tall. The western Sydney basketball club has caught the eye of the world, with 23 of its players recruited to play college and high school basketball in the US “Akuei!” Mayor Chagai calls out. “Why are you late?” The boy, hands in the pockets of his black tracksuit pants, looks uneasy. He missed a train connection at Granville, he mumbles. “You’re coming from Campbelltown? What time did you leave?” “Ten-thirty,” says the boy. That is four-and-a-half hours ago. To be fair, Campbelltown is almost 50km from here, but Chagai is not satisfied: “Why didn’t you leave at 8?” Akuei shrugs, looks down, and says quietly: “Mum was at work.” “And you had to look after the kids, right?” Chagai’s tone softens. “All right.” But then: “Why didn’t you text me? You text next time you’re going to be late. OK, jump in.” Akuei enters the line, waiting to join the boys flowing in waves down the court. “I wanted him to explain to me what was going on,” Chagai, the founder of the Savannah Pride basketball club, says. “If he gets a job and turns up late, then doesn’t communicate to the boss why he’s late, then he won’t have that job.” Chagai, who left his village in South Sudan at the age of seven and wandered across three countries before arriving in Sydney in 2006 as a 22-year-old refugee, wants to teach his players not only how to dribble and dunk a ball but how to study and work and take their place in society. He is trying to develop not just good basketballers, but fine human beings. The story unfolding in this spare gymnasium in Blacktown, a western Sydney municipality that contains some of Australia’s most disadvantaged urban areas, is about more than sport. It is about how a community and a country are built. Singh, Smith and Jones Start with map and compass in George Street, in the Sydney CBD. Head 30km west and a little north, upriver. At Parramatta, strike west for another 10km, up a hill or two, down another. When you reach the heart of a wide open plain, nearer to the Blue Mountains than the sea, you’re in Blacktown. It’s not a journey that many Sydneysiders who live closer to the sea ever make. Which is a shame, because the joke that journalist Joanne Vella remembers being made in the newsroom of The Blacktown Advocate might well be true: “You haven’t been to Australia till you’ve been to Blacktown.” More than 4 million people have arrived in Australia in the past 25 years. Most newcomers have moved to the big cities, but few have moved into the inner cities, which have become gentrified, increasingly monocultural, and locked up by prohibitive housing prices. Instead, recent migrants have had to look to the urban fringe. Lueth Awan arrives for training. The players are mostly South Sudanese, but there are also Islanders, Lebanese, Chinese, Serbians, Italians and Anglos As a result, an unprecedented transformation of Australia’s population has occurred out of sight of policymakers, captains of industry, arts and culture leaders, academics and journalists. This century Blacktown has received three main streams of migrants: refugees from South Sudan, Bhutan and Afghanistan, among other places; people of Pacific Island background and Māori; and migrants coming on skilled visas, mainly from the Indian subcontinent. The largest overseas-born groups today are the nearly 26,000 residents born in India – Blacktown’s most common surname in 2015 was Singh, followed by Smith and Jones – and 22,000 in the Philippines. Blacktown also has more people born in South Sudan than any other municipality in Australia. These migrants followed other waves of migrants since the second world war: first the British and Irish, then other Europeans, including Italians, Hungarians, Poles and Maltese, the last of whom came, in many cases, to work in the market gardens on the city’s edge. Blacktown also contains Australia’s largest urban Indigenous population, of about 10,000 people. It includes members of the original Darug people, but most Indigenous residents moved to Blacktown from regional New South Wales after 1960. Savannah Pride basketball player Joseph Amelsom. Mayor Chagai trains about 250 players, including 20 girls Blacktown’s population of nearly 400,000 numbers about 180 different national backgrounds, with more than 40% of people born overseas. As late as the 1950s the municipality was mainly countryside. That means nearly everyone, apart from the Darug, is in one way or another a recent migrant. From the savannah to the US and Sydney It is Saturday afternoon at the Police Citizens Youth Club in the Blacktown suburb of Shalvey. The under-18 squad of the Savannah Pride basketball club has been training for 15 minutes, but Chagai – or “coach,” as players call him – has been taking training sessions since five in the morning. All Saturday and on weeknights he trains groups from under-12 to open age – about 250 players in all, including 20 girls. The players are mostly South Sudanese, but there are also Islanders, Lebanese, Chinese, Serbians, Italians and Anglos. One white boy from the Central Coast played just one game against Savannah Pride, in which his team was smashed. He was so impressed that he asked Chagai if he could join, and now makes the two-hour journey to Shalvey every weekend to train. Chagai keeps all his players’ numbers in his phone, and often those of their parents, too. Savannah Pride runs a homework club (suspended during the pandemic) and Chagai gets parents to send him school reports. Any student suspended from school is temporarily banned from games against other clubs. But if a player overdoses and ends up in hospital, or does something that lands him in a police cell, Chagai will turn up to take him home. This club in western Sydney has caught the eye of the basketball world. American scouts have swooped on Savannah Pride, recruiting 23 of its players to play college and high school basketball in the United States. Duop Reath, who represented Australia at the Tokyo Olympics, played for a time with Savannah Pride. Chagai has featured in The New York Times and on the ABC’s Australian Story, and is the subject of a planned movie. Joe Mantegna, head coach of Blair Academy, a basketball boarding school in New Jersey, has said that Savannah Pride is “impacting more people than most of us ever do in a lifetime”. Savannah Pride player Pachong Malok takes a rest during training Over two Saturdays at the Shalvey PCYC gym, Chagai tells me a little of his long journey from the savannah of Africa to the streets of Sydney. As he speaks of the friends he lost along the way he seems to be carrying sorrow, but when he talks about the game he loves, his face lights up, almost grows mischievous. He has two sides, but they come from the same place. Sport, he says, must be fun, or young people will not play. Even more importantly, players who enjoy the game can learn to take risks and believe in themselves. The best players are great, Chagai says, not because they have skills or fitness, but because they make good decisions, free of fear. Chagai wants his players to play instinctively, to trust themselves and their teammates. Confidence in the game can lead to confidence in work and in life. He learned all this, he says, in his journey through Africa, as a refugee. The end of a dream At the age of seven, Chagai left his South Sudanese village, where his family herded cattle. Over the next 15 years he trekked to Ethiopia, then to the world’s biggest refugee camp, Kakuma in Kenya, then back to South Sudan as a child soldier for the Sudanese People’s Liberation Army. He left his village with a cousin to avoid war but war followed him. Bombs fell and battles exploded around him and his companions. Many died of illness or hunger, drowned, or were eaten by wild animals. “Nearly all the people I knew at that time are dead,” he says. “No food, no sleep, hide in the swamp, dig the roots of plants to eat. No day, no night, all time was the same. Someone can be walking around and in the next few minutes, dead. As long as you breathe, that’s all you know.” In Kakuma, which he reached at the age of nine, he discovered he had a rare gift for basketball, and the courage to play it. He had seen fear kill people, make them give up and drown, or die of thirst. But in the savannah, with wild animals all around, he had overcome his fear. What, then, did he need to fear on a basketball court? As Chagai speaks, a small boy waits respectfully at a distance: could he go home? “Have you called your mum?” Chagai asks. The boy shakes his head. “Here,” Chagai hands the boy his phone. “He’s new, very shy,” Chagai says. “A lot of kids have no parents, or no dads, a lot of single mums. I see myself in them.” After getting back to South Sudan as a teenager, he played in Kenya, Uganda, Egypt. His talent was spotted, and he was offered scholarships to the US, Spain and France. Then he fell during a tournament and badly broke an arm. His dream of a basketball career in the US died with that fall. He accepted a refugee visa for Australia, and arrived in Blacktown in 2006. Music beats ‘fight night’ Every refugee is unlucky, but while camps in some countries were peaceful, the same cannot be said for the South Sudanese, whose journey to Australia was marked by violence, hunger and war. Their arrival presented Blacktown with the biggest test of its multiculturalism in its history. From the mid-2000s, groups of young black men could be seen hanging around the Blacktown CBD. They were part of a rapidly growing South Sudanese population in the municipality. The council felt frustrated that neither the federal nor state government had provided any notice – let alone funding – to help it manage the change. Many locals were also unhappy. Some demonstrated in the street, with ugly signs. “There was a real fear at the time,” says Michelle Rowland, who was a Blacktown councillor in that period and is now MP for the federal seat of Greenway, which covers half of Blacktown. “Council got this constant feedback: ‘There are all these tall, dark people standing around and I feel intimidated. This is not the Blacktown I used to know, I don’t feel like I belong here any more.’ I always thought it was bizarre: doesn’t everyone stand around? You’re just noting that they’re black. But the fact that it never boiled over into race riots was really lucky. Some non-government organisations stepped in to help but a lot of the work fell to the local area command of the police.” The local commander, Mark Wright, had taken the Blacktown job in 2008 with a brief to reduce youth crime, especially at the station and Westpoint mall. Westpoint had just become the first shopping centre in Sydney to ban students during school hours. Groups of young people were stealing with abandon, businesses were leaving the mall. On Thursday nights, crowds of young people would come by train from across Sydney and gather on the fourth floor of Westpoint to watch young men of all backgrounds trade punches. Wright says it was known as “fight night”. Former Blacktown commander Mark Wright ‘had a very big role in transforming’ the area, says Om Dhungel Wright began by pulling leaders of ethnic communities, schools, welfare bodies, churches and a Westpoint manager around the same table. He asked them one question: what do we do? Out of those meetings emerged many ideas and one coalition: Com4Unity (coming together for unity). The most important initiative came from youth workers, who polled 2,500 young people around the train station and mall about activities they wanted to see in Blacktown. People said they wanted more opportunities to dance, perform and play music. As a result, Switch, a dance and music showcase, was held on the same Westpoint floor where “fight night” used to occur. Critically, the event was run by young people themselves. “I still get goose bumps when I think about it,” Wright says. “Rotary had the barbecue going, the mayor would be sitting in the front row, and you’d have 300 or 400 young people singing, dancing – that top floor was pumping.” Savannah Pride player Atem Mayol. Coach Mayor Chagai named the team in honour of the friends he has lost After Wright left his job in 2014, and other Com4Unity leaders also moved on, the initiative did not survive. Yet the impact on Blacktown seems to have lasted. “Mark [Wright] had a very big role in transforming Blacktown,” says Om Dhungel, who sits on the NSW police multicultural advisory council. “Blacktown station used to be very scary in some way. Young people standing around; you had to navigate through them so you didn’t get pushed. That’s all changed.” One basketball court, two basketballs When Chagai arrived in Australia in 2006, he found the country strange, hostile. He and about 10 other young South Sudanese formed a basketball group, but whenever they tried to play a scrimmage game at the PCYC in Blacktown, one particular police officer would kick them out. A Parramatta stadium also kicked them out. I ask him why he thought that happened. “We were different, and we were black.” When the group tried to play scratch games on outdoor courts around western Sydney, groups of boys would appear and challenge them to a game. Often the boys were Islanders but some were Lebanese, Aboriginal, Caucasian. The Sudanese always won, which often caused fights. Sometimes the boys would leave and return with baseball bats, even knives. Chagai was spending all his time pulling away his boys, who wanted to fight back. He was near despair. One day a Sudanese leader in Blacktown, Ajang Deng Biar, called him. The multicultural liaison officer at Blacktown police, Assefa Bekele, wanted to meet the basketballers. Warily, Chagai and seven other young men agreed to attend a meeting with police commander Wright. In the meeting Wright got straight to the point: what did the players need? Chagai said they needed just one evening on a basketball court and basketballs, as they had no money. Wright said he would arrange a month’s trial at the PCYC. If there were fights or other troubles, they were out, but if the trial went well, police would extend it. Chagai asked: when is this going to start? “Right now,” said Wright. And he, Biar, another Sudanese leader, Mary Mamur, and the players left the meeting and walked through the streets of Blacktown to the PCYC. Wright booked them in. He also booked a meeting for two days later, at which he laid out the new approach to the officer who had banned the Sudanese. Bekele took the players to Rebel Sport in Westpoint and bought them two basketballs. Savannah Pride player Joseph Amelsom waits for training to begin The trial was a success. Wright helped the group secure a three-year grant from the Department of Immigration to pay four part-time salaries. He also joined the Savannah Pride board, and is now chair. “What started out as a mentor relationship has become much more than that,” says film-maker Brendan Fletcher, who is making a movie on Savannah Pride. “Mayor has no family here, and very few elders in Sydney who can play that role for him. Mark is one.” Basketball NSW and the Women’s World Cup have asked the club to run a trial “dads and daughters” program focusing on South Sudanese families. Involving girls is a challenge, Chagai says. “We are trying to build up, but Sudanese parents do not like their daughters playing sport or being too long out of the house.” Chagai says Sudanese boys receive more attention because their struggles have been more visible, but “a lot of girls are suffering mentally – they just hide it”. ‘Blacktown is a better place now’ Chagai has to return to coaching. I talk to others on the sidelines of the gym. “Coach is really tough, but it’s to get the best out of us,” says Isaac (Achek) Chol, an 18-year-old player whose uncle is Deng Adut, the criminal lawyer from Blacktown who was the 2017 NSW Australian of the Year. Chol says that Chagai “doesn’t sing out, but he tells us straight up when we’re being lazy, and if you don’t like it, tough”. Savannah Pride player Chan Deng takes a moment on the court This year Chol got into Macquarie University, but to study business administration, not law, as he had hoped. He was downcast, but Chagai told him not to lose heart; he could transfer later. “He’s definitely made me more resilient,” Chol says. “Mayor is a beautiful, beautiful man,” says Kasia Rettig, a Polish immigrant whose 15-year-old son, William, plays with Savannah Pride and coaches its younger boys. “My boy doesn’t see his father. Mayor has been like a father to him.” Savannah Pride began as a South Sudanese club. But in 2015 three players who went to boarding school in Bathurst asked if they could bring two white friends, Will and Daniel, to training; those players are still with the club today. Through word of mouth and socialising after games, players from other African backgrounds joined, and some Iraqis, too. A Ghanaian had an Indian friend – could he come along? Two Islander boys joined after Chagai and Joe Tau, the youth worker who had helped to run Com4Unity, organised three camps to diffuse longstanding conflicts between boys of Sudanese and Islander backgrounds. In time, Savannah Pride became the diverse club it is today. Mayor Chagai says that Australia remains a “very tough” environment for South Sudanese people, yet over the years he has become an optimist about Blacktown. Mayor Chagai talks to the team at the end of the training session He says that when he first arrived in Blacktown, “people would spit on us, call us cockroaches. The police would harass kids – I wrote so many letters to Mark Wright about it. Now we Africans have got achievements in sport, people have gone to university, joined the police force. In Blacktown, we still have a few racists, but they are being outnumbered by people who are willing to say, ‘Blacktown is a better place now.’ That’s an amazing thing that has happened.” Chagai says he will never forget something Lorraine Landon, a Savannah Pride board member, told him 10 years ago. “I was very upset. I kept hearing, ‘These refugees are bad.’ I said to Lorraine, ‘When are we going to become accepted in this country?’ “She said, ‘Mayor, this a bad part of people who feel entitled to say that only they are Australian. It’s not fair, it’s not good, but you have to be resilient. It happened to the Italians, the Vietnamese, the Chinese. You have to fight through it, and it will fade away. But it will never go away if people don’t fight through it, positively. Australia is a great country that welcomes everyone. It will welcome you.’ “I felt so deeply about what Lorraine said,” Chagai remembers. “I thought, ‘That’s true’.” Chagai has sat with young men charged with serious crimes, who have asked to see him from their cell. “It takes a village to raise a child is an African proverb,” he reminds me. Just the other day, one of his players, Akol Mawein, texted him from the University of Oklahoma, where he is on a scholarship worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. Mawein sent Chagai a photo of him mopping the floor at the Blacktown PCYC with an Islander boy, an Aboriginal boy and a couple of white boys. People in Oklahoma did not know where he came from, Mawein texted. “This is the place where I started bouncing a ball when I was 10.” Chagai first called his club Star Basketball, but six years ago, he gave it the name it has today. He wanted to honour the friends he had lost. He was the lucky one. He had survived the savannah. He wanted others to survive it, too. “We share some fates with the wild animals,” he says. He still remembers watching the animals gather on the savannah, under the shade of the trees. “They just sit there together. We, too, are a group of people getting together – as a group, as a family, as a pride.” This article is based on a narrative paper on Blacktown written for the Scanlon Foundation Research Institute.Scary Monsters by Michelle de Kretser Allen and Unwin I keep thinking about the formal gambit on which Scary Monsters is built: it is a book with two faces. Quite literally: it has two covers, two sets of end pages, and it forces the reader at the outset to choose where they begin. It’s a device more complex and consequential than it first seems, because there’s only one opportunity to read one section of the novel unencumbered by the other, to read innocently. And because the sections could each, in theory, stand alone, and because the ties between them are allusive and never overt, the connections and conclusions a reader might draw are up for grabs. It’s an inventive and playful book, funny and heartbreaking, and beautifully accomplished. – Fiona Wright Read more: Michelle de Kretser turns the novel upside down: ‘My aim was to play with form’ The Mother Wound by Amani Haydar Pan MacMillan There are memoirs that tell extraordinary personal stories and hold the reader’s attention because, well, the stories are extraordinary. Then there are memoirs that take it to another level, threading greater meaning through the narrative thanks to the supreme skill, grace and intellect of the writer. In Amani Haydar’s hands, the terrible story of the murder of her mother by her father becomes so much more than that: she transforms it into a thoughtful meditation on memory, culture, patriarchy, intergenerational trauma and, ultimately, hope and renewal. This book is stunning. – Lucy Clark Read more: ‘I was filled with dread’: after her father killed her mother, Amani Haydar found words to heal How to End a Story by Helen Garner Text publishing In her third volume of edited journals, How to End a Story: Diaries 1995-1998, Helen Garner covers the implosion of her third marriage. Almost unbearably intimate, her forensic reports on the tensions between two writers and her slowly breaking heart have operatic intensity. After the controversy of The First Stone, with no room of her own, she struggles to write and examines herself in therapy. Yet amid misery, she finds joy and silliness, and sees Sydney with an ever-curious Melburnian eye. The diaries throw light (and shade) on the career of a great Australian writer who can shape an archetypal drama from life’s daily mess and knows exactly how to end a story. – Susan Wyndham Read more: Helen Garner: I always liked my diary better than anything else I wrote She is Haunted by Paige Clark Allen and Unwin Debut books of short stories can follow something of a pattern: some pyrotechnics to show range, potentially autobiographical elements, a singular perspective or worldview that separates the author from the pack. But while all of this is true of She is Haunted, this book is a true original, with skilled, delicate power and an unforgettable mix of raw humour, fantastical digressions and melancholy insight. Reviews of debut fiction often lean on phrases like “prodigiously talented” and “bursts on to the scene”. Again, these are true of Paige Clark but don’t do her justice. This is one of the most enjoyable, memorable Australian books of this year. – Michael Williams Read more: Paige Clark: ‘My husband finished his album from hospital. His death taught me how to live’ Dear Son: letters and reflections from First Nations fathers and sons, edited by Thomas Mayor Hardie Grant Torres Strait Islander author and activist Thomas Mayor introduces readers to his poignant collection of father-son letters by writing how colonial institutions have taught his people to “hate themselves”. Resounding postcolonial stereotypes – such as the caricature of the hopeless Indigenous parent perpetuated by an infamous Bill Leak cartoon five years ago – have further demonised and demoralised Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men. Mayor’s book offers a positive counter-response in which First Nations men, writing mostly to their children (but sometimes to their fathers), lay bare the generational legacies of the “colonial stain” of self-criticism through reflections of what it means to nurture and love one another across the generations. These are heartfelt and deeply moving essays that all men can learn from. – Paul Daley The Game by Sean Kelly Black Inc Sean Kelly’s first book initially doesn’t sound that promising: a biography of Scott Morrison, for which the subject has not granted the author access. But for Kelly the obstacle is the way. Without Morrison, Kelly can create a narrative that is not dependent on the self that the prime minister wants to show. Instead his book probes Morrison’s absence: that is the absence of a story, of an inner life, of the ability to empathise, and ultimately of the ability to lead. With a variety of literary references, including Joan Didion and Janet Malcolm, Kelly has crafted an intelligent, thoughtful book that ultimately doesn’t just reveal Morrison to us but shows us the “real Australia”. – Brigid Delaney Grimmish by Michael Winkler Self-published No Aussie publisher was bold enough to take a chance on Michael Winkler’s debut novel, so Winkler published it himself. Thank the literary gods he did, for Grimmish arrives with its wildness untamed and excesses untamped. This “exploded nonfiction novel” begins with the true-life tale of Joe Grim, a fin de siècle boxer famed for his capacity to endure round-after-round of punishment; a human punching bag. Around Grim’s bruised and bruising life, Winkler crafts a fable of masculinity, pain, art-making and madness. JM Coetzee has called it “the strangest book you are likely to read this year”, and he’s spot on. Grimmish has all the makings of a cult classic. It’s grotesque and gorgeous, smart and searching. And did I mention the talking goat? – Beejay Silcox Wild Abandon by Emily Bitto Allen and Unwin 2021 has been a great year for fiction for me – particularly by Australian writers. Wild Abandon stands out as a favourite because at the peak of such an exhausting, depleting time it was an absolute delight to read something so lush and full of energy. I’ve always loved Bitto’s writing, but her joy in experimenting with craft and character shines through on every page of this. And while there is something expansive and liberating about Will’s journey from Australia to New York to the deep heartlands of America, there is also genuine pathos, and an understanding of the endless search for connection that drives so many of us. This book is wondrous. – Bec Kavanagh Read more: Wild Abandon by Emily Bitto review – a thrilling, irreverent take on the great American road trip Another Day in the Colony by Chelsea Watego UQP Chelsea Watego is inspired by two great contemporary philosophers, Audre Lorde and bell hooks. The result is a book that only Watego could have written, a galvanic critique of colonial complacency and institutional racism in Australia. Watego herself experienced a trial by fire in academia, when a piece she wrote for an academic journal heavily criticising a white author’s book was pulled from publication and resulted in defamation threats (the piece is reprinted here). The penultimate chapter, Fuck Hope, is essential summer reading. Another Day in the Colony is a wonderful continuation of the critical race and feminist critiques of thinkers such as Jackie Huggins, Lilla Watson, and Aileen Moreton-Robinson. – Declan Fry Read more: Another Day in the Colony by Chelsea Watego review – a fierce manifesto for First Nations to flourish One Hundred Days by Alice Pung Black Inc In suburban 1980s Melbourne, 16-year-old Karuna falls pregnant. Enraged, her mother confines the teenager to their commission flat, where she yearns for escape and independence. This claustrophobic, epistolary novel is beautifully nuanced in exploring the chasm between mother and daughter, especially where culture is concerned – Pung writes with empathy for both characters, even if the mother’s actions appear outwardly monstrous. As with her other works of fiction and nonfiction, Pung’s handling of race and class is impressive, providing great insight into the complexities of both. One Hundred Days isn’t always an easy read, but it is an important and moving one. – Giselle Au-Nhien Nguyen Read more: ‘Teenagers can deal with tough things’: Alice Pung on the complexities of race, class and motherhood The Three Burials of Lotty Kneen by Krissy Kneen Text publishing Krissy Kneen was raised on a “strict diet of fairytales”, the frayed threads of her family history always woven into fables. The chief mythmaker was her Slovenian grandmother, Lotty: a mystical, matriarchal woman who spurned any probing inquiry into her obscured past. After Lotty’s death, Krissy is liberated to unearth the kernels of truth in her grandmother’s tales, to discover the lineage of her ancestors and where she might overlap with them – “skin to skin, blood to blood”. This peripatetic memoir is an absorbing chronicle of that journey, with Krissy travelling with Lotty’s ashes from Australia to Slovenia to Egypt. It’s an intimate tale of identity – as well as of bodies, inherited trauma, and memory – and is its own heady cocktail of truth and lore. – Jack Callil Read more: The Three Burials of Lotty Kneen by Krissy Kneen review – memoir as both fairytale and defiant truth Echolalia by Briohny Doyle Penguin Random House This brooding novel from Briohny Doyle tells the story of a young mother on the brink of breakdown, struggling to manage the needs of her neuro atypical son and hounded by the memories of sexual assault and harassment she experienced as a teenager. Doyle sets this core narrative against the backdrop of a town slowly drying up – both figuratively and literally – unable to withstand economic and climate pressures. Then, a single, horrific act rocks its people to the core. Doyle is a master at bringing together disparate and complex themes, timelines and perspectives to deliver a taut and engaging read. – Zoya Patel Read more: Author Briohny Doyle: ‘The myth of motherhood is that it’s fantastic even when it’s hard work’ Why You Should Give a F*ck about Farming by Gabrielle Chan Penguin Random House Full disclosure: Gabrielle Chan is a friend and colleague, neither of which would ordinarily compel me to read a whole book about farming – but after only a few pages you’ll see why you should, indeed, give a very big concern about farming in Australia. If you eat and you care about the environment and food supply chains, Chan’s exposition of this enormous part of Australia’s economy and culture – not to mention actual landmass – is an urgent wakeup call. Her knowledge of policy in this area is without peer; her prodigious storytelling abilities and analysis make this subject timely, relevant and readable. – Lucy Clark Hear more: Gabrielle Chan on why you should definitely care about farming – podcast Bodies of Light by Jennifer Down Text publishing Given the various traumas and societal failures that have dominated our news cycle for the better part of 2021, Bodies of Light – Jennifer Down’s vast novel of grief, institutionalisation, pain and loss – might not feel like an easy recommendation for the reader seeking escapism or respite. But if you’re feeling robust enough to give over to the forensic, immersive story of one woman’s attempts to survive tragedy over many decades, the rewards are considerable. Bearing witness to Maggie’s abuse, to her thwarted and often heartbreaking efforts to escape her past and ultimately to overcome it may leave you wrung out, but Down is a beautiful writer and this epic novel is first and foremost about strength and resilience. – Michael Williams Read more: Bodies of Light by Jennifer Down review – remarkably empathic tale of vulnerability Working From Home (may ở nhà) by Emma Do and Kim Lam Self-published No book this year moved me half as much as Emma Do and Kim Lam’s brilliant history of outwork in Australia. Written by Do and illustrated by Lam, it tells a story of Australia during the 80s and 90s, when Vietnamese migrants and refugees struggling to find regular employment became outworkers. The result is a stunning portrait of resilience despite adversity; of small wins and larger injustices, and of little reprieves in the face of larger marginalisation. It is an intimate look at what it means to cultivate a life, a family, a home: how care is the basis upon which our existence depends, in both the smallest and largest parts of our lives. When Do observes that “everything you wear has passed through skilled hands”, the larger analogy is impossible to miss. You’ll laugh, you’ll cry, you’ll mobilise for migrant labour rights. – Declan Fry Read more: ‘All clothes are handmade’: the migrant workers behind Australian fashion Leaping Into Waterfalls: The Enigmatic Gillian Mears by Bernadette Brennan Allen &amp; Unwin Bernadette Brennan had the pleasurable challenge of mining a vast archive for her biography of Gillian Mears. No writer has documented her own life more obsessively than Mears, the dazzling Australian author who wrote, loved and lived passionately, until her death at 51 from multiple sclerosis in 2016. Brennan brings scholarly discipline and an appreciative open mind to her subject’s nonconformist life: her turbulent relationships and complex sexuality, her debilitating illnesses and search for alternative treatments, her travels to a Venezuelan mountaintop and into the Australian bush. All was in service to literature, as Brennan shows in her sensitive reading of award-winning stories and novels, ending with the triumphant Foal’s Bread. – Susan Wyndham Black and Blue by Veronica Gorrie Scribe Black and Blue is the extraordinary kind of memoir that has you laughing and then, in the next paragraph, feeling like all the wind has been taken out of you with shock. Veronica Gorrie tells her story of growing up as a Gunai/Kurnai woman in Australia, and then going on to be a police officer in Brisbane where she witnessed and was the target of personal and structural racism. Her voice is so clear and sharp it feels at times like she is talking directly to you and she has a unique gift of threading a story with small details and sideways routes that add to the odd charm of the book. It is a story of great resilience but also of great love, in her family and also in her community. – Bridie Jabour Read more: ‘I had not one friend in the job to debrief with’: life as an Indigenous police officer In Moonland by Miles Allinson Scribe It says something about the past year that the books I found myself most lost in were set among the hippy idealism of the 70s: Allison Gibbs’ Repentance, Jonathan Franzen’s Crossroads (don’t @ me) and Miles Allinson’s In Moonland among them. In Moonland – Allison’s second novel – is a generational saga that begins in modern-day Melbourne, when new father Joe becomes fixated on learning about his dead father Vincent. But the most escapist bits are set in the past: vivid, dreamlike scenes spent with Vincent, who gets lured into the ashram/cult of the magnetic mystic Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (AKA Osho) in India in 1976. It’s by no means a hopeful read, but it’s beautifully written and took me to another world, another time. Which: yes please. – Steph Harmon Love Objects by Emily Maguire Allen and Unwin The two protagonists of Love Objects are both such kind-hearted but complicated characters, witty and brittle and bruised by the world, that they have stayed with me all year. Nic is cheeky, a bit offbeat, and so full of compassion that it almost hurts. Her niece Lena is feisty but riven with doubt, and entirely unprepared for who and what she encounters in the adult world. Love Objects is about their relationship, and about family and care – but it’s also about class and how it carries across generations, as well as the choices and outcomes it makes available or closes off, despite our cultural insistence to the contrary. – Fiona Wright Read more: Love Objects by Emily Maguire review – a compassionate, harrowing portrait of a hoarder Fury by Kathryn Heyman Allen &amp; Unwin The brilliant intensity of this memoir grabs you by the scruff in its opening pages and doesn’t let go. Novelist Kathryn Heyman takes the reader back to her early 20s when, fleeing a traumatic sexual assault and subsequent court case, finds work as the only female deckhand on a fishing trawler in the wild and stormy Timor Sea. It’s cinematically dramatic, yes, but also measured, as Heyman intersperses her compelling narrative of personal transformation with broader reflections on her childhood, on male violence, class, and the redemptive power of language to describe the world and her place in it. Along the way she places stepping stones many women will recognise – from everyday insults to serious assaults – all of them rising to a sense of cold, implacable fury that builds throughout. In a lesser writer’s hands it could have been overplayed, but Heyman is meticulous with pacing and structure. – Lucy Clark Read more: Kathryn Heyman on writing her ‘white hot’ memoir – and finding refuge on the Timor Sea Dark As Last Night by Tony Birch UQP Predominantly set in Melbourne – for Tony Birch a place of struggle, grief and violence, but also community, quiet generosity, and kindness – Dark as Last Night gives the reader 16 carefully crafted short stories. Like much of Birch’s oeuvre, central to this collection is the experience of children and the ties that bind siblings. The way love and care is shown contrasts with the difficulties of resolving past hurt and present grief. But at the same time, moments of levity and youthful fun balance out the darkness in Birch’s world. This is a serious and memorable set of stories from a master of the form. – Joseph Cummins Read more: Dark as Last Night by Tony Birch review – 16 new vignettes from a master of the short story As Beautiful as Any Other by Kaya Wilson Pan Macmillan It was a life-threatening surfing accident that prompted tsunami scientist, Dr Kaya Wilson, to come out as transgender – but bodies don’t tell linear stories and neither does his remarkable memoir. Instead, Wilson considers the things that mark us – death, grief, rage – and what a joy it is to watch his compassionate mind at work. Reviewing Wilson’s book for Guardian Australia, Bec Kavanagh observed: “he writes with an expectation that people can do better, and provides plenty of opportunities for them to do so”. It’s this generosity – this open-hearted trust – that makes As Beautiful As Any Other so potent. “Once the question of being alive had been answered, I had to figure out how I wanted to live,” Wilson writes. His book invites us to answer that mighty question for ourselves. – Beejay Silcox Read more: As Beautiful As Any Other by Kaya Wilson review – urgent and powerful trans memoir No Document by Anwen Crawford Giramondo publishing An experimental elegy for Anwen Crawford’s late friend, collaborator and fellow activist Ned Sevil, No Document weaves together personal loss with political and artistic commentary. Through these lenses, this polyphonic book-length essay makes a compelling argument for solidarity, resistance and rebellion. Crawford’s background as a zinemaker is evident through her inventive approach here – some pages have only a single line, and some simply an empty box. Part of the experience and pleasure of reading No Document is choosing how to. Crawford has taken risks with form, and it’s paid off – despite the book’s slim size, it’s expansive in thought and an utterly original work of creative nonfiction. – Giselle Au-Nhien Nguyen The Newcomer by Laura Elizabeth Woollett Scribe In her past books, Laura Elizabeth Woollett has dwelled on the actions of “bad men”. In The Newcomer, she turns her gaze from perpetrators to their victims. When a young woman is found murdered in the small community of Fairfolk Island, her mother is distraught. But the deceased wasn’t always easy to like, and her actions in her time on the island mean not many are inclined to delve into her death. Woollet poses many questions in The Newcomer, including what makes a sympathetic female victim, how grief can consume us, and where the line is drawn between loyalty to a place versus justice for a person. – Zoya Patel Read more: The Newcomer by Laura Elizabeth Woollett review – murder in a Pacific island paradise Complaint! by Sara Ahmed Duke University Press An Australian based in the UK, Ahmed is a founding figure of affect theory, as well as a highly regarded queer and critical race theorist. Complaint! is fueled by intimate experience: in 2016, Ahmed left her post at a British university over its treatment of sexual harassment. Complaint! comprises interviews with forty students, academics, and administrators variously involved with formal complaint procedures, not only around sexual harassment, but sexism, racism, and bullying. The result is a collective intervention full of humour and a sardonic intelligence, as Ahmed describes how sharing class notes is a way to recognise that “an incident, an event, a one-off, has a longer history”. She concludes by reminding us how a single act of complaint can set off a chain reaction, leading to the creation of collectives for shared experience, shared critique and, ultimately, shared change. – Declan FryTwo asylum seekers caught up in a mass stabbing attack at a Glasgow hotel have issued a high court claim against the Home Office and their accommodation provider, the Guardian has learned. The men, one of whom said he reported concerns about the attacker to hotel management the night before the stabbings, are also calling for an independent investigation. On 26 June 2020, Badreddin Abadlla Adam, a 28-year-old asylum seeker from Sudan, stabbed six people including a police officer at the Park Inn hotel in Glasgow before police shot him dead. One of the two asylum seekers now bringing a challenge lost his spleen in the attack and is on lifelong medication as a result. His asylum claim was refused in July this year and he is appealing against the decision. The other had supported Adam as he witnessed his mental health deteriorate after he was moved, along with 320 other asylum seekers, from self-contained accommodation into hotels at the start of the pandemic. On the evening before the attack, Adam told him that he wanted to stab people, he said. The asylum seeker reported this to hotel management and said he believed the threat was credible. The next day he was woken by the sound of the fire alarm and when he opened his bedroom door he saw people lying on the ground in pools of blood. This man is awaiting a decision on his asylum claim. Both men say they do not blame Adam for the attack because his mental health had declined sharply. But they expressed serious concerns about alleged failings by the Home Office and the housing contractor Mears. The evidence provided to the high court shows how tensions at the Park Inn hotel built before the attack. Many asylum seekers experienced worsening mental health. Some reported feeling dehumanised by their treatment and said if they raised concerns about mental health they were told to “open the window” or “have an orange” while others were told to return to their home country if they did not like Britain. Witnesses to the attack said they were traumatised and some had nightmares, PTSD and flashbacks. The asylum seeker who was stabbed said he was now fearful of going out and felt abandoned by the Home Office and Mears. The second asylum seeker said they were made to feel like criminals when interviewed by police. He told the Guardian: “I would like to see asylum seekers getting better treatment instead of being prisoners in hotels. I really do not blame Badreddin for what he did, he was in a very bad state. I blame the Home Office and I blame Mears. They did not listen enough.” Sheroy Zaq, of Duncan Lewis solicitors, who is bringing the high court challenge, said: “Vulnerable people continue to die whilst accommodated by the home secretary and her associated private contractors, and this will likely continue unless and until lessons are learned. All that the claimants seek, which ought to be uncontroversial, is that a lawful investigation takes place into such tragedies, as opposed to what appears to have happened to date; the home secretary marking her own homework by way of an internal and unpublished review.” Dylan Fotoohi, of Refugees For Justice, a group founded after the attack and an interested party in the case, said: “Thousands have suffered physical and psychological damage in these hotels. This tragedy was preventable. The underlying cause is the dysfunctional and unaccountable way asylum accommodation is managed. An independent inquiry is needed so that lessons can be learned.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Following the incident at the Park Inn hotel we commissioned an internal review to assess the circumstances, in line with routine procedure, however a Scottish fatal incident investigation remains ongoing. We take the welfare of those in our care extremely seriously.” Police Scotland assistant chief constable Steve Johnson said: “The circumstances are being independently investigated by the police investigations and review commissioner under the direction of the lord advocate, therefore we are unable to comment further.” Mears was approached for comment.Foreign ministers of the G7 group of rich democracies have warned Russia of “massive consequences” if it invades Ukraine and urged it to de-escalate its military buildup on its border. A communique from the meeting in Liverpool said the group reaffirmed its “unwavering commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the right of any sovereign state to determine its own future” and praised what it called Ukraine’s “restraint” as tensions grew. “Any use of force to change borders is strictly prohibited under international law. Russia should be in no doubt that further military aggression against Ukraine would have massive consequences and severe cost in response,” the statement said, after a weekend meeting dominated by discussion of Russia’s movement of weapons and troops to the border region. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said all forms of economic sanctions against Russia were on the table if it made an incursion into Ukraine, and hinted she may be prepared to look again at the UK’s laws against money laundering, seen by some as a way for Russian elites to stash their cash. She said an invasion would come with a “severe cost” for Russia. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, told Russian media on Sunday it was being demonised for moving its troops within its own borders and said Vladimir Putin had told Joe Biden in a video call last week that Russian troops did not pose a threat to anyone. Economic sanctions could include restricting access to global finance markets and setting new conditions on funding Russian government debt. Cancelling Russia’s Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany is also on the agenda. On Sunday Germany’s new foreign minister Annalena Baerbock said the pipeline will not be allowed to operate in the event of any new “escalation” in Ukraine, under an agreement between Berlin and Washington. “In the event of further escalation this gas pipeline could not come into service,” Baerbock told German television station ZDF, clarifying earlier threats made by Chancellor Olaf Scholz. Although all foreign ministers at the G7 – a gathering that collectively represents 50% of global GDP – were clear that they had to send the strongest possible signal to Putin not to invade Ukraine, there were differences of emphasis on the best kind of sanctions, and whether G7 domestic laws needed to be reviewed. Truss said the UK was considering all options, when asked if she was willing to launch a review of anti-corruption laws in the wake of criticism that London has acted as a haven for kleptocrats. “We do have very strong anti-corruption and money laundering laws in the UK, but let us be clear: when the UK has wanted to send clear messages and achieve clear goals, we have been prepared to use economic sanctions, so we are considering all options and together with our allies, including the US and our G7 partners, we have been very clear there would be severe consequences,” she said. It was not clear from her reference to “all options” how far Truss intended to go. EU foreign ministers in Brussels on Monday are likely to announce the start of a process to impose sanctions on the Russian private military contractor Wagner Group. Moscow denies Wagner is linked to the Russian state but has said the EU would face retaliation over any sanctions on its citizens. The move is being pushed forward by France, which is concerned by the scale of Wagner Group intervention in the Sahel region of Africa. US intelligence assesses that Russia could be planning an offensive on Ukraine involving up to 175,000 troops as early as next year. Moscow has denied it plans to invade and demanded security guarantees that Nato will not expand farther east or place its weapons close to Russian territory. In 2014 Russia seized the Black Sea peninsula of Crimea from Ukraine, prompting the west to impose sanctions. Truss said Iran had a last chance to come back into compliance with the 2015 nuclear deal. Foreign leaders in Liverpool exchanged notes on whether they believed Iran was being serious in seeking a deal in the talks in Vienna, or was instead playing for time. Negotiators from Europe, Russia, China, the US and Iran have stayed in the Austrian capital over the weekend to work on a possible text under which the US would lift sanctions against Iran, leading to Tehran’s return to the nuclear deal. “This is the last chance for Iran to come to the negotiating table with a serious resolution to this issue, which has to be agreeing the terms of the JCPOA [joint comprehensive plan of action],” Truss said. “This is their last chance and it is vital that they do so. We will not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon.” European diplomats claim that Iran’s behaviour cannot be seen as a true effort to secure a deal. It is likely that if talks do not make progress at the speed required by the US and Europe, a discussion at leaders’ level will be called to decide whether to refer Iranian non-compliance with the 2015 deal to an emergency board meeting of the UN’s nuclear inspectorate. That would signal the start of the final collapse of the deal. At the same time, however, diplomats stressed that some progress had been made over the past three days because Iran was no longer insisting that talks focused on drafts the newly elected government had prepared. The G7 members, joined by members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, spent the evening at the Beatles Museum, which has a Cavern club mockup inside, and went to Anfield, the home of Liverpool football club, for lunch.Sale produced an archetypal game of two halves in their Heineken Champions Cup win over the Ospreys to leave the Sharks’ director of rugby Alex Sanderson happy with victory but far from satisfied. Sanderson saw his team race into a 21-3 half-time lead, but they did not score after the break as their discipline imploded. Sale conceded a mammoth 18 penalties and received two yellow cards. It meant the Gallagher Premiership side missed out on a bonus-point win. The Ospreys went into this game on the back of hearing their hooker Ifan Phillips had suffered life-changing injuries in a road traffic accident and they struggled badly to start with but their response in adversity was admirable. “We are very happy with the outcome, but there are some things we could have done a lot better,” said Sanderson. “An 18-4 penalty count and playing with 14 men makes it tough. “We were clinical at times and back to our best with our physicality, but we couldn’t get a foothold in the second half and it was penalty after penalty. I’m disappointed not to score four tries because I felt we were good for it.” The Ospreys warmed up with Phillips’s name on the back of their shirts as fundraising efforts to support the 25-year-old in his post-rugby career continue. Phillips’s injuries mean he will not play again. The Ospreys head coach Toby Booth described the buildup to this game as an “emotional week” and his team were caught cold by Sale’s physicality. The Sharks’ power game was too much for the Welsh side to handle and Rohan Janse van Rensburg, Ewan Ashman and Jean-Luc du Preez all powered over in the first half. The watching Wales head coach Wayne Pivac would not have been impressed with two of his potential Test centres in Owen Watkin and Michael Collins both missing tackles for Van Rensburg’s try. AJ MacGinty kicked all three conversions with Gareth Anscombe booting an Ospreys penalty. A yellow card for Lood de Jager before the break for taking out Morgan Morris following repeated Sale maul infringements pointed to future Sharks problems and so it proved. In the second half, the breakdown became a total farce as both sides piled into the contact area knowing the Italian referee Andrea Piardi’s decision making was swinging back and forth. With the England flanker and captain Tom Curry and his twin brother Ben in their back-row, Sale were always going to be a menace at the breakdown, but they kept on conceding penalties. Tom Curry was forced off injured in the second half, but Sanderson allayed any serious concerns. “Tom is carrying an old man’s back at 23,” he said. “He took it through the autumn and if he needs a bit of time off to freshen up, we’ll give him that. “The breakdown got a bit messy and we could look to blame the referee, but we have to look at our own actions first.” The Ospreys were much better in the second half and had the dominant scrum, a platform from which they scored when the captain Rhys Webb threw a long pass to wing Luke Morgan who dived over in the corner. The Wales fly-half Anscombe was forced off at half-time and his replacement Josh Thomas kicked the conversion and a penalty. Ben Curry was the second Sale player to be sin-binned late on. But their defence saw them hold out for the win although Sanderson will know his team can improve significantly from this display. The England scrum-half Raffi Quirke thought he had grabbed a bonus-point try late on after chasing a long kick, but the score was ruled out even though he seemed to have beaten Collins to the ball. “It would have been magical to get a bonus point, but when you are betting on millimetres, it’s pretty desperate,” said Sanderson. His opposite number Booth said: “It’s been an emotional week, for sure. It wasn’t spoken about as a motivator but, in a perverse way, that performance almost epitomised Ifan as a guy. “He’ll be the first to say he’s not the tallest, but he’s plucky and I thought our performance was plucky. He always got stuck in and made the best of it. I suppose our performance looked a little bit like that.”Boris Johnson will deliver a televised address to the nation at 8pm on Covid booster vaccines amid growing concern about the highly-infectious Omicron variant. The prime minister’s intervention follows a further 1,239 cases of the variant being confirmed on Sunday in the UK – nearly double the number reported the previous day. There are major worries in Whitehall at findings by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) that having two doses of a Covid vaccine offers less defence against symptomatic infection from Omicron than the current dominant variant, Delta. Johnson is not expected to announce any new Covid restrictions. Cases have also recently increased to levels not seen since England’s third lockdown, with 58,194 new infections reported on Friday – the most since 9 January. The figure dropped on Sunday, reflecting the usual weekend effect, to 48,854. While ministers were relatively relaxed about higher case levels because the link between infection and serious illness – including hospitalisations and deaths – had been severely weakened, they now fear Omicron could have changed the equation. Earlier on Sunday, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, revealed there were patients being treated in hospital with Omicron. He told Sky News that the variant was “highly infectious” and that “very quickly Omicron will be the dominant variant in the United Kingdom and probably the rest of the world”. Zahawi said Johnson would be saying more on Sunday about speeding up the rollout out of booster jabs, adding: “It is now a race between the booster and that protection and the Omicron variant.” The number of true Omicron cases that have not been discovered or sequenced yet is likely to be up to 10 times higher than the number of confirmed cases, Zahawi also said.Paris, London and Brussels have dropped talk of a trade war and appeared to settle a dispute over post-Brexit fishing licences, but angry French fishers threatened to go ahead with a pre-Christmas blockade of British goods entering Calais. The European Commission and the French government signalled satisfaction with the result of an intensive fortnight of negotiations as the UK and Channel Islands governments agreed to issue 83 more operating licences before an EU deadline. The offer did not fully meet the demands of Emmanuel Macron’s government, however, and fishers in Brittany said they would go ahead with a planned blockade of Calais on 23 December. “Far from satisfying the professionals of the sector, this news exasperates the fishermen of Hauts-de-France, who feel both betrayed by the British government … and neglected by the European Commission”, the committee for maritime fisheries in the region said in a statement. “Movements will be expected, movements which will target the import of British products”. French vessels imposed a similar blockade at Calais, described at the time as a warning shot, in November. A vessel run by DFDS, a Danish shipping company, and a P&amp;O ferry were forced to wait outside the port, the biggest entry point to the continent for British goods. The EU commissioner for fishing, Virginijus Sinkevičius, had thanked the UK earlier on Sunday for respecting the deadline by which Paris had demanded additional licences for small boats seeking to fish in the coastal waters of the UK and the British Crown dependencies of Jersey and Guernsey. “I think it was a very important step achieved last night and I’m thankful to the UK that they respected a deadline that we set by 10 December,” he said. “The two weeks were very intensive, we’ve managed to bring over 80 additional licences now.” He said the European Commission and the French authorities would examine all applications to ensure they included the necessary evidence of having previously fished in the waters. The French minister for the seas, Annick Girardin, said the government would seek to assist those fishers who had not been successful in their applications. The government had previously made a range of threats over an alleged failure to respect the trade agreement by providing sufficient small boats with fishing licences for the waters around the UK, Jersey and Guernsey. Downing Street had insisted that sufficient evidence proving that applicants had previously fished in the coastal waters had not been met, but Macron demanded a “gesture of goodwill” by midnight on 10 December. French ministers spoke of cutting energy supplies to Jersey and applying tariffs on UK trade. The latest threat had been to start the dispute process in the EU-UK trade agreement, but other key member states with fishing interests showed a distinct lack of enthusiasm shown.Government whips are braced for a major rebellion by Tory MPs over new plan B Covid restrictions due to come into force this week, against a backdrop of anger over rule-breaking Christmas parties. The restrictions are set to pass – but only thanks to support from Labour. Ahead of the Commons votes on Tuesday on mask-wearing, working from home and Covid passports, these are the camps that are set to oppose at least some of the measures. Hardliners There are seven Tory MPs whose have become serial rebels on Covid restrictions, with their refusals to back the government stretching into double digits. Though they have not opposed every measure since the pandemic began last spring, they have generally judged ministers to be imposing disproportionately tough curbs that are not based on evidence. This hardline cadre of libertarians includes former cabinet minister Esther McVey and the chair of the 1922 Committee backbench group, Graham Brady. The latter wields particular influence among others in the party, and his standing up to Downing Street has helped embolden others to do the same. Other notable senior MPs who have held firm against what they see as unnecessary restrictions are William Wragg, the chair of the public administration and constitutional affairs committee, and Charles Walker, a member of two committees that look at House of Commons procedures and sign off restrictions for politicians, staff and others who work in the Palace of Westminster. Walker was so incensed about extending Covid regulations in March 2021 – a year after they had been in force – that he took to claiming he would carry around a pint of milk as a symbol of his protest. He said the milk could represent opposition to “the roaring back of a mental health demon brought on by lockdown”, “a loss of career or job or business” or “this country’s slide into authoritarianism”. The hardliners are of a view that the country must learn to live with Covid and that a cycle of fresh restrictions whenever a new threat is thrown up by the pandemic is not a sustainable way to live, nor the right way to govern the country. Vocal but tempered critics Then there are about three dozen Conservative MPs who take different issue with Covid restrictions. Some have raised concerns over the isolation policy for people identified as close contacts of a positive Covid case, citing the “pingdemic” last summer, while others have been more muted about domestic restrictions but feel strongly about barriers to international travel, whose efficacy has been questioned. Mark Harper, chair of the Covid Recovery Group, has been fairly agnostic on the recent reintroduction of compulsory masks in more settings, but much more vocal about the idea of vaccine passports. Steve Baker, deputy chair of the same group, has said the Conservative party needs to be truer to its belief in the freedom of the individual, and accused ministers of a “creating a miserable dystopia”. Another Tory MP – and a former health minister – Steve Brine, claimed the idea that ministers accepted the country would have to learn to live with Covid was “dead”. This group of vocal but tempered critics of Covid restrictions were sometimes more accepting of measures, but have become increasingly determined to speak out against the government’s approach in the run-up to winter, fearful that plan B is a slippery slope towards lockdown and concerned that people will not be able to see family and friends over Christmas. Newbie rebels While many Conservative MPs have supported all Covid restrictions, the number who will rebel this week is set to rise considerably. Previously fairly loyal and keen to keep No 10 happy and their ministerial hopes alive, some are preparing to rebel over plan B. Many are from the 2019 intake and include Lee Anderson, Matt Vickers and even Jill Mortimer – who was only elected in a byelection in Hartlepool seven months ago. Others are more resolutely opposed to the idea of vaccine passports, though they have been watered down by the government to include proof of a recent negative test result to gain access to some venues. However this has still not won over many. Another new-intake MP, Alicia Kearns, said she “cannot justify introduction of Covid-19 passports just in case and without the data”. Around six Tory MPs who act as ministerial aides are also known to be opposed to vaccine passports, and are either trying to get permission to miss the vote, given Labour’s support means it will definitely pass or, if not allowed, plan to abstain or vote against the plan – and be prepared to lose their job. Jacob Young, the new MP for the red wall seat of Redcar, is said to be among them.The UK’s Covid alert level has been raised, indicating substantial pressure on the NHS, amid concerns over the rapid increase in Omicron cases and a warning that the health service is “on its knees”. The decision to move from level 3 to 4 was taken on Sunday on the recommendation of the UK chief medical officers and NHS England’s national medical director. They said: “The emergence of Omicron adds additional and rapidly increasing risk to the public and healthcare services. Early evidence shows that Omicron is spreading much faster than Delta and that vaccine protection against symptomatic disease from Omicron is reduced.” Level 4 is defined by the government as “a Covid-19 epidemic is in general circulation; transmission is high and direct Covid-19 pressure on healthcare services is widespread and substantial or rising”. The alert level was moved down from level 4 to level 3 in May. However, the emergence of the Omicron variant has set alarm bells ringing, with the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) warning that even if the new variant causes less serious disease than Delta, it could lead to 5,000 people admitted to hospital a day, while the epidemiologist Prof Neil Ferguson said the total could be double that number. The chief medical officers referred to the fact that the NHS is already under pressure even before the full impact of Omicron has been felt, a point that was made in starker terms by other senior health figures on Sunday. Prof Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) from University College London, told LBC: “We’re talking about a hospital system that is already pretty much on its knees with the current level of activity, and that level of activity is going to go up dramatically and much worse than a normal winter. So you know, there is going to be a big problem.” Hospitals are expecting NHS England to declare a national incident within days, meaning decision-making will be more centralised. It will probably lead to routine operations being cancelled once more, adding to a waiting list that is already almost 6 million long, and staff repurposed. A senior NHS source said GPs would be told to massively ramp up boosters over the next two weeks, prioritising them over non-urgent appointments and reducing the number of face-to-face interactions outside administering vaccine doses. Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, which represents hospital trusts in England, said the health service was already “experiencing significantly higher pressure than we have ever seen before at this time of year”. He said he was “struck by how many long-serving [hospital] CEOs are saying that this is clearly and incontrovertibly the highest and longest sustained period of pressure they have seen in their careers. They are also worried that this is occurring before the traditional January winter peak and at a time when they don’t yet know what extra Covid caseload will come from Omicron. And there seems to be a good chance that an Omicron peak may fall in exactly the same early- to mid-January time period.” He said it was a mistake to just look at the Covid caseload for hospitals and wrong to compare the current situation, which had seen “pressure for months on end”, with January 2020 which he said was challenging but saw a peak which came and went relatively quickly. Hopson pointed to the latest NHS statistics, saying they showed it was the second busiest ever November for A&amp;E attendances and bed occupancy rates, with 11% occupied by patients medically fit to be discharged but delayed by insufficient social care capacity. He said this had partly been driven by a reduction in workforce which the NHS was also experiencing, losing staff to the retail, hospitality and logistics sectors which were paying sign-on bonuses and higher wages, or to early retirement or staff moving overseas.Anne Hidalgo, the French Socialist presidential candidate, has repeated her plea for her leftwing rivals to unite, saying the left risked collapsing amid the alarming rise of the far-right. “We’re at a critical moment for our democracy,” Hidalgo said before a rally in Perpignan. “The left is at risk of disappearing. Hate speech and xenophobia have saturated the airwaves for months.” Taking the stage, she appealed to other candidates on the left not to split the vote: “Wake up, see the danger that is facing us.” French voters felt “despairing and anguished” that the left was being drowned out of the political debate, she said. Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris, is polling at a historic low of between 3% and 5% for the first round of April’s presidential race. In a dramatic announcement on TV news last week, she said she supported a citizens’ vote in January to choose one candidate on the left who had the best chance of winning. The left has never fielded so many different presidential candidates at this stage of the race. They include the Greens’ Yannick Jadot; Jean-Luc Mélenchon of La France Insoumise, who has a more leftwing programme than the Socialist party; and the Communist party’s Fabien Roussel. All have so far refused Hidalgo’s plea. They insist they will run separate campaigns, despite opinion polls putting each of them at no more than 10% and unable to reach the second round of voting. Roussel said the problems of the left were far more deep-seated than just “a casting problem” of finding a joint candidate. “The problem of the left today is that it no longer speaks to the working class,” he said. There is panic among some Socialists. The combined leftwing candidates currently account for between 24 and 29% of April’s first round vote, compared with 43% 10 years ago. The left has made a strong showing in recent regional elections and there is a new generation of young leftwing and green mayors in major cities, but it is in difficulty on the national stage. The far right is becoming the country’s strongest force and has taken working-class voters from the left. Polls show it with at least 30% support with two major candidates. The traditional far right figure Marine Le Pen is running for a third time, but she has competition from the high-profile TV pundit Éric Zemmour, who has convictions for inciting racial hatred, and who has launched an outsider presidential bid, saying immigration and Islam will destroy France. Hidalgo warned of “merchants of hatred … suffocating France” with their “morbid fantasies” of intolerance. She said she would not let Muslims be scapegoated or sit back while racist policies were discussed. Emmanuel Macron is likely to declare his re-election bid next month. Polls currently show him making it to the final round of voting against either the right’s Valérie Pécresse, who has risen in the polls, or a candidate from the far right. Voters on the left took to the streets in Paris and across France this weekend to urge parties on the left to join the “primary of the people”, a citizens’ initiative for a vote in mid-January to choose one leftwing candidate with the best chance of winning. “It’s very demoralising that the left isn’t capable of making a decent showing in the presidential race, when growing numbers of people have taken part in climate marches as well as the Black Lives Matter movement, and when we want social justice and proper environmental protection,” said Emma, 25, a community manager for a health charity who lives in the suburbs south-west of Paris. At the Paris protest, many hoped a new figure would step into the ring: Christiane Taubira, a former justice minister and member of parliament who supporters would like to see become France’s first black female president. Taubira, who introduced same-sex marriage in 2013 when she served in the Socialist government of François Hollande, is also well-known for the 2001 law recognising slavery as a crime against humanity. She has been described by the professor of political science Rémi Lefebvre as “the moral conscience of the left”. A recent poll by L’Obs magazine found she was the preferred candidate of voters on the left, but she has not yet said whether she would consider running at this late stage and in difficult circumstances with the left splintered into different factions. The L’Obs poll found that 86% of leftwing sympathisers would like one candidate to stand for a united left. “The left is low in the polls and it is divided,” said Gérard Grunberg, a political scientist and director of the Telos website. “No force really wants to ally with another, there is no strategy ... What is fundamental is the disappearance of the centre left. For the first time since the foundation of the Socialist party more than a century ago, there is no force on the centre left.” Grunberg said the party’s current low score confirmed its poor showing in the last presidential election in 2017, in which Macron won over centre-left voters when Hollande failed to stand for re-election after his presidency was mired in rows and internal feuding over economic policy.John Midwinter, who has died aged 83, did much to transform telecommunications from a simple phone-based service in the 1970s to the full broadband and internet network that we have today. Before such services came from the privatised British Telecom, the state provider was the Post Office: during John’s time at its research laboratory (1971-84), he shaped the understanding, design and development of the first optical fibre communications systems and their introduction into the UK network. In the process he helped Britain lead the world in establishing optical communications as a fast-moving and competitive research area. When, in 1966, Charles Kao of Standard Telecommunication Laboratories proposed the idea of optical fibres – strands of glass as thin as a hair carrying communications traffic – the challenges were huge, and struck many as insurmountable. A full system called for the design of optical transmitters and receivers, reliable lasers to generate pulses of light, techniques to modulate and demodulate data, and a better understanding of the physics of data-carrying optical pulses propagating in glass. However, John, as head of what became the Post Office’s optical communications division, set about developing a complete system carrying live traffic. In 1977 the world’s first optical fibre system was installed between Martlesham and Kesgrave, in Suffolk, with members of his research team splicing fibres in the snow, sleet and rain, to successfully demonstrate the transmission of data over approximately 8km of fibre. The next problem was to significantly extend the length of these systems. This involved the use of mono-mode fibres of a much smaller diameter core, supporting a single path for the light to follow. Data-carrying pulses of light could be prevented from spreading, so allowing much higher data rates over longer distances. This went against conventional wisdom, which held that it would be impossible to join such thin, fragile fibres. However, by the early 80s, John’s group achieved this feat, sending data at four times the rate over a distance of 60km. British Telecom, as it was from 1980, stopped all work on competing technologies and in 1984 became the first telecommunication operator to switch entirely to single-mode fibre systems. The rest of the world soon followed, with the help of John’s textbook, Optical Fibres for Transmission (1979). As a result of his work, today more than 95% of all data is transmitted over optical fibres and more than 500m kilometres of fibre are installed each year on land or under the sea. In 1984 Eric Ash, head of the department of electronic and electrical engineering at University College London, recruited John as BT professor of optoelectronics. At UCL John focused his research on exploring whether photons could be used to carry out processing functions in order to design, for example, an optical computer. But while photons were excellent for transmission, electrons proved better for switching and other digital functions. By the early 90s, John returned to research on optical communications, exploring the use of multiple wavelengths or colours for the routing of optical information. He was elected to the fellowship of Engineering (now RAEng) and appointed OBE (both 1984), and became fellow of the Royal Society (1985). He succeeded Ash as head of the department in 1988 and a year later became Pender professor of electrical engineering (the Victorian cable pioneer Sir John Pender endowed the chair in UCL in 1885). John also served as vice-provost of UCL (1994-99) and president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (2000-01), and retired as emeritus professor in 2004. John was calm, logical, efficient in all ways, encouraging and respectful of well-reasoned opinions. The concept of procrastination was alien to him, and he was always supportive and generous with advice. Born in Newbury, Berkshire, he was the son of Vera (nee Rawlinson) and Harry (Henry) Midwinter. As Harry belonged to the fourth generation of Midwinters to run a corn merchant’s business, it was expected that John would follow this path. At St Bartholomew’s grammar school, John was a bookish child who hated team sports, and showed early aptitude for engineering, building model aircraft and cars in his spare time. Following school, John volunteered for national service with the RAF. There he became a radar instructor and broke with family tradition by going on to study physics at King’s College London, where he gained a first-class degree (1961). His first job was with the Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern, Worcestershire, carrying out research in nonlinear optics, which led him to work on the first ruby laser in the UK. He continued this research with the Perkin-Elmer corporation in the US, and in 1971 returned to the UK to take up his Post Office post. John met Maureen Holt through ballroom dancing as a teenager, and they married in 1961. Together they enjoyed travelling, hiking, planting their meadow, sharing a love of classical music and looking after several generations of Labrador dogs. In retirement, John became a passionate advocate for mitigating climate change, lecturing widely for the University of the Third Age (U3A). Maureen survives him, along with their four children, Timothy, Philippa, Kim and Piers, and five grandchildren. • John Edwin Midwinter, optical fibre communications engineer, born 8 March 1938; died 13 November 2021 • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. By the time John Midwinter began research work for the then state telecommunications provider, it was the Post Office rather than the General Post Office: the change came in 1969.Tuesday’s Premier League match between Brentford and Manchester United has been placed in doubt after a number of Ralf Rangnick’s squad tested positive for Covid-19. United won 1-0 at Norwich on Saturday, with a late penalty from Cristiano Ronaldo. Everyone who travelled to Carrow Road had tested negative in the last round of routine tests. However, on Sunday morning, a small number of positive lateral flow tests were found among the players and staff, who were all sent home. The rest of the squad trained outdoors and the schedule was adjusted, taking in individual and non-contact sessions. It is understood the Premier League has been notified of the results by United and it is not clear if Tuesday night’s match at Brentford will be able to go ahead. Last week, eight Tottenham players and five staff members had returned positive tests with Spurs’ matches against Rennes and Brighton postponed as a result. Their Europa Conference League game has not be rescheduled and could be forfeited. On Saturday, West Brom were hit by an outbreak, with four defenders testing positive before their match with Reading. Sheffield United’s clash with QPR at Bramall Lane on Monday has been postponed after the visitors returned a number of positive coronavirus cases and were left with with “insufficient numbers to fulfil the fixture”.Leading scientists have called for the vaccination of younger children to allow as many as possible to stay in school next year as Omicron cases rise dramatically across the UK. Prof Peter Openshaw, a member of the government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), said that without vaccinating children there could be further huge disruption to education and that health concerns about infection now outweighed initial justified caution in extending vaccination to five- to 11-year-olds. “There was more uncertainty earlier. It’s now becoming clearer that vaccination is generally safe and that it’s better to be vaccinated than to be infected,” he said. “To my mind it’s clear: the safest option is to be vaccinated.” Deepti Gurdasani, clinical epidemiologist and senior lecturer at Queen Mary University of London, said that schooling would “not be feasible” next year without extending the vaccination programme to primary school age groups. “There’s been no discussion of how we’re going to protect children in January when schools reopen,” she said. “The US has vaccinated five million children. The EMA [European Medicines Agency] has approved, FDA [US Food and Drug Administration] has approved, there’s no word from the MHRA [the UK regulator] which is quite stunning.” Openshaw said that there is some evidence that Omicron is reproducing more efficiently in younger age groups, meaning that the vaccination of children could be especially important. It is not clear whether extending vaccination to primary school children would be able to happen quickly enough to affect the oncoming wave of cases, which is expected to peak early next year. But Openshaw added: “The ‘too late’ argument is not a good one. We’d always prefer to have done something three months ago. The second best time is now.” The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) is currently reviewing data on Covid jabs for children over five as a “matter of urgency” and expected to give a recommendation if the UK’s medicine regulator gives the green light for vaccines to be administered to younger age groups. June Raine, chief executive of the MHRA, has said that it is “very likely” an assessment of whether to approve the Pfizer vaccine for children as young as five would be concluded before Christmas. The FDA authorised the Pfizer/BioNTech Covid vaccine for use among 5- to 11-year-olds in late October, and the EU’s regulator, the EMA, followed suit in November. Previously, the JCVI said that the use of vaccines for healthy children could not be recommended on health grounds alone, saying that children were at such low risk from the virus that vaccines would offer only a marginal benefit to them. This had to be weighed against the possibility of an extremely rare side effect of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines that causes heart inflammation. However, as more data has become available, including the vaccination of 5 million five- to 11-year-olds in the US with no reports of myocarditis or other red flags, the argument for vaccinating children has become more compelling, Openshaw said. “I’m very concerned about what the long-term effects of infection with Sars-CoV-2 will be on health and wellbeing for children,” he said. “We don’t know yet what twists and turns this virus might have.” Kit Yates, senior lecturer in mathematical biology at the University of Bath, said: “Once the MHRA have given their approval for the vaccine for five- to 11-year-olds we should be rolling out the offer of vaccination to that age group quickly. The evidence from the trials and the real world administration of the vaccine to children across the world have demonstrated it to be safe and effective.” Yates added: “Whilst children do seem, so far, to have suffered less sever consequence of Covid than older age groups, it is not the case that children do not get ill or die from Covid. Certainly, fears that new variants might affect children more severely, have focused attention back on the issue of vaccinating children for children’s sake rather than simply to protect others.”My husband, Peter Wilmers, who has died aged 72, was a pioneer of community greening whose work helped transform the Lancashire valley of Rossendale and inspired a national movement. A creative worker for the environment, he had a rare combination of strategic vision and an ability to get things done. In 1983, Peter moved as a planner from Norfolk to Lancashire to lead Rossendale Groundwork, a not-for-profit environmental charity based on local partnerships, supported by the Countryside Commission. Rossendale, a Pennine valley with high unemployment and a degraded landscape, was not home to the first Groundwork trust, but Peter, with energy and political skill, established the Rossendale organisation as a model of what Groundwork could achieve. Work focused on “New Landscapes” and “New Lives”. For 10 years, Groundwork was the third largest employer in the valley. Training schemes exceeded expectations; local footpaths and walls were restored; a derelict building became a visitor centre; and 22,000 trees a year were planted. Perceptions changed with community involvement. Peter played a major role in getting ministers to support a national rollout of Groundwork. The local MP, Sir David Trippier, emerged as a champion for the wider movement and the federation continues today as a national force for regeneration. Sporting his green suits and red shoe laces, Peter attracted the great and the good while pioneering many innovative programmes. He led Groundwork’s expansion into east Lancashire and Bury in the 1990s. In Blackburn, a derelict canal building became a flagship centre; a £5m grant transformed wastelands around a deprived estate. “Youth Works” programmes targeted youth crime. He set up the UK’s first business environmental audit programme, enabling small businesses to reduce their environmental impact and costs. This led to work in Hungary and Poland and conference presentations across Europe, in Beijing and New York. By 2003 Peter was managing four Groundwork organisations. At the North West Development Agency, to which he moved in 2005, he championed “green infrastructure”, proposing investment in functional green space to sit alongside other infrastructure programmes. He helped Natural England reveal and celebrate the economic benefits of nature. This approach, pioneered through Natural Economy Northwest, is now established. Peter retired in 2010. For 15 years he was a governor of Cribden House school, Rawtenstall. He actively participated on the board of Rossendale Leisure Trust and the Whitaker Museum until his death. Born in Clapham, south London, Peter was the son of June (nee Mecredy), who taught English as a foreign language, and John Wilmers, a QC. He attended and was influenced by Leighton Park, a Quaker school in Reading, from which he went on to study social science at Leicester University and postgraduate planning at Nottingham University. Talented and multifaceted, Peter sparkled. His legacy continues in the landscape and the people changed and inspired by his work. Peter was married first to Sue Biffen and then to Kath Long, with whom he had two sons, Tom and Harry. Both marriages ended in divorce, and Harry predeceased him. Peter and I met in 1987, and married four years later; he is also survived by Tom, his grandchildren, Hugo and Clara, and June.Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad are “fit and ready to go” for the pink-ball Test starting on Thursday in Adelaide, when England will attempt to end Australia’s perfect home record in day-night matches and revive a faltering Ashes campaign. The pair’s absence from the nine-wicket defeat in Brisbane dominated the post-match inquest. Anderson’s buildup period was limited after an early calf niggle on tour while Broad was overlooked for the subsequently mauled left-arm spin of Jack Leach. But Chris Silverwood, a head coach-cum-selector under mounting pressure after one victory in 10, has confirmed the pair’s readiness to face an Australia side who have won all eight of their floodlit Tests at home. “They are available, yes,” Silverwood said on Sunday, 24 hours before the team’s journey to Adelaide. “Jimmy will be fit and ready to go for the second Test, as will Stuart. [But] I have not told anyone they are playing yet. “The guys have already been training with the pink ball behind the scenes. And what we have got is a very skilful set of bowlers. We have talent and we still have two of the best up our sleeve as well.” Australia are also mulling a significant change: Josh Hazlewood has 28 wickets at 18 from five day-night Adelaide Tests but has flown to Sydney nursing a “mild” side strain. The pacy outswing of Jhye Richardson should step up here, if not Michael Neser after match figures of seven for 65 helped to beat an England Lions side in Queensland, despite 113 from James Bracey. David Warner, suspected if not confirmed to have sustained a cracked rib when struck by a Ben Stokes short ball in Brisbane, will likely be given painkilling injections and hidden in the field to open at a ground where he averages 80. If the 35-year-old really struggles in training this week, Usman Khawaja is the spare batter in the squad. England have endured three defeats in three floodlit Tests overseas to date, most recently a two-day thrashing against India in Ahmedabad this year when they completely misread conditions, picked frontline three seamers – plus Stokes – yet spin dominated and Joe Root claimed five for eight with his off-breaks. Like then, Silverwood and his captain appear to be placing huge stock in the pink ball swinging under lights for Anderson and his teammates. Whether one or both veterans slot back in, a possible all-seam approach looms after Leach’s 13 overs at the Gabba were ruthlessly targeted to the tune of 102 runs. Broad’s return, and potential reunion with Warner after dominating him at home in 2019, would mean one of Chris Woakes, Ollie Robinson or Mark Wood missing out. Each ultimately held their own in Brisbane, however: Robinson the standout with match figures of four for 71, Wood beating the bat 24 times and picking up two wickets, and Woakes the most qualified No 8 in the squad. Much will hinge on how Wood pulls up after 25.4 overs of sustained speeds, with Silverwood citing a need to look after their one “out-and-out pace bowler” given the absence of Jofra Archer and Olly Stone. If rested, however, it would mean a unvaried right-arm fast-medium attack and little by way of physical intimidation. Either way, no spinner would challenge an over rate that has already cost England’s players their match fees and the team five World Test Championship points. Silverwood stressed this was a collective issue in the field and claimed the points deduction hurt more than losing around £14,500 a man. Along with praising the chosen seamers, Silverwood praised Broad’s response to being left out initially. This appears to differ from his previous omission – in the first Test against West Indies in 2020 – when the now 35-year-old felt personally affronted and returned for a golden summer. England’s frustration stems chiefly from ragged periods in the field at the Gabba and a batting lineup that, while supposedly working to a mantra of big totals, has passed 400 just once in their last 19 innings. Root this year has scored 1,052 more runs than the next best Englishman, Rory Burns, and they remain the side’s only centurions in 2021. Asked about the dearth of batsmen – Root is the only England player to make a Test debut since 2012 and average more than 40 – Silverwood replied: “It is part of my role to take the criticism because the buck stops with me. I have no problem with that and it is how it should be, but we have to work with what we have got.” This represented an honest if stark admission for the head coach, who has spent two years planning for this tour but now finds himself hoping the possible vagaries of pink-ball cricket can level a series that Australia lead 1-0.Boris Johnson has long been considered a king of comebacks. And some Tory MPs hope he’ll continue that streak by managing to rescue himself from plummeting poll ratings in the wake of a string of Downing Street parties in defiance of Covid laws. The prime minister had tangled himself in knots by repeatedly denying any rules were broken before more reports and evidence emerged to suggest the opposite. First there was the video of No 10 aides laughing while they discussed a Christmas gathering on 18 December last year. Then Dominic Cummings, once Johnson’s closest adviser, promised pictures had been taken of parties, and so with bated breath critics of the government waited for them to surface. When an image was published on Sunday showing Johnson on a screen hosting a Christmas quiz for staffers tuning in from No 10 and at home, it was not quite the smoking gun some thought would finally skewer him, however. The Sunday Mirror image shows Johnson with two aides who were dressed up with tinsel and a Santa hat – not socially distanced from one another, and clearly engaged in a social occasion while mixing households. But it could have been worse. There have been other parties hosted in No 10 and Conservative party headquarters in which people drank copious amounts of alcohol, played party games, exchanged secret Santa gifts and socialised into the small hours, sources have told media outlets including the Guardian, Mirror, BBC and Times. Ministers will quietly breath a sigh of relief no pictures of these scenes have been leaked – yet. While Johnson’s attendance at the quiz broke the rules, according to Keir Starmer, the Labour leader and a former director of public prosecutions, Tory MPs think people will look at the photo and judge that it really shows him hosting a virtual quiz – a familiar sight during the pandemic. The staff, dialling in from other rooms in No 10 while drinking and not socially distancing, cannot be seen. On Sunday Nadhim Zahawi insisted the picture was just an example of Johnson “thanking his staff” and used it to play down the party scandal as “hype”. He told LBC: “On that front page, I think your listeners will look at that and see a PM in his office, with the two close people that work with him, with no alcohol, taking 10 to 15 minutes to thank and motivate his staff, who have been coming in because they can’t work from home.” Much damage has already been done, with mutinous MPs furious at the prime minister allowing a “one rule for them” narrative to take hold, from Cummings to Matt Hancock and more recently Owen Paterson. Johnson is teetering on the edge of favour with his own MPs; if further photos surface, they may push him over the edge.The ash is one of Britain’s most recognisable and common trees. Tall and elegantly canopied, it is also one of its most beautiful, with its pale, feathered leaves and its fruits – its “ash keys” – hanging from its branches like real bunches of keys dangling from a caretaker’s belt. The late emergence of the leaves of ash trees allows species such as dog violet and mercury to thrive beneath them. Woodpeckers, owls and nuthatches nest in them. Lichens, moss and liverworts grow happily on them. Friendly fungi – such as the marvellously named King Alfred’s cakes – flourish upon them. The National Trust reports that 30,000 ash trees on its land will have been felled this year owing to ash dieback. “Dieback” sounds like a gentle, seasonal withdrawal. In fact, ash dieback is a devastating disease caused by a fungus, Hymenoscyphus fraxineus, likely to have been carried into the UK on imported ash saplings in the early part of this century. A ban came on such imports in 2012 – too late to do much but slow the fungus’s spread. When affected by the gradually developing ailment, the leaves of the ash wither and blacken, and lesions develop on the branches; eventually the tree dies. The skeletal, bleached remains of ashes, denuded of their glorious foliage, is already an all-too common sight. The Woodland Trust predicts that ash dieback will eventually kill 80% of ash trees. The scale of this is hard to comprehend: the government estimates there are 125m ash trees in woodlands alone in the UK. English landscapes such as the Mendips and the White Peak, now ash-dominated, will be drastically transformed. And losing ashes means not only losing trees but the habitat they provide. The ash has an ineradicable place in European folklore. In Greek mythology, it was of ash felled from Mount Pelion that Achilles’s spear was made – the one he used to kill Hector in Homer’s Iliad. (Even now its hard timber is reckoned good for tough objects, such as hammers and walking sticks.) In Norse myths, a great ash, Yggdrasil, grew at the heart of the world. The Norns – the ancient female deities that allotted the fate of humankind – dwelt among its roots; the gods held their courts among its branches. The 18th-century English naturalist Gilbert White reported a folk remedy for children with weak or ruptured limbs, perhaps a late survival from British pagan beliefs. Climate change has helped the spread of arboreal diseases. A small percentage of ash trees appear to have immunity to the disease: it is here that hope lies for an eventual regeneration of the generously self-seeding ash, especially if the spread of the fungus is slowed as much as possible. Meanwhile, it is time to pay attention to, and make the most of, the noble ash, and perhaps do as Wordsworth once did, when he watched the moon “couched among the leaves / Of a tall ash, that near our cottage stood / Had watched her with fixed eyes, while to and from / In the dark summit of the moving tree / She rocked with every impulse of the wind.”An 11-year-old girl has died and several other people have fallen ill after apparent pest control chemicals were found at a block of flats in east London. Paramedics called in police on Saturday afternoon after reports of a girl unresponsive in a flat in Shadwell. She was taken to hospital and died a short time later. Other residents in the building reported feeling unwell and three people were taken to hospital, where they remained on Sunday, the Met said. It said the girl’s death was being treated as unexplained and a postmortem examination would be carried out. London fire brigade said it was called to the scene just after 7pm and discovered a number of chemicals believed to be used in pest control. The mayor of Tower Hamlets, John Biggs, said: “My thoughts and those of TH councillors are with the family and others in Sutton Street following the chemical incident in Nida House, E1, in which a young girl lost her life, others evacuated with some in hospital. We will support the families. A terrible tragedy.” The MP for Poplar and Limehouse, Apsana Begum, tweeted: “My thoughts and prayers are with her and her loved ones. I am following up to support constituents including everyone who was evacuated and in care of Tower Hamlets council.” A Met spokesperson said the block’s residents had been evacuated from the building as a precaution and were being looked after by the local authority. They said the chemicals would “be safely removed and an investigation will be carried out to determine how they came to be in the building. Enquiries into the circumstances are ongoing.”Last week, Emmanuel Macron became the first French president for more than 40 years to make an official visit to the town of Vichy in order to speak about its history. His purpose was to counter an insidious historical revisionism which is casting a shadow over France’s presidential election campaign. The far-right television pundit Éric Zemmour, who announced his candidacy a fortnight ago, has claimed that the Vichy regime gave protection to French Jews during the second world war, a falsehood that has been denounced and debunked by historians. The bleak truth of the round-ups and persecution that took place, said Mr Macron, must not be “manipulated” or “revised” for political motives. That this trip was felt to be necessary gives an indication of the disturbing extent to which extreme views are becoming normalised in French politics, where the centre of gravity has lurched to the right. Around 30% of French voters plan to cast their ballot next spring either for Mr Zemmour’s reactionary agenda or for Marine Le Pen. Denying Vichy’s crimes is part of a toxic nationalism which seeks to “save” French civilisation from the effects of immigration, and draws on white supremacist “replacement” theory to suggest that traditional French culture is under threat. To an alarming degree, this agenda has succeeded in setting the tone in the presidential race so far. The extent to which that continues to be the case may depend on the candidate for the Gaullist Républicains party, Valérie Pécresse, who recently won her party’s primary. Ms Pécresse, who would be France’s first female president were she to defeat Mr Macron, hails from the moderate, centrist wing of her party and has enjoyed a notable bounce in the polls since her victory. In a second-round runoff with the president, predicted one survey of opinion, she would score a narrow win. But to reach the second round Ms Pécresse will need to defeat both Ms Le Pen and Mr Zemmour, in what promises to be a tight three-way race on the right. In an effort to attract support away from both, and prevent defections from the more conservative wing of her own party, she has promised controversial constitutional reform to limit immigration and a referendum “on internal security and against Islamism”. In her victory speech she said she felt the “anger” of voters who felt culturally threatened by migration. Ms Pécresse’s closest rival in the primary race, Éric Ciotti, who has warned of a coming “war of civilisations” and called for a French “Guantánamo” for terror suspects, has been promised a central role in her campaign. The electoral maths – and Mr Macron’s proven ability to win support from centrist former Républicains voters – means that Ms Pécresse may feel obliged to tack in this direction, in what is becoming a race to the bottom on xenophobic policies. But it is vital that France’s traditional centre-right party remains within the political mainstream, and does not succumb to what has been described as the “Zemmourisation” of French political debate. This is all the more true given the disarray on the divided, failing French left, none of whose candidates have a realistic chance of reaching the second round runoff. Last week, the Socialist candidate for the presidency, Anne Hidalgo, suggested that if it could not unify behind a single candidate, the left risks becoming extinct as a political force. This is not a healthy state of affairs for one of the world’s most important liberal democracies. For her part, Ms Pécresse will naturally seek to navigate the most viable route to the Élysée in the spring. But as France swings right, it must be hoped that she does not sell her party’s soul in the process.Covid-19, we should know by now, is a moving target. In autumn the rollout of boosters to older age groups was contentious. Now they’re the single biggest focus. So why do boosters help so significantly compared with first and second jabs, and are we on a conveyor belt towards needing an ever-increasing number of top-ups? Even before Omicron, it was clear boosters would be required to maintain the levels of protection against infection, although protection against severe illness appeared to be holding up well. Vaccines prompt the body to make neutralising antibodies that intercept Covid before the virus infects our cells, but circulating antibodies can wane over time. Data from Israel, one of the first countries to vaccinate its population, showed a drop-off in protection against infection after only three months. It revealed that were people about 15 times more likely to be infected six months after their second dose compared with a few weeks after it. Even if most people remain protected against serious illness, this waning immunity presents a significant public health issue when a proportion of adults remain unvaccinated or have immune conditions that leave them vulnerable. Omicron has made the need for boosters more urgent. Mutations in the virus mean its spike protein now looks quite different from that of the original Wuhan strain that all current vaccines were designed to target. That in turn means antibodies from previous infection and vaccination will be less efficient at intercepting Omicron. Because they stick to the virus less vigorously, a higher quantity of antibodies is also required to compensate for them being less well matched. Studies show that a booster dose increases the levels of antibodies significantly above the level seen after two doses, which some hope means waning immunity will occur more slowly after a third dose, though insufficient time has passed to determine if this is the case. Early studies also suggest that the quality of antibodies is higher following a booster. The immune system continues to refine exactly which antibodies are selected and amplified based on subsequent encounters with the virus or vaccine, and studies suggest there is a broader, more potent immune response following a third dose. There is also reason for some optimism that vaccines may hold up better against severe disease than against infection. The immune system has a second line of defence in T cells, which attack cells already infected. These tend to stick around longer and they recognise parts of the virus that are more highly conserved, meaning Omicron’s mutations are less likely to throw them off the scent. So if antibodies are not good enough to stave off infection, T-cells can swoop in to bring the disease under control before it makes a person seriously unwell. Laboratory data looks encouraging, but real-world outcomes are being followed closely in South Africa, the UK and elsewhere to answer this question, which remains one of the biggest uncertainties about how this wave will play out. For now, vaccine makers are working on variant jabs that could be ready to deploy as soon as March, but tweaking current vaccines will leave the same vulnerabilities should Omicron in the future be overshadowed by another even more fast-spreading variant. The next generation of vaccines, scientists hope, will not only be a good match to circulating strains but provide far broader immune protection so that they are effective against mutations. One possibility is a vaccine specifically designed to trigger a T-cell response to the viral replication machinery as opposed to the spike protein, which scientists have suggested could result in immunity lasting years rather than months.The long-running and bitter row over language teaching in Catalonia has intensified after a family in the Spanish region was harassed and abused for seeking to ensure that a quarter of the lessons at the school their five-year-old son attends are taught in Spanish. The family’s actions have provoked an angry response from some Catalan nationalists who view their stance as an assault on the region’s language and culture. According to media reports, the family became the subject of a WhatsApp group that has suggested identifying the child and his parents. One person tweeted that their house should be stoned, while another called for the little boy to be shunned, adding: “The other children should leave their class when lessons are taught in Spanish. If we don’t react, they’ll kill our language.” At the end of last week, the Catalan high court ordered the regional education ministry and the head of the school in the town of Canet de Mar to take measures to protect the boy and his identity. During a visit to the school last Thursday, Josep Gonzàlez-Cambray, who serves as education minister in the pro-independence regional government – said he condemned “any kind of threats or violence”. But he criticised the Catalan high court’s decision to order that 25% of classes be taught on Spanish as “an intolerable attack”, adding: “The Catalan school model is a model of success, which guarantees us social cohesion, equity and equal opportunities.” Fernando Grande-Marlaska, the interior minister in Spain’s Socialist-led coalition government, has warned that “any threats to coexistence” will be investigated. Salvador Illa, a former central government minister who now leads the Catalan Socialist party, also criticised the attacks on the family and said schools need to obey the decisions made by courts. “This doesn’t go against Catalan; it’s about complying with rulings, and the [regional education system] still guarantees Catalan as the educational centre of gravity in Catalonia,” Illa said on Thursday. The Spanish right has seized on the episode as proof of anti-Spanish discrimination in Catalonia, where the separatist government attempted unilateral secession in 2017. Pablo Casado, the leader of the rightwing People’s party – which is leading the national polls but has just three MPs in the 135-seat Catalan parliament – said: “Today in Spain, we’re suffering a terrible case of linguistic segregation involving a five-year-old boy.” Casado said the Catalan government was practising “linguistic apartheid” and accused the Socialist-led minority government of “complicit silence” because it relies on the support of some Catalan nationalists in congress. The far-right Vox party, whose rise has been partly fuelled by the Catalan independence crisis, has called a demonstration outside the regional parliament on Tuesday evening. It said it would no longer allow “twisted separatism to continue assaulting the little boy and his family from Canet with total impunity”. Language issues have also featured in the central government’s efforts to get next year’s budget through parliament. Last month, the administration of Pedro Sánchez attempted to placate the Catalan Republican Left party – which heads the regional government – by proposing that at least 6% of streaming platforms’ content would have to be in Spain’s co-official languages: Catalan, Galician or Basque.Veteran TV anchor Chris Wallace signed off his Fox News Sunday show after 18 years to join CNN, dealing a blow to Fox’s news operation at a time when its opinion side has become preeminent. CNN announced shortly after his show ended that Wallace, who is 74, will join the streaming service CNN+ as an anchor. The service is due to debut sometime next year. “It is the last time, and I say this with real sadness, we will meet like this,” Wallace said on Fox on Sunday morning. “Eighteen years ago, the bosses here at Fox promised me they would never interfere with a guest I booked or a question I asked. And they kept that promise,” he said. Wallace was a veteran broadcast network newsman, working at both ABC and NBC News, before the late Roger Ailes lured him to Fox with the promise of his own Sunday show. Wallace is known for his methodical preparation and willingness to ask hard questions of all guests. He persevered even when Murdoch-owned Fox News shifted further right with Donald Trump’s administration, as news shows often soft-pedal issues reflecting badly on the now-former president while comment shows can tend to mislead the public on facts relating to US elections, the 6 January insurrection by extremist Trump supporters or coronavirus and vaccines, sometimes veering into offensive insults and racial bias. Wallace was the first Fox News staffer to moderate a presidential debate, in 2016. His 2020 performance attracted criticism for not reeling in Trump when he broke debate protocols in trying to steamroller Joe Biden. Wallace generally co-existed with Fox’s opinion side and infrequently took them on publicly, although in 2017 he said it was “bad form” when opinion hosts bashed the media. “I have been free to report to the best of my ability, to cover the stories I think are important, to hold our country’s leaders to account,” Wallace said Sunday. In CNN’s announcement, he said: “I look forward to the new freedom and flexibility streaming affords in interviewing major figures across the news landscape.”Conor Gallagher wasn’t even born when Crystal Palace last managed to beat Everton at home but a scintillating performance from the England midfielder finally ended that sequence despite a late fightback from Rafael Benítez’s side. Such is Gallagher’s influence on the club he joined from Chelsea on a season-long loan that he has now been involved in almost half of all Palace’s goals so far this season, with six goals and three assists. His superb second strike of the afternoon in stoppage time almost lifted the roof off Selhurst Park as Patrick Vieira’s side ended a run of three successive defeats in style. How Everton must wish they had a player like Gallagher in their ranks. “What’s extraordinary is we are talking about the 90th minute and he’s been running all over. To find the energy to score that goal took a lot,” admitted Vieira. “The challenge for him is to maintain that level.” While another lacklustre performance from Benítez’s side that saw an ineffective Richarlison show his displeasure after being hauled off with more than half an hour to play almost ended with something to show for it after James Tomkins had made it 2-0 to Palace, the Everton manager insisted the Brazilian forward had been carrying a calf injury. “At half-time we could see he was limping but he said he wanted to try the second half,” he said. “We always try to do the best for the team.” With Lucas Digne again omitted, Benítez started with Ben Godfrey at left-back once again and selected midfielder André Gomes for his first league start of the season. The spirited second-half comeback against Arsenal on Monday may have eased some pressure on their manager but Benítez knew that relinquishing a record that has stood since Andy Preece scored the only goal of the game here in October 1994 would certainly not help his cause. Palace had managed only six goals in 10 previous home matches against these opponents since then, having last beaten Everton in 2014 twice in the space of five months at Goodison Park.Jordan Ayew’s 43-game wait for a Premier League goal is another unwanted statistic Vieira would definitely prefer to put behind him and that drought should have been ended in the seventh minute. Not for the last time, Jordan Pickford came to Everton’s rescue. A twisting run by Gallagher ending with a left-footed shot that dipped just over the bar was a portent of what was to come, before Pickford beat away Wilfried Zaha’s effort at the near post. Demarai Gray’s shot from distance that was easily gathered by Vicente Guaita midway through the half was at least a sign of attacking intent from the visitors. Gomes’s volley after Godfrey had made a rare foray forward could easily have broken the deadlock but instead it went straight at the Palace goalkeeper. As well as an unbelievable work ethic, Gallagher has also developed a penchant for scoring goals since moving to south London. His fifth of the campaign duly arrived before the break when Everton failed to clear and Ayew showed great coolness to allow him to sweep the ball past Pickford. Everton’s players were sent out early for the second half presumably hoping for a repeat of their comeback against Arsenal. But it was Palace who resumed control, with Gallagher going close to his second when he nodded Zaha’s cross just wide. A stunning piece of control that saw the 21-year-old instantly bring down a long pass and almost set up Zaha took the breath away, although Gallagher was unable to direct his next effort on target after another lung-bursting run. Benítez’s response was to withdraw Fabian Delph and Richarlison, who had somehow managed only 10 touches in 57 minutes of action. The Brazilian left the pitch shaking his head, with the away supporters making their displeasure clearly heard. Their misery seemed complete five minutes later when a corner from Will Hughes found Tomkins unmarked at the back post and the centre-back gleefully rammed in his first goal for two years. Yet rather than just roll over, from somewhere Everton suddenly found their fighting spirit. A Gray free-kick went just over the bar before Salomón Rondón bundled home when Abdoulaye Doucouré’s effort deflected off Joel Ward. Another error from Ward almost gifted them an equaliser, only for a heroic block from Jeffrey Schlupp to deny Andros Townsend a goal against his former club. Despite their struggles, Everton had already picked up more points from losing positions than any other side and their opportunity to complete another comeback came when Anthony Gordon found himself in acres of space and bearing down on Guaita’s goal. But the Spaniard was equal to his shot and Palace gratefully hacked clear, with Gallagher deservedly having the final say in stoppage time when he punished Séamus Coleman for trying to take a quick free-kick by finding the top corner from 25 yards out.Thank you very much for joining me. Here is a match report from Ed Aarons for you to enjoy. Vieira: “It was a big team performance. We stick together and to win a game we needed to win took a lot of personality and courage. I am really pleased for them. “Today was a hard process to go through but that is how you improve. “There is still a lot to come from him [Gallagher]. We need to manage his strength and find out the best way to manage his energy. For us he is a fantastic player to have as it gives everything for his team.” A decent hit. Gallagher: “I think it was a fantastic performance from us. It was a bit nervy after they scored but we defended superbly. “I’ve felt like we’ve been unlucky recently. We wanted to give the fans a performance today and we did. “I love it, them [the fans] singing my name is a great feeling for me, it gives me confidence. “We are not where we want to be in the table so hopefully we can pick up some more points (this week).” I was pretty shocked by how poor Everton were today. I thought they would come into this game bouncing after beating Arsenal but instead invited Palace onto them, allowing a team who had lost their past three games to build their confidence up against a ragged defence. Another great day for Gallagher and Palace. The midfielder looks like he is set for bigger and better things than Palace in the future (no offence Eagles fans). He kept Palace ticking and scored with two fine finishes, the second being beyond impressive. All of Palace’s goals came from mistakes in the Everton defence, which will be very frustration for Benitez but the result was a very fair one as Palace were superior from start to finish. Palace look to kill some time in the corner but they give away a foul. Coleman decides to whack the free-kick immediately, only hitting it about 20 yards where Gallagher picks it up before picking out the top corner with a beautiful curling shot from the edge of the box. 90+2 mins: Townsend goes to the floor looking for a foul in the Palace half but nothing is doing for him, much to his chagrin, instead the hosts get a throw in order to kill some time. More needle as Holgate flies into Benteke on the left flank, resulting in a Palace free-kick. 90 mins: Guaita gets his finger strapped up. Not the best time to suffer an injury. Clyne comes on for Mitchell. Five minutes added on ... 88 mins: Benteke flies into Coleman on the right touchline, catching him on the top of the foot. Not Benteke’s best work but he avoids a booking. 86 mins: Benteke drives into the box and then pulls a cross back but Everton just about manage to clear. They quickly break down the other end through Gordon on the right, who dribbles into the error and shoots at Guaita who palms it into a dangerous area and the ball lands at the feet of a defender who clears. 84 mins: Palace clear a free-kick but Coleman is there to stop it the counter by diving on top of the ball and handling it. Inexplicably, he is not booked for his cynical efforts. 82 mins: Gallagher is on holding his right foot after a few knocks. Godfrey the latest to catch him. Despite sitting there for a good minute, no one has bothered to come on to try and treat him. 80 mins: More pushing and shoving as Gomes takes down Zaha and then Gallagher in quick succession. Palace are irked by the Portuguese’s illegal efforts, especially his shouting at Gallagher on the ground. 78 mins: Gallagher plays a corner short, getting it back on the edge of the box but his shot is turned behind by a defender’s boot. The next corner is more traditional but Benteke’s header ends up going behind him rather than toward goal. 76 mins: Everton have a chance level! Ward is caught in possession by Godfrey inside the Palace box, before pulling it back to Rondon who lays the ball into Townsend’s path but his shot is deflected wide. Gray takes a poor touch and then cleans out Ayew in response, catching him on both feet with a lunge. Gray is, understandably, booked. 74 mins: A double change for Palace as Hughes and Edouard are replaced by Schlupp and Benteke. Brad Wilson emails: “As an Evertonian I feel badly for Gordon. He always gives 100 percent and seems to really care and play hard — unlike several others I could name — but he does not get enough time. At this point I would play him and Braithwaite and Simms and the other kids. How could it be worse?” 72 mins: Everton are back in the game but Richarlison just looks even angrier on the bench. Chin up, mate. Doucoure goes into the book for a foul on Ayew and then does his best to do a Jimenez by moaning at the referee for an extended period. Game on! Rondon controls the ball in the box, holding it up before laying it into Doucoure’s path - his shot is deflected back to the striker who slides in the goal. 68 mins: Pickford has been over to the side for a big gulp of water or something of that ilk. I would have thought he has a bottle in his net, so I wonder if he was washing painkillers down or something. Gray gets a free-kick up and over the wall from 30 yards but it dips just over the bar. 66 mins: Gordon picks up a loose ball and drives down the right, before fizzing in a low cross which Guehi turns behind. Unsurprisingly, the corner comes to nothing. I fear we could be going through the motions for the final 25 minutes. 64 mins: Everton’s counter-attacking style is based on the defence being competent but they have let the side down for the two goals. Oh well. Hughes swings in a corner from the right, which is flicked on to the back post where Tomkins is lurking in acres of space and he jabs home after inadvertently controlling the ball on his thigh. More poor Everton defending. 61 mins: Richarlison is now sat at the back of the dugout eating his shirt. He does not look happy. He gets to watch as Gray curls a potentially dangerous free-kick out for a goal-kick. 59 mins: Richarlison was anonymous for an hour. On the one hand, his performance does not merit him being kept on but, on the other, Everton’s style would not help any striker. 57 mins: Everton are going for Plan B. It seems to involve Solomon Rondon and Anthony Gordon. Delph and Richarlison depart. Neither of those going offer seem pleased with Benitez’s decision. 55 mins: Hughes excites the crowd with some skilful twists and turns in his own half to bamboozle the Everton midfield. Holgate ends the fun with a Peter Kay style ‘ave it, which goes behind for a goal-kick. Down the other end ... Ayew clips a pass to Gallagher the other side of the defence, he controls the ball and fires a shot from a tight angle, which Pickford turns behind. 53 mins: The ball is lifted into the box for Gallagher, who controls it after pushing Keane out of the way, allowing him to lay it into Edouard’s path but his toe-poked effort does not make it as far as the goal. 51 mins: Ward gets the ball back from a throw-in and then whacks it straight into the main stand. Not the best attempt at a clearance from the Palace skipper. 49 mins: Townsend twists and turns away from Mitchell, forcing the left-back to bring him down. Zaha whips in a cross from the left which finds Gallagher eight yards out but he can only divert his header wide. 47 mins: Ayew whips in another dangerous cross but it defeats both attackers and defending as it goes out for a throw. “Jose to Everton?” asks Mary Waltz. “No. Nyet. FFS no. Hell no.Noooooooooooooooooooooo. nevah, nevah, nevah.” So, that’s a maybe? Here we go again! Our man at Selhurst. Palace have been pretty dominant from the first minute as Everton hope for the best on the counter attack but they are yet to threaten in any meaningful way, as they play without much in the way of ambition. 45 mins: Two minutes added on. “Sure,” says Peter Oh. “Patrick Vieira may have transformed Crystal Palace, but today they don’t need to be better than ever. They just need to be better than Everton.” Aye, it ain’t hard. You’d think Everton would be on a high from beating Arsenal but instead they currently look incredibly mediocre. 43 mins: Benitez will be ripping out whatever hair he can find after that goal. The attempts were impressively amateur. I would have been shouting abuse for a good two hours if any of my teammates cocked up like that. Holgate gets into it with Ayew because Everton are making up for a lack of quality with plenty of needle. Everton have about three chances to clear the ball but fail to do so in pitiful fashion. The ball ends up with Ayew in the box and he pulls it back for the the onrushing Chelsea loanee to calmly tuck into the corner from eight yards. 40 mins: Palace win a corner on the right after Ayew’s cross is blocked. Hughes wanders over to take it and swings a cross to the edge of the six-yard box where it is met by a defender who clears. 38 mins: Edouard charges down a Keane clearance to give the crowd something to cheer but it comes to nothing. 35 mins: Crystal Palace have not threatened Pickford since the early Ayew chance. They play some decent stuff but really need to be more incisive if they are to get the win here. 33 mins: Makeshift left-back Godfrey marauds down the wing and swings in a dangerous cross which Gomes meets on the volley but once again Guaita does not need to move an inch to save it. 31 mins: Gallagher is dispossessed facing his own goal on the halfway line, he claims a foul is involved but the referee does not; Everton break down the pitch, as Gray takes control of the ball and drives inside, only to skim a low shot into the arms of Guaita. 29 mins: Edouard has not really got into the game thus far, which is a concern for a Palace side struggling to convert chances. I would like to see him play on the centre backs, rather than dropping deeper as he keeps doing. 27 mins: A long ball is sent up for Richarlison to control under pressure from Guehi; the Brazilian takes it down but uses his arm to do so. Down the other end ... Palace win a corner, which is sent into the box by Gallagher. The ball is cleared to Guehi about 15 yards out but his shot is deflected wide. 25 mins: Zaha is unhappy with the referee about something or other. Moments later he cleanly clatters into Delph but then they both partake in a bit of pushing and shoving for good measure. The referee pulls the two players and captains in for a chat, allowing them to all make up and be friends again. What a lovely sight. 22 mins: Benitez comes out of the dugout to have a word with Townsend as he looks to tweak a few things to get Everton into this match. 20 mins: Zaha has his first run of note, he cuts in from the left and fires a low shot at goal but it only makes it as far as Holgate’s right ankle. 18 mins: Everton enjoy their first break of the match but it ends when Townsend is bundled out of play on the right. Everton are here to play on the counter, so we can expect plenty more of this. 16 mins: Gallagher takes the subsequent free-kick which makes its way over the wall and towards the bottom corner but Pickford grabs it with ease. Down the other end, Gray decides it is time Everton have a shot at goal, so does so from distance but it is straight down Guaita’s throat. 14 mins: Richarlison sprints back to clatter into Hughes who heads the ball forward before hitting the deck. Palace get the free-kick 3o yards from goal thanks to Richarlison’s missplaced exuberance. 12 mins: Gallagher takes the ball from Edouard 20 yards from goal, he spins and gets it out of his feet before flashing a shot over the bar. Palace very much on top. Efan Ekoku describes Everton as “timid”. Ayew sprints down the right and sends in a fine cross for Edouard to attack but he does not connect with the ball and Everton manage to clear after a little pinball in the box. 10 mins: Palace look the more aggressive side, as Everton are feeling their way into the game. The Toffees have not even considered threatening the Palace backline yet. 8 mins: Ayew is slipped through by Edouard, before whacking a shot at goal from inside the area only to see Pickford’s boot repel it. 6 mins: The two back fours consist of seven Englishmen and one Irishman. Graeme Souness will be very pleased. 4 mins: Gray bursts down the left flank but gets crowded in the corner. He manages to get a weak cross into the box, which is easily cleared. Gomes is on the deck after getting a finger from Kouyate in the eye. One of those that looks innocuous but really ruddy hurt. 2 mins: Palace have the best of the opening exchanges but there is little to write home about. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! Very much a crisp day for football in south east London. You could not ask for much better conditions in December. I assume by the end of the 90 minutes, people will be talking more about this match than the F1 championship. “Two years living in Italy in my youth made me a Roma fan,” emails Eric Peterson. “The 1984 European Cup final made me an Everton fan. The Circus Maximus that Jose Mourinho has created at Roma makes me sad. Jonathan Wilson’s observation that the next club Mourinho runs into the ground could be Everton makes me angry. The knowledge that Farhad Moshiri is fully capable of falling for the Specious One’s snake-oil charm and opening the Goodison gates to his medieval managerial rampage makes me nauseous.” These are Mr Wilson’s views: The gaffers. Andros Townsend is back at Selhurst Park. He seemed to find it very frustrating playing under Hodgson where defending was more important than attacking. He has a new lease of life at Everton as he looks like a winger once again. Seeing as Everton are playing, some proof that I am a versatile professional. Still no Lucas Digne for Everton ... Will Hughes makes his first start for Palace following his summer move for Watford. He is joined in the starting XI Edouard, who is preferred to Benteke. Crystal Palace (4-3-3): Guaita, Ward, Guehi, Tomkins, Mitchell, Kouyate, Hughes, Gallagher, Ayew, Edouard, Zaha Subs: Butland, Kelly, Clyne, Riedewald, Schlupp, Eze, Olis, Matten, Benteke Everton (4-3-3): Pickford, Coleman, Holgate, Keane, Godfrey, Delph, Doucoure, Gomes, Gray, Townsend, Richarlison Subs: Begovic, Kenny, Iwobi, Gordon, Gbamin, Branthwaite, Rondon, Simms, Onyango It is 14th v 18th in the Premier League form table, which does not give us much reason to get excited on paper. Crystal Palace and Everton are, however, two pretty interesting sides, I promise. Palace have been completely transformed under Patrick Vieira since the former Arsenal man replaced Roy Hodgson in the summer. The team have gone from the kings of tedium to become an attacking threat, but they do not have a striker suitably prolific to make the difference in the box. Christian Benteke has four goals to his name but plenty more chances missed. If Vieira can get the Belgian to re-find the composure he enjoyed at Aston Villa, it could complete this Palace side, otherwise he could be desperately asking for money to spend in January. Everton are unlikely to splash much cash in the winter window, too. Investment at Goodison Park has slowed this season - there was little spent over the summer and that has showed in their form. Demarai Gray has rightly earned praise for his efforts but there have been few others to impress this season for the Toffees. They come into this off the back of defeating Arsenal at home, which should give the team a morale boost and could make this outing a far more entertaining affair. Let’s hope for a classic!As a boy, one of the first records I bought was a single called Upsetting Station by Dave Barker, a Jamaican singer. It used the rhythm of the Wailers song Duppy Conqueror and began with an announcement: “This is the Upsetting Station recording – the news as it happens.” Back then, I didn’t know what a producer did or even what a producer was, but I recognised there was something special going on with this record. It sounded really different and it fascinated me. Soon after, I heard the Wailers’ Small Axe and I noticed that it was also produced by Lee Perry. I was still at school at the time and I felt that something innovative was happening with those records. Just instinctively I sensed that. Then, around 1974, there was an album called King Tubby Meets the Upsetter at the Grass Roots of Dub, which was really popular. It had some serious musicians playing on it – Vin Gordon, Tommy McCook, Bobby Ellis. That’s when I started to take more notice and realised that the role of the producer was to shape the sound. The sound of the records Lee made in his Black Ark studios in Kingston in the 1970s – songs such as Police and Thieves by Junior Murvin or One Step Forward by Max Romeo – was just incredible. He loved the sweet soul side of reggae, singers like George Faith. There is something fascinating and hypnotic about the production on those songs and that came from Lee himself – his character. At that time, he produced some of the greatest reggae records ever made. Nothing comes close to them. We first met in 1983 and started working together the following year. He came from Jamaica with a load of tapes he wanted to finish. After we did that, he started to record for me at my studio, Ariwa, in east London. We did three albums together in 1984, but only one, Mystic Warrior, was released. Lee was hard working and hugely productive – we worked 12-hour days, 10 in the morning to 10 at night. That was one of the things I learned from him - you have to put in the hours. We did a UK tour together and made a documentary for Channel 4. It was a busy time and I was happy to be close to him as an apprentice. Lee brought out the best in people. When I started working with him, I noticed that my records sounded better. It was some kind of magic that rubbed off on you. He could be tricky, of course, but no more tricky than the average Jamaican reggae producer. They were all tricky. You had to be to survive. The rules of the reggae business are vague. It’s not straightforward. We became friends and stayed friends for a long time, which I don’t think was the case with too many people. You had to know how to work with Lee. He wasn’t easy. He definitely had a destructive streak and he could be a lot of trouble because he was naturally unpredictable. He was the Upsetter. Still, there was never a dull moment when he was around. There was one time he was chatting with some musicians outside in the sunshine and, every few minutes, he would jump up, move a few feet to the side, and then sit down again. He did this two or three times, before he got really angry and started shouting at them: “Listen! Why do you keep standing on my shadow?” That was pure Lee. It was part of his personal Obeah and he believed in that stuff. He once put a spell on a local Jamaican musician who had run off with his [then] wife, Pauline. That was round the time he set fire to the Black Ark studios. A lot of musicians were bothering him for money. I think the pressure of it all just got too much. He was a deep, dark soul. People say Lee was mad, but I don’t think he was any madder than most. After a time, it became a kind of performance for the press, for white people generally. He realised they would take more notice of him if he put on an act. That, too, was a survival strategy. He had to be smart. And he was. I spoke to Lee two weeks before he died. He was getting tired and weak – he was an older man and things were starting to fall apart. I know it wasn’t Covid, but no one knows for sure what happened. That’s pure Lee as well. I honestly don’t know why he was so brilliant and I’ve thought about it a lot. He was just unique in every way, someone who could turn anything into music. And he believed there is a spirituality to everything. He was a mystic. Totally. All I can say is that I had never met anyone like him and I don’t expect to again.Maybe this is the way forward for rugby as a spectator sport. Pick two teams pretty much out of a tombola, mix Lions and World Cup winners with hastily-recruited academy kids and then watch them collectively deliver a cheerfully unscripted antidote to Covid defeatism. Despite neither side being remotely at full strength this was a crazily entertaining contest by most other measures. Given Munster had around 34 individuals unavailable following their Covid-hit trip to South Africa, and had not played for seven weeks, the outcome will also be viewed as a minor miracle in Ireland, whose teams have had a properly epic European weekend. To Connacht smashing Stade Français, Ulster conquering Clermont and Leinster thumping Bath can now be added this unexpected Wasps walloping. A currently luckless Wasps will justifiably point to the 25th dismissal of their captain Brad Shields as a major turning point but the future, on this evidence, could be bright for the visitors, who had five debutants in their starting lineup and a similarly callow bench. They still had sufficient nous to take full advantage early in the second half when the home side were reduced to 13 men and a try bonus point was the cherry on the top for the delighted travelling fans. Ian Costello, the Munster academy coach in charge of the first team for the day, described it as “extraordinary and “special” and his players could be rightly proud of the way they weathered a challenge which would have floored many others. Even scraping together 23 players in the first place proved tricky for both teams, with almost 60 players ruled out between them. Munster have never dipped this deeply into their academy well and Wasps were almost as hamstrung, missing 18 through injury before recording eight positive tests on the eve of the game. Jacob Umaga, Sebastian de Chaves, Elliot Stooke and Tom Willis were all ruled out on the eve of the game following their final round of Covid testing, leaving their director of rugby Lee Blackett fearful that he might not be able to raise a side. “We only had 25 to pick from, that’s all we’ve got left,” said Blackett. “It’s been a difficult 48 hours. This time yesterday I couldn’t see this game going ahead.” Anyone turning up in Coventry unaware of the fraught buildup would have left wondering if rugby is always this bonkers. A madcap game veered wildly in terms of its momentum, the unfamiliarity of many combinations proving a recipe for chaos even without the referee Romain Poite’s enduring love of a vigorous breakdown contest. Poite’s key decision, though, was the dismissal of Shields, whose upright tackle on a charging Dave Kilcoyne was adjudged to be worthy of red even though the Munster player was rising towards him at the last. At first glance it looked a possible yellow card but slow motion replays tend to be less forgiving and Wasps suddenly had another yet massive forward hole to fill. Both coaches also had cause to wince at the injury toll, with Wasps now anxiously awaiting injury updates on Nizaam Carr and Gabriel Oghre ahead of this weekend’s scheduled trip to Toulouse for which Shields is now likely to be suspended. Munster, in turn, will be hoping the shoulder knock Joey Carbery suffered after a thumping tackle from Robin ‘Bomber’ Hislop is not as bad as it initially looked. For the likes of Scott Buckley, officially named the star of the game, Patrick Campbell and Daniel Okeke, however, this was absolutely a day to remember. Buckley, scorer of Munster’s fourth try which secured a priceless bonus point, made a striking impact at hooker while Campbell, a law student at the University of Limerick, showed decent pace in bursting through a midfield hole for his own debut score. The experience of Andrew Conway, Keith Earls, Tadhg Berne and the skipper Peter O’Mahony was also instrumental, not least O’Mahony’s brilliant cover tackle on a flying Thomas Young which set the early visiting tone. A sidestepping Alfie Barbeary, starting his first game since March, finished off a helter-skelter passage of play to put his side ahead 7-6 after Shields’ departure but either side of half-time the visitors took a grip on the contest via tries from Earls and Campbell. Wasps, who also lost Barbeary at half-time with a hamstring twinge, were occasionally their own worst enemies, a loose midfield pass gifting a score to Conway but ultimately it was the 21-year-old Buckley, helped by a forward pass from Beirne, who popped up to complete one of the more auspicious away days even in Munster’s fabled European history.After a season of intense, turbulent, and controversial yet gripping racing, Formula One almost unfeasibly found aspects of every element for its denouement in the desert. With Max Verstappen’s victory at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix decided in taking the lead from Lewis Hamilton on the final lap of the final race, he believed he had sealed his first F1 world championship. His reaction and that of his Red Bull team was one of unbridled joy while Hamilton and Mercedes were left disconsolate and convinced the win that had been in their hands had been unfairly snatched from their grasp, leaving the greatest prize in motor racing potentially in the laps of the lawyers. In a season already marked by drama this finale simply could not have been scripted nor will there be consensus on how it played out. Inevitably it ended in protests to the stewards grinding on long after the trophies had been awarded and the fans departed. The stewards rejected the protests but more wrangling may lie ahead with Mercedes having lodged an intention to appeal against the decision, and with the right to take their case to the court of arbitration for sport. As the fireworks went off at Yas Marina, Verstappen celebrated with tears in his eyes while a similarly emotional Hamilton held his obvious disappointment in check but having been consoled by his father Anthony, offered sportsmanlike congratulations to his rival. For Verstappen should he maintain his grip on the trophy, this was the culmination of a lifelong dream, achieved in the white heat of competition against the best driver of this generation in what has been a superb season. He can be rightly proud in winning it although he is still only 24 and becomes the first Dutchman to have won the F1 world championship. He was the youngest driver in the history of the sport on his debut aged 17 in 2015, and has the potential to go on and win many more. A more mature, complete driver now, Verstappen’s youthful excesses have been largely curbed and his judgement is more circumspect although he remains an aggressively confrontational driver, uncompromising with his elbows as Hamilton discovered this season. This year he has taken 10 wins, delivering some relentlessly confident and controlled drives for some dominant victories. He was unbowed and entirely unintimidated going up against the seven-times champion Hamilton, supremely confident in his own ability to do so. His appetite to race, to compete, is fierce. His victory was made all the more remarkable such has been the level of competition from Hamilton who was at the top of his game. Their relationship, initially one of mutual respect, has deteriorated as the intensity has grown and the accusations between teams have flown. This was a conflict fought on many fronts, a maelstrom with the two drivers locked in a battle of wills at its heart, growing increasingly fractious and ending on a similarly discordant note in Abu Dhabi. Hamilton, Mercedes and many fans felt that their driver had been the victim of a decision making process that had been influenced by Red Bull and cost Hamilton the title. After taking the lead with an electric getaway Hamilton had enjoyed a comfortable pace advantage. He held it despite cutting a corner as he was driven wide when Verstappen attempted to retake the place. The stewards deemed it acceptable for Hamilton to do so which was a debatable decision but one dwarfed by what later transpired. Hamilton had maintained his lead through the pitstops and had even seen off a late surge from Verstappen who had taken an extra stop for fresh tyres to try and chase down his rival. The race looked all but won as Hamilton held a solid gap only for a remarkable final twist. A late crash for Williams’s Nicholas Latifi brought the safety car out on lap 53, with five to go. Red Bull immediately pitted Verstappen for fresh tyres but Mercedes left Hamilton out to maintain his track position. As the laps ticked down the FIA had announced lapped cars could not overtake to move them out of the way, leaving a five-car buffer between Hamilton and Verstappen, enough to ensure Hamilton would almost certainly hold his lead to the flag. Then the FIA race director Michael Masi was contacted by Red Bull team principal Christian Horner. “Why aren’t we getting these lapped cars out the way?” he said. “You only need one racing lap.” Shortly after which the FIA then approved the five cars in question could unlap themselves, removing them from between Hamilton and Verstappen. However, had they allowed all the lapped cars to unlap themselves there would not have been time to complete a final racing lap. Within which arcane and apparently arbitrary calculation lay the ire of Mercedes. Instead it left one lap of racing on the restart, a sudden death, single-lap shootout between the pair and Verstappen’s fresh tyres paid off as he passed for the lead at turn five to take the place and the win. The Mercedes team principal Toto Wolff, objected to Masi. “No Michael, no Michael no, this isn’t right ... Michael!” he said on the radio, and his team issued two protests after the race, relating to the safety car procedure. The key issue was whether protocol was correctly followed and the level of discretion Masi had to interfere within the framework set out by the regulations. Both protests were rejected, over four hours after the chequered flag. The win, for the moment, remains the Dutchman’s as does the title with Hamilton denied for only the second time since 2014. Certainly the drama, the controversy was apt, indeed almost inevitable given how the season has been fought but the way it played out in Abu Dhabi left an aftertaste of acrimony and bitterness in many quarters, and F1 facing the fallout from a finale which will doubtless rain long and hard.Joe Biden has asked the US environmental protection agency (EPA) to investigate what role the climate crisis might have played in the deadly tornadoes that killed scores in Kentucky and several other states this weekend. Experts have said that tornadoes with such intensity are rare later in the year during colder seasonal weather, and that Friday night’s storms, which included one tornado tearing a path of more than 225 miles across Kentucky, appeared to be an anomaly. In remarks on Saturday addressing the devastation, Biden said he wanted to know to what degree the climate crisis might have been a contributory factor. “The specific impact on these specific storms, I can’t say at this point. I’m going to be asking the EPA and others to take a look at that,” the president said in an afternoon briefing in his home town of Wilmington, Delaware. “But the fact is that we know everything is more intense when the climate is warming. And obviously it has some impact here.” Climate analysts have long studied links between a rise in global temperatures and the increasing intensity of unseasonal severe weather events around the world, including more powerful hurricanes, heatwaves and stronger and more widespread flooding and wildfires. On Sunday, Deanne Criswell, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema), was asked in a CNN interview if she thought the climate crisis intensified the power of the tornado that traveled more than 200 miles. “I think it [the incident] is incredibly unusual. We do see tornadoes in December, that part is not unusual. But at this magnitude I don’t think we’ve ever seen one this late in the year. But it’s also historic. The severity and the amount of time this tornado, or these tornadoes, spent on the ground is unprecedented,” she said. She added more generally on extreme weather: “This is going to be our new normal, and the effects that we’re seeing from climate change are the crisis of our generation.” Scientists have been wary of attributing the frequency and intensity of convective storms that can produce tornadoes to climate change, in part because historical and observational data around tornadoes is relatively limited. In simple terms, that’s because tornadoes are relatively small and can easily go unreported, Michael Tippett, a professor of applied mathematics at Columbia University and co-author of a study published last month by the American Geophysical Union, has explained. “In linking climate change to extreme weather like hurricanes or extreme rainfall and flooding, some connections are easier to make than others,” Tippett said. “Making the connection to tornadoes is the hardest of all.” In September, Richard Allan, a professor of climate science at the University of Reading and lead author of an alarming report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the world’s leading authority on climate science, warned that each fraction of a degree of warming was crucial. “You are promoting moderate extreme weather events to the premier league of extreme events [with further temperature rises],” he said. Experts in the US agree. Friday’s storm was “one word: remarkable. Unbelievable would be another [word],” according to Victor Gensini, meteorology professor at Northern Illinois University. “It was really a late spring type of setup in the middle of December.” The Associated Press contributed reporting.Good morning. The Queensland border has reopened to the fully vaccinated after nearly five months as WA prepares to announce its reopening plan. The US grapples with the aftermath of devastating tornadoes. And Russian missiles have been spotted near Ukraine border. A person in NSW has been admitted to hospital infected with the Omicron variant of Covid-19, the first Omicron patient to be hospitalised since it arrived in Australia last month. Meanwhile, Queensland throws open its borders today, with thousands expected to queue to enter the state and authorities are urging drivers to be patient as they conduct checks. And the WA premier, Mark McGowan, is finally announce his state’s reopening plan today. It is the last jurisdiction in Australia to do so. The tornadoes that hit the US on Friday are feared to have killed at least 100 people. On Saturday at least five central and southern US states reported deaths after what Joe Biden said was “likely to be one of the largest tornado outbreaks in our history”, with an estimated 22 tornadoes touching down. Dozens remained unaccounted for on Sunday as rescuers worked overnight searching for survivors in a trail of destruction from Arkansas to Kentucky. Biden has asked the US environmental protection agency to investigate what role the climate crisis might have played. Experts have said tornadoes with such intensity are rare later in the year during colder weather, and that Friday night’s storms, which included one tornado tearing a path of more than 225 miles across Kentucky, appeared to be an anomaly. The Guardian has gathered photos of the aftermath. Foreign ministers of the G7 group of rich democracies have warned Russia of “massive consequences” if it invades Ukraine and urged it to de-escalate its military buildup on its border. The British foreign secretary has said all forms of economic sanctions against Russia are on the table if it makes an incursion into Ukraine. But this does not seem to be stopping Russia. A sighting of Vladimir Putin’s notorious Buk missiles on their way to the frontline suggest Russia is inching closer to being ready to launch a full-scale ground invasion. Australia After a man who bludgeoned his teenage girlfriend to death escaped a murder charge by arguing he had been provoked by her tales of infidelity, the Queensland government decided to step in. But a decade later, the government’s reforms have done little to stop men from successfully arguing they are guilty of manslaughter, rather than murder, on the grounds that they were provoked. The government is on track for deficits totalling nearly $240bn over four years, according to Deloitte Access Economics, marking an estimated improvement of $100bn since the last budget. Primary teachers in Victoria say children have not only suffered academically from lockdowns, they have also missed out on two deeply formative years of socialisation of school. Upgrades to the Newell Highway near Goondiwindi on the Queensland-NSW border are changing the way water flows across the floodplain and affecting farms and ecosystems, according to local residents and experts. The world Paris, London and Brussels have dropped talks of a trade war and agreed to issue more post-Brexit fishing licences. But the offer did not fully meet the demands of Emmanuel Macron’s government and fishers in Brittany said they would go ahead with a planned blockade, claiming they had been “abandoned by the European Commission”. Naftali Bennett is to make the first official visit by an Israeli prime minister to the United Arab Emirates since the two countries established diplomatic ties last year. Globally, the superyacht industry is booming – and the number of vessels under construction or on order worldwide has hit a new record. Recommended reads Amanda Gorman, who became the youngest inauguration poet in US history when Joe Biden was sworn in as president, says she is attempting to “preserve the public memory of a pandemic” in a new collection published this week. It was hard enough being a long-distance dad. But when Covid hit and travel became more difficult, Xand van Tulleken worried about not being there for his son. Over time though, he learned to let go of his guilt. “It’s useful to have a moment as a parent where you can do so little you’re forced to sit back and question what – at its core – your role is.” From experimental elegies to political manifestos, Guardian Australia critics and staff have selected the 25 of the best reads of the year. Listen For the past two and half years, domestic violence awareness advocate, mother and victim-survivor Roia Atmar has been chronicling her life after abuse for the podcast Tender. In this episode Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to Atmar about the complex intricacies of what it means to live with abuse, and her journey from survival to advocacy. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport In a sparse gym in one Sydney’s most disadvantaged areas, Mayor Chagai is not only teaching basketball but also transforming Australia. Chagai, who left his village in South Sudan at the age of seven and wandered across three countries before arriving in Sydney in 2006 as a 22-year-old refugee, wants to teach his players not only how to dribble and dunk a ball but how to study and work and take their place in society. He is trying to develop not just good basketballers, but fine human beings. Media roundup A Victorian woman accused of forcing her daughter to marry a stranger who later murdered the young bride has pleaded not guilty to coercing her daughter into the marriage, the Age reports. In the Northern Territory, some patients are waiting up to three years for surgery, according to NT News, as the health system struggles to stay afloat. Coming up South Korea’s President Moon Jae-in visits Australia to meet Scott Morrison and will host a press conference in Canberra at 11.15am. The national broadband network will announce plans to switch to 100% renewable electricity by the end of 2025 and use electric or hybrid cars where possible by 2030. And if you’ve read this far … Want to give someone a cookbook this Christmas? Cookbook-obsessive Max Brearley dives into where to shop, how to pick the right book, and why you should look beyond the pictures. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.The woolly thinking Last month Jack Leach was out for dinner in Brisbane with Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad when a local approached them. “Hey guys,” he said, “I just want to wish you the worst of luck at the Gabba.” So far, so tedious, but then the man added: “It’s going to be a green seamer.” This amused Leach, who was thinking: “I’m not sure that’s the best sledge to two of the greatest bowlers that England have ever had”. The joke was on that gloating Aussie, until it wasn’t – because the pitch was indeed a greentop, and England somehow omitted both their old maestros. Anderson, OK: save him for Adelaide, where he has a far better record. But Broad?! He loves Brisbane, he relishes a scrap, he lives for the Ashes, and when he fills in the form for room-service breakfast, he writes “David Warner, on toast”. England had to pick Broad, had to bowl first, had to keep it simple, had to play to their strength. The floppy batting When England were enjoying their best moment, 220 for two with Joe Root and Dawid Malan cruising along at the close on Friday, the predictor on CricViz was still saying they’d be all out for 298. It seemed harsh, but was all too fair: they made 297. Since time immemorial, they have always had a collapse up their sleeve, and this one began even before the second new ball. Again and again, their batters were bamboozled by the bounce: of their 20 wickets, 13 were caught in the cordon from keeper to gully. Three of those nicks came off Cameron Green, the gangling greenhorn who threatens to fix Australia’s one traditional weakness – not producing all-rounders. The shoddy fielding Ashes to Ashes, rust to dust – if Warner don’t getcha, Travis Head must. England gave both of them gifts by dropping catches and missing run-outs. And the price they paid came in more than mere runs. Fielding is not just fielding: it’s a marker of morale, professionalism, pride and togetherness. Of the elements of the game, it’s the easiest for the underdog to shine at – as New Zealand have shown, all the way to the World Test Championship. The leaky bowling England’s specialist seamers, never seen before as a unit and given no runs to play with, acquitted themselves well in the circumstances. Mark Wood was rapid and unlucky, Ollie Robinson forensic as ever, Chris Woakes respectable if mild-mannered. But Australia still scored far too fast: their innings of 425 took only nine more balls than England’s 297. They helped themselves to eight sixes while conceding none. They picked on poor Leach, and even bullied the normally bullish Ben Stokes. After five months out, England’s talisman leaked runs and bowled several blatant no-balls. He’s not the messiah, then, just a very rusty guy. The woolly thinking (again) Root is usually good at giving interviews straight after defeats, perhaps because he’s had a lot of practice. He is always likable, largely honest, and quick to take responsibility (are you paying attention, prime minister?). But he slipped up this time: by insisting that he’d been right to bat first, and to leave out both Anderson and Broad, he ended up defending the indefensible. He talked about “lessons to learn” while showing he hadn’t managed to see what they were. If he and Chris Silverwood were managing a football team, they would have been sacked three times this year. But all is not lost – yet. The pink ball is a leveller, and for the first time it will feature twice in the series. The next two venues are Adelaide and Melbourne, the Australian grounds where England bowl best. The last Test is at Hobart, where Australia have lost two of their last four. Those are the three England have to win (they gave up on Sydney, where the ball turns, the moment they spurned Matt Parkinson’s promising leg-spin). Haseeb Hameed, Ollie Pope and Jos Buttler have all shown some intent. If they can turn their 20s and 30s into 120s and 130s, and Root can extend his batting masterclass, and Stokes can be himself again, and Anderson and Broad can manage a swansong, we could just witness a contest.And that’s IT for Sunday nights on Strictly, and we’ve got the final three we predicted when Robert Webb left the show two months ago and we knew we were lining up for a three-way Grand Final - AJ and Kai, John and Johannes, and Rose and Giovanni. Thank you for joining me for a lovely season of Sunday fun, I will obviously be back next Saturday for the GRAND FINAL, which starts at 7pm and is lining up to be an amazing show. Give me your thoughts in the comment box – who do you WANT to win, and who do you think WILL win? I’ve also kicked off my annual poll for the winner on Twitter if you fancy joining in – you can find me @heidistephens, so come and say hello and cast your vote. Also if you’re waiting to watch the smoking wreckage of a high emissions clunker that can’t quite accommodate a large family, our Prime Minister is up next. Then Top Gear is on afterwards. See you next week for the Grand Final, whoop whoop! Hx Nancy and Rhys say lovely things about each other and the Strictly experience, including FRIENDS FOR LIFE. ’It’s good to cry, it’s good to feel,’ says Rhys. ‘Strictly makes you feel things, you feel so much and sometimes that’s overwhelming.’ Cry it out, Rhys, we’re all here sobbing along with you. Honestly, we’re all going to need to rehydrate after next week’s Final. Bring Dioralyte. Rhys and Nancy take to the floor for their final dance, to ‘Never Gonna Give You Up’ by Rick Astley. A dancefloor classic. I’m gutted for Rhys and Nancy, they’ve been amazing contenders and he should be hugely proud of how far he’s come – he started out all legs and arms, and now he’s an exceptional dancer. All four judges save John and Johannes, although it’s clear that it was (genuinely) a very tough decision that none of them wanted to make. Which means RHYS AND NANCY are leaving Strictly. Shirley would have saved them too, so that’s pretty conclusive. And now it’s JoJo’s turn to Jive. This time I’m going to block out the dreadful music and focus on the technicalities. The harder thing is blocking out Johannes and watching John – Johannes has incredible stage presence and is mesmerising to watch. I think the thing I love about this most is the sheer joy on John’s face - he’s got nothing to lose and he’s giving it everything. If he goes out tonight, it’s on the highest of highs, but on the basis of that performance, I’d say he had the edge over Rhys. What happened to the musical interlude? It was supposed to be Mabel, but she never showed. How strange, does anyone know? I was really looking forward to that. ANYWAY, Rhys is up first in the dance-off. I loved this Samba last night, it was great fun and definitely the best Samba we’ve seen this season. Rhys is the Latin god we’ve been waiting for, although I would say that this footwork isn’t quite as polished this time round. Time for another montage! I’m afraid montages WILL be included in next week’s Bingo, so please come prepared. I didn’t get a proper chance to examine AJ’s frock last night - how fabulous is that? Loving the arm pompoms. ‘Kai has ignited something inside me that I have not felt in years,’ says AJ. Bit early in the evening for that kind of thing, but I’m here for it anyway. Well, there we are. I think that’s the right call based on last night’s performances, and I’m delighted for Rose and AJ that they’re through to the Grand Final – that’s very well deserved. As for John and Rhys, they were incredibly close on the leaderboard last night – John and Johannes scored 39 to Rhys and Nancy’s 38. So it’s hard to know which of them the judges will save – this could well come down to a Shirley vote. EEK. So who is joining John and Johannes in the dance off? AJ and Kai are safe, which means RHYS AND NANCY are in the bottom two. ‘I love being on your show, Anton,’ says Craig witheringly as Anton blathers on about nothing. I love him. Ooh, time for a judges’ montage! ‘Craig, you are obsessed with me we knoooow,’ from Motsi was one of my highlights. Rose’s reaction to being in the Final is so joyous - she’s SO excited. It’s Gio’s fourth time but he’s never won, but 2021 is definitely Italy’s year - Eurovision, the football thing, Guiseppe in Bake Off. It HAS to be Giovanni, surely? Rose and Giovanni are safe, and JOHN AND JOHANNES are in the bottom two. I’m not hugely surprised, but realistically being up against Rhys and Nancy is their only chance of staying. If it’s AJ and Kai in the dance off with them, JoJo will almost certainly be going home. So who is the first couple safely through to next week’s Grand Final? Interesting to note which dances they’re lining up for the dance-off – we can tell from the outfits. Samba for Rhys, Jive for JoJo, Quickstep for AJ and Argentine for Rose. Last night on Strictly: an absolutely MASSIVE semi. Brilliant dancing all round, tens being thrown around like confetti, many of them justified. Usually two dances means cutting corners, but very clearly all our couples had been working their sparkly butts off. It was very much appreciated. Highlights: Motsi’s afro, John Whaite’s ‘I feel like I’ve been dipped in UHU and rolled in Claire’s Accessories’, AJ and Kai’s super-hot Rumba, Rose and Gio’s Argentine fabulousness, Rhys’s Samba and Nancy’s swan knickers. Lowlights: other than choosing Coldplay for a Jive, I don’t think there were any. It was just the right length for a liveblogger, had a great mix of dances, a few emotional moments, and we were all Bingo drunk by the end. My kind of Saturday night. Tess in a fabulous hot pink frock with dangerous thigh split , Claudia in a leopard print catsuit and black jacket ensemble. Love both. And we’re OFF! Tonight’s opening pro dance is called *checks notes from the BBC* ‘The Library’, and features a medley of ‘It’s Oh So Quiet’ by Noise For Pretend, ‘This Is How We Do It’ by Montell Jordan and ‘Boom! Shake The Room’ by DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp; The Fresh Prince. If this sounds like A Lot, throw in Aljaz in a beret and Neil in an ugly tank top leading a street dance crew, proving that People Who Like Books Can Also Be Cool. Sigh. Incidentally Montell Jordan is often the cool down track at my Tuesday night aerobics class, so this is making me want to stretch my hamstrings. Tonight’s Countryfile Casual Weatherperson is the sublime Stav Danaos, in 80s purple neon plaid and stonewashed denim. With those sleeves rolled up and an extra button undone, he’d qualify for the 2022 Countryfile Casual Weather Calendar. 7/10 - you had your chance Stav, but you blew it. I’m not angry, just disappointed. Evening all, and welcome back to our very last Sunday Night Results of the season! I’ll miss this little end-of-weekend interlude, although I’d like to register a polite request for the BBC to could put Countryfile back in the pre-Strictly slot every Sunday next year. This liveblog isn’t the same without sheep tupping, the Countryfile Casual Weather and John Craven aggressively hawking a calendar featuring an acorn superglued to a squirrel. Tonight we’re saying goodbye to one more couple, leaving just three for next week’s Strictly Grand Final. It’s sad but necessary, and all four remaining couples should be hugely proud of how far they’ve come. I’m reasonably confident that Rose will be through to next week after last night’s two dances, but the dance-off could be any two of the other three. If you’ve seen a spoiler, please keep it to yourself. Also I was looking at the line-up for the Christmas Show earlier, which looks brilliant this year. As usual we’ll open a liveblog you can all have a party in the comment box, but due to Covid regulations you all have to lie about whether it actually happened. Kick off is at 7.20pm, so please join me then! And that’s Strictly done for our penultimate Saturday – I’ll be back tomorrow at 7.20pm for our very last Sunday Night Results Show, so please come back then. Thank you for joining in and being sparkly and brilliant as always, enjoy the rest of your Saturday! Hx The dancing is over! Phew, that felt like a marathon. With both sets of scores added together, we’ve got AJ And Kai and Rose and Giovanni drawn at the top of the leaderboard, and Rhys and Nancy currently at the bottom. So now it’s over to you now guys, but how do you choose? All four couples belong in the Final. It looks very much like it will be Rhys vs. John in the dance off tomorrow, but it’s impossible to call how that might go - it will all come down to that final performance. I’m already tense. Sebby’s verdict - Rhys was the best and Rumbas are boring. Flo went to bed after three dances, because being five is exhausting. Scores: 10,10,10,10 - DRINK. Motsi thought it was the dance of the season, and Shirley wanted to put it in a basket and keep it forever. Anton thought it was unbelievable - it was serene and calm and amazing. Craig thought that was a dance that belonged in the final. Love a traditional Argentine, and I love hot Latin Gio in guyliner even more. Some really gorgeous accents in this from Rose and you can’t fault the connection between these two. The wafty legs in the middle are amazing and she climbs up and down Gio like an extremely elegant rat up a pole. Outstanding, I was mesmerised by that from start to finish. Their second dance is the Argentine Tango to ‘A Evaristo Carriego’ by Eduardo Rovira. Rose has a great track record with dances that require acting skills, but I’m interested to see if she and Giovanni can break out of their ‘best mates/mild crush’ space to deliver the intense connection of an Argentine Tango. Particularly without much time for rehearsal – it’s a big ask in a two-dance week, but the standard tonight has been INCREDIBLE. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for John and Johannes. Johannes is crying. DRINK. Craig wanted more retraction in the kicks but otherwise amazing. Motsi loved how John took the brakes off and it had great attack from beginning to end. Shirley loved how not-safe that was - John simmered, bubbled and boiled and it was absolutely superb. Anton thought it was marvellous and the sychro was great, he loved it. John and Johnannes are on top of the world, in a CGI sense anyway. Loving the matching sparkly tops and this Jive is great fun, but John has a few tiny timing issues at the beginning. Nice leg retraction and some lovely kicks and flicks - another dance that would have benefitted from a couple of days of extra rehearsal, but an amazing effort. LOVED that. Incidentally, a Coldplay Jive is an absolute no from me. Their second dance is the Jive to ‘Higher Power’ by Coldplay. It’s an oddly middle-of-the-road choice for a Jive from these two, I was very much hoping for something a bit more…extra, especially after Adele in round one. Have John and Johannes been possessed by the spirit of Radio 2? I’ve seen a lot of discussion about the main issue John faces, which is being paired with Johannes – as two men dancing a lot of side-by-side synchro moves, you can’t help but compare them in a way you probably wouldn’t with a traditional male/female couple. So it would be helpful if perhaps Johannes could dial down the details a bit in this Jive and give John a chance to shine. I’ve just looked up ‘the full bifta’ and it means going for it and giving it your best. Every day is a school day, no? Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for AJ and Kai. There are only two paddles available this evening, apparently. Anton goes full Len - he loved the lovely lines and the ‘full bifta’ - I’m not even sure what that is but I want some. Craig congratulates AJ on an amazing achievement, it was a difficult dance. Motsi loved the connection, the dance came together perfectly. Shirley bows to AJ in awe, she loved the nuances and the tracking of AJ’s legs and feet. Lovin AJ in sparkly chiffon, and despite the excess of ankle fog this Rumba is strictly post-watershed. Some nice shaping and lovely leg work from AJ - she’s got great fluidity and poise in this dance and she and Kai are smoking hot. Kind of sad they don’t snog at the end, not gonna lie. Their second dance is the Rumba to ‘Show Me Heaven’ by Maria McKee. We’ve not any truly brilliant Rumbas this year, possibly because the Rumba is a hellish nightmare of a dance that mostly involves moving around the dancefloor like a human slinky. But if any couple is going to deliver something sizzlingly hot, it’s these two. I’ve got my smelling salts at the ready just in case. Scores: 9,10,10.9 - a total of 38 for Rhys and Nancy. Shirley’s going full shimmy and she’s not even wearing a sports bra, it’s pure danger. Anton thought it was a marvellous effort, it had amazing rhythm through the body and the hips apart from a clunky bit. Craig thought have Rhys absolutely smashed it, even though it needed a smoother bounce. Motsi could see how hard Rhys fought for that Samba and he deserves a huge well done. Goodness, they’ve killed a lot of neons swans for this dance, most of which are stuffed in Nancy’s knickers. Rhys is actually doing a very decent job of this, but it’s got his usual level of absolute loose-limbed Latin chaos and I’m not even sure that’s a bad thing. Bonus points for the twerking at the end, actually kind of loved that. Their second dance is a Samba. EEEEK. This could be amazing, or it could be a dance DISASTER. I’m excited and also terrified. Come on Rhys, you can do it. That’s the first round of dancing done, and AJ and Kai are currently at the top of the leaderboard. But there’s another round to go, so let’s not count our glitterchickens just yet. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for Rose and Giovanni. Ignore the sticky foot and drink anyway, we’ve come this far. Motsi wants a ten with a star or a crown so she can communicate how much more than a ten that was. Shirley thought it was quality personified and it warmed her heart. Anton starts crying (DRINK) because he believes in their dancing. Craig points out a sticky right foot but otherwise it was one of the most amazing waltzes he’s seen. Rose’s pin dress is gorgeous, and as expected this is a stunning Waltz with beautiful changes of pace and lovely rise and fall. Sweet without being saccharine, charming without being mawkish. Possibly my favourite Waltz of the season. Their first dance is the Waltz to ‘How Long Will I Love You’ by Ellie Goulding. I think we’ll possibly love this coupling forever, but maybe that’s just me. Anyway it’s a lovely song and it’s great to see some classic ballroom this late in the competition; usually we’re down to the dregs by now. If Strictly was a tin of Quality Street, there’d be nothing left but Coconut Eclairs and the odd Strawberry Crème. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for John and Johannes. Craig loved how John was leading the dance and telling the story. Motsi loved how much John let go and gave himself to that dance, and Shirley loved how John put his soul and emotion into it. Anton thought it was strong and powerful and the number demonstrated so much about John the man as well as John the dancer. I know I’ve slagged off Couple’s Choice over the years, but this is a beautiful and heartfelt and powerful piece ofcContemporary dance and it brings home how important representation on shows like Strictly is. Just stunning. Their first dance tonight is Couple’s Choice to ‘Hometown Glory’ by Adele. It’s a risky strategy, leaving Couple’s Choice this late in the competition. If John and Johannes do make the final, they’ve got to deliver something completely different for their Showdance, otherwise it might fall flat. And at this stage in the competition the expectation for Couple’s Choice is HIGH, because the judges have everyone else’s to compare it to. Bit of a nail biter, this. John’s story is so lovely and his family are incredible. So much crying, please drink everything. I’m in bits at this dedication. Scores: 10,10,10,10 - a full house for AJ and Kai. DRINK for that, and the ugly crying. Sorry, tonight’s Bingo is a killer. My liveblog helper Sebby loved that, but Rhys and Nancy are his favourite and he has a bad feeling they’re going to go this week. Don’t give up, Sebby, there’s a long way to go. Anton thought it was a triumphant return from last week’s dance-off, it was worth of the Blackpool ballroom. OMG says Craig, it was incredible, AJ ripped that floor up. Motsi is so proud of AJ - it was a difficult dance and AJ looked beautiful. Shirley was in absolute awe, the whole dance came together like pure Strictly magic. AJ was sensational. Loving AJ’s fabulous dead swan frock, and this is a proper old-school Hollywood Quickstep with style and flair. Nice footwork from AJ and lovely timing as always, although it gets a bit gappy in places. Like every dance we’re going to see this evening, it could have done with a couple more days of rehearsal, but there’s plenty to love about this. FAB.U.LUSS. Their first dance tonight is the Quickstep to ‘ Sing, Sing, Sing’ by Benny Goodman. We’ve seen a few Quicksteps to this over the years – Denise and Ian, Chelsee and Pasha, Graeme and Oti. I’m very much hoping this is going to be a classic crowd-pleaser, without any unnecessary tricks and nonsense that might get messed up and lose AJ points from the judges. If these two can nail the basics and bring some sparkle, they’ll bag a well-earned space in next week’s Final. Dad message! DRINK. Ugly crying! DRINK! Scores: 9,9,9,9 - a total of 36 for Rhys and Nancy. Bonus drink for all the screaming. Shirley thought it was a fabulous way to open the semi-final - Rhys came out on fire and is mastering his craft, but he struggled to get back into hold after the solo bits. Anton thought the in-hold parts were better than out of hold tonight, Rhys’s frame was immaculate. Craig loved it too - it has power and drama and Rhys was definitely in charge. Motsi loved Rhys’s control and his improvement is sensational. See, I know nothing. Other than I have the biggest girl crush on Motsi and would kill for that disco sequin outfit. This takes FOREVER to get into hold, and Rhys’s timing is all over the shop. He’s got some nice shaping out of hold but it feels more Paso than Tango, and his feet are turned in as well. Not Rhys’s greatest dance, at least from where I’m sitting. But what do I know?? Their first dance tonight is the Tango to ‘One Vision’ by Queen. They’ve got a Samba later, but this is much more Rhys’s kind of dance. Very much hoping he and Nancy can pull this off. Out come the judges! Motsi ‘s hair has absolutely been the star of this year’s Strictly. Out come the stars! Loving JoJo in matching hipster yoga outfits. Tess in a scarlet pantsuit that’s all pants and no suit, Claudia in black sparkles. Pretty sure we’ve seen both outfits before? And we’re off! Time for a slo-mo VT, and it’s time for the semi-final! There’s only one show between our four remaining couples and the final. They’re exhausted. DRINK. Take a semi-sip of your favourite festive semi-tipple for any occurrence of the following: Four tens People being exhausted Last chance messages from family members Montages Ugly crying Goodness, this is a tough one. The good news is that we’ve got the correct final four based on performances across the series; I think we’re mostly agreed on that, anyway. The bad news is that one couple isn’t going to make it to the Grand Final – the journey so far suggests that might be Rhys, who also has a Cursed Samba this evening. But the judges’ scores could make a huge difference, so there’s never been a better time to deploy some FAIRNESS AND CONSISTENCY. Watching the Festive Hit List - trying to imagine any circumstances where I might look at a poo-brown pleather flasher mac and think ‘that will look nice on telly’. I’m in lovely Eastbourne for tonight’s liveblog, spending the weekend with my partner’s brother and his family. So Heidi’s Little Helpers for this evening are Strictly superfans Sebby (8) and Florence (5). If I fail to notice something hilarious or write things like ‘xfdgiosu!idfjdf@’, it’s because I’m not in my usual Liveblog Zen Lounge. Feel free to use the comment box to fill in the gaps, hopefully between us we’ll give readers the general gist. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing liveblog! It’s a MASSIVE semi-final, with the four remaining couples performing TWO DANCES in a bid to win a coveted place in the Grand Final next Saturday. It’s the final push, glitterpals, so please stick around for what is already lining up to be the most nail-biting weekend of the season. Historically this week has been very much about quantity over quality, but I’m one of life’s optimists and am hoping 2021 might bring us a surprise or two. Tonight’s kick-off is at 7.05pm, so please join me then for the penultimate spin around the Strictly dancefloor. Who’s excited? MEEEEEEE.Boris Johnson is gambling on an unprecedented ramping up of vaccinations, rolling out 1m booster jabs a day to stem an incoming “tidal wave of Omicron” and avoid imposing further restrictions. The army will be deployed across the country to help rapidly accelerate the vaccine programme and GPs will be told to cancel appointments to dedicate resources to offering vaccines to every UK adult by the end of December. In a televised address to the nation on Sunday night, the prime minister said he was “afraid we are now facing an emergency in our battle with the new variant, Omicron, and we must urgently reinforce our wall of vaccine protection to keep our friends and loved ones safe.” Johnson, who is facing a major test of his authority this week as MPs rebel against new Covid restrictions, called the target “a national mission unlike anything we have done before in the vaccination programme”. It means vaccinating around 1 million people a day, up from 530,000 on Saturday. The UK record is 844,000 in March. All over-18s will be eligible from Monday, and NHS booking will open to that age group from Wednesday. Until now eligibility has been limited to over-40s. Jabs will be available on Christmas Day, though demand is expected to be low. On Sunday the Covid alert level was raised from 3 to 4, indicating substantial pressure on the NHS, after a further 1,239 UK cases of Omicron were confirmed, nearly double the number reported the previous day. Omicron is expected to become Britain’s dominant variant within days, and Johnson warned it could “overwhelm the NHS and lead to very many deaths”. Announcing the booster offensive, Johnson said: “We know from bitter experience how these exponential curves develop. No one should be in any doubt: there is a tidal wave of Omicron coming.” He said two doses of vaccine were not enough, but scientists were confident that three would make a huge difference. On Friday UK data suggested that three jabs provide 70-75% protection against infection with Omicron, while two doses given three or more months ago give 30% to 40% or less. GPs and other vaccinators will be required to prioritise jabs over non-urgent care and reduce the number of other face-to-face interactions. Johnson will also scrap the 15-minute post-jab wait in order to speed through even greater numbers of people. Forty-two military planning teams will be deployed across every region of the UK, and there will be additional vaccine sites and mobile units. There will be extended opening hours with more appointments early in the morning, in the evening and at weekends, and thousands more volunteer vaccinators will be trained. Hospitals expect NHS England to declare a national incident within days, the Guardian has learned, making decision-making more centralised and likely leading to routine operations being cancelled with staff redirected. The prime minister said it could not be taken for granted that Omicron was causing less severe illness. “Do not make the mistake of thinking Omicron can’t hurt you, can’t make you and your loved ones seriously ill,” he said. Johnson is facing open war in the Tory party over the move to plan B restrictions, with the biggest rebellion since his election expected from MPs opposed to Covid passports for large venues and more mask wearing. Up to 100 MPs could oppose the changes on Tuesday as Johnson battles on multiple fronts to contain the damage from reports of a series of parties in Downing Street last year, which have left MPs openly discussing a vote of no confidence. The acceleration of the booster rollout, which will put Johnson under pressure to meet the target, is likely to be a key argument to reassure furious Tory MPs who have warned the prime minister they will not tolerate further restrictions. Johnson will offer a number of concessions to the rebels, starting with an announcement that from Tuesday contacts of Covid cases will be able to take a lateral flow test every day instead of isolating if they have been vaccinated. The Guardian understands that the red list for travel is likely to be scrapped in the coming days, given the worldwide spread of Omicron. The change would mean there is likely to be no enforced hotel quarantine for people returning from southern Africa, though travellers may be required to isolate at home. Scientists warned that while booster jabs were crucial, they should be combined with restrictions on the size of gatherings. Prof Christina Pagel, of University College London, said some current policies appeared contradictory, including letting vaccinated people take tests instead of isolating after contact with a Covid case. “Don’t go to work but go to parties. Get a booster, but it’s fine not to isolate if you’re vaccinated. It’s not consistent,” she said. “This idea that kids can go to school if someone in their house has Covid is just stupid. We should be saying no parties, no gatherings bigger than 10 people, say. We need to think about moving back down the roadmap and restricting contact.” She added: “I just don’t think they [ministers] can say ‘this is it’ until Christmas when things are so uncertain.”Shortly after the most chaotic and enthralling finish to a Formula One title in the sport’s history, Max Verstappen stood on top of his Red Bull car, fists pumping and shaking as if a lightning bolt was surging through him, before making a flying dismount, Frankie Dettori style. Who could blame him? Somehow, against the odds, he had muscled past Lewis Hamilton during a dramatic final lap shootout in the last race of 2021. A first world title was secured. Yet this thriller of an F1 season still had one final vicious twist to come. While the Dutch driver was celebrating, Hamilton’s Mercedes’ team had spotted two apparent breaches of the rulebook. An appeal went in. Barristers were consulted. Suddenly this was no longer a sporting contest, but a legal one. And so the world waited. It took until 11pm local time in Abu Dhabi – more than four hours after Verstappen had finished two seconds ahead of Hamilton – for the stewards to reject both Mercedes’ appeals. It was official. Verstappen really was the world champion. “I’m very relieved,” the Dutchman admitted. “It has been a very stressful day. I’m going to have a tiny drink.” There was then a firm hug for Red Bull principal Christian Horner, who pronounced that the right man had won. “I am disappointed we had to go through that but it has been an amazing year,” Horner said. “He is a deserved world champion and nobody can take that away from him.” Mercedes certainly tried. First on the track. Then on a lengthy and torturous appeal. The myriad twists and turns of what happened in Abu Dhabi will make great content for the Netflix series, Drive To Survive, which has attracted millions of new fans to F1. But it also felt unsatisfactory for such an intense contest to be settled in the stewards’ room. The race itself? Well, that was bookended by stunning stanzas at the start and finish, and a sedate middle eight. Verstappen overspun when the lights went off, allowing his rival to go clear. But the Dutchman quickly recovered and on turn six dived on the inside, forcing Hamilton to cut the chicane. It was a smart move and most experts felt Verstappen should have been given the lead. The stewards disagreed. After the adrenalised opening, the race settled into an uncomplicated narrative: Hamilton leading, Verstappen chasing, but without ever threatening to mount a serious challenge. By lap 53 the Englishman’s long waltz to victory appeared nearly complete, and he was ready to greet the highest step of the podium like an old friend. At this point Red Bull had pretty much given up too. As Horner admitted with 10 laps remaining: “The pace of the Mercedes is just too strong today. In all honesty they have just had a quicker car. We are going to need a miracle.” Then, from nowhere, Red Bull got an almighty slice of luck. With five of the 58 laps to go Nicholas Latifi crashed his Williams, forcing the safety car out. Red Bull called Verstappen in for new tyres. But initially it didn’t seem to matter. Laps 54, 55, 56 came and went with the safety car still out and Latifi’s car still not cleared. Then in a few remarkable seconds the race, and the championship, supercharged into life again. First Latifi’s vehicle was cleared. Then Michael Masi made the fateful decision to allow five lapped cars to overtake the safety car, which suddenly meant a shootout between Verstappen and Hamilton. As they waited for the signal to go, centimetres separated them. Hamilton had the faster car, but worn tyres. It proved too much of a handicap. Verstappen launched past him, then fended him off as the pair nearly touched wheels, before speeding home. Yet the title race wasn’t over yet. Mercedes had spotted an apparent breach of sporting regulation 48.8, with Verstappen inching ahead of Hamilton under the safety car before the start of the last lap. The stakes couldn’t have been any higher. Red Bull knew that if the FIA sided with Mercedes, a potential punishment could include a five-second penalty, which would demote Verstappen to second and give Hamilton the title. Mercedes also argued that article 48.12, relating to lapped cars being allowed to overtake the safety car, had also been breached by race director Masi in the final dramatic stages. “This was so not right,” fumed Mercedes’ Toto Wolff after Masi’s decision. Masi responded: “It’s a motor race, we went car racing.” It took some time but both appeals were eventually rejected – with the FIA saying the Dutchman had not broken any rules and that Masi had flexibility under the rulebook to control the safety car. Many will disagree with that decision. But can you really blame him for wanting a head-to-head clash to settle a world title, rather than a last-lap procession behind a safety car? “It’s unbelievable,” said Verstappen afterwards. “Throughout the whole race I kept fighting and then the opportunity came in the last lap. It’s insane. This year will go down in history. Miracles do happen.” Hamilton, meanwhile, took his defeat with impressive grace, immediately hugging Verstappen and wishing him well. This result means the 36-year-old remains level with Michael Schumacher on seven titles. Still, he has time – and the fastest car in the paddock – on his side.The wording of the four home nations’ chief medical officers joint statement on Sunday was undramatic but still ominous. “Transmission of Covid-19 is already high in the community, mainly still driven by Delta, but the emergence of Omicron adds additional and rapidly increasing risk to the public and healthcare services.” Given that “vaccine protection against symptomatic disease from Omicron is reduced … hospitalisations from Omicron are already occurring and these are likely to increase rapidly”, they added. The growing threat means the urgent twin imperatives of all policy now are to save lives and prevent the NHS becoming overwhelmed by what Boris Johnson in his televised address called “the tidal wave of Omicron coming”. The UK Health Security Agency has already warned that the new variant could produce 1m infections a day by New Year’s Eve. Johnson’s message and tone made clear the urgency of the threat. He made clear that vaccination is the main – in reality the sole – meaningful tactic the government has chosen to pursue both outcomes, given another lockdown or anything resembling it is for now not on the cards. As the prime minister said: “To hit the pace we need, we’ll need to match the NHS’s best vaccination day yet – and then beat it day after day. This will require an extraordinary effort.” In simple terms that means doing 1m or more boosters a day from now on, especially as he brought the deadline for everyone in England to have been offered a top-up from 31 January to 31 December. Bear in mind that the record number of jabs administered in one day across the UK to date was 844,285 on 20 March and that the most since the booster rollout began in September was 699,192 on 10 November. For an NHS already under the most intense pressure it has ever faced, this is a massive task. It means that for an undetermined period GPs and their teams will have to provide less of the care they usually give to patients as delivering huge numbers of boosters becomes their top priority. Hospitals will also come under more strain once Omicron leads to more people being admitted who are seriously ill. As Johnson acknowledged, the “extraordinary effort” will come at a price. “As we focus on boosters and make this new target achievable, it will mean some other appointments will need to be postponed until the New Year. But if we don’t do this now, the wave of Omicron could be so big that cancellations and disruptions, like the loss of cancer appointments, would be even greater next year.” He did not quantify how many fewer GP consultations, operations and outpatient appointments will now not happen in the weeks ahead. It is impossible to know what those numbers will be. But given GPs see more than 20m patients a month, they will be measured in the many millions. The backlog of people awaiting hospital care in England is already just shy of 6 million. The widespread cancellation of hip and knee replacements, cataract removals and other planned operations will send that soaring. This is a strategy of short-term pain for long-term gain. The initial reaction from NHS bosses was one of support. As one official said: “NHS leaders will be fine with the plan as they recognise that the likely pressures from Omicron could be very serious. But they will need the PM and ministers to make clear that the number one and number two priorities are delivering the booster – and first and second doses to those who haven’t been jabbed – and dealing with medical emergencies. That means non-urgent ops and so on will likely be pushed back but hopefully this is for a specific period of time as we race to get as many people jabbed as possible.” Hospital bosses are acutely aware of the terrible human cost of the huge backlog of people waiting for planned care, mainly surgery – anxiety, pain, inability to lead a normal life and in some cases less chance of surviving their illness – and have made strenuous efforts this year to perform as many non-urgent operations as possible. They will hate to have to start cancelling surgery again, especially as no one will be able to give patients affected any real sense of when they will finally be treated. But they will have to do it. GPs will feel the same about putting such a large amount of normal care on hold for patients but again have no choice. But medical need does not magically disappear, though. The next few weeks, possibly months, are going to be tough for anyone who relies on the health service as well as those who work in it. Both will hope that the sacrifices involved turn out to be worth it.• An editorial said the review into the death of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes would scrutinise issues such as “social workers’ decision not to place him on a child protection register”. To clarify: that decision process is a multi-agency one (7 December, Journal, p2). • The Leeds Hospitals Charity is planning to build a new care centre, not a care home, with funds raised by former rugby player Kevin Sinfield (‘I’m broken’, 24 November, p3). • Other recently amended articles include: Covid news: Australia to offer jabs to children; people in Scotland urged to cancel Christmas parties – as it happened Bosses at West Suffolk hospital criticised over ‘intimidating’ hunt for whistleblower Travellers to Ireland from Great Britain advised to take Covid tests for five days Under the skin of the ocean, there’s a super-loud fishcotheque going on ‘The Wizard of Oz of entertainment’: the incredible career of Robert Stigwood Scott Morrison says Gladys Berejiklian may not run for federal seat of Warringah Editorial complaints and corrections can be sent to guardian.readers@theguardian.com or The readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. You can also leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Max Verstappen celebrated winning his first Formula One world championship with victory at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, but only after huge controversy, that still leaves his title in some doubt. Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes are angry at a win they felt had been unfairly snatched away and which remains under debate with Mercedes intending to appeal against the stewards’ decision and the option of taking their case to the court of arbitration for sport. The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, has made clear his intention to oppose any attempt to strip his driver of the title. A tense battle at the Yas Marina circuit was decided on the final lap in this final race of the season when Verstappen overtook Hamilton for the win to seal the championship after a fiercely-contested 22 meetings. Yet in doing so his Red Bull team and Mercedes were left at loggerheads over how the win had been achieved, with Mercedes taking a barrister to their meetings with the stewards. Their protests were rejected but while they were taking place a discontented Hamilton opted to take no part in the post-race press conference. He had gone into the race equal on points with Verstappen attempting to win his eighth title and was hugely disappointed but had congratulated his rival on the victory. The flashpoint came after Verstappen pitted during a late safety car period for fresh tyres with which to attack Hamilton and then what Mercedes saw as an unfair FIA intervention to ensure he was on Hamilton’s tail for that final lap shootout. Horner had requested the FIA race director, Michael Masi, act to allow the lapped cars between Verstappen and Hamilton to unlap themselves leaving the title protagonists closed up for the crucial final lap. Having initially stated they would not be allowed to do so, it was then announced that those five cars specifically could unlap themselves. Horner was convinced it had been the right decision but admitted that without an intervention Hamilton would have been uncatchable. “We needed something from the racing gods in the last 10 laps,” he said referring to the safety car prompted by Nicholas Latifi’s accident. He then issued a bullish response after the post-race wrangling had taken place. “It’s obviously a little bit desperate,” he said of the Mercedes protests. “If they appeal it we will fight it in the appeal court and then the legal court after that. Maybe I need a barrister on the pit wall with me. We didn’t want it to finish in front of the stewards.” Hamilton’s only comments were those made in the moments immediately after climbing from his car and before the protests were made. “Big congratulations to Max and his team,” he said. “We did an amazing job this year. It’s been the most difficult of seasons and I’m so proud of them, so grateful to be part of the journey with them. “We gave it everything, we gave it absolutely everything, we never gave up, and that’s the most important thing.” Verstappen acknowledged that without the final safety car he would have been unable to catch Hamilton but was unequivocal in his belief the stewards had made the right decision to allow the final lap of racing. “Everything was clear, so why would you run another lap behind a safety car?” he said. “When everything is clear you have to release the track. I think that’s a fair point from the race direction.” In a season that has become marked by increasingly acrimonious and ill-tempered exchanges between the two teams this was a nadir with the finale decided over bitter disagreement. Verstappen believed Mercedes’ protests and the controversy was indicative of how fractious the relationship had become. “It sums up, a little bit, the season,” he said of their attempts to overturn the result. McLaren’s Lando Norris believed the decision had been made deliberately to provide a climactic finale after he had not expected to be given permission to unlap himself. “It was obviously made to be a fight,” he said. “It was for the TV, of course. It was for the result. Whether or not it was fair, it’s hard for me to decide.”Workers on the night shift at the candle factory in Mayfield, Kentucky, were part of the holiday rush that was keeping the place going around the clock when a tornado whirled towards the small city and the word went out to “duck and cover”. Autumn Kirks pulled down her safety googles and took shelter, tossing aside wax and fragrance buckets to make room for herself. She glanced away from her boyfriend, Lannis Ward, and when she looked back, he was gone. On Sunday, he was among scores of people missing and feared dead in the rubble of the factory leveled by the record tornado that howled in on Friday night, with the death toll expected to exceed 100 in Kentucky alone. Kirks and others are waiting in a heartbreak of emotional agony for news of their loved ones, even though by late Sunday afternoon no one had been found alive in the wreckage since 3am Saturday. “Not knowing is worse than knowing right now. I’m trying to stay strong. It’s very hard,” she said. The factory is now 15ft deep of mangled steel and there are cars on top of the ruins where the roof was, the state governor, Andy Beshear said on CNN. Kirks said she and her boyfriend were about 10ft apart in a hallway. Suddenly, she saw sky and lightning where a wall had been, and Ward had vanished. “I remember taking my eyes off of him for a second, and then he was gone,” she said. Kirks was at a ministry center where people gathered to seek information about the missing. The pastor, Joel Cauley, said of the disaster scene: “It was almost like you were in a twilight zone. You could smell the aroma of candles, and you could hear the cries of people for help. Candle smells and all the sirens is not something I ever expected to experience at the same time.” Kyanna Parsons-Perez, who was also on shift at the Kentucky candle factory, told the Guardian while sitting in the hospital, how a gust of wind suddenly changed everything. “My ears started popping and I felt my body swaying,” she said of the moments right before “boom, everything fell on us”. She was stuck for three hours in the rubble despite being in a storm shelter deep in the interior. She was trapped by a water fountain, an air conditioner and 5ft of debris. In Arkansas, where a nursing home was destroyed and two people were killed, the governor, Asa Hutchinson, said workers shielded the residents with their own bodies.