Randstad, the Dutch multinational company responsible for delivering the government’s flagship National Tutoring Programme (NTP) is under mounting pressure after claims that pupil enrolment for subsidised tuition is more than 90% below target. MPs on the cross-party education committee were told the recruitment business, which was controversially awarded the NTP contact in June, has enrolled just 5% of the target number of pupils for the 2021-22 academic year. Talks are being held to set up a new not-for-profit consortium of education charities which could take over the running of the NTP from September 2022. A meeting is due to take place with the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, next month to discuss options. On Tuesday, the committee was told 28,000 pupils out of an end-of-year target of 524,000 had so far been enrolled, though schools were almost a third of the way through the year. The Department for Education (DfE) said that figure was out of date and has since increased, while the TES reported 8% of the target had started tuition. Randstad was awarded the contract to run the programme in June after it submitted a £25m bid, which was considerably lower than rival bids and far below the £62m maximum suggested by government. Asked if it was proving value for money, Nick Bent, the chief executive of the Tutor Trust, one of the partners providing tutoring in schools, told the committee: “I’m afraid all the evidence we’ve seen so far about Randstad’s performance in delivering this contract suggests this is a massive false economy and that the previous secretary of state [Gavin Williamson] made a mistake in awarding this contract to Randstad. “The question is whether the new secretary of state [Zahawi] will do anything about that. It seems very clear to us who are the frontline delivery organisations with the NTP, that Randstad just simply has not got the capacity or the competence to deliver this programme effectively.” He went on: “They are now trying desperately to rectify that and we are collaborating closely with them … but there’s a huge question mark about whether it’s right for Randstad to continue running this programme for the full three years.” The committee was told there was a break clause in the three-year contract at the end of the first year – and the second – which could allow the DfE to bring in an alternative organisation to run the NTP. Asked what evidence there was that Randstad lacked the competence to deliver the programme, Bent said: “Our day-to-day experience of working with them is they simply do not have enough staff or the right expertise.” A meeting was planned with the education secretary on 19 January “but there’s serious talk going on at the moment about co-creating a new organisation – a not-for-profit entity – that could potentially take over the running of the NTP from 1 September 2022”, Bent said. It came as new research published on Wednesday found that more than 50,000 disabled pupils went without social services and healthcare support for more than 12 months during the pandemic, resulting in huge developmental losses for the children and young people concerned. Researchers from ASK Research, UCL and the National Foundation for Educational Research, funded by the Nuffield Foundation, found that more than a third were still not receiving the health or care support to which they are legally entitled by the end of the summer term and learning losses were greater than in mainstream education settings. When the NTP first launched it was run by the Education Endowment Foundation. Under the scheme schools choose from a list of approved tuition partners and pay 25% of the cost while the government picks up the rest of the bill, although the level of subsidy will reduce over the next three years. The DfE maintains the programme is on target and the 28,000 figure does not take into account the school-led tutoring arm of the programme, which is the largest component. Data will be published next year to update progress. The DfE said: “The NTP is on track to reach hundreds of thousands more pupils this year, as part of a significant expansion to give schools more flexibility to deliver tutoring that works for them and families, and ensure no child is left behind. We have set high standards for the programme and feedback from schools shows the positive impact it is having in helping pupils to catch up.” Randstad said: “We are working closely with tuition partners to deliver an ambitious and high-quality programme, at pace, to help pupils whose education has been most impacted. We absolutely recognise the importance of the programme and take the responsibility of managing it extremely seriously. We are working very closely with all of our stakeholders to provide further information and support across the programme. “We have received positive feedback from a large number of tuition partners on the support we have provided. Schools have also given positive feedback on the quality and impact that the programme is already having. We are working hard to build on this success and move forward collaboratively, to ensure high-quality, targeted tuition support reaches pupils most in need.”Millions of people in England will be able to book their Covid booster vaccine on Wednesday as the NHS cuts the qualifying time from six months after a second dose to three. Every adult aged 40 and over and all those in high-risk groups will be able to arrange their Covid booster jab to take place three months after their second dose as the vaccine programme widens significantly today. The online booking system for vaccines will be updated in the morning and details will be updated throughout the day, officials revealed on Tuesday night. About seven million people in England alone will be able to book appointments up to a month in advance – two months on from their second dose – as part of the booster push which comes amid mounting concern over the Omicron variant. Official figures showed 101 more confirmed cases of the Omicron variant have been reported across the UK, taking the total to 437. Overall, a total of 336,893 new Covid-19 cases have been reported in the past seven days, including 45,691 on Tuesday, official government figures show – the highest since the week to 16 January. Addressing the growing threat posed by Omicron, NHS England chief executive Amanda Pritchard suggested that even if current vaccines work less well against the new variant, they will probably still reduce the risk of severe disease, hospitalisation and death. “There is a lot we do not know about the Omicron variant but experts believe that even if existing vaccines are less effective they will give protection. So I would urge anyone eligible to come forward as soon as possible, and to keep checking for appointments in their area.” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, added: “We are boosting our booster programme to get more jabs in arms more quickly, and from today millions of people over the age of 40 in England will be able to pre-book their booster jab two months after their second dose, a month ahead of them becoming eligible for their top-up vaccine. “We are halving the gap that people have to wait to get their booster to three months – prioritising those most at risk of serious illness and strengthening our collective defences in light of the Omicron variant, as this virus goes on the advance this winter.” Hundreds of hospitals are already jabbing their staff and have now been asked to vaccinate other local NHS workers, eligible patients and social care staff as the programme expands. About 30 hospitals are already offering jabs to the public through the national booking service with more set to open. The NHS is asking people to keep checking for appointments once the system updates, as more become available every day. No date has yet been set for when adults aged under 40 will be able to book their booster. Ministers have promised to offer every eligible adult in the UK an opportunity to book in for their booster jab by the end of January.Un-policed and often unenforceable anti-corruption laws have made the UK the global money-laundering capital for a post-Soviet Union elite, severely damaging Britain’s international reputation and the rule of law, the London-based thinktank Chatham House says in a report. The research calls for new measures to constrain what it described as a near-self-regulated army of professional enablers – accountants, lawyers and reputation managers – that service Russian criminals in the UK. Urging a complete reset in the government’s laws to combat money laundering, the report by coincidence will be published later on the day that the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is due to address the thinktank about the UK’s foreign policy priorities. It was authored by leading researchers from the universities of Exeter, Oxford, Cambridge and Columbia (New York) and was funded by the Foreign Office’s own anti-corruption evidence programme. The report urges ministers to recognise that Britain’s laws do not simply help organised crime, but are a way for kleptocratic authoritarians to launder their illegal assets and remain in power. “The British government has placed combating serious organised crime at the centre of its foreign policy, but often fails to recognise the intimate connections UK society and institutions have with kleptocratic states and their elites, the latter of which continue to find a home-from-home in London,” it says. It finds there is “a failure of enforcement by the National Crime Agency (NCA) and other UK state bodies, as expensive and capable lawyers (hired by members of transnational elites or their advisers) defeat or deter the regulators’ often weak and under-resourced attempts to prosecute politically exposed persons”. The report unpicks the failure of the key anti-corruption pillars on the statute book, and finds most of them wanting, especially the requirement for regulated industries to flag potential corruption to the NCA by filing suspicious activity reports. In 2020, regulated industries filed 573,085 SARs – 20% more than in 2019 – the vast majority of which (75.4%) were issued by banks. The report describes this level of reports as a risk-averse response that is also risk-insensitive, pointing out that the NCA Financial Intelligence Unit has only 118 employees to scrutinise SARs. By contrast, only 861 SARs were issued by estate agents in 2021, compared with approximately 1,500 issued by legal professionals in relation to property deals. Proposing a slew of changes to the law, the report concluds: “Without actively complicit service providers facing prison and negligent ones facing punitive fines, it is hard to see how transnational kleptocracy can be arrested in the UK, however well-drafted the law.” The report highlights the adoption of only four “unexplained wealth orders” since the measure was introduced with fanfare in the Criminal Finances Act 2017. An UWO allows for assets to be seized if, on the balance of probabilities, the wealth has been obtained illegally. None have been issued since 2019. One reason for the failure, the report says, is that seizure is permitted only if the assets are thought to have been acquired through an activity that is illegal in the original country. If the original country is itself a kleptocracy, the activity is unlikely to have been deemed illegal. The report also points out that the Office for Professional Body Anti-Money Laundering Supervision (OPBAS) – a UK government body set up to oversee the professional bodies that supervise legal and accountancy firms and companies in regard to their anti-money-laundering procedures – found that the vast majority (81%) of the 22 professional bodies had not implemented an effective risk-based approach, and only one-third of them were effective in developing and recording adequate risk profiles for their sector. The authors say the only success has been the little-known account freezing orders that allow UK law enforcement bodies to freeze the contents of a bank account if they can show reasonable grounds to suspect that money in an account was obtained through unlawful conduct or is intended for unlawful use. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021. An earlier version referred to account freezing orders as “arrest freezing orders”.Nearly two decades ago, Nicholas Hytner triumphantly staged Philip Pullman’s trilogy His Dark Materials at the National Theatre. He returns to that questing world with this version of the first volume in another trilogy, set 12 years earlier than His Dark Materials. Hytner displays the same wizard’s touch for turning Pullman’s fast, fantasy narratives into theatrical gold. His supremely elegant production is vast, but never unruly, on a set that dazzles but does not swamp the storytelling. Bryony Lavery’s adaptation is lean without short-changing us on the story. A newborn Lyra Belacqua is being hunted by the theocratic authorities after her anti-Christian future is prophesied. Malcolm is the 12-year-old son of an inn-keeper (a single mother here) who becomes embroiled in Lyra’s care along with his prickly fellow adventurer, Alice. The central, ideological battle between scientists and the sinister forces of the Magisterium is captured with a clean economy and some of Pullman’s inquiries into the nature of matter and consciousness are briefly summarised, though purists may want a little more. In some scenes, Lyra is played by a real and formidably well-behaved baby which instantly raises the stakes and heightens our emotional responses. Samuel Creasey, an adult actor playing Malcolm, gives an uncannily convincing performance of boyhood. He is cheeky, outspoken and earnest. Ella Dacres, as Alice, is his steely equal and there is chemistry between them, although Lavery’s script does not develop their romance to the same degree as the book. The dark forces are convincingly troubling: the body of a woman floats face down in the water, we hear the sound of a neck being broken. Ayesha Dharker, as Marisa Coulter, is a cultish figure, encouraging pupils to join the League of St Alexander and Pip Carter’s predatory Gerard Bonneville has a sibilant menace, along with his giggling hyena daemon. The stage is action-filled with one dangerous turn after another, which reflects the spirit of the original faithfully, albeit unleavened by the deeper philosophical ruminations in the book. The production only falls short of perfection for those who find themselves flagging at Pullman’s – rather than Hytner’s – breakneck pace and plotting. It is no small accomplishment that a story which teems with such a large cast of nuns, church authorities and terror police, along with an underground resistance and a secret service of scientists, is incorporated on stage with a sleek discipline that avoids overcrowding and confusion. The characters never feel flat and they have interesting intellectual complications. There is also greater wit than in Pullman’s book: the nuns make wry asides, Malcolm brings hapless comedy and throwaway lines are humorously delivered. Bob Crowley’s stage design glides seamlessly from the Trout Inn to the convent, the inner realms of Oxford University and then a flood that fills floors and walls and creates a convincing illusion of Malcolm’s canoe – and the stage itself – afloat on waves. Luke Halls’ video design, Jon Clark’s lighting and Paul Arditti’s sound design combine expertly: there are diaphanous mobile screens that create the effect of depth, with beautiful pencil sketches of trees and windows. What is more remarkable is the production’s ability to keep closely to Pullman’s earth-bound and realistic brand of fantasy. Just as in Hytner’s previous production, the daemons are puppets (kingfishers, lemurs, badgers, each as gorgeous as the next). Designed and directed by Barnaby Dixon, they are a marvel and glow from within like luminous origami. They seem like Jungian projections rather than airy, fantastical creatures. Pullman, an avowed atheist, cannot resist the narrative lure of biblical imagery and they abound here, from the almighty flood to the Herod-like hunt for baby Lyra, right down to the final image of this marked child, miraculously saved, like Jesus in a manger. Here is the ultimate Christmas show – with sacrilegious twists. • At the Bridge theatre, London, until 26 February.Having long complained that movies aren’t engaging with the most vital issue of our time – the climate crisis – it’s perhaps churlish of me not to be glad when one comes along that does exactly that. But Adam McKay’s laboured, self-conscious and unrelaxed satire Don’t Look Up is like a 145-minute Saturday Night Live sketch with neither the brilliant comedy of Succession, which McKay co-produces, nor the seriousness that the subject might otherwise require. It is as if the sheer unthinkability of the crisis can only be contained and represented in self-aware slapstick mode. With knockabout hints of Dr Strangelove, Network and Wag the Dog, Don’t Look Up is about two astronomers discovering that a Mount Everest-sized comet is due in six months’ time to hit planet Earth and wipe out all human life. The scientists urgently present their findings to the White House, but find that the political and media classes can’t or won’t grasp what they are saying: too stupefied with consumerism, short-termism and social-media gossip, and insidiously paralysed by the interests of big tech. Leonardo DiCaprio plays nerdy, bearded astronomer Dr Randall Mindy, nervous of human interaction and addicted to Xanax. Jennifer Lawrence is his smart, emotionally spiky grad student Kate Dibiasky. Meryl Streep is the panto-villain president, Jonah Hill her son and chief-of-staff, and Mark Rylance is the creepy Brit tech mogul Sir Peter Isherwell. The comet stands for the climate catastrophe, but the metaphor isn’t the problem. The clear danger of global heating means that it is no longer such a stretch to compare it to an Uluru-sized chunk of blazing rock heading our way. This is not like Mimi Leder’s 1998 thriller Deep Impact, which had a comparable story – it’s more conscious of its loftier satirical importance. But the pointed wackiness means that, with interesting exceptions, it’s not really working at its own chosen level of megaphone comedy, which is presented as the only workable medium for its politically serious and (justifiably) unfunny message. Having said this, the pure, bizarre spectacle of the opening act is startling and based on fact. It really is official US government policy to deflect incoming asteroids by launching missiles at them, a point made by Werner Herzog in his recent documentary Fireball: Visitors from Darker Worlds. This policy is not in itself disturbing but, as this film suggests, what is worrying is that the erosion of our ability to react in time, to understand that something awful could happen is happening – right now. You get a sense of Randall and Kate’s suppressed delirium as they prepare to go on a TV show and find everyone chattering about a pop star’s failed relationship. They have taken the red pill. Time is running out for everyone else to take theirs. There are some sharp political points to be made. Jonah Hill’s obnoxious political bro addresses his Trumpite base, describing what he sees as the three estates in today’s world: “There’s you, the working classes; there’s us, the cool rich, and there’s them …” and here he gestures vaguely at the woke left, whining about something as stupid as the end of the world. Don’t Look Up finally upshifts into a mode of exaltation and transcendance, and I couldn’t help thinking of Lars von Trier’s 2011 planet-collision film Melancholia, which is similar. But for all its faults, Von Trier’s film chose a more interesting and disquieting mode of dark comedy (and I’m sorry that, in 2011, I didn’t see the connection with climate change). This film could have done something more convincing with that mode of reverse-vertigo hinted at in its title: that fear and willed blindness about what looms over us. But if the movie helps to do something about climate change, such critical objections are unimportant. • Don’t Look Up is in cinemas from 10 December and on Netflix from 24 December.Downing Street is facing renewed pressure after TV footage emerged showing senior No 10 officials joking about a Christmas party during lockdown last December. In the leaked video, obtained by ITV, an adviser to Johnson is seen joking with Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. The footage was shot on 22 December 2020. The Friday before was 18 December, the date on which multiple sources have said there was a staff party inside Downing Street, which would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. Boris Johnson and his aides have repeatedly denied that a lockdown Christmas staff party broke Covid rules or took place at all. Here is a timeline of the events and coronavirus restrictions: 2 December More than half of the population of England, including those living in London, are moved into “high alert” tier 2 lockdown restrictions. Households mixing indoors is banned, and the rule of six applies outdoors including in gardens and public spaces. 10 December Then education secretary Gavin Williamson holds a Christmas party for up to two dozen staff at the Department of Education cafe. A Department for Education spokesperson confirmed a report that Williamson gave a short speech before officials and ministers enjoyed “drinks and canapes” at the evening event, adding: “Looking back we accept it would have been better not to have gathered in this way at that particular time.” 16 December Boris Johnson urges the public to severely limit the length and scale of gatherings over the Christmas period. “A smaller Christmas is going to be a safer Christmas,” he tells a Downing Street press conference. London is moved into tier 3 – at the time the toughest coronavirus restrictions – meaning the only permitted indoor social mixing outside your own household was with a support bubble. 18 December The date on which a staff party is allegedly held inside Downing Street. Testimony from many sources says No 10 staff held a party with a Secret Santa, refreshments and games. About “40 or 50” people are said to have been crammed “cheek by jowl” into a medium-sized room, the Mirror reported last week. Government guidance at the time stated: “Although there are exemptions for work purposes, you must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” 19 December Johnson announces that a planned relaxation of the rules across England will not go ahead, effectively cancelling Christmas for millions of people across London, the south-east and east of England. At a No 10 briefing, the PM says: “We’re sacrificing the chance to see loved ones so we have a better chance of protecting their lives.” 21 December Tier 4 restrictions come into force in London and the south-east of England, meaning people must stay at home and are only allowed to leave for specific purposes or if they have a “reasonable excuse”. People are forbidden from mixing indoors with anyone from outside their household and can only meet one person outdoors. The rest of England was only permitted to mix in bubbles of up to three households on just Christmas Day. 22 December A mock televised press briefing is held in which an adviser to Johnson is seen joking with Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. The Friday before the briefing would have been 18 December, the day the party is alleged to have taken place. 26 December More areas of England enter tier 4 restrictions. 4 January Johnson says children should return to school after their Christmas break, but warns restrictions could tighten. 6 January England enters its third national lockdown. It is not until 21 June that all legal limits on social contact are removed.As debt concerns rise and a new coronavirus variant emerges, China appears to be adjusting its approach to Africa: cutting finance pledges while doubling down on vaccine diplomacy. On Monday last week, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, opened a China-Africa forum with a pledge to supply 1bn vaccine doses to Africa, amid global concern over the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. He also pledged $40bn to the continent, ranging from credit lines to investments – a significant cut from the $60bn promised at the previous two summits. Analysts say the shift in approach signifies Beijing’s rethink about its overall strategy on the continent at a time of Covid health emergency and great power competition. “In a way Xi’s reduced financial pledge is not surprising because we’ve already seen signs in the last couple of years,” says Lina Benabdallah of Wake Forest University in North Carolina. “China has entered a phase of greater caution with regard to Africa. After two decades of heavy state funding, it is beginning to pull the brakes.” The caution, as Carlos Lopes of the University of Cape Town notes, partly derives from the west’s long-held narrative about China’s alleged debt trap and taking advantage of the Africans to exploit natural resources and export their cheap goods. “[Beijing is] sensitive to criticism and [is] reacting to it by applying tools they know will please and obfuscate firmed negative views resulting from past exposure,” Lopes says. “… [W]e are witnessing a change to a more technocratic approach; obviously more cautious, using soft conditionality and creating new instruments to control flows tighter.” Moral high ground The pledged billion doses includes 600m donations and 400m locally produced, and is in addition to 200m doses already delivered to African nations under previous pledges. Xi says China will also send 1,500 health experts to Africa to assist. Xi’s words came at a time when China’s vaccine diplomacy is under heavy scrutiny. Yet Carlos Oya, an expert on China-Africa relations at Soas, University of London, says that if extending vaccination in Africa truly contributes to a gradual end of the pandemic worldwide, this could be an important achievement. “[It’s] potentially giving impetus to a narrative that China has contributed to end this pandemic beyond its borders.” Chris Alden, director of the thinktank LSE Ideas, says that with this announcement, China would hope to be in a position to occupy the moral high ground by addressing an acute crisis being experienced by a fellow developing region and concurrently demonstrating its capacity to produce and deliver vaccines across Africa. “This global public good will concurrently open up more market opportunities for Chinese pharmaceuticals in the spirit of the oft-quoted adage of ‘doing good while doing well’,” he says. Critics, however, argue that Xi’s emphasis on vaccines in Africa is not new. In late February, China pledged to provide vaccines to 19 African countries. To date, 46 African countries have been receiving vaccines from China. Out of the 155m pledged doses to Africa so far, China has delivered 107m, of which only 16m have been donations, according to Bridge Beijing, a vaccine tracker. ‘An urgency that can’t wait’ The Omicron outbreak, which was first detected by South African scientists who then alerted the world, has highlighted the stark gaps in vaccination rates. Around 11% of people on the African continent have had at least one dose, while just 7% are fully vaccinated. By contrast, nearly 32% of the UK population aged 12-plus have already had their third jab. “There have been lots of great words by various leaders but the actual vaccines delivery has not met the promises made … by Covax, the US, by Australia,” says Prof Joel Negin, head of the University of Sydney’s school of public health. Covax has secured pledges of about 5.59bn doses from various governments but delivered just 585m. Australia has promised about 60m doses to other countries, Negin says, but delivered about 9m. “We see now there’s an urgency that can’t wait.” Health bodies and experts have long warned that leaving developing countries under-vaccinated increased the risk of new variants emerging to threaten the whole world. But unequal distribution of vaccines has seen entire regions such as Africa mostly unvaccinated while rich countries begin rolling out booster shots. One recent analysis suggested two-thirds of people in high-income countries were fully vaccinated, compared with just 2.5% of the population in low-income countries. There are a couple of reasons for the shortfall, says Negin, including the lack of production capacity outside a few nations. “We’ve had two years, we should have set up systems and invested in production capacity in south-east Asia, southern Africa, for production of mRNA vaccines,” he says. “It can’t be done overnight but we have to start on setting up those capabilities.” The delay was in large part due to continued refusals by governments to issue intellectual property waivers on the vaccines, he adds – something backed by US president Joe Biden and which Xi also called for in his speech. Xi said: “We need to put people and their lives first, be guided by science, support waiving intellectual property rights on Covid-19 vaccines, and truly ensure the accessibility and affordability of vaccines in Africa to bridge the immunisation gap.” While China has delivered fewer vaccines to Africa than it has elsewhere, it has been committing more than most bilateral donors and the Covax initiative, says Leah Lynch, deputy director of Development Reimagined, an African-led international development consultancy. She says the key part of Xi’s speech was not the 600m donations but the 400m coming from joint productions. “This … is a demand-led initiative which came from Africa. They want to be able to do that vaccine production themselves.” Egypt has already made a deal to produce Sinovac, while Senegal will produce Sinopharm, and 14 Chinese pharmaceutical companies were also involved in production or investment in Africa, Lynch says. “It’s ultimately about self-sufficiency.”We’ve come a long way since the days when mental illness was treated like a shameful secret. But there is still a long way to go. The system remains fragmented, chronically under-funded and not fit for purpose. Getting timely, appropriate care can be a lottery that is too often predicated on your bank balance, postcode, or background. These inequities have been exposed and amplified during the pandemic as fault lines in our society. Just as the impacts of mental health and suicidality are not felt equally, the impacts of the Covid crisis have been unevenly distributed. People in insecure work and housing, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, LGBTIQ+ Australians, young people, those from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds or living with disabilities or pre-existing mental health conditions have been disproportionately affected. Women have also been heavily impacted – and we already know that gender plays a role in mental health outcomes. Men die by suicide at greater rates than women. Women self-harm and attempt suicide at higher rates than men, and transgender and non-binary Australians at even higher rates. Gender matters. It’s not everything, but it’s something. And during the Covid crisis, it’s been a significant factor. We’ve seen the disadvantage women face become more entrenched. But history tells us these moments of disruption are often dividing lines. When we look back, we see a clear distinction between the way we lived before and how we emerged on the other side. As an active and committed feminist throughout my political life, I want to see advances in gender equality across the spectrum – from ensuring every girl has access to education right through to how many women are sitting in boardrooms as CEOs. I direct that energy to my work at the Global Institute for Women’s Leadership at King’s College London and now at the Australian National University. Gender inequality was a persistent feature of our society before Covid and the impact of the pandemic has exacerbated it through what the Grattan Institute report released earlier this year described as the “triple whammy” suffered by women in last year’s recession. Women were more likely to lose jobs, do more unpaid work, and get less government support. At the peak of the crisis, women lost jobs at double the rate of men – almost 8% compared with 4% for men. And they shouldered the increase in unpaid work, including supervising children learning from home, and taking on an average of an extra hour each day on top of their existing heavy load. Mothers in couples, and single parents – 80% of whom are women – were more likely to leave the labour force than other groups. Women of child-bearing age were also forced to give up study in record numbers. These structural inequalities compound women’s lifetime economic disadvantage. Six months out of work can add another $100,000 to the $2m average lifetime earnings gap between men and women. As Australia contemplates a life beyond Covid, we must seize the moment to create a more equal playing field. Access to quality education and gender equality are not only significant issues in their own right. These are also key social drivers that influence our mental health. Applying a social determinant lens is at the centre of our work in the mental health sector. The Covid crisis has underscored that, without secure work, a safe place to call home, social connection, access to childcare and education, people quickly start to struggle. And those who are already disadvantaged struggle the most. The greater burden women carried through the pandemic meant they reported higher levels of anxiety, depression, distress and self-harm. There was a particularly troubling spike in the number of teenage girls and young women presenting to hospital with self-harm injuries. This tallies with research released in August from Monash University’s Centre for Health Economics, which found that, during economic downturns, women in their 20s were most likely to suffer poor mental health. The trend is largely driven by insecure employment, particularly for those who already face greater adversity. During Covid, female-dominated industries such as hospitality, tourism and retail were hardest-hit by lockdowns, suggesting the mental health effects for women were likely to be even greater in this downturn. And yet, measures that went some way to alleviating women’s psychological load – such as free childcare and the jobkeeper supplement – were the first to be rolled back. We need to think differently in the future if we are to reduce the disproportionate mental health burden women face. And of course, we must also acknowledge the toll placed on men – who are over-represented in the suicide statistics – and build a system that works for everyone. Right now, Australia is at a reform crossroads. Wholesale structural change to our mental health and suicide prevention systems is long overdue and has never been more urgently required. But we must get reform right. This is our opportunity to come together – governments, the sector and the community – with a laser focus on the social inequities that drive poor mental health. Creating a compassionate, person-centred system where we listen to people’s lived experience and put it at the heart of the decision-making process will remove some structural barriers. We must see the whole person and address their unique life circumstances. I want to see an Australia where we achieve true equality, and women leaders are everywhere. And I believe we have reason for optimism on that front. I see the trailblazing spirit alive and well in young women like Brittany Higgins, Grace Tame and Chanel Contos, who are bravely challenging the status quo. The ability of these women to take constructive action in response to life-changing events and challenges, has me both awestruck and inspired. Chanel’s petition for earlier sex education in schools on consent – which led to disclosures of sexual assault from schoolgirls all over Australia – shows the power and resilience of the female collective. I spent time with Chanel in London, where she’s currently studying, and I was delighted when she came to a dinner for my 60th birthday. Inevitably at a birthday event, there was much talk of ageing, and in the course of that I asked Chanel when she was born and while it was sobering for someone born in 1961 to hear her say 1998. It struck me as wonderful that feminist activism and connection spans the generations. These young women are harnessing this moment of social disruption, with a more impatient brand of feminism that grabs change with both hands. We will only achieve gender equality if more women step into public life and shake things up, and men stand alongside us as firm allies. That might seem a counter-intuitive wish, given my experience in politics. But my experiences – while played out on the most public stage – are not unique. They are emblematic of a broader problem every woman in Australia has faced – in her workplace, at home, in education, or just in day-to-day life. My story struck a chord because every woman has felt the sting of being demeaned, undermined, or overlooked. But I want to assure you all that my experiences have not bred disillusionment or resentment. They have only strengthened my resolve to make the path easier for tomorrow’s female leaders. We cannot change the past, but we can learn from it and change the future. Indeed, times of adversity offer us a chance to grow and build resilience. And that’s where we find ourselves as a nation after this period of great trauma. You would all be familiar with the notion of post-traumatic stress. But there is also a lesser-known phenomenon when people have been through disruptive times, and that is post-traumatic growth. These moments that set us back on our heels also give us pause to reassess how we’re living, and what’s truly important. We’re all having those deep reflections – at an individual level and as a society – as we emerge from this period of turbulence. We have an opportunity to use this collective contemplation to fix the structural problems that have for too long driven inequality. If we get the settings right, we can redesign the mental health system, putting in place social guard rails that remove inequities and help keep people well. Gender equality does not only benefit women. It empowers every person to live free from the suffocating constraints of gender stereotypes. We need men to be part of the solution because power disproportionately remains in their hands. I would ask any men to reflect on how you can use that power for change. And I urge policy makers and sector leaders to think of all the layers of societal inequality that have been exposed and exacerbated by the Covid-19 crisis. We cannot squander this opportunity for reform but seize it as a defining moment to reshape our nation’s future by tackling the root causes of disadvantage. Julia Gillard is chair of Beyond Blue and a former prime minister of Australia This is an edited extract from the Grace Groom Oration for Mental Health Australia, which will be delivered online on Wednesday nightJoe Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin held a virtual summit that lasted roughly two hours. According to the White House’s readout of the conversation, Biden shared “deep concerns” about Russia’s increased troop presence along the country’s border with Ukraine, which has stirred fears of a potential invasion. National security adviser Jake Sullivan said Biden urged Putin to embrace “de-escalation and diplomacy” toward Ukraine. Sullivan also said that Biden warned Putin there would be “strong economic measures” taken if Russia invaded Ukraine. “I will look you in the eye and tell you, as President Biden looked President Putin in the eye and told him today, that things we did not do in 2014, we are prepared to do now,” Sullivan added, referring to the US response to the Russian annexation of Crimea. Biden spoke with several European leaders, including British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, to provide an update on his conversation with Putin. “The leaders underscored their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the need for Russia to reduce tensions and engage in diplomacy,” the White House said. Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, is no longer cooperating with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Meadows’ attorney said the panel wanted the former official to discuss matters over which Trump has claimed executive privilege, although lawmakers have rejected the legitimacy of the former president’s claims. The select committee warned it would move forward with holding Meadows in criminal contempt if he did not appear for his scheduled deposition tomorrow. Committee chair Bennie Thompson and vice-chair Liz Cheney said in a statement, “If indeed Mr Meadows refuses to appear, the Select Committee will be left no choice but to advance contempt proceedings and recommend that the body in which Mr Meadows once served refer him for criminal prosecution.” – Joan E Greve Elsewhere in the political landscape today, my colleague Ed Helmore reports on the hurdles that Donald Trump’s new media company, Truth Social, is already hitting even before it gets up and running. On Monday it was revealed that top US financial regulators are scrutinizing the deal between Trump Media &amp; Technology Group Corp (TMTG) and Digital World Acquisition Corporation, an acquisition firm, which agreed to merge to form the new media company. Helmore writes: Donald Trump’s plan to launch “Truth Social”, a special purpose acquisitions backed social media company, early next year may have hit a roadblock after US regulators issued a request for information on the deal on Monday. The request from the SEC and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority for information from Digital World Acquisition Corp (DWAC), a blank-check SPAC that is set to merge with Trump Media &amp; Technology Group, comes as a powerful Republican congressman, Devin Nunes, announced he was stepping out of politics to join the Trump media venture as CEO. The twin developments set the stage for a major political battle over Truth Social, a platform that purportedly plans to challenge Twitter and Facebook, social platforms that have banned or curbed the former president over his involvement in stoking the 6 January Capitol riot. The request for information relates to DWAC board meetings, policies about stock trading, the identities of certain investors and details of communications between DWAC and Trump’s social media firm. It comes three weeks after Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren asked the SEC to investigate possible securities violations at the company. Warren quoted news reports that said DWAC “may have committed securities violations by holding private and undisclosed discussions about the merger as early as May 2021, while omitting this information in [SEC] filing and other public statements.” But investigations into the Trump project appear to predate Warren’s request. “According to the SEC’s request, the investigation does not mean that the SEC has concluded that anyone violated the law or that the SEC has a negative opinion of DWAC or any person, event, or security,” DWAC said in a statement. Maya Yang reports: People in counties that voted for Donald Trump are nearly three times more likely to die from Covid-19 than those who live in counties that voted for Joe Biden, according to a new study by National Public Radio. NPR examined deaths per 100,000 people in about 3,000 counties across the US since May 2021. According to NPR, 1 May was chosen as the start date as it is roughly the time when vaccines became universally available to adults. The study found that areas that voted for Trump by at least 60% in November 2020 had death rates 2.7 times higher than counties that voted heavily for Biden. The study also found that counties that voted for Trump by an even higher percentage had lower vaccination rates and higher Covid-19 death rates. Charles Gaba, an independent analyst who helped review NPR’s methodology, said that in October, the reddest 10th of the country saw death rates six times higher than the bluest 10th. “Those numbers have dropped slightly in recent weeks,” he said. “It’s back down to 5.5 times higher.” Hawaii, Nebraska and Alaska were excluded from the study because they either do not report election results by county or do not report county-level vaccine data. The study only examined the geographic locations of Covid-related deaths. The political views of each person remain unknown. Nevertheless, according to NPR, “the strength of the association, combined with polling information about vaccination, strongly suggests that Republicans are being disproportionately affected”. People in rural Republican areas, and white Republicans in general, tend to be more resistant to getting vaccinated. According to the latest data from the Kaiser Family Fund, the rate of Republican Covid vaccination has plateaued at 59%, while 91% of Democrats have been vaccinated. Read more: The White House has said it “strongly opposes” a resolution introduced by the senators Bernie Sanders, Mike Lee and Rand Paul that would block a proposed $650m arms sale to Saudi Arabia. The bipartisan resolution is driven by concerns over Saudi Arabia’s involvement in the war in Yemen. “As the Saudi government continues to wage its devastating war in Yemen and repress its own people, we should not be rewarding them with more arms sales,” said Sanders in a joint statement from the lawmakers. The proposed arms sale package includes 280 air-to-air missiles and 596 launchers, as well as other equipment and technical support from the US government and contractors. “These missiles are not used to engage ground targets,” the White House said in a statement today. “Saudi Arabia uses these munitions to defend against aerial cross-border attacks, such as Houthi explosive-laden drones.” The senators behind the resolution have argued that the missiles could be used offensively, and asserted there is a lack of assurance that the equipment wouldn’t harm any civilians. The Senate is expected to vote on the resolution tonight. Even as Vladimir Putin has built up an invasion force on his borders, he has repeated a refrain that Russians and Ukrainians are one people, bemoaning a “fraternal” conflict that he himself has provoked. As Putin speaks on Tuesday with Joe Biden, western analysts have likened his focus on Kyiv to an “obsession” while Russians have said Putin believes it his “duty” to reverse Ukraine’s path towards the west. Putin has threatened a broader war in Ukraine over Nato enlargement, demanding “legal guarantees” to ensure Ukraine does not join the military alliance or become a kind of “unofficial” member hosting troops or defense infrastructure. But that fear has gone hand-in-hand with chauvinistic bluster that indicates Moscow has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and the goals it wants to achieve there. “Russia fundamentally misunderstands Ukraine and its nature,” said Pavlo Klimkin, the former Ukrainian foreign minister. “Russia has been continually trying to prove that Ukraine is a sort of failed state, that Ukraine has no statehood, no history, no language, no religion. It’s a kind of separate reality.” In June, Putin published an article in which he doubled down on a public claim that “Russians and Ukrainians were one people”, saying the formation of an ethnically Ukrainian state hostile to Moscow was “comparable in its consequences to the use of weapons of mass destruction against us”. Analysts in Washington were alarmed by the rhetoric because it came shortly after Russia had engineered its first troop build-up, causing a war scare in April. Eugene Rumer and Andrew S Weiss of the Carnegie Endowment called Putin’s text a “historical, political, and security predicate for invading it – if and when that ever became necessary.” Read more: Alexandra Villarreal in Austin and Joanna Walters in New York report: US immigration judges are embroiled in a tense dispute with Joe Biden over their battle to restore union rights taken away from them under the Trump administration. The head of the federal immigration judges’ union has accused the Biden administration of “doubling down” on its predecessor’s efforts to freeze out their association even as they struggle with a backlog of almost 1.5m court cases and staff shortages, which exacerbate due process concerns in their courts. Mimi Tsankov, president of the National Association of Immigration Judges (NAIJ), declared herself “mystified” that Biden’s Department of Justice would not negotiate with her members despite the US president vocally and frequently touting his support for workers’ representation. “This administration has really doubled down on maintaining the [Trump] position that we are not a valid union,” Tsankov said. Tsankov was appointed as an immigration judge in 2006 and is based in New York, where she also teaches at Fordham University School of Law. She spoke to the Guardian only in her union role. After what she described as “decades” of relatively smooth relations between the NAIJ and the Department of Justice, Donald Trump capped four years of rightwing immigration policy by successfully petitioning to strip hundreds of immigration judges of their right to unionize. The hostile move was decided by the Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA), an independent administrative federal agency that controls labor relations between the federal government and its employees, on 2 November 2020, the day before the presidential election. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin held a virtual summit that lasted roughly two hours. According to the White House’s readout of the conversation, Biden shared “deep concerns” about Russia’s increased troop presence along the country’s border with Ukraine, which has stirred fears of a potential invasion. National security adviser Jake Sullivan said Biden urged Putin to embrace “de-escalation and diplomacy” toward Ukraine. Sullivan also said that Biden warned Putin there would be “strong economic measures” taken if Russia invaded Ukraine. “I will look you in the eye and tell you, as President Biden looked President Putin in the eye and told him today, that things we did not do in 2014, we are prepared to do now,” Sullivan added, referring to the US response to the Russian annexation of Crimea. Biden spoke with several European leaders, including British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, to provide an update on his conversation with Putin. “The leaders underscored their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the need for Russia to reduce tensions and engage in diplomacy,” the White House said. Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, is no longer cooperating with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Meadows’ attorney said the panel wanted the former official to discuss matters over which Trump has claimed executive privilege, although lawmakers have rejected the legitimacy of the former president’s claims. The select committee warned it would move forward with holding Meadows in criminal contempt if he did not appear for his scheduled deposition tomorrow. Committee chair Bennie Thompson and vice-chair Liz Cheney said in a statement, “If indeed Mr. Meadows refuses to appear, the Select Committee will be left no choice but to advance contempt proceedings and recommend that the body in which Mr. Meadows once served refer him for criminal prosecution.” Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The White House has released a readout of Joe Biden’s afternoon call with French President Emmanuel Macron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson. “President Biden briefed leaders on his call with President Putin, in which he discussed the serious consequences of Russian military action in Ukraine and the need to de-escalate and return to diplomacy,” the White House said. “The leaders underscored their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the need for Russia to reduce tensions and engage in diplomacy. They agreed their teams will stay in close touch, including in consultation with NATO allies and EU partners, on a coordinated and comprehensive approach.” The Guardian’s Martin Pengelly and David Smith report: Mark Meadows’ attorney, George Terwilliger, wrote in a letter on Tuesday that a deposition would be “untenable” because the 6 January select committee “has no intention of respecting boundaries” concerning questions that Donald Trump has claimed are off-limits because of executive privilege. Executive privilege covers the confidentiality or otherwise of communications between a president and his aides. The Biden administration has waived it in the investigation of 6 January. Trump and key allies entwined in events leading up to the storming of the Capitol, around which five people died, have invoked it. Terwilliger also said he learned over the weekend that the committee had issued a subpoena to a third-party communications provider that he said would include “intensely personal” information. In an interview on the conservative Fox News network, the attorney added: “We have made efforts over many weeks to reach an accommodation with the committee.” But he said the committee’s approach to negotiations and to other witnesses meant Meadows would withdraw cooperation. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has warned Mark Meadows that lawmakers will move forward with holding him in criminal contempt if he does not appear for his scheduled deposition tomorrow. Meadows, who previously served as Donald Trump’s chief of staff, indicated earlier today that he would no longer cooperate with the committee’s investigation. The chair and vice-chair of the select committee, Democrat Bennie Thompson and Republican Liz Cheney, warned Meadows of the potential contempt charge in a new statement. “Mark Meadows has informed the Select Committee that he does not intend to cooperate further with our investigation despite his apparent willingness to provide details about the facts and circumstances surrounding the January 6th attack, including conversations with President Trump, in the book he is now promoting and selling,” Thompson and Cheney said. The two lawmakers noted investigators have many questions and requests for Meadows that do not fall under potential executive privilege claims, including “voluminous official records stored in his personal phone and email accounts”. “Tomorrow’s deposition, which was scheduled at Mr. Meadows’s request, will go forward as planned,” Thompson and Cheney said. “If indeed Mr. Meadows refuses to appear, the Select Committee will be left no choice but to advance contempt proceedings and recommend that the body in which Mr. Meadows once served refer him for criminal prosecution.” National security adviser Jake Sullivan described the summit between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin as a “useful meeting,” although he declined to characterize the Russian leader’s remarks during the discussion. “He can speak for himself,” Sullivan said of Putin, noting that the Russian president was “direct and straightforward” in his conversation with Biden. “This was a real discussion. It was give and take. It was not speeches,” Sullivan said. “It was back and forth. President Putin was deeply engaged.” National security adviser Jake Sullivan said Joe Biden will speak with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Thursday, after the US president held a virtual summit with Vladimir Putin today. Sullivan said the White House does not believe that Putin has yet made a decision about whether to approve an invasion of Ukraine, as Russia builds up its troop presence along the border. “What President Biden did today was lay out very clearly the consequences if he chooses to move,” Sullivan said of the summit. “I will look you in the eye and tell you, as President Biden looked President Putin in the eye and told him today, that things we did not do in 2014, we are prepared to do now,” Sullivan added, referring to the US response to the Russian annexation of Crimea. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing with reporters, and she is joined by national security adviser Jake Sullivan. Sullivan provided more details on Joe Biden’s virtual summit with Vladimir Putin this morning, saying the US president was “direct and straightforward” with the Russian leader. The president warned Putin that the US would respond with “strong economic measures” if Russia invaded Ukraine, Sullivan said. The national security adviser added that Biden urged his Russian counterpart to embrace “de-escalation and diplomacy” toward Ukraine rather than continuing to build up a military presence along the border. The Republican National Committee criticized Joe Biden’s foreign policy agenda after the US president’s virtual summit with Vladimir Putin this morning. “Biden’s weak leadership on the international stage has emboldened our enemies and shaken our allies’ trust,” RNC chair Ronna McDaniel said in a statement. “While claiming to be tough on Russia, Biden gifted Putin the Russian Nord Stream 2 pipeline while simultaneously embarking on a job-killing crusade against the U.S. energy industry. Today’s meeting underscores how Biden’s weak global leadership, Afghanistan disaster, and failure at our border is emblematic of his America last agenda.” In its readout of the summit, the White House said Biden “voiced the deep concerns of the United States and our European Allies about Russia’s escalation of forces surrounding Ukraine and made clear that the U.S. and our Allies would respond with strong economic and other measures in the event of military escalation”. Donald Trump’s plan to launch “Truth Social”, a special purpose acquisitions backed social media company, early next year may have hit a roadblock after US regulators issued a request for information on the deal on Monday. The request from the SEC and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority for information from Digital World Acquisition Corp (DWAC), a blank-check SPAC that is set to merge with Trump Media &amp; Technology Group, comes as a powerful Republican congressman, Devin Nunes, announced he was stepping out of politics to join the Trump media venture as CEO. The twin developments set the stage for a major political battle over Truth Social, a platform that purportedly plans to challenge Twitter and Facebook, social platforms that have banned or curbed the former president over his involvement in stoking the 6 January Capitol riot. About 200 officers have left the US Capitol police since the 6 January insurrection, according to the force’s inspector general. Giving testimony before a Senate committee hearing, Michael Bolton also said the Capitol police had not done enough to improve its practices in the 11 months since the attack. Bolton also said that out of “200 security enhancements” the department told him it would make, “only 61 of those items have supporting documentation to support that those enhancements have occurred”. The Senate Rules Committee hearing was also notable for a suggestion from Shelley Moore Capito, a Republican senator for West Virginia, that Congress should conduct large-scale drills, in the same way many US schools are forced to, in case of an active shooter. Joe Biden voiced “deep concerns” about the escalation of Russian forces surrounding Ukraine during his call with Vladimir Putin today, according to a summary of the conversation published by the White House. The call took in a “range of issues”, the White House said, including the Ukraine situation and ransomware. From the White House: President Biden voiced the deep concerns of the United States and our European allies about Russia’s escalation of forces surrounding Ukraine and made clear that the US and our allies would respond with strong economic and other measures in the event of military escalation. President Biden reiterated his support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and called for de-escalation and a return to diplomacy. The two presidents tasked their teams to follow up and the US will do so in close coordination with allies and partners. The presidents also discussed the US-Russia dialogue on strategic stability, a separate dialogue on ransomware, as well as joint work on regional issues such as Iran. This is Adam Gabbatt, taking over from Joan for a little while. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin held a virtual summit that lasted roughly two hours. The meeting comes as Putin has built up Russia’s troop presence along the country’s border with Ukraine, raising concerns of a potential invasion. Biden is speaking with several European leaders this afternoon to provide an update on his conversation with Putin. The White House said Biden will speak with French President Emmanuel Macron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson. Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, is no longer cooperating with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Meadows’ attorney said the panel wanted the former official to discuss matters over which Donald Trump has claimed executive privilege, although lawmakers have rejected the legitimacy of the former president’s claims. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The White House has shared a photo of Joe Biden’s virtual summit with Russian President Vladimir Putin this morning, which wrapped up about an hour ago. The photo shows the US president, accompanied by secretary of state Antony Blinken and national security adviser Jake Sullivan, in the Situation Room. “.@POTUS held a secure video call with President Putin of Russia today to discuss a range of topics in the US-Russia relationship, including our concerns about Russian military activities on the border with Ukraine, cyber and regional issues,” the White House said on Twitter. The Guardian’s Kim Willsher and Stephanie Kirchgaessner report: French police have arrested a former member of the Saudi royal guard who has also served as a personal security official for the Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman for his suspected involvement in the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. Khalid Aedh al-Otaibi was taken into custody at Paris’s Charles de Gaulle airport as he was about to take a plane to the Saudi capital, Riyadh. The arrest marks the first time that any individual accused by international experts of participating in the grisly state-sponsored execution of the Washington Post columnist has been arrested outside of Saudi Arabia. Otaibi, 33, has been named as one of the “commando” group in the Saudi Arabia consulate in Istanbul where Khashoggi was killed on 2 October 2018. He was on the Interpol red list after an arrest warrant was issued by Turkey. He was travelling under his real name, according to French radio RTL, which broke the story. Joe Biden’s virtual summit with Russian President Vladimir Putin has ended after about two hours, the White House told the press pool. The White House and the Kremlin are expected to release readouts of the summit, which was not viewable by the public. Joe Biden will soon hold a call with several European leaders -- including British Prime Minister Boris Johnson -- to provide an update on his conversation with Putin. National security adviser Jake Sullivan will also join White House press secretary Jen Psaki at her daily briefing this afternoon to provide more details on the call. Stay tuned. Joe Biden will speak to several leaders of European nations this afternoon, after his virtual summit with Vladimir Putin concludes. “This afternoon, President Biden will convene a call with President Macron of France, Chancellor Merkel of Germany, Prime Minister Draghi of Italy, and Prime Minister Johnson of the United Kingdom following his call with President Putin,” the White House told the press pool. “On their call yesterday, the leaders agreed to stay in close touch on a coordinated and comprehensive approach in response to Russia’s military build-up on Ukraine’s borders.” National security adviser Jake Sullivan will also join White House press secretary Jen Psaki for her daily briefing this afternoon to provide reporters with more details on the summit. The Atlantic has published a profile of Peter Meijer, one of ten House Republicans who voted to impeach Donald Trump for inciting the Capitol insurrection. Meijer is now trying to determine his place in a party that remains extremely loyal to the former president, who has dedicated himself to ousting Republicans who pushed for his impeachment or conviction. Meijer told the Atlantic about his experience on January 6, as the insurrection unfolded: On the House floor, moments before the vote, Meijer approached a member who appeared on the verge of a breakdown. He asked his new colleague if he was okay. The member responded that he was not; that no matter his belief in the legitimacy of the election, he could no longer vote to certify the results, because he feared for his family’s safety. ‘Remember, this wasn’t a hypothetical. You were casting that vote after seeing with your own two eyes what some of these people are capable of,’ Meijer says. ‘If they’re willing to come after you inside the U.S. Capitol, what will they do when you’re at home with your kids?’ The Guardian’s Helen Davidson and Vincent Ni report: China has reacted angrily to the US government’s diplomatic boycott of next year’s Winter Olympics, as more countries said they would consider joining the protest over Beijing’s human rights record and New Zealand announced it would not send representatives to the Games. Chinese officials dismissed Washington’s boycott as a “political posturing and manipulation” and tried to discredit the decision by claiming that US diplomats had not even been invited to Beijing in the first place. “The US should stop politicising sports, and stop disrupting and undermining the Beijing Winter Olympics, lest it should affect bilateral dialogue and cooperation in important areas and international and regional issues,” foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian warned. The White House confirmed on Monday that it would not send any official or diplomatic representatives to the Winter Games and Paralympics in February, “given the PRC’s [People’s Republic of China’s] ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. Russian state television shared a clip of the start of Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden’s virtual summit this morning, which started about 45 minutes ago. The clip shows the American and Russian leaders greeting each other before beginning their discussion about the situation in Ukraine. The rest of the summit will not be viewable by the public, but both the White House and the Kremlin will likely release readouts of the conversation after it wraps up. Joe Biden’s virtual summit with Russian President Vladimir Putin has officially begun, a White House official told the press pool. The conversation comes as Putin has built up Russia’s troop presence along the country’s border with Ukraine, raising concerns of a potential invasion. According to CNN, the Pentagon is now making plans to evacuate US citizens from Ukraine if Russia does invade the country. The White House is expected to release a readout of the closed-door summit after it concludes. Stay tuned. Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, reportedly plans to stop cooperating with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Meadows’ attorney, George Terwilliger, told Fox News, “We have made efforts over many weeks to reach an accommodation with the committee.” Terwilliger claimed that Meadows was willing to appear before the committee and discuss matter that are not protected by executive privilege. However, the panel’s leaders have indicated they wished to discuss issues where Donald Trump has attempted to claim executive privilege, after the lawmakers dismissed the legitimacy of the former president’s claims. Meadows is expected to appear on Sean Hannity’s Fox News show tonight to discuss his decision. The Biden administration is reportedly preparing for a potential evacuation of US citizens from Ukraine if Russia invades the country. CNN reports: The contingency planning is being led by the Pentagon, [half a dozen] sources said, and comes as the administration briefs Congress on how the US is preparing. In a ‘gloomy’ briefing to senators by senior State Department official Victoria Nuland on Monday night, Nuland outlined the tough sanctions package being prepared by the administration in response to a potential Russian attack, but acknowledged that the US’ options to deter an invasion are fairly limited, a person familiar with the briefing said. It is still unclear whether Russian President Vladimir Putin has made the decision to invade, US officials stressed. But he has amassed enough forces, equipment and supplies near Ukraine’s borders that he could move to attack on very short notice. Biden and Putin are scheduled to hold a virtual call starting in about five minutes, and that conversation may inform the Pentagon’s preparations for a potential evacuation. Stay tuned. Before his virtual summit with Vladimir Putin, Joe Biden made a trip this morning to the World War II Memorial in Washington. The president and his wife, Dr Jill Biden, laid a wreath at the memorial to commemorate the 80th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. A swift reprisal package against Russia – including US troops and Patriot missiles stationed in the Baltics, the cutting off of Russia from the Swift banking payments system and reinstated sanctions on the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline – must be prepared now in case it invades Ukraine, the Latvian foreign minister has said. The warning from Edgars Rinkēvičs comes as Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin prepare to hold talks about the growing tensions. The US has said it would send reinforcements to Nato’s eastern flank in the event of an invasion, as well as imposing severe new economic measures against Russia. With an estimated 100,000 Russian troops already gathered within striking distance of the borders, the situation is the worst it’s been since 2015, when Moscow staged a large-scale incursion into Ukraine, clandestinely sending tanks and artillery to encircle Ukrainian troops and compelling Kyiv to sign a peace agreement in Minsk that has since come close to collapse. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will hold a virtual call with Vladimir Putin today, amid intensifying concerns about the increased Russian troop presence along the country’s border with Ukraine. The Guardian’s Julian Borger reports: Biden goes into Tuesday’s virtual summit with Vladimir Putin, after days of close consultation with European allies on a joint response to an invasion of Ukraine, armed with a wide range of punitive measures at his disposal. There would be increased military support for Kyiv and a bolstering of Nato’s eastern flank, but the primary focus would be on sanctions. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said they would include ‘high-impact economic measures that we’ve refrained from taking in the past’. ‘I think Biden will lay out in considerable detail what sanctions the US will undertake,’ said Anders Åslund, adjunct professor at the center for Eurasian, Russian and east European studies at Georgetown University. ‘There are very many tools that they have available.’ Previewing the summit yesterday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said, “It is an opportunity for the president to underscore, of course, US concerns with Russian military activities on the border with Ukraine and reaffirm the United States support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.” The summit is set to get underway in the next hour. Stay tuned.Scott Morrison says he suspects the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian may not run for the Sydney seat of Warringah at the forthcoming federal election. Berejiklian, who stood down as a result of an Icac investigation which is yet to deliver its findings, is being lobbied by federal Liberals to run for Tony Abbott’s former seat to win it back from the independent MP Zali Steggall. A string of senior Liberals, including Abbott and the former prime minister John Howard, have backed Berejiklian to make the switch to federal politics, despite the incomplete Icac investigation. A Guardian Essential poll published on Tuesday found NSW voters were sympathetic to the former premier, with most agreeing with Morrison’s criticism of the anti-corruption investigation. Amid the mounting speculation about Berejiklian’s intentions, the prime minister on Tuesday watered down expectations, saying she had “suffered terribly” as a result of the Icac hearings and may choose not to run. “If she wished to put herself forward, of course I would welcome her,” Morrison said. “That’s a decision for Gladys, ultimately, and she may choose not to go ahead here, I suspect. That’s a matter for her, and I respect her choice.” The prime minister said he believed she had been an “outstanding” premier, treasurer and transport minister and would make a “a continued strong contribution” to public life if she decided to put herself forward. “But if she doesn’t wish to, I equally respect that decision. I know it’s been a very difficult time for her in recent times. She has suffered terribly in terms of things that have been aired publicly and I think that was just awful, awful to watch, terrible. “And so I can totally respect that if she didn’t want to go ahead, then that would be totally her choice about what she wants to do and the contribution she wants to make going forward.” The former premier resigned in September after Icac revealed it was investigating whether she broke the law by failing to report a reasonable suspicion of corruption on the part of her ex-lover, the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. Berejiklian, who has denied any wrongdoing and says she had no reason to suspect Maguire, said at the time she had “no option but to resign the office of premier”. The push for Berejiklian to run in the seat comes amid frustration that the NSW branch of the party has yet to finalise preselections in a raft of target seats in the state. The party is yet to finalise candidates for Dobell, Hughes, Gilmore, Bennelong, Macquarie, Parramatta, Greenway and Eden-Monaro. Factional chiefs are trying to negotiate a settlement for their preferred candidates, with expectations that a deal will be done to prevent sitting MPs from any challenge. • This article was amended on 10 December 2021 to remove the description of Warringah as a “blue-ribbon seat”.Consumers using cryptocurrency exchanges and buy now, pay later services could be protected under what the federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, says would be the largest reform to Australia’s payments system in 25 years. Frydenberg, in a speech on Wednesday, will promise a “comprehensive payments and crypto-asset reform plan” to boost innovation and consumer uptake of digital technologies. Throughout 2022, the federal government will consult on potential reforms including a central bank digital currency, a licencing framework for digital currency exchanges, and fixing the problem of fintech de-banking (where banks refuse to offer services to certain individuals or businesses). The package aims to give the federal government more oversight including enhanced powers for the treasurer to set rules for payments systems. The Coalition claims this would result in better fees, transparency and competition in the buy now, pay later market. The crypto reform proposal promises consumers would be allowed to buy and sell assets in a regulated environment, with new rules for businesses that hold crypto assets on behalf of consumers. Investment in cryptocurrency is becoming more mainstream in Australia, with the Commonwealth bank announcing in November it would allow customers to buy and sell cryptocurrencies on its platforms. But the sector is still poorly regulated. On Tuesday, myCryptoWallet, one of the country’s highest-profile cryptocurrency trading platforms, reportedly collapsed. Australia is already considered a market-leader in buy now, pay later technology, due to the success of ASX-listed Afterpay, stocks of which soared during the pandemic before it was bought for A$39bn by US fintech giant Square. According to a draft of his speech, Frydenberg will tell the Australia Israel Chamber of Commerce and Industry the reforms would help business by addressing “the ambiguity that can exist about the regulatory and tax treatment of crypto assets and new payment methods”. “For consumers, these changes will establish a regulatory framework to underpin their growing use of crypto assets and clarify the treatment of new payment methods,” he will say. Frydenberg notes that up to 17% of Australians own cryptocurrency, warning that without regulatory changes it will be “Silicon Valley that determines the future of our payments system”. “Australia must retain its sovereignty over our payment system. These are significant shifts that we need to be in front of. “What is clear is that if we embrace these developments, Australia has an enormous opportunity to capitalise on the convergence between finance and technology.” Frydenberg cites the fact Australia’s tech sector already generates $167bn in output and employs 850,000 people. There are more than 220 million participants in global crypto markets, with assets now worth over US$2 trillion. “Australia has an opportunity to be among the leading countries in the world in leveraging this new technology,” Frydenberg will say in Wednesday’s speech. Much of the reform package is still to be determined in consultation with industry including a “strategic plan for the payments system” to be delivered by mid-2022. A federal election is due by May. The commonwealth plans to consult financial regulators, states and territories to address the issue of “debanking”. Consumer Action Law Centre chief executive, Gerard Brody, welcomed the consultation as “an opportunity to ensure [Buy-Now Pay-later] is regulated effectively and consistently with other credit products, to address the significant risk of debt and financial stress associated with these products”. “There is no doubt that crypto exchanges need to be regulated more akin to banks—these entities are now holding significant sums of peoples’ money and investments, and there needs to be accountability,” he said. In August 2019, Frydenberg set out a timetable to legislate the recommendations of the Hayne royal commission into the banking and financial services. In January 2021, Guardian Australia revealed that more than half of the recommendations had either been abandoned or were yet to be fully implemented.This blog is closing now but you can continue to keep up wuth developments at the new blog that I’ve just started up here. Mexico’s health ministry reported 289 more deaths from Covid-19 on Tuesday evening local time, bringing the country’s death toll since the pandemic began to 295,601. A new Omicron variant, known as Omicron “like”, has been identified in an overseas arrival to Queensland from South Africa, Australian Associated Press reports. Confirmation of the new lineage came as health authorities identified another case of Omicron in an overseas arrival from Nigeria, health minister Yvette D’Ath said on Wednesday “I want to give a huge thank you to our forensic (and) scientific services, because it is their work ... with the international committee that has led to the ... reclassifying of Omicron into two lineages, and we have both of them here in Queensland,” D’Ath said. The case from Nigeria is currently in hotel quarantine in Cairns and everyone on the direct flight from Sydney has been deemed a close contact. Confirmation of Omicron in Queensland come as the state reports two new cases in quarantine on Wednesday, one from interstate and one from overseas. Hello - this is Martin Farrer taking over from Léonie Chao-Fong on the blog. We’ve got some more detail from South Korea about its increasingly serious outbreak. Prime minister Kim Boo-kyum said on Wednesday morning that daily cases topped 7,000 for the first time on Tuesday, putting hospital capacity under strain as deaths and severe cases rise. The government will mobilise additional personnel to oversee coronavirus patients treating themselves at home and improve the emergency transfer system to hospitals for those who develop severe symptoms under the at-home treatment, Kim told a Covid-19 response meeting. Private clinics will also treat COVID-19 patients in addition to large hospitals. With 80% of the country’s cases in the greater Seoul area, authorities have struggled to secure enough beds for hospitalised patients. South Korea imposed stricter measures on Monday, including reduced numbers of people allowed at private gatherings and expanding vaccine pass mandates to contain growing coronavirus infections and the Omicron variant. South Korea has so far confirmed 36 cases of the Omicron variant. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. Before I hand over to my colleague, here is a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: Boris Johnson is facing accusations of lying after senior No 10 officials were filmed joking about a staff Christmas party that would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. Johnson and his aides have repeatedly denied that the event broke Covid rules or took place at all. The Metropolitan Police has confirmed it is reviewing the video footage. Separately, the UK’s education department confirmed a report that some staff and the then education secretary Gavin Williamson held an office party last year, while London was in tier 2, the second-highest level of Covid restrictions. Early data from South Africa suggests the Omicron variant can partially evade protection from the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine. Researchers found there was about a fortyfold reduction in vaccine-induced antibodies that could neutralise the Omicron variant relative to an earlier strain. The African Union has called for an urgent end to travel restrictions imposed on some of its member states, arguing that the measures effectively penalise governments for timely data sharing in line with international health regulations. Scientists have identified a “stealth” version of the Omicron variant which cannot be detected with the routine tests that public health officials are using to track its spread around the world. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but researchers say it is genetically distinct and so may well behave differently. Daily cases in South Korea have surpassed 7,000 for the first time since the start of the pandemic, the country’s prime minister Kim Boo-kyum said. No more than 10 visitors will be allowed in private homes in Norway, and people must keep a distance of at least one metre from anyone outside of their household in new restrictions introduced by the government today. Prime minister Jonas Gahr Støre warned people to expect a “different Christmas holiday” following a recent surge of infections and hospitalisations. From Wednesday, people in Sweden will face new measures to curb rising Covid infections, including renewed social distancing, home-working and the use of face masks on public transport. “We need to work together so that the situation doesn’t get worse, so today we are presenting further precautionary measures,” the prime minister, Magdalena Andersson said. Nicola Sturgeon urged companies in Scotland to ensure that all staff who can are working from home until the middle of January, telling people to do a lateral flow test “on every occasion” they intend to mix with others over the festive season, whether at work, socialising or going shopping. Preliminary evidence indicates that the Omicron variant likely has a higher degree of transmissibility but causes less severe illness, US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said, warning it will take a few weeks to reach any definitive conclusions. EU health agencies have recommended that Covid vaccines be mixed and matched for both initial courses and booster doses. Evidence suggests that the combination of viral vector vaccines and mRNA vaccines produces good levels of antibodies against the coronavirus, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) said in a joint statement. Daily cases in South Korea have surpassed 7,000 for the first time since the start of the pandemic, the country’s prime minister Kim Boo-kyum said. The Yonhap news agency quotes the PM at a government Covid-19 response meeting: In the capital area, where 80% of total cases are reported, we continue to add hospital beds with active cooperation from the medical community, but still it is tough to catch up with the pace of rising virus cases. The Omicron variant can partially evade protection from the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, according to early data from South Africa. Prof Alex Sigal, a professor at the Africa Health Research Institute, said there was “a very large drop” in neutralisation of the Omicron variant relative to an earlier strain. The lab tested blood from 12 people who had been vaccinated with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine but had not received a booster shot. Researchers found there was about a fortyfold reduction in vaccine-induced antibodies that could neutralise the Omicron variant. The preliminary data in the manuscript has not yet been peer-reviewed. The UK Department for Education has admitted it held a social gathering of staff last December in contravention to Covid social distancing rules. It comes after a report claimed that then education secretary Gavin Williamson threw a party where he delivered a short speech before officials and ministers knocked back glasses of wine. Up to two dozen of Williamson’s staff gathered for “drinks and canapes” in the DfE cafe on 10 December, the Mirror reports. At the time, London was in tier 2, which banned any social mixing between households. One source told the paper: There were lots of people gathered in the cafe area, mingling and drinking wine. It was just so reckless. While another said: He hosted a drinks do when people were considering whether they could spend Christmas with their families. In response, a DfE spokesperson said: On December 10 2020 a gathering of colleagues who were already present at the office - and who had worked together throughout the pandemic, as they couldn’t work from home - took place in the DfE office building in London at a time when the city was subject to tier 2 restrictions. The gathering was used to thank those staff for their efforts during the pandemic. Drinks and snacks were brought by those attending and no outside guests or supporting staff were invited or present. While this was work-related, looking back we accept it would have been better not to have gathered in this way at that particular time. Just a week before the party, Williamson urged people to take the “responsible approach” of following social distancing and self-isolation rules. The Metropolitan Police has confirmed it is reviewing video footage of senior UK No 10 officials discussing a Christmas party. A statement from the force said: We are aware of footage obtained by ITV News relating to alleged breaches of the Health Protection Regulations at a Government building in December 2020. It is our policy not to routinely investigate retrospective breaches of the Covid-19 regulations, however the footage will form part of our considerations. Preliminary and anecdotal evidence indicates that the Omicron variant likely has a higher degree of transmissibility but causes less severe illness, according to US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci. Speaking during a White House coronavirus task force briefing today, he said: It appears that with the cases that are seen, we are not seeing a very severe profile of disease. In fact, it might be — and I underscore might be — less severe as shown by the ratio of hospitalisations per number of new cases. More data is expected next week, Fauci said, but it will take a few weeks to reach any definitive conclusions. The UK’s scientific and medical community have been responding to the leaked video showing senior Downing Street staff joking about holding a Christmas party just days after the event is alleged to have taken place last December. Trisha Greenhalgh, professor of primary care health sciences at the University of Oxford, slammed Boris Johnson’s then press secretary Allegra Stratton for laughing in the footage. Prof Christina Pagel, a member of the Independent Sage committee, said the video was “damning” and revealed the government’s hypocrisy while people were making enormous sacrifices. Loughborough University data analyst Dr Duncan Robertson said the leaked video could impact how the public heed public health measures and restrictions. The African Union has called for an urgent end to travel restrictions imposed on some of its member states. In a statement, the AU said the measures effectively penalise governments for timely data sharing in line with international health regulations, and could act “as a disincentive for information sharing in the future, potentially posing a threat to health security on the continent and globally”. Three Omicron cases have been confirmed in total, the Department of Health said. Two are from the same household in the greater Belfast area and a third unconnected case is in the South Eastern Trust area. All three positive cases have a link to travel from Great Britain to Northern Ireland, the department said, adding there is no current indication of wider community transmission present. The UK Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, called on Boris Johnson to “come clean and apologise” after TV footage emerged showing senior No 10 officials joking on camera about a Christmas party in lockdown last December. In the video obtained by ITV, an adviser to the PM is seen joking with Allegra Stratton, Johnson’s then press secretary, about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. The footage was shot on 22 December 2020, just four days after the date on which multiple sources have said there was a staff party inside Downing Street, which would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. Johnson’s spokesperson and several ministers have insisted that any event complied with Covid rules, without saying why, before the spokesperson changed stance on Monday, saying no party had taken place. On Tuesday, Johnson’s spokesperson had reiterated that this was Downing Street’s view, saying: “I don’t think there is anything to add to what I have said previously. Our position has not changed.” But the video – recorded as part of preparations for planned daily televised briefings hosted by Stratton, which were later abandoned – will raise fresh questions about No 10’s version of events and increase pressure for a formal inquiry. Starmer said that during the lockdown last December people followed rules “even when that meant being separated from their families, locked down and – tragically for many – unable to say goodbye to their loved ones”, adding: They had a right to expect that the government was doing the same. To lie and to laugh about those lies is shameful. The prime minister now needs to come clean, and apologise. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, described the video as “damning”, adding: When every individual up and down the country was told to stay at home in order to protect the NHS, the Tories were instead having a Christmas party which, as a senior staff member has now confirmed, was “not socially distanced”. If this is true, then the prime minister’s position is untenable and he must remove himself from office immediately. Read the full story by my colleague Peter Walker here: Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over from Lucy Campbell. A global trial of a Covid-19 vaccine from GlaxoSmithKline and Canada’s Medicago has produced “positive efficacy and safety results”, the companies announced. If approved, it would become the world’s first plant-based coronavirus vaccine. The late-stage trial, which studied 24,000 adults across six countries, found that the overall efficacy rate of the vaccine candidate was 71%, rising to 75.3% against the Delta variant. The Omicron variant was not circulating at the time of the trial but GSK said it is planning to test the vaccine against the new strain. GSK and Medicago have sought approval from the UK’s MHRA watchdog, the US Food and Drug Administration, Canadian regulator Health Canada and the World Health Organization (WHO). Before I hand over to my colleague shortly, here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today: Norway introduced stricter rules to limit the spread of Covid, including a cap on the number of visitors in private homes and shortening the hours bars and restaurants can serve alcohol. The country has seen a surge of Covid infections in recent weeks, followed by a rise in the number of hospitalisations. “We really wished we were done with the pandemic. But the situation is now so serious that we must put in place new measures to keep control,” the prime minister, Jonas Gahr Støre said. “Therefore it will be a different Christmas holiday this year as well,” he said. No more than 10 visitors will be allowed in private homes, and people must keep a distance of at least one metre from anyone who is not a member of their household. The serving of alcohol must stop at midnight every day, he added. Scientists have identified a “stealth” version of the Omicron variant which cannot be detected with the routine tests that public health officials are using to track its spread around the world. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but it lacks a particular genetic change that allows lab-based PCR tests to be used as a rough and ready means of flagging up probable cases. Researchers say it is too early to know whether the new form of Omicron will spread in the same way as the standard Omicron variant, but that the “stealthy” version is genetically distinct and so may well behave differently. Story here. Sweden will roll out a raft of measures to curb rising Covid infections, urging renewed social distancing, home-working and the use of face masks on public transport, the government said. “We need to work together to that the situation doesn’t get worse, so today we are presenting further precautionary measures,” the prime minister, Magdalena Andersson said. The measures will take effect from Wednesday. Nicola Sturgeon urged Scottish firms to ensure that all staff who can are working from home until the middle of January, telling people to do a lateral flow test “on every occasion” they intend to mix with others over the festive season, whether at work, socialising or going shopping. The UK has reported a further 101 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant, taking the total number of cases across the country to 437. Of the new cases, 72 were confirmed in England, 28 in Scotland, and one in Wales. There have been no new cases reported in Northern Ireland. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, said early indications suggest the Omicron variant is more transmissible than Delta. Johnson made the comment as he updated his team of ministers on the latest Covid situation at a cabinet meeting on Tuesday morning. Giving an account of the meeting, the prime minister’s official spokesman said: “The prime minister said it was too early to draw conclusions on the characteristics of Omicron but early indications were that it is more transmissible than Delta.” But the spokesman said there was no debate around the cabinet table on whether to introduce “plan B” of the government’s plans to control the virus this winter. The spread of Omicron in Wales is expected to reach its peak by the end of next month, the health minister, Eluned Morgan, said. She said: “We are expecting a significant wave of Omicron to hit Wales. The modelling suggests it will reach its peak by around the end of January, which is why there is an urgency in terms of getting people vaccinated and boosters done as soon as possible.” Poland will introduce compulsory Covid vaccinations for doctors, teachers and security service personnel from 1 March, the health minister said, as he announced a raft of new measures to curb the spread of the virus. Niedzielski said the limit on the number of people allowed in public spaces such as restaurants and cinemas would be lowered to 30%, not including vaccinated people, from the current 50%. Businesses will also be required to check customers’ Covid certificates. Nightclubs will be closed from 15 December and on New Year’s Eve. On New Year’s Day, only 100 people will be allowed to enter, not counting those who have been vaccinated. Additionally, travellers from outside the European Union’s Schengen passport-free zone will need to show a negative test result from 15 December and schools will return to distance learning for periods just before and after the Christmas holiday. Niedzielski said that the government was also working on a draft law that would allow employers to check workers’ Covid test results. EU health agencies have recommended that Covid vaccines be mixed and matched for both initial courses and booster doses as the region battles rising cases ahead of Christmas. Evidence suggests that the combination of viral vector vaccines and mRNA vaccines produces good levels of antibodies against the coronavirus, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) said in a joint statement. Such an approach “may offer flexibility in terms of vaccination options, particularly to reduce the impact on the vaccine rollout should a vaccine not be available for any reason”, the EMA and ECDC said, while urging people to get fully vaccinated. However, the EMA and ECDC said more research was needed to support the use of mixing and matching in people with weak immune systems, such as older people and those with chronic conditions like cancer, and for two-dose mRNA vaccine regimens. Spain’s health commission approved vaccinations against Covid for children aged five to 11, following a recommendation by the European Union’s health regulator late last month. Spanish authorities expect to start vaccinating children on 13 December as the first doses of Pfizer and BioNTech’s vaccine are expected arrive, the health minister, Carolina Darias, said. The Norwegian government introduced stricter rules on Tuesday to limit the spread of Covid, including a cap on the number of visitors in private homes and shortening the hours bars and restaurants can serve alcohol. The country has seen a surge of Covid infections in recent weeks, followed by a rise in the number of hospitalisations. “We really wished we were done with the pandemic. But the situation is now so serious that we must put in place new measures to keep control,” the prime minister, Jonas Gahr Støre, told a news conference. “Therefore it will be a different Christmas holiday this year as well,” he said. No more than 10 visitors will be allowed in private homes, and people must keep a distance of at least one metre from anyone who is not a member of their household. The serving of alcohol must stop at midnight every day, he added. Companies hit by the restrictions will receive compensations from the government, the finance minister Trygve Slagsvold Vedum, said. The government last week reimposed some restrictions on travellers, requiring that anyone arriving in the country must test for the coronavirus and that people wear face masks in most crowded places, but infections have still continued to rise. France has registered a surge in Covid hospitalisations as a rise in new infections in mid-November translates into patient numbers. The health ministry reported that the number of patients with coronavirus in hospitals rose by 618 to 12,714, the second-highest net one-day increase this year behind the net increase of 732 on 6 April when the patient tally was above 30,600. Due to one of Europe’s highest vaccination rates, a rise in new cases now has less impact on hospital numbers than in the spring. France also reported that the number of patients in intensive care units with Covid rose by 160 to 2,351, the second-highest increase this year. On 6 April, ICU numbers rose by 193 to 5,626. On Monday, France reported a seven-day moving average of nearly 43,000 new infections per day, a new high for the year, but the rate of increase has been slowing for over two weeks. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said she supports an intellectual property waiver on Covid-19 vaccines, so that low and middle income countries can manufacture their own jabs. Responding to a question from Joe FitzPatrick MSP, asking if she supports a waiver of intellectual property rules to ensure equitable access to Covid vaccines, Sturgeon said: I do support the calls of the People’s Vaccine Alliance. I certainly call on the prime minister to take whatever action he can to ensure that we get vaccines equitably to the population of the world as quickly as possible. I also take very seriously the responsibility on the shoulders of my government to make sure we are doing everything possible. Covid is a global crisis. It is very understandable that often we focus on the implications for ourselves and our own country, but it is an unprecedented global crisis. Earlier in the pandemic, the government allocated funding for our own international development budget to provide Covid support for partner countries Malawi, Rwanda, Zambia, and Pakistan. The UK also participates in Covax, which is an important way to help other nations access vaccines. But it is fundamentally the case, as Omicron is reminding us, that until everybody across the world is safe, none of us are truly safe. So we are very keen to explore further routes that support equitable access to vaccines. She added that she would write to the prime minister to encourage him to take action on the issue and to offer the full cooperation of the Scottish government. The first minister’s comments were welcomed by Liz Murray, head of campaigns at Global Justice Now Scotland. Murray said: The British government has repeatedly blocked efforts to expand access to Covid-19 vaccines around the world through an emergency suspension of intellectual property rules, including vaccine patents. But today, Nicola Sturgeon has made clear that the UK does not do this in Scotland’s name. The first minister’s statement will be welcomed by all those in the global south who have been calling for this life saving measure for more than a year. A businessman who has a severe nut allergy has accused the UK government of endangering his life after he was served nuts and traces of nuts during hotel quarantine after returning from a work trip to South Africa. Richard Lace, 40, went into anaphylactic shock and had to call for an ambulance after eating two mouthfuls of a rice dish at a hotel at Heathrow on 3 December. The Department of Health and Social Care has now released him from quarantine on medical grounds – something Lace had requested to no avail four days previously – after it was contacted by the Guardian. “It really is ridiculous. They had the information from day one. They had two opportunities to get it right and not kill me and I can’t trust that they won’t kill me on the third occasion,” he said. Read the full story here: Quarantined man goes into allergic shock after Heathrow hotel serves nuts Finland’s prime minister came under sustained criticism on Tuesday after it was revealed she stayed out dancing until the early hours on the weekend despite knowing she had been exposed to Covid-19, AFP reports. Sanna Marin, 36, apologised on Monday after the gossip magazine Seiska published photos of her dancing in a Helsinki nightclub with friends on Saturday night until almost 4am, hours after her foreign minister, Pekka Haavisto, tested positive for coronavirus. “My husband and I... had been out to eat, been shopping in town, seen friends and also spent time [enjoying] the evening and nightlife,” the Social Democrat leader wrote on Facebook. She added that she was told by an official that the coronavirus guidelines did not require her to isolate, despite having been in contact with an infected person. “I should have used better judgement and double-checked the guidance given to me. I am very sorry for not understanding that I needed to do that,” Marin wrote. A poll commissioned by TV channel MTV3 found that two-thirds of respondents thought Marin’s night out was a “serious mistake”. Opposition parties also slammed Marin for potentially breaking official Covid guidelines and for missing a later text message warning her to isolate. The finance minister, Annika Saarikko, from the Centre Party, the ruling coalition partner, stopped short of criticising Marin directly. However Saarikko told the Helsingin Sanomat newspaper that she was “glad I was at home” when she received the text message to isolate, adding that she had cancelled her plans for the next day. Finland has sustained some of Europe’s lowest incidences of the virus throughout the pandemic, recording more than 196,000 cases and 1,384 deaths in the country of 5.5 million. However infections are now at an all-time high, with 308 new cases per 100,000 population in the last fortnight. The country has also recorded eight cases of the Omicron variant. Scientists have identified a “stealth” version of the Omicron variant which cannot be detected with the routine tests that public health officials are using to track its spread around the world, my colleagues Ian Sample and Peter Walker report. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but it lacks a particular genetic change that allows lab-based PCR tests to be used as a rough and ready means of flagging up probable cases. Researchers say it is too early to know whether the new form of Omicron will spread in the same way as the standard Omicron variant, but that the “stealthy” version is genetically distinct and so may well behave differently. The stealth variant was first spotted among Covid virus genomes submitted in recent days from South Africa, Australia and Canada, but the difficulty in detecting the variant means it may already have spread more widely. Among the few dozen cases identified so far, none are in the UK. Read the full story here: Scientists find ‘stealth’ version of Omicron not identifiable with PCR test Britain’s lockdown drinking habits may have had fatal consequences. Deaths caused by alcohol in 2020 increased by almost 19%, marking the biggest rise since records began, according to the Office for National Statistics. There were 8,974 deaths from alcohol specific causes registered in the 12 month period, up from 7,565 deaths in 2019 – the highest year-on-year increase since the data series began in 2001. It bucks a trend in which fatalities from alcohol remained stable for the previous seven years. In England, the number of people drinking more than 14 units a week increased after the first national lockdown, according to surveys by Public Health England (PHE), and has remained at similar levels since. As pubs shut, drinking at home soared, with off-licence sales of beer rising 31% and spirits 26% compared with 2019. Dr James Tucker, the head of the government’s data quality hub, said: There will be many complex factors behind the elevated risk since spring 2020. For instance, Public Health England analysis has shown consumption patterns have changed since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, which could have led to hospital admissions and ultimately deaths. We’ve seen increases in loneliness, depression and anxiety during the pandemic and these could also be factors. However, it will be some time before we fully understand the impact of all of these. Close to eight out of 10 of the deaths were from alcoholic liver disease and although alcohol-related cirrhosis can take a decade or more to develop, most deaths occur as a result of acute-on-chronic liver failure owing to recent alcohol intake, a PHE study in July found. Scotland and Northern Ireland continued to have the highest rates of alcohol deaths, but the fastest rises were in Wales and England. The sharpest rise in deaths in England was in the West Midlands, followed by the south-west and London. Nearly twice as many men died as women, which is consistent with previous years. Read the full story here: Britain’s drinking deaths rose at record rate in pandemic Omicron has spread across Denmark, health authorities said on Tuesday after registering large outbreaks of the variant in the east and west of the country. “We now have society-wide infection with the Omicron variant,” director of the Danish Patient Safety Authority, Anette Lykke Petri, told reporters. Denmark has so far registered a total of 398 Omicron cases. Sweden will roll out a raft of measures to curb rising Covid infections, urging renewed social distancing, home-working and the use of face masks on public transport, the government said on Tuesday. “We see an increased spread of infection, but still from low levels,” the prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, told a news conference. The measures will take effect from Wednesday. “We need to work together to that the situation doesn’t get worse, so today we are presenting further precautionary measures,” Andersson said. Cases in Sweden have started to rise in recent weeks after a relatively calm autumn. Hospitalisations and the number of patients requiring intensive care are still among the lowest per capita in Europe but have also started to creep up. There will be no changes this week to Covid restrictions in Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon has said, while telling the Scottish public “it is time for all of us to go back to basics”. She urged employers to ensure that all staff who can are working from home until the middle of January, telling people to do a lateral flow test “on every occasion” they intend to mix with others over the festive season, whether at work, socialising or going shopping. At her regular Covid briefing to MSPs, Sturgeon confirmed 99 cases of the Omicron variant in Scotland, an increase of 28 since yesterday [see 2.47pm.]. To give a sense of the speed of increase – albeit at this stage from a low level – the figure I reported this time last week was nine. She said health officials estimate the “R” number associated with the new variant may be well over 2, and that there are confirmed cases in nine of Scotland’s 14 health board areas, “suggesting that community transmission is becoming more widespread, and possibly more sustained, across the country”. Underlining the significance of this speed of increase, Sturgeon warned: The sheer weight of numbers of people who could be infected as a result of increased transmissibility and some immune evasion will create this pressure even if the disease the new variant causes in individuals is no more severe than Delta. The UK has reported a further 101 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant, the UK Health Security Agency said on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases across the country to 437. Of the 101 new cases, 72 were confirmed in England, 28 in Scotland, and one in Wales. There have been no new cases reported in Northern Ireland. Earlier, the prime minister, Boris Johnson, said early indications suggest the variant is more transmissible than Delta [see 12.23pm.]. Johnson made the comment as he updated his team of ministers on the latest Covid situation at a cabinet meeting on Tuesday morning. Giving an account of the meeting, the prime minister’s official spokesman said: The prime minister said it was too early to draw conclusions on the characteristics of Omicron but early indications were that it is more transmissible than Delta. But the spokesman said there was no debate around the cabinet table on whether to introduce “plan B” of the government’s plans to control the virus this winter. Confirming that a total of 99 Omicron cases have so far been found in Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon told MSPs on Tuesday that the R number of the new variant could be above two. The spread of Omicron is expected to reach its peak by the end of next month, the Welsh health minister Eluned Morgan has said. She told a press briefing in Cardiff: We are expecting a significant wave of Omicron to hit Wales. The modelling suggests it will reach its peak by around the end of January, which is why there is an urgency in terms of getting people vaccinated and boosters done as soon as possible. Morgan said health boards are again setting up more vaccination centres, including walk-in and drive-through clinics with longer opening hours. Local government officials, firefighters and students are to provide support to the clinics and Morgan called for volunteers to come forward. No new restrictions have been introduced in Wales in response to the new variant, but the first minister, Mark Drakeford, is due to announce the Labour-controlled government’s latest coronavirus review on Friday. The Welsh Conservatives are worried that the government could extend its vaccine passport scheme (which currently affects settings such as nightclubs) to other hospitality businesses. The shadow health minister, Russell George, said: The possibility of extending vaccine passports to hospitality business is a slap in the face for one of the worst-affected sectors of the pandemic. They are coercive, ineffective, anti-business, and have no evidence base whatsoever. Concern has been growing in Norway over a sharp rise in coronavirus infections across the country, including 29 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant. That includes 17 Omicron cases reported in Oslo, many of them linked to a super-spreader event at a nightclub where 130 Covid cases were reported. Amid concern over rising hospitalisations, combined with the impending flu season, the Norwegian government is expected to announce new restrictions on Tuesday evening. In the last 24 hours, Norway reported 4,117 new infections, an increase of 1,240 on the same day last week. Most striking, however, has been the outbreak linked to a Christmas dinner at Oslo’s Louise nightclub. There were 130 Covid cases recorded from the event, with Norwegian media quoting Tine Ravlo, an infection control doctor, suggesting that perhaps half could be Omicron. The club had been booked by Scatec, a renewable-energy company, for its Christmas party, despite the fact that only vaccinated employees were invited and had been required to take a rapid Covid test the day before. It appears that some guests had recently returned from South Africa and may have been infected there. In this instalment of the Guardian’s Lost to the virus series, Sirin Kale tells the story of Michele Brown, a mother-of-two who carefully shielded until the UK government said it was safe to see friends and family. She was fully vaccinated against Covid, but had a suppressed immune system and had no idea how her existing conditions could affect her. She died last July at the age of 58. Modern society has largely exiled death to the outskirts of existence, but Covid-19 has forced us all to confront it. Our relationship to the planet, each other and time itself can never be the same again. Here is the long read from Jacqueline Rose: Life after death: how the pandemic has transformed our psychic landscape Poland will introduce compulsory Covid vaccinations for doctors, teachers and security service personnel from 1 March, the health minister said on Tuesday, as he announced a raft of new measures designed to curb the spread of the virus. While the number of daily coronavirus cases in the European Union’s largest eastern member has stabilised, it remains at a high level and authorities fear that the new Omicron variant could trigger a rise in infections. “There are no signals of a clear downward trend, and … there is a risk that the Omicron mutation will appear,” Adam Niedzielski told a news conference. “These two factors require us to take decisive action.” Poland has not reported any cases of the Omicron variant yet. Niedzielski said the limit on the number of people allowed in public spaces such as restaurants and cinemas would be lowered to 30%, not including vaccinated people, from the current 50%. Businesses will also be required to check customers’ Covid certificates. Nightclubs will be closed from 15 December and on New Year’s Eve. On New Year’s Day, only 100 people will be allowed to enter, not counting those who have been vaccinated. Additionally, travellers from outside the European Union’s Schengen passport-free zone will need to show a negative test result from 15 December and schools will return to distance learning for periods just before and after the Christmas holiday. Niedzielski said that the government was also working on a draft law that would allow employers to check workers’ Covid test results. The country of around 38 million has so far reported 3,704,040 cases of the coronavirus and 86,205 deaths. Switzerland will deploy up to 2,500 military personnel to help regional authorities cope with the coronavirus pandemic, the government said, again tapping the armed forces to support the healthcare system as Covid cases rise. Switzerland and tiny neighbour Liechtenstein have reported more than 1 million confirmed cases of Covid and nearly 11,300 deaths since the pandemic began. Cases have been on the rise again, straining some hospitals as the Swiss government tries to keep the economy open amid what it calls a “critical” situation. Last week, it tightened rules on wearing masks and producing a certificate to prove a person is vaccinated or has recovered from the virus. Switzerland, which used the military twice last year to help out, will let cantons request help to care for or transport patients and to support vaccinations if their civil defence, fire department and private-sector resources are inadequate. The government said it would will ask parliament to approve the measure, that will run until 31 March. Nearly 79% of hospital intensive care units are now occupied, of which patients with coronavirus account for just over 30%. Only 66% of the Swiss population – or three out of four people aged 12 or older – is fully vaccinated, despite repeated public campaigns to encourage holdouts to get jabbed. Tottenham Hotspur FC’s plans for a busy period of games have been hurt by a coronavirus outbreak at the club. A number of first-team players and two members of the coaching staff have reportedly tested positive ahead of further PCR tests on Tuesday. With a must-win Europa Conference League game against Rennes on Thursday then Premier League games at Brighton and Leicester, Spurs’ preparations look set to be severely impacted. Get the full story here: Tottenham games under threat following Covid outbreak at club Denmark’s health minister, Magnus Heunicke, has tested positive for Covid-19 and is self-isolating in a hotel in Brussels, the ministry said in a statement. Heunicke had stayed in his hotel room and not been in contact with other ministers, Denmark’s permanent representation in the EU told Reuters. The early indications are that the Omicron variant appears to be more transmissible than Delta, the UK prime minister has said. Boris Johnson made the comment as he updated his team of ministers on the latest Covid situation at a cabinet meeting on Tuesday morning. Giving an account of the meeting, the prime minister’s official spokesman said: The prime minister said it was too early to draw conclusions on the characteristics of Omicron but early indications were that it is more transmissible than Delta. But the spokesman said there was no debate around the cabinet table on whether to introduce ‘Plan B’ of the government’s plans to control the virus this winter. As of Monday, 336 cases of Omicron have been identified in the UK - 261 in England, 71 in Scotland and four in Wales. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, told MPs on Monday that cases of Omicron in people without any travel history have been confirmed in the UK, meaning it is now being transmitted within the community. EU health agencies have recommended that Covid vaccines be mixed and matched for both initial courses and booster doses as the region battles rising cases ahead of Christmas, Reuters reports. Evidence suggests that the combination of viral vector vaccines and mRNA vaccines produces good levels of antibodies against the coronavirus, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) said in a joint statement on Tuesday. Such an approach “may offer flexibility in terms of vaccination options, particularly to reduce the impact on the vaccine rollout should a vaccine not be available for any reason”, the EMA and ECDC said, while urging people to get fully vaccinated. Their endorsement comes after a major study on Monday said a first dose of AstraZeneca or Pfizer/BioNTech shots followed by a Moderna vaccine nine weeks later induced a better immune response. However, the EMA and ECDC said more research was needed to support the use of mixing and matching in people with weak immune systems, such as older people and those with chronic conditions like cancer, and for two-dose mRNA vaccine regimens. Longevity of protection offered by vaccines has been under scrutiny and the world is scrambling to trace the Omicron variant as governments impose fresh restrictions, and speed up rollouts of vaccines to children and booster doses. Official rollout of vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds will start next week in Europe. The EMA and ECDC recommendations are also meant to help EU member states with their own vaccination campaigns before any formal EU-wide approval as the health agencies continue studying data on mixing vaccines. The US has given the green light to mix and match, while the World Health Organization is assessing the approach. The EMA and ECDC’s review did not consider vaccines that are not approved in the European Union. Covid shots from AstraZeneca, Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson have been authorised for use in the bloc. Many countries have deployed a mix and match well before robust data was available as nations faced soaring infection numbers, low supplies and slow immunisation over some safety concerns. Spain’s health commission has approved vaccinations against Covid for children aged five to 11, following a recommendation by the European Union’s health regulator late last month. Spanish authorities expect to start vaccinating children on 13 December as the first doses of Pfizer and BioNTech’s vaccine are expected arrive, the health minister, Carolina Darias, told reporters in Brussels, where she was attending a meeting of EU health ministers on Tuesday. The decision comes as Spain, with a nationwide vaccination rate of nearly 80%, seeks to address an acceleration of Covid cases. Inoculating children and young people, who can unwittingly transmit the virus to others, is considered a critical step towards taming the pandemic. EU countries such as Germany, Italy and the Czech Republic have already approved vaccinations for children under 12. Uganda has detected cases of the Omicron variant in travellers coming into the country, the first infections to be reported in east Africa, AFP reports. The cases were detected in people screened at Entebbe International airport who flew in from five different countries, Ugandan medical authorities said in a statement. Five had come from Nigeria, two from South Africa and two from the United Arab Emirates. The others had travelled from the Netherlands and the neighbouring Democratic Republic of Congo. Two weeks after first being identified in South Africa, Omicron has been found in about 40 countries around the world. Some European governments have reintroduced tough measures, including mandatory mask-wearing and social distancing, while travel restrictions, mostly targeting southern Africa, have also come into force. Uganda has been spared the worst of the pandemic after imposing some of the first and strictest containment measures on the continent. The country has recorded 127,708 infections, of which 3,258 have been fatal, according to the health ministry. But, as in other countries in the region, inoculation has been slow due in part to hesitancy surrounding the jabs and poor access to vaccines. The country of 45 million people has vaccinated only 7.6 million people, according to the latest government figures. Wales’ health minister has said booster vaccinations will be offered to all eligible adults by the end of January. PA Media reports that Eluned Morgan MS confirmed people would still be called in priority order of age and vulnerability, but stressed the importance of people coming forward when contacted to “extend their protection”. NHS Wales is said to be giving more than 19,000 jabs a day after ramping up the booster programme in response to the spread of the Omicron variant. The Welsh government said it was aiming in the coming weeks to almost double the rate vaccinations are being administered to more than 200,000 a week. Five million vaccines have so far been administered in Wales. Health boards are again setting up more vaccination centres, including walk-in and drive-through clinics with longer opening hours. Local government, fire services and students will then provide support to the clinics, along with volunteers. Meanwhile, the minister said a request for assistance has been sent to the military. Morgan will hold a press conference on Tuesday with the deputy chief medical officer, Dr Gillian Richardson, about the progress of the booster rollout. She said: The vaccines become less effective over time so it’s really important that people come forward to have a booster when invited to extend their protection. Millions of people have accepted the vaccine, it has saved lives and helped prevent serious illness in tens of thousands of people. Please wait until you are invited for your booster and prioritise your appointment over everything else to support the hard-working staff and volunteers at our vaccination centres, who will be spending a second festive period helping to keep Wales safe. With high levels of the Delta variant in the community and the emergence of the Omicron variant, you can continue to disrupt the transmission of the virus by wearing a face covering in indoor public places, getting tested, self-isolating when positive and getting vaccinated. Hundreds of cases of the new Omicron variant have now been confirmed in the UK and experts have called for a renewed focus on vaccination rates. As of 4 December, just over eight in 10 people aged 12 or older UK-wide had received two doses of a coronavirus vaccine, according to data from the UK Health Security Agency, while 89% had received a first dose. This means about 6 million eligible people may still be unvaccinated, based on ONS population figures as opposed to counts of GP records. So who are they? My colleagues Niamh McIntrye and Tobi Thomas have examined the data, which shows disparities in uptake across age, region and ethnicity. Read their report here: As many as 6 million eligible Britons may not have had a Covid jab. Who are they? Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Prof Tim Spector, from the Covid Zoe app, said that in about 10 days’ time the UK could have more cases of Omicron than some countries it had put on the travel red list. The professor of genetic epidemiology said: “The official estimates are about 350-odd Omicron cases, and because the current testing is missing a lot of those, it’s probably at least 1,000 to 2,000 I would guess at the moment.” Dr Jeffrey Barrett, director of the Covid-19 genomics initiative at the Wellcome Sanger Institute, has agreed that Omicron would take over from Delta in the UK as the dominant variant of coronavirus “within a matter of weeks”. He said: “I think we can now say that this variant is spreading faster in the UK than the Delta variant at the same time, and that’s something that I think was unclear until very recently.” Austria’s general lockdown will be lifted on Sunday as planned – however, restrictions will stay in place for the unvaccinated. Germany’s outgoing health minister Jens Spahn said travel curbs that limit arrivals to the European Union are important until more is known about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. EU health commissioner Stella Kyriakides said: “We are facing a very challenging epidemiological situation in all members states with the Covid-19 pandemic, made especially challenging with the appearance of the Omicron variant.” She said she would urge ministers to step up vaccinations and, when necessary, to promote other non-pharmaceutical measures, such as requiring the wearing of masks and social distancing. In France, it is hoped a combination of vaccination booster shots and more rigorous social distancing will avoid the need for renewed lockdowns or curfews. Nightclubs will be shut for four weeks and requirements for mask-wearing in schools will be tightened. The Netherlands is drafting in soldiers to support hospitals as Covid cases surge. The Office of National Statistics says that from the week ending 13 March 2020 to the week ending 26 November 2021, the number of excess deaths above the five-year average in England and Wales was 128,740. The UK’s justice secretary Dominc Raab has insisted that, regarding the allegations of a Christmas party last year at Downing Street while the rest of London was in tier three Covid restrictions, “there was no party, and there were no rules breached”. Raab also insisted “We don’t think plan B is required. Why? Because of the success of the vaccine programme.” UK hospitals have cancelled at least 13,000 operations over the last two months as they struggle to cope with record demand for NHS care and people sick with Covid-19. GSK has released new data from early-stage studies, citing that its antibody-based Covid-19 therapy with US partner Vir is effective against all mutations of the new Omicron coronavirus variant. New York City has expanded its array of Covid-19 mandates on Monday, setting vaccine requirements for children as young as five. This is on top of the mandates required for all private employees. People in US counties that voted for Donald Trump are nearly three times more likely to die from Covid-19 than those who live in counties that voted for Joe Biden. In Australia, senior health officials have rejected claims made by Queensland senator Gerard Rennick that Covid-19 vaccinations amount to “experimenting” on children after the Liberal senator questioned the safety of the vaccine for children aged five to 11 in a Senate inquiry. More than 40 countries have confirmed the presence of Omicron. Our Science Weekly podcast today explores what we know about the new variant. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to guide you through the rest of the day’s Covid news from the UK and the rest of the world. Head of the World Health Organization’s Europe division, Hans Kluge, has been giving a press briefing this morning. Here are some of the key lines to come out of it Kluge said mandatory vaccinations against the coronavirus are an “absolute last resort” and “only applicable when all feasible options to improve vaccination uptake have been exhausted.” He also said that vaccine mandates should not contribute to inequalities in accessing healthcare. He reiterated that it is yet to be seen with the Omicron variant where it will be more transmissible, or whether it will lead to milder cases of Covid-19. He said that we now know that vaccine-driven immunity wanes after around 30 weeks. Here is an updated map illustrating the severity of Covid caseloads across Europe at the moment. A quick snap from Reuters here that unvaccinated people will remain in lockdown when Austria’s general lockdown lifts on Sunday, new chancellor Karl Nehammer confirmed this morning, the day after he took office. It was no longer a question of whether the general lockdown would end on Sunday as planned but how, and consultations on that would take place on Wednesday, Nehammer told a news conference. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) weekly deaths bulletin for England and Wales has been released this morning, as it always is on a Tuesday. Here are the key findings: In the week ending 26 November 2021, 11,467 deaths were registered; this was 636 fewer deaths than the previous week and 10.5% above the five-year average (1,087 more deaths). Of the deaths registered, 817 mentioned “novel coronavirus (COVID-19)”, accounting for 7.1% of all deaths; this was a decrease in the number of deaths compared with the previous week (952 deaths, 7.9% of all deaths). From the week ending 13 March 2020 to the week ending 26 November 2021, the number of excess deaths above the five-year average in England and Wales was 128,740. Germany’s outgoing health minister said that travel curbs that limit arrivals to the European Union are important until more is known about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. “Until we know more, we need to be careful and so travel restrictions are important to keep the entry in Europe and Germany as low as possible,” Jens Spahn told reporters as he arrived for a meeting of EU health ministers in Brussels. Reuters remind us that late in November, EU states agreed to impose travel restrictions on seven southern African countries after they reported several cases of the Omicron variant, which is considered highly infectious. EU sources said on Monday there was no immediate plan to ease the restrictions, quashing a media report that cited a diplomat saying this could be the case. Ahead of Tuesday’s meeting, EU health commissioner Stella Kyriakides said: “We are facing a very challenging epidemiological situation in all members states with the Covid-19 pandemic, made especially challenging with the appearance of the Omicron variant.” She said she would urge ministers to step up vaccinations and, when necessary, to promote other non-pharmaceutical measures, such as requiring the wearing of masks and social distancing. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics blog for the day, and I imagine he will be fully taken up with the fallout from the whistleblower claims about the UK government’s handling of the evacuation of Kabul. I will continue to bring you UK and global Covid lines here. More than 40 countries have confirmed the presence of Omicron. In the UK, scientists have been increasingly expressing their concern about the new variant. Some have speculated there could be more than 1,000 cases in the country already, and that it could become the dominant variant within weeks. In today’s Science Weekly podcast, to get an update on what we know about the Omicron variant, and how quickly it might be spreading, Madeleine Finlay speaks to Nicola Davis, the Guardian’s science correspondent. In Australia, senior health officials have rejected claims made by Queensland senator Gerard Rennick that Covid-19 vaccinations amount to “experimenting” on children after the Liberal senator questioned the safety of the vaccine for children aged five to 11 in a Senate inquiry. It comes after Rennick posted anti-vaccine content on Facebook making similar claims. At a fiery hearing on Tuesday, the head of the Therapeutic Goods Administration, John Skerritt, rejected suggestions it was “nothing much” for children to catch Covid-19 and warned that misinformation was hindering its work. The chair of the Senate Covid-19 committee, Labor’s Katy Gallagher, urged Rennick to “talk to a few parents whose children have struggled to breathe with Covid”, suggesting he “give [her] a call” – in reference to her daughter’s struggle with the illness. Read more of Paul Karp’s report here: Liberal senator Gerard Rennick’s vaccine claims condemned by health officials in Covid inquiry Overnight, the Belfast Telegraph has broken a story that fake vaccine certificates for use in Northern Ireland are being sold in Ireland. Allison Morris reports: Fake vaccine cards are being sold online ahead of the introduction of fines for those in breach of the Covid certification scheme in Northern Ireland. Blank vaccine cards that can be filled in with personal details are being sold by a man based in the Irish Republic for €50. The reports are similar to claims last month that digital vaccine passes for Ireland were changing hands for €350. By the way, as part of his media round this morning, Dominic Raab, the UK government justice minister, has again insisted that there will be no need for any further Covid restrictions in England. Reuters quote him telling the BBC: “We don’t think plan B is required. Why? Because of the success of the vaccine programme.” Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett writes for us today, arguing that the explosion of Covid PTSD cases is a mental health crisis in the making: The NHS forecasts that nationally, there will be 230,000 new cases of PTSD as a result of Covid-19. It is not only social care and medical staff who will be affected. Those who lost loved ones, and those who have been very ill or hospitalised (35% of Covid-19 patients who were put on a ventilator go on to experience extensive symptoms of PTSD) may also suffer. Then there are those living with the effects of domestic and sexual abuse, which may have worsened due to lockdown, and children and young people whose lives changed immeasurably due to our shift to a state of emergency. I imagine that some women whose birthing experiences were marked by the pandemic will also be experiencing symptoms. Unfortunately, the current system is still not fully equipped to deal with this explosion in trauma cases. The Royal College of Psychiatrists says the NHS is already facing the biggest backlog in its history of those waiting for mental health help. As of September, 1.6 million people were waiting for treatment, and the college says that more funds than those committed to by the government are desperately needed. Read more here: Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett – The explosion of Covid PTSD cases is a mental health crisis in the making Prof Tim Spector, from the Covid Zoe app, said that in about 10 days’ time the UK could have more cases of Omicron than some countries it had put on the travel red list. The professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London told BBC Breakfast: “The official estimates are about 350-odd Omicron cases, and because the current testing is missing a lot of those, it’s probably at least 1,000 to 2,000 I would guess at the moment. “And we are expecting this to be doubling about every two days at the moment, so if you do your maths – say, assumed it’s 1,000 at the moment, and you think it’s going to be doubling every two days, you can see that those numbers are going to be pretty (high) certainly in about 10 days’ time. By that time, we’ll probably have more cases than they will in some of those African countries. “So I think these travel restrictions do perhaps have their place initially, when cases are really low here and really high in the other country, but when we reach that equilibrium, there’s very little point in having them in my opinion.” PA Media quotes him saying that data from the Zoe symptom study app suggests that about half of all cases at the moment of Delta are being “missed” because they are not presenting with “classic” Covid symptoms of fever, new and persistent cough and a loss or change of smell or taste. “Omicron is probably more, much more similar to the mild variants we’re seeing in people who have been vaccinated with Delta than anything else,” he said. “And so it is going to be producing cold-like symptoms that people won’t recognise as Covid if they just believe the official government advice.” Here’s a reminder of England’s current travel restriction red list. With the caveat that until scientists get more data, there is a lot of speculation around, but Dr Jeffrey Barrett, director of the Covid-19 genomics initiative at the Wellcome Sanger Institute, has agreed this morning with those suggesting that Omicron would take over from Delta in the UK as the dominant variant of coronavirus “within a matter of weeks”. PA Media quotes him telling the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: “I think we can now say that this variant is spreading faster in the UK than the Delta variant at the same time, and that’s something that I think was unclear until very recently. I am pretty confident that it’s going to take over probably in a matter of weeks.” Asked about the implications of that, he said: “Well, we don’t know and that’s the really critical question, of course, is how many of those cases of which there will likely be a large number will lead to severe disease? “And a number of people including Dr Fauci have hypothesised that this variant may be more mild or less likely to cause severe disease than previous variants of the virus. “I think what we have seen so far in South Africa, for example, is possibly consistent with that, but it’s really much too soon to say, and the reason for that is that this variant seems to be able to infect individuals who either have been vaccinated or previously have been infected. “And we know that second infections or breakthrough infections of vaccinated individuals tend to be more mild. So the fact that so far we have seen not very many severe cases of Omicron, maybe because it is infecting these individuals with some amount of immunity and that’s good news that they aren’t having tonnes of severe disease, but I think it is too soon to assume that fundamentally Omicron is more mild than say Delta.” A quick one from Reuters here which sounds like good news. Britain’s GSK has released new data from early-stage studies, citing that its antibody-based Covid-19 therapy with US partner Vir is effective against all mutations of the new Omicron coronavirus variant. The data, yet to be published in a peer-reviewed medical journal, shows that the companies’ treatment, sotrovimab, is effective against all 37 identified mutations to date in the spike protein, GSK said in a statement. The justice secretary and former foreign secretary Dominic Raab was mostly questioned on Sky News this morning about the whistleblower report which has condemned the Foreign Office over its handling of the Kabul evacuation. However, there was time for him to be asked once again about allegations that there was a Christmas party at Downing Street last year while London was under tier three restrictions, which would have forbidden it. He was asked about the contrasting approach outlined by policing minister Kit Malthouse yesterday, who said police should investigate, after Raab himself said on Sunday they do not look at historical crimes. This morning, Raab said: I was directly quoting from what the Metropolitan police say, this is a matter for them. They said that in relation to Covid regulations, it wouldn’t routinely investigate retrospective breaches. So I was simply pointing to what the police themselves are saying. No 10 have been very clear. There was no party and there’s been no breach of the rules and frankly, you’ll appreciate I’ve answered the questions for you, answered the questions on Sunday, which I’m very happy to do, but I don’t have any further to add. Pretty categorically. To be honest with you, it’s for the police. They’ve already had the facts sent to them. We’ve seen two Labour MPs ask for it. But it’s ultimately a matter for the police. And just on the fundamental point, No 10 have been very clear. There was no party, and there were no rules breached. The Morrison government is considering citing Covid restrictions as a reason for officials to stay away from the Beijing Winter Olympics, as calls grow for Australia to follow the US in a diplomatic boycott. Guardian Australia understands while an announcement could be made soon, the government is unlikely to take as strong a position as the Biden administration, which blasted China over “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity”. The Australian government was still considering the language to be used, with suggestions that it may not be presented as a boycott. Instead, it is weighing up saying officials will not go because Covid restrictions meant they would mostly be confined to their hotel rooms. The New Zealand government said on Tuesday it would not send diplomatic representatives at a ministerial level to the Winter Olympics, citing “a range of factors but mostly to do with Covid”. Read more of Daniel Hurst’s report here: Australia may use Covid restrictions to justify diplomatic boycott of Beijing Winter Olympics People in counties that voted for Donald Trump are nearly three times more likely to die from Covid-19 than those who live in counties that voted for Joe Biden, according to a study by National Public Radio. NPR examined deaths per 100,000 people in about 3,000 counties across the US since May 2021. According to NPR, 1 May was chosen as the start date as it is roughly the time when vaccines became universally available to adults. The study found that areas that voted for Trump by at least 60% in November 2020 had death rates 2.7 times higher than counties that voted heavily for Biden. The study also found that counties that voted for Trump by an even higher percentage had lower vaccination rates and higher Covid-19 death rates. Charles Gaba, an independent analyst who helped review NPR’s methodology, said that in October, the reddest 10th of the country saw death rates six times higher than the bluest 10th. “Those numbers have dropped slightly in recent weeks,” he said. “It’s back down to 5.5 times higher.” Read more of Maya Yang’s report here: People in counties that voted Trump more likely to die from Covid – study Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. It is the Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, doing the media round for the government today. I shall have some quotes from him in due course. Here’s a reminder of the UK Covid situation. Over the last seven days there have been 330,918 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 9.1% week-on-week. There have been 836 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 0.2% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 0.8% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,268 people in hospital in total, of whom 900 are in ventilation beds. UK hospitals have cancelled at least 13,000 operations over the last two months as they struggle to cope with record demand for NHS care and people sick with Covid-19. Figures collected by A&amp;E doctors showed that 13,061 planned surgeries had to be called off during October and November because of shortages of beds and staff. However, the cancellations occurred at just 40 of the several hundred NHS hospitals across the four home nations, so those 13,061 are likely to be a major underestimate of the scale of the problem. Dr Adrian Boyle, a vice-president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM), which published the data, said the cancellations represented “a stark warning for the months ahead”. Read the full story here. The Cook Islands, a tiny country in the Pacific, has managed to avoid any cases of Covid-19 throughout the pandemic. On Friday, the country announced its first case: a 10-year-old boy who arrived on a flight from Auckland to Rarotonga, the main island in the country. After days of panic, the case has been declared a false alarm. “I was honestly going to quit my job and stay home when I found out it was a positive case. I was shocked and scared at the same time,” said Ake Vailoa, who works as a shopkeeper for a small store on the edge of Rarotonga’s main town. Read the full story here. Ukraine has just released their Covid numbers for the past 24 hours. Another 8,655 new cases of coronavirus were recorded for Monday, 6 December. A further 467 deaths were also reported, according to a statement from the ministry of health. The Omicron variant of coronavirus is likely to be more widespread in the UK than official numbers suggest owing to patchy monitoring and a time lag in the data, scientists and officials have said. Ministers said 336 cases had been identified by whole-genome sequencing, but experts said numbers were expected to be much higher given the variant’s potential for exponential growth and the fact it takes five to seven days for a case to be confirmed. All international arrivals to the UK are now required to take a pre-departure Covid-19 test to tackle the new Omicron variant. Thailand is hoping to forge a more sustainable model of tourism as the country reopens to visitors. New York City has expanded its array of Covid-19 mandates on Monday, setting vaccine requirements for children as young as 5 years old. This is on top of the mandates required for all private employees. In France, a combination of vaccination booster shots and more rigorous social distancing is hoped to avoid renewed lockdowns or curfews. Nightclubs will be shut for four weeks and requirements for mask-wearing in schools will be tightened. The Netherlands is drafting in soldiers to support hospitals as Covid cases surge. India has reported another 6,822 new coronavirus cases, the lowest figures in 558 days. A leading infectious diseases specialist who monitors variants for a research collaboration led by Harvard Medical School believes the world is seeing “what appears to be a signal of exponential increase of Omicron over Delta” where Omicron is “likely to become the dominant strain in the coming weeks and months”. How fast is the Omicron variant spreading? Over 40 countries have now confirmed the presence of Omicron. And, in the UK, scientists have been increasingly expressing their concern about the new variant. Some have speculated there could be more than 1,000 cases here already, and that it could become the dominant variant within weeks. To get an update on what we know about the Omicron variant, and how quickly it might be spreading, Madeleine Finlay speaks to Nicola Davis, the Guardian’s science correspondent. Listen to the Guardian’s latest Science Weekly podcast here. Mexico City officials will begin offering a third Covid-19 vaccine dose to residents over the age of 60 on Tuesday, officials said, part of a government plan to roll out booster shots, Reuters reports. President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador said last week the third doses would be made available as soon as possible, beginning with elderly people who are more vulnerable to the coronavirus. The first booster shots in the massive capital of nearly 10 million people will be AstraZeneca doses given to residents of the southern Tlalpan neighbourhood, officials told a news conference on Monday. To be eligible, people must have had an initial two doses six months ago. The health ministry on Monday reported 110 more deaths from Covid-19 and 752 new cases, bringing the death toll since the pandemic began to 295,312 and total infections to 3,902,015. All international arrivals to the UK are now required to take a pre-departure Covid-19 test to tackle the new Omicron variant. The tightened requirements have just come into force from 4am (GMT) on Tuesday 7 December. Travellers will now need to submit evidence of a negative lateral flow or PCR test to enter, which must have been taken a maximum of 48 hours before the departure time. People currently only need to self-isolate until they test negative within two days of arrival. Los Angeles county is reporting a third case of the Omicron variant. The individual is believed to have recently travelled from West Africa and is fully vaccinated, according to a statement from Los Angeles County Health. The individual had mild symptoms and is self-isolating. Known close contacts are fully vaccinated and have tested negative. “This latest case of the Omicron variant in Los Angeles County underscores how critical safety measures are while traveling,” said Dr Barbara Ferrer, Director of Public Health. “These requirements include a negative test before boarding your flight, wearing a mask, and not traveling while you are sick. Residents should also consider delaying travel until their and all of their traveling companions are fully vaccinated.” India has just released a Covid update with the latest numbers from the past 24 hours. Another 6,822 new coronavirus cases have been recorded, the lowest figures in 558 days. India’s active caseload currently stands at 95,014 and is the lowest in 554 days, according to a statement from the ministry of health. Thailand is hoping to make its idyllic Phi Phi islands a more sustainable model of tourism as the country reopens to visitors, Agence France-Presse reports. Before the pandemic, Phi Phi National Marine Park attracted more than two million visitors a year and Maya Bay drew up to 6,000 people a day. Tourists and noisy, polluting motorboats have had a huge impact on the area’s delicate ecology. “The coral cover has decreased by more than 60% in just over 10 years,” says Thon Thamrongnawasawat of Kasetsart University in Bangkok. Since the pandemic hit and visitor numbers dwindled to virtually nil, the entire archipelago was forced into convalescence and dozens of blacktip sharks, green turtles and hawksbill turtles have returned. The government now says it wants to move on from Thailand’s history of hedonistic mass tourism, with Tourism Minister Phiphat Ratchakitprakarn saying the focus would be on “high-end travellers, rather than a large number of visitors”. Phi Phi national park chief Pramote Kaewnam says boats will no longer be allowed to moor near the beach and will instead drop tourists off at a jetty away from the cove. Tours will be limited to one hour, with a maximum of 300 people per tour. “Maya Bay used to bring in up to $60,000 a day, but this huge income cannot be compared to the natural resources we have lost,” Pramote said. New York City has expanded its array of Covid-19 mandates on Monday, setting vaccine requirements for children as young as 5 years old. This is on top of the mandates required for all private employees we previously reported. The most-populous US city set a 27 December as the deadline for all 184,000 businesses within its limits to make their employees show proof they have been vaccinated, Mayor Bill de Blasio said. In addition, children 5 to 11 years old must get at least one dose by 14 December and those 12 and older need to be fully vaccinated by 27 December to enter restaurants and participate in extracurricular school activities, such as sports, band and dances, Reuters reports. “Vaccination is the way out of this pandemic, and these are bold, first-in-the-nation measures to encourage New Yorkers to keep themselves and their communities safe,” de Blasio, who leaves office next month, said in a statement. China has reported 94 new confirmed coronavirus cases for 6 December, up from 61 a day earlier, its health authority confirmed on Tuesday. Of the new infections, 60 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission as seen by Reuters, compared with 38 a day earlier. The new local cases were reported by local authorities in Inner Mongolia, Heilongjiang, Yunnan and Zhejiang. China reported 14 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 44 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Mainland China has had 99,297 confirmed cases. We have some more information on the new Covid restrictions taking effect in France. A combination of vaccination booster shots and more rigorous social distancing is hoped to avoid renewed lockdowns or curfews, prime minister Jean Castex said on Monday. From Friday, nightclubs will be shut for four weeks and citizens will be asked to voluntarily limit private and professional gatherings. Requirements for mask-wearing in schools will also be tightened. From 15 December, children aged five to 11 who are overweight or who have a serious health condition will be offered access to vaccination. Children over the age of 12 can already be inoculated. “Vaccination will be open to 5-11 year olds overweight or suffering from a risk pathology from December 15,” a statement from the ministry of health reads. Health minister Olivier Veran reiterated vaccination for “the most fragile children” will begin next week and vaccination to all children on 20 December 20. The Netherlands is drafting in soldiers to support hospitals as Covid cases surge, Agence France-Presse reports. The UMC Utrecht hospital has opened a second care unit which can take patients with Covid-19 from across the region and is being helped by 50 members of the military with medical backgrounds. “What we are try to do here is to increase the amount of nursing beds that we have for Covid patients,” Martin van Dijk, a Dutch military aid coordinator, told AFP. “By that, the military tries to support the Dutch hospitals to make sure that no hospital has to say no to a patient, basically.” This is the second time that the military has been sent in to help at the hospital in the city in the central Netherlands, with the first time being from October 2020 to June this year. Covid cases in the nation have soared to record levels of more than 20,000 a day in the country of 17 million people. The Dutch government has warned that hospitals are overstretched, with 2,143 Covid patients in hospital, including 611 in intensive care, accounting for 59% of all ICU beds, according to the latest figures. Nightclubs in France will be ordered to close for four weeks from Friday to counter a Covid surge that has put hospitals under strain, the prime minister said on Monday. “We will close the nightclubs for the next four weeks. This measure will apply from next Friday until the beginning of January,” Jean Castex, who emerged from quarantine last week after contracting the virus, said. “We have all had a tendency to lower our guard” in recent weeks, he added. “The situation demands an individual as well as a collective effort,” Castex said in a televised address. A raft of new measures will be coming into force according to a statement from the ministry of health. France has confirmed only 25 cases of the new Omicron variant but officials say the number could jump significantly in the coming weeks. On Sunday, the health ministry reported more than 42,000 cases in the previous 24 hours, and more than 11,000 patients in hospital - the highest number since August - with 2,000 in intensive care. Hello and welcome back to our coronavirus live blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking you through all the latest Covid developments as they happen. A leading infectious diseases specialist who monitors variants for a research collaboration led by Harvard Medical School believes the world is seeing “what appears to be a signal of exponential increase of Omicron over Delta.” “It’s still early days, but increasingly, data is starting to trickle in, suggesting that Omicron is likely to outcompete Delta in many, if not all, places,” Dr Jacob Lemieux said in an interview with the Associated Press. Others say it’s too soon to know how likely it is that Omicron will spread more efficiently than Delta, or, if it does, how fast it might take over. “There’s still a lot of uncertainty ... but when you put the early data together, you start to see a consistent picture emerge: that Omicron is already here, and based on what we’ve observed in South Africa, it’s likely to become the dominant strain in the coming weeks and months and will likely cause a surge in case numbers,” Lemieux added. Meanwhile, nightclubs in France will be ordered to close for four weeks from Friday to counter a Covid surge that has put hospitals under strain. Here’s everything you might have missed over the past few hours: New Covid restrictions are to be introduced in Norway after a recent increase in infections. Britain’s health minister said there is now community transmission of the Omicron variant across regions of England. The Czech government will order Covid-19 vaccinations for people working in hospitals and nursing homes as well as police officers, soldiers and some other professions and all citizens aged 60 and older. A new range of pandemic restrictions will be imposed in Poland this week. Italy tightened restrictions on people still not vaccinated, limiting their access to an array of places and services. Children in the Philippines’ capital Manila returned to school after a near two-year suspension. India’s cases of the Omicron variant rose to 21 over the weekend, officials said, while Nepal and Thailand detected their first cases. South Africa is preparing hospitals for more admissions, as the Omicron variant pushes the country into a fourth wave of infections. Austria’s general lockdown will end on 11 December for those who have been vaccinated. All private employers in New York City will have to mandate Covid-19 vaccinations for their workers.South Korea has reported a record daily total of 7,175 new Covid cases as officials urged people to complete their vaccinations. The prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, warned that hospitals were coming under intense pressure amid a rise in serious cases, days after the government announced a return to stricter restrictions on social gatherings. The total caseload rose to 489,484 on Wednesday, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. That was a rise of 2,221 from a day earlier, the biggest daily jump since the start of the pandemic. The number of critically ill patients also rose to a record high of 840, up 66 from a day early, while the death toll increased by 63 to 4,020, the agency said. People aged over 60 account for 35% of the total caseload and 84% of critically ill patients, including those whose immunities have waned since receiving their first two vaccine doses early this year. Kim said the government would increase the number of hospital beds in the Seoul area, where 80% of infections were reported, but conceded that it would be “tough to catch up with the pace of rising cases”. It would also mobilise more medical personnel to monitor patients with mild symptoms who are treating themselves at home and speed up hospital transfers among those who develop severe symptoms, Kim told a virus response meeting. Private clinics would be enlisted to treat Covid patients to ease the pressure on large hospitals, he added. The recent surge, in a country that had been relatively successful in keeping infections and deaths to a minimum, is being attributed to young people who have yet to be fully vaccinated and older citizens who have not received boosters. Having kept the virus in check for much of the pandemic, South Korea has had, on average, more than 5,000 new cases a day for the past week. It has identified 38 cases of the Omicron variant. In response, the government introduced stricter social distancing and other measures on Monday that will remain in place until early January, the Yonhap news agency said – a move that came just weeks after it eased measures as part of its “living with Covid-19” approach. Private gatherings will be limited to a maximum of six people in the Seoul area and to eight outside the capital. The numbers had previously been capped at 10 and 12. In addition, people wishing to access “high-risk” venues such as pubs, saunas and gyms will have to show proof of full vaccination or a negative coronavirus test. Kim acknowledged that the measures would create anxiety among small business owners, but added: “We know from experience that if virus prevention falters, then so do people’s lives.” Although 80.7% of South Korea’s 52 million population have been double jabbed, younger people are being urged to complete their vaccinations after the education ministry reported this week that almost all of the children and young people diagnosed with Covid-19 over the previous fortnight had not received their second dose. Only 8.8% of the population has had a booster dose, Yonhap said.Kellogg has said it is permanently replacing 1,400 workers who have been on strike since October, a decision that comes as the majority of its cereal plant workforce rejected a deal that would have provided 3% raises. The Bakery, Confectionary, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers (BCTGM) International Union said an overwhelming majority of workers had voted down the five-year offer. The decision follows months of bitter disagreement between the company and the union. The rejected offer would have provided cost of living adjustments in the later years of the deal and preserved the workers’ current healthcare benefits. But workers say they deserve significant raises because they routinely work more than 80 hours a week, and they kept the plants running throughout the coronavirus pandemic. Employees have been striking since 5 October at plants in Michigan, Nebraska, Pennsylvania and Tennessee. They make all of the company’s well-known brands of cereal, including Apple Jacks and Frosted Flakes. The strike is expected to continue. “The members have spoken. The strike continues,” the union president, Anthony Shelton, said. “The International Union will continue to provide full support to our striking Kellogg’s members.” Workers say they are also protesting planned job cuts and offshoring, and a proposed two-tier system that gives newer workers at the plants less pay and fewer benefits. Speaking to the Guardian in October, Trevor Bidelman, president of BCTGM Local3G and a fourth-generation employee at the Kellogg plant in Battle Creek, Michigan, described it as a “fight for our future”. “This is after just one year ago, we were hailed as heroes, as we worked through the pandemic, seven days a week, 16 hours a day. Now apparently, we are no longer heroes,” said Bidelman. “We don’t have weekends, really. We just work seven days a week, sometimes 100 to 130 days in a row. For 28 days, the machines run, then rest three days for cleaning. They don’t even treat us as well as they do their machinery.” Kellogg said it would now move forward with plans to start hiring permanent replacements for the striking workers. The company has already been using salaried employees and outside workers to keep the plants operating during the strike. “While certainly not the result we had hoped for, we must take the necessary steps to ensure business continuity,” said Chris Hood, president of Kellogg North America. “We have an obligation to our customers and consumers to continue to provide the cereals that they know and love.” The Rutgers University professor Todd Vachon, who teaches classes about labor relations, said he was not sure the company would be able to hire enough workers to replace the ones who are out on strike in the current economy, and Kellogg may have a hard time finding people willing to cross a picket line. “By voting ‘no’, the workers are making a strong statement that they are not satisfied by the agreement, but they are also signaling they believe they have the leverage that’s needed to win more,” Vachon said. Earlier this year, about 600 food workers went on strike at a Frito-Lay plant in Topeka, Kansas, and 1,000 others walked off the job at five Nabisco plants across the US. In another recent strike, more than 10,000 Deere workers secured 10% raises and improved benefits, but those gains came after the workers remained on strike for a month and rejected two offers from the company. The offer that Kellogg workers rejected was the first one they have voted on since the strike began. Michael Sainato contributed reportingFinding the perfect gift – whether it’s a birthday, a thank you or just because – is an art. There is something special about giving something meaningful and unique, so we’ve rounded up some present inspiration for all your 2022 occasions. As well as being thoughtful, these eight gift ideas get extra points for making a difference in the world. These social enterprises are supported by Westpac Foundation, and help create local employment pathways for people overcoming barriers to mainstream work. In the spirit of the season, we’ve chosen some present ideas from eight incredible organisations making a real difference. Thoughtful tokens Whether you’re looking for a thank you gift or something for your favourite relative, SisterWorks offers a beautiful variety of options. From reusable sandwich wraps to natural soy candles, and from locally made food to accessories, each product is made with love by refugee and migrant women. We love their Sisters of the World dolls, inspired by women from different cultural backgrounds. Based in Victoria, SisterWorks provides women from refugee, asylum seeker or migrant backgrounds with life-changing opportunities to build their confidence, independence and skills through paid employment. A visual feast Studio A artist Catherine McGuiness in the studio with one of her artworks. Brighten up any home with art from Studio A, such as this sea turtle in pastels by Lauren Kerjan. The gallery features an array of prints, textiles, graphic novels, jewellery and original art, so you’re bound to find the perfect object. This is a Sydney-based social enterprise that, as well as showcasing amazing art, provides professional pathways for artists with intellectual disabilities. Through Studio A, artists have the opportunity to exhibit and sell their work, be recognised with awards, secure commissions and brighten the world with their art. Studio A says it’s driven to provide income for artists with intellectual disability and offer them a voice in contemporary Australian culture. A gift to turn heads Known for its bold patterns and versatile designs, The Social Outfit is a fashion label with a difference. Choose geometric earrings in bright summer colours, perfect for dressing up a pair of jeans or one of the label’s jumpsuits. Or gift The Social Outfit vibe every day with a silk scarf, clutch or tote bag. The Social Outfit runs an ethical manufacturing workroom and retail store in Newtown, Sydney, with 100% of profits from clothing sales supporting training and employment programs for refugee women in retail, manufacturing and design. Sustainability is part of its passion, too – all collections use remnant fabrics donated by fashion industry partners, which has saved 8.5 tonnes of fabric from landfill. A message of hope SCARF Refugee Support’s Champions of Welcome range shares a message of hope and community, through T-shirts and tote bags to suit any friend or family member. Not only do these gifts help spread SCARF’s vital message, but 100% of proceeds go to help refugees rebuild their lives in the Illawarra. From its beginnings helping a single family settle in the region, SCARF now has more than 2,100 community members registered, and 250 volunteers offering practical and social assistance to new families as they settle. An afternoon treat Give someone a moment of relaxation that also supports youth mental health and suicide prevention. Miks Chai sells a variety of vibrant, aromatic blends including traditional chai masala. For the ultimate indulgence, choose a luxurious gift pack with a selection of bath salts and delicious teas – perfect for yourself or gifting to someone in need of a little self-care. Miks Chai supports mental health and wellbeing through a range of positive teas encouraging human connection, and 50% of its profits go to suicide prevention. The eponymous Miks, a Westpac Scholar, started brewing her Aaji’s (grandmother’s) chai to bring people together to share stories, and says hearing the courageous experiences of others and sharing her own story saved her life. Now, Miks has the ambition of sharing 1 million stories over 1 million cups of Miks Chai by 2022. One for the green thumbs This is the gift that keeps on giving. Let your friends grow their own superfoods at home with a Micro Urban Farm from Green World Revolution. Microgreens are full of antioxidants, vitamins, minerals and fibre, and the kits supply everything needed to grow a tiny garden bursting with leafy and nutritious greens. Plus, by buying one, you’ll be helping Green World Revolution reach its goal of helping 100 long-term unemployed, mature-age women re-enter the workforce by 2025. A flavour sensation with a difference Expand a loved one’s kitchen repertoire with a Free to Feed incredible food journey. These are not just cooking classes – they are three-hour trips through diverse cultural experiences, in which you will form lifelong connections and celebrate the many contributions of newly arrived people. With meals such as Persian sambooseh, Iraqi stuffed dates and Syrian fattoush on the menu, why not make it a family affair and book a class together. Free to Feed says it’s in awe of the potential and spirit of refugees, and since 2015 has been working to help people who are seeking asylum find meaningful employment and community connection. Through its training and development programs, it has provided more than 25,000 hours of paid training, run more than 1,200 life-changing events and distributed more than $650,000 in employment wages to refugees and people seeking asylum. Culinary indulgences Create the ultimate feast with Kinfolk. As well as delivering ethical events and catering across Melbourne, this social enterprise offers myriad gifts and delicacies to buy online. Choose from decadent dark chocolate, house-made muesli, fresh hampers and epic cheese boards. Or give on someone’s behalf to the food relief program, which supports vulnerable people across Melbourne. Sibling by Kinfolk is a not-for-profit cafe that believes in eating well, for good. Its in-house training program builds employment capacity and community for volunteers from all walks of life, and each week it delivers to people experiencing food scarcity and financial distress. With so many incredible organisations supported by Westpac Foundation, it’s easy to choose gifts that give back. By supporting these social enterprises, you’re helping people become job-ready through education, training and employment opportunities. For more social enterprises you can support, explore Westpac Foundation’s 2021 giving for good gift guide.A taxpayer-funded staffer for federal MP Andrew Laming, Barclay McGain, has posed with a paintball-style toy assault rifle dressed as acquitted Kyle Rittenhouse, the teenager who shot dead two Black Lives Matter protesters and was acquitted of all criminal charges related to the deaths in a trial that deeply divided opinion in the US. McGain posted the photo to social media on 27 November, 18 months after he was sacked from his electorate officer position by Laming over a controversial schoolies video that denigrated Indigenous Australians. Six months later he was rehired by Laming, who described McGain as an important asset to his office due to the staffer’s youth connections. On Wednesday, the prime minister’s office condemned the actions of the staffer and said it had raised “serious concerns” with Laming about McGain. “Mr McGain’s actions were completely inappropriate and the prime minister’s office has contacted Mr Laming to raise its serious concerns and options for further action,” a spokesperson said in a statement. The employment of electoral staff is at the discretion of individual MPs. The former chairman of the Gold Coast Young LNP posted a photo of himself on Facebook holding a gel blaster gun which bears resemblance to an assault rifle, wearing a green t-shirt and blue plastic gloves, with the captions, “Kyle Rittenhouse on neighbourhood watch duties in Brisbane’s south tonight.” This was followed by the hashtag “#NotGuilty”. Rittenhouse has become a celebrated figure in right-wing circles after he was acquitted last month on charges of murdering Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and the shooting of Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, during protests for racial justice in Wisconsin last year. The US teenager shot the men with an assault rifle as he roamed the streets of Kenosha with other armed men acting as a self-described militia during anti-racism protests in August 2020. The now 18-year-old’s legal team argued he had been acting in self-defence. McGain confirmed he was currently employed as an electoral worker for Laming’s office and said that while he did not know if the MP had seen the Facebook post, he was “not particularly worried” that the costume would affect his employment status as it was outside work hours and Rittenhouse had been found not guilty. McGain said the costume was for a delayed Halloween party and the replica assault rifle was a toy gel blaster gun, which shoots soft gel pellets. While many states have outlawed gel blasters, or require a firearms licence to own them, they remain legal in Queensland. The photograph posted online shows McGain on a private balcony. McGain said the costume was “not necessarily an endorsement or condemnation” of Rittenhouse’s actions. “I thought it was topical. He had just been found not guilty, and you know, like any Halloween costume, I guess you’re trying to excite people, entertain people. “Same as someone who dresses as Edward Scissorhands isn’t saying, ‘oh, you know, he was great to children’… The notion that I was impersonating a murderer or glorifying a murderer, I just don’t think it stacks up.” The staffer said that those who took offence to the costume “need to learn to respect the rule of law.” “He was clearly found not guilty … You know, this guy, his whole entire life will never be the same. You know, he’ll never be able to go down to the shops for a cup of coffee. He’ll never be able to get a normal job where he just isn’t recognised by people. Like this has changed his whole life forever, and it’s because of the media backlash that he received, which in my opinion, framed him as someone who was going out intending to kill people of colour because he didn’t agree with their political views.” McGain has previously been embroiled in controversy after he was filmed in 2019 interviewing school leavers on the Gold Coast about whether the Australian flag and anthem should be “kept or ditched”. In footage posted to Gold Coast Young LNP’s Facebook page, which was later removed, McGain was seen laughing when one school leaver said: “I mean we’ve got to stop celebrating a culture that couldn’t even invent the bloody wheel for God’s sake. We’ve got to start enjoying and living in western culture.” Laming hired McGain as an electorate officer, a taxpayer-funded position, in February 2020, while the staffer was still under party investigation. In June of 2020, the MP said that “after becoming aware of the material, the staff member’s employment in [his] office was terminated.” However, in March 2021 Laming confirmed to Sky News that McGain was again on the payroll after being made to sit out for six months. McGain says he was officially welcomed back in early January. Laming defended the decision to reinstate McGain, stating the young staffer’s “impressive knowledge and young networks is something very important for politicians to have.” “Barclay McGain has tried at times to be entertaining, funny, to satire and parody and often his humour falls completely flat, but that’s not a reason for a life sentence either,” Laming told Sky News. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Politicians need to relate to 15-year-olds who will be voting at the next election all the way through to the oldest Australians.” When approached for comment, Laming did not deny that McGain was currently in his employment, instead stating that he did not wish to comment. Laming also declined to comment on if he believes the costume and post were appropriate behaviour for a political staffer. After the schoolies video emerged McGain was suspended, and later resigned, from the Liberal party. He later stated that he felt the LNP had responded to the backlash to the video by “throwing young teenagers under the bus, to make out as though we had gone rogue under the use of party branding”. McGain also shared a Snapchat of himself grinning while posing in front of an antique-style money box depicting a black person with exaggerated features – similar to those portrayed in offensive blackface caricatures – just days after the video that led to his suspension was taken down. In defending the photo, McGain said the picture was taken “to convey the irony of myself being cast in the media as someone who ‘disrespects Indigenous culture’ when, in reality, I’d grown up over the past 12 years, with an Aboriginal stepfather, who always respected and honoured his Indigenous heritage”. Guardian Australia has chosen not to publish the picture. • With additional reporting from Sarah Martin, Amy Remeikis and Daniel Hurst.Some ideas are so stupid, you just know they’re a work of genius. Take Scott Morrison spruiking Gladys Berejiklian for the federal seat of Warringah. As long as she remains under a cloud from the New South Wales Independent Commission Against Corruption, it seems daft. Conventional wisdom is straightforward. The prime minister is trailing in the polls. He needs to refresh, to promote the image of a government not falling apart as it seeks a second decade in office but brimful of energy and great new ideas. It’s not easy. All governments accumulate embarrassments. But the Coalition’s front bench has delivered a stench of them. Normal practice would see Morrison seek to put maximum distance in the public’s mind between his brand and its ethical failings. Instead, he seems determined to pursue the candidacy of the former NSW premier. If he succeeds and Icac then finds against her, it gets nasty fast. Just as the Coalition campaign machine seeks to make everything about the economy, Morrison’s ethical misjudgements would again be a central focus. His failure to bring on a promised commonwealth integrity commission will appear stark. Voters would inevitably be reminded of “sports rorts”, which temporarily derailed the career of the minister Bridget McKenzie after the ONAI found the projects allocated funding were not selected on the basis of Sports Australia’s merit based recommendations. Or “carpark rorts”, involving the same prime ministerial staffer; $400m of taxpayer money splashed, as the auditor general reported, primarily in marginal Coalition seats rather than in areas recommended by the department on the basis of actual need. Gaze across the front bench and there is the energy minister Angus Taylor. When an allegedly forged – and undeniably false – document turned up for his use in a parliamentary attack on Sydney’s lord mayor Clover Moore, it almost seemed too much. He denied he or his office had altered the document, insisting staff had downloaded it from the council website and wasn’t personally interviewed by federal police before they decided not to proceed with an investigation, instead answering questions through his lawyer. While whistleblowers are pursued to the point of destruction for revealing dubious practices by agents of the state, the former attorney general Christian Porter slopes into retirement with citizens having no acceptable explanation for how an MP can declare he received substantial sums (speculated to be up to $1m) in donations for legal fees from a blind trust with neither Parliament nor the public any wiser about where it ultimately came from. Morrison’s dilemma, on its surface, is a simple one. Recent federal elections have been tight. He needs every hope to come home. He needs a superstar candidate to win back Warringah and reinvigorate his line-up as so many of his MPs race for the exit. Six months ago, that would have seemed to be Berejiklian. She seems an odd choice now. The prime minister is doing all he can to reconstruct a halo around her. In parliament, he has cast Icac as a “kangaroo court” – an “abuse of process” and an “absolute disgrace”. He has portrayed the release of taped conversations between Berejiklian and her lover Daryl Maguire as prurient and unseemly – “just awful”. Many in NSW still like and respect Berejiklian for her handling of the pandemic and for turning up through fire and flood while men around her prioritised their holidays. Many punters doubtless felt awkward and embarrassed for her as her private life was exposed. But she was in a secret relationship with a politician who has since admitted before Icac to using his position to make money. In those circumstances, it’s reasonable for Icac to question whether she should have had “a reasonable suspicion of corruption” to be reported. The tapes played before the Commission found him freely discussing unspecified deals that would clear his debts. She says she “wasn’t always listening” and insists she had no reason to suspect him of corruption. But she listened enough to promise $170m on a hospital project in his electorate in one exasperated throwaway line. Berejiklian denies any wrongdoing and insists she always acted in the best interests of the people of NSW. Public money, folks. Against that, we have a prime minister who believes in miracles. And is desperate enough for bold plays. What if Berejiklian stands for Warringah and wins it? And with it, helps Morrison to another term? What if Icac decides there is indeed “nothing to see here”. Or it delays its findings until after the election, which for the moment is all Morrison calculates he needs. And what if Berejiklian in the meantime gains a pre-election prominence justifying frequent reminders from the prime minister of just how awful corruption commissions can be: look at what they did to “our Glad”! That alone could help blunt the growing calls for a properly functioning federal anti-corruption commission, a real point of difference currently being exploited by Labor. Gladys wins. Morrison wins. The Icac can is kicked down a country road. Ethics be damned. It’s genius.Australia’s fertility rate continues to plummet, with registered births dropping below 300,000 for the first time in 14 years. Figures released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Wednesday showed there were 294,369 registered births in 2020, a decrease of 3.7% from 2019. The previous year’s decline was 3%. Importantly, the total fertility rate (TFR) fell to a record low 1.58 babies per woman, extending a decline from 2.02 in 2008. The rate rose from about 2.1 – the population replacement rate – in the early 1930s to a peak of 3.55 babies per woman in 1962. ABS director of demography Beidar Cho said fewer births in most jurisdictions could largely be attributed to “a year marked by Covid-19 disruptions”. The Northern Territory had the highest fertility rate, at 1.86 babies per woman last year, ahead of Tasmania at 1.77 and Western Australia at 1.70. Victoria posted the lowest rate, at 1.43 babies per woman. Aude Bernard, a senior lecturer at the University of Queensland’s school of earth and environmental sciences, said Australia’s population growth rate was probably at its lowest in at least a century. The pace may accelerate this year to an actual contraction, with migration all but stopping and people leaving Australia, she said. However, with reports of maternity wards filling up and the return of migration, the decline of births should halt, at least temporarily. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Based on historical data, it’s very likely to rebound,” Bernard said. “But it’s going to be short-lived. There’s going to be an increase in people who just postponed having children because of the uncertainty before the [Covid] lockdowns.” The data revealed longer term trends such as a reduction of younger women having children, while the number of those aged between 40 and 44 giving birth has tripled in recent decades. The decline in the fertility rate was largest among women aged 15-19 years, decreasing by nearly two-thirds to 7.8 per 1,000 women. Babies born to women aged 40-44 almost tripled, to 15.2 per 1,000 women. Given the later age women are giving birth, the window for more children is reduced, Bernard said. “There is this very well-established relationship between the age at first birth and the total number of children one will have.” The median age of parents also edged up, to a record 31.6 years for mothers and 33.6 years for fathers. The two-year age gap has been roughly constant since the ABS began releasing such data in the mid-1970s. The total fertility rate for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mothers was 2.25 babies per woman, down from 2.32 in 2019. “There were 22,016 births registered (7% of all births) where at least one parent was an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australian,” Cho said. Victoria had the biggest drop in registered births, with 3,846 fewer in 2020 than the previous year, while NSW had 3,330 fewer. The Northern Territory had the largest increase, with 103 more births than in 2019. In 2020, 63.5% of the births were in a registered marriage, down from 64.4% in the previous year, the ABS said.From whoops to purrs, snaps to grunts, and foghorns to laughs, a cacophony of bizarre fish songs have shown that a coral reef in Indonesia has returned rapidly to health. Many of the noises had never been recorded before and the fish making these calls remain mysterious, despite the use of underwater speakers to try to “talk” to some. The reef had been devastated by blast fishing, where explosives are used to stun or kill everything in the area. The corals are now being restored, but the scientists wanted to know if the many other creatures that inhabit reefs were also returning. Visual surveys miss camouflaged animals and those that come out only at night, so the researchers turned to the noise of the reef. They found the vibrant soundscape was close to those of reefs that had never been damaged. Sound is vital for reef survival, because almost all of its inhabitants, from corals to crustaceans to fish, produce offspring that spend the early part of their lives in the open oceans, before using sound and other cues as a homing beacon to return. Tim Lamont, at the University of Exeter, UK, and the lead author of the study, said: “Working on underwater sound on coral reefs has often been quite miserable. We’ve been listening to reefs going into silence as they degrade. But this restoration site was exciting and inspiring, because the change was going in the other direction.” There were many projects regrowing corals around the world but the return of a diverse array of creatures in this case showed it was more than “a coral gardening project”, according to Lamont. “Furthermore, as we listened through these hours and hours of recordings, we kept discovering sounds we had never heard. Some were a bit familiar but some were just like, ‘I have no idea what that is’. It was a real sense of adventure and discovery,” he said. “The foghorn one really blew our minds. I got really enthusiastic about trying to work out exactly what fish was making it. So I downloaded the noise on to an MP3 player, and got an underwater speaker, the type synchronised swimmers use. “I was swimming around blasting it out, trying to get a call and response going. I thought I got it replying a few times, but I never saw the fish itself swim out to meet the call. So the mystery continues.” Lamont suspects it may be a type of toadfish, based on other recordings from the Caribbean. Prof Steve Simpson, at the University of Bristol, UK, and part of the team, said: “Some of the sounds we recorded are really bizarre. We still have a lot to learn about what they all mean and the animals that are making them. But for now, it’s amazing to be able to hear the ecosystem come back to life.” The world’s scientists have warned that global heating of 2C could cause warm-water corals to be bleached into extinction. As well as being a catastrophic loss of biodiversity, this would destroy the livelihoods of the hundreds of millions of people who rely on reefs for food, income and storm protection. The new study, published in the Journal of Applied Ecology, analysed about four hectares of recovering reefs at the Mars Coral Reef Restoration Project in the Spermonde archipelago in central Indonesia. Here, small pieces of live coral have been attached to star-shaped metal frames, which were placed in the rubble field left by the blast fishing. The researchers compared areas one to three years into recovery against areas still degraded and areas that had never been damaged. They found most of the noises recorded were at least 50% more frequent in the healthy and restored habitats. A computer-generated measure of the complexity of the soundscape also showed the restored reefs were similar to the undamaged ones, suggesting a healthy and functioning ecosystem, the team said. While the specific organisms making the noises were not identified, some types of sound had previously been ascribed. Whooping sounds have been linked to the Ambon damselfish, growls and grunts with soldierfish, and knocking sounds with triggerfish. But the laugh sound was new to science. Noises can come from fishes’ drum-like swim bladder, their throats or from teeth being banged together. “We were surprised to see such a holistic recovery of the reef in such a small amount of time,” Lamont said, adding that a complete recovery would take longer, to allow rarer slow-growing corals to return. The team wants to develop more affordable listening devices and computer-automated analysis to enable broad ecosystem monitoring programmes. “The manual listening took months and months,” Lamont said. “I could only do it about an hour at a time, because it’s just such a bizarre thing to do, to sit, close your eyes and listen to these chirps, pops and whistles.” The blast fishing in the area has been replaced by sustainable community management. But Lamont said: “Restoration is not a solution that means we don’t have to worry about all the threats to the world’s reefs [such as the climate crisis and water pollution]. “If we don’t address these wider problems, conditions for reefs will get more and more hostile, and eventually restoration will become impossible.”Olaf Scholz is to be voted in as chancellor by the Bundestag on Wednesday, opening a new chapter in German and European politics as the Merkel era comes to an end. Scholz, the outgoing deputy chancellor and finance minister, will lead a government composed of his Social Democrat party, the business-friendly Free Democrats and the Greens, a coalition of parties never tried before at the federal level in Germany. The alliance brings to a close 16 years of rule by Angela Merkel, who chose not to run again. During her turbulent time in office, spanning eurozone crises, more than a million refugee arrivals and Brexit, there have been four French presidents, five British prime ministers and eight Italian premiers. The 177-page coalition agreement, entitled Dare More Progress, was signed by the party leaders at a ceremony at Berlin’s Futurium Museum on Tuesday. It was “the moment the post-Merkel era begins for real”, tweeted the political editor of Deutsche Welle’s international channel, Michaela Kuefner. The agreement had already received strong backing from the three parties, clearing the way for Scholz to be voted in by Germany’s lower house on Wednesday. The new government has a full in-tray, from Germany’s spiralling number of coronavirus cases to Russian troop movements on the Ukrainian border, on top of its priorities to overhaul the German economy by modernising creaking infrastructure and sharply reducing fossil fuels. Scholz said any moves by Russia to cross the Ukrainian border would be unacceptable. “It is very, very important that no one rolls through the history books to draw new borders,” Scholz told reporters after signing the coalition agreement. He was less firm when asked about China, skirting questions on whether Germany would join a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing. The new chancellor, an architect of the EU’s coronavirus recovery fund, said his first trip outside Germany would be to Paris and Brussels, as he seeks to ensure that “Europe is secure and sovereign”. Scholz’s approach to EU discussions will differ from that of Merkel, who grew up in East Germany. The outgoing chancellor was credited with a special understanding of EU members from the former Communist bloc, but also criticised for failing to tackle the threat to democratic values in Hungary and Poland. Hungary’s autocratic prime minister, Viktor Orbán, who quit Merkel’s centre-right European People’s party grouping, said when Merkel leaves office “a piece of the life of the central Europeans will go with her”. In an article to mark her departure, he criticised Merkel’s decision to open Germany to Syrian refugees in 2015, while revealing his suspicion of what he called “the new, leftwing German government’s pro-immigration, pro-gender, federalist, pro-German Europe agenda”. “One thing is for sure: the era of ambiguity, stealth politics and drifting has ended with Merkel. We now prepare for battle with our eyes wide open.” Germany’s incoming government has agreed that EU authorities should act more urgently to defend the rule of law, including withholding EU funds if necessary. The unity of the coalition could be tested by the Nord Stream II pipeline, which is to transport gas from Russia to Germany, bypassing Ukraine. The incoming vice-chancellor, Robert Habeck, a co-leader of the Greens, which campaigned to abolish the project, said the pipeline had not received approval and political discussion would continue. Habeck, a former translator of British poet Ted Hughes, also said it would take two to three years to see the result of investment in renewable energy. By 2030 the new government wants to have phased out coal and have 15 million electric cars on the roads. Christian Lindner, the Free Democrats’ leader and next finance minister, said: “We have no illusions we face great challenges.”“They ordered everyone to come around, saying if you run, if you cry, you will die,” said Bala Pada, recalling the moment in April when jihadists rounded up people at a market in his home town of Kaure to witness the execution of two alleged vigilantes. Hundreds of jihadists have settled over the past year in Kaure and other remote communities in Niger state in Nigeria, according to displaced residents and local government officials. They began to arrive in November 2020, hoisting flags and declaring the communities under their control. “They said this is what will happen to anyone that tries to stop them,” Pada said from a classroom in the Central primary school in Gwada, where he, his family and about 400 others displaced by violence now live. “Everyone was made to watch it but no one was allowed to react at all or they would face the same fate as the vigilantes,” the 45-year-old said. “Then they sprayed them with bullets.” Fighters from competing Islamist terror groups linked to Boko Haram and Islamic State West Africa Province have gained a foothold across Niger state by easily displacing an often feeble government or security presence. The development has caused increasing concern in the Nigerian capital, Abuja, just over three hours by road from towns and villages where jihadist flags fly and other armed groups have settled. Residents and local officials have for years and with growing desperation raised the alarm about the domination of armed groups – called bandits – in much of Niger state. The arrival of jihadists in this often ungoverned space has made the situation more complicated, and even more dangerous. Many of the jihadists arrived from Nigeria’s north-east, where they were engaged in fighting with the Nigerian army. They have found a haven in and around the same mineral-rich forests of the north-west that provided a fertile breeding ground for bandit gangs. The militants in Niger state have terrorised communities by carrying out public executions, abducting young girls to be “wives”, forcibly recruiting young boys to be child soldiers, and decreeing that state schools close. Alarmed officials in the state have pleaded for military reinforcements. They say their warnings are being acknowledged at the federal level but go largely unheeded. “The problem is that insecurity is everywhere in the country,” said Suleiman Chukuba, the chairman of the Shiroro local government area. From his office in the state capital, Minna, he explained how Shiroro, one of the worst-affected areas in Niger state, had been left without adequate help. “We really need more manpower in the army, and better weapons,” Chukuba said, echoing sentiments expressed across the country that areas suffering violence have been abandoned by the central government. Swathes of Niger state were already being subjected to what was in effect an insurgency waged by heavily armed bandit gangs before the jihadists turned up. The bandit gangs are made up of various ethnic groups, but dominated by mostly young ethnic Fulanis. Many of the Fulani armed groups have emerged from historic and complex conflicts over land between largely Fulani herders and farmers from other ethnic groups. In recent years these conflicts have worsened dramatically, killing thousands and becoming the most pronounced of the many security threats facing Nigeria. The bandit groups have overpowered local police and army units, killing civilians and prolifically carrying out kidnaps for ransom – especially targeting school students – from the dense forests that span north-west Nigeria and stretch into the Sahel. The ransom money has bolstered the bandits’ capabilities, said Chukuba. “They have general purpose machine guns, they have AK47s, they have ammunition,” he said. “They are at times better armed than the army.” The bandit crisis created a vacuum of governance and security into which the jihadists have stepped. Twelve of Shiroro’s 15 wards have been overrun by armed groups, and jihadists are thought to be at large in at least five. Other local government areas in Niger state such as Rafi have been similarly affected. “Two weeks ago they [jihadists] went to Korebe,” Chukuba said of a ward in Shiroro. “They saw a girl less than 14 and they kidnapped her and took her to their camp in the forest. Then they came back to the parents, to the father, with their arms, and they said, ‘we want to marry her and we’re here to pay the dowry.’” In another incident, a seven-year-old boy was taken. “Again they went back to the parents and said, ‘don’t worry the boy is with us. We’re going to teach him the Islamic way of living’,” Chukuba said. “It’s a very desperate situation. They ‘[the jihadists] come to you and tell you ‘we have your child and they’re carrying weapons’. People are living in a state of fear.” Chukuba said 70% of Shiroro’s school are no longer operational either because of kidnappings by bandit groups or decrees from jihadists forbidding education. In some areas the jihadists are positioning themselves to locals as being able to offer a more reliable protection from banditry than the government. “What we’re seeing is them coming in and preaching to people that they are on their side,” Chukuba said. But in others, the jihadist and bandit causes have aligned. Gambo Isiaku, the headteacher of the Central primary school in Gwada, said school kidnappings were increasingly an area where alliances were being formed. “The bandits get what they want which is ransom money and so they kidnap the children, while Boko Haram get what they want which is an end to western education.” As the insecurity worsens, accounts of acts of terror have multiplied. According to Isiaku, people across Shiroro have reported armed groups and jihadists committing mass rapes of women and girls in front of their families. “It’s so bad, it’s hard to even imagine,” he said. In a briefing to journalists last week, a secretary to the Niger state governor said jihadists were setting up a caliphate in the state, and lamented that there were just 8,000 police officers trying to protect the state’s population of roughly 4 million people. In recent days the army has told people in several communities in Shiroro and other areas in Niger state to leave their homes before a possible impending military offensive. Yet in a largely impoverished state, where many people rely on their farmland for food and income, leaving means abandoning livelihoods. Pada now does odd manual labour jobs in the area close to the school to make ends meet. He was born and grew up in Kaure, but cannot return, he said. “We want to go back home but we don’t have a choice.” Chukuba described Shiroro as a peaceful place before the violence that has reshaped it. A day after explaining what had befallen residents in his jurisdiction, he learned his brother and other members of his family has been abducted by a bandit group. “They recently told all those living in the town to leave, but he was staying there because he didn’t want to abandon our farm,” he said over the telephone. “Inshallah [God willing], we will be able to rescue them.”Queensland has declared a “world-first” sub-lineage of Omicron but experts say it’s not a new variant or a new strain and more information is needed. The new Omicron Covid sub-lineage, known as Omicron “like”, was identified in an overseas arrival to Queensland from South Africa. Confirmation of the new lineage comes as health authorities identified a second Omicron case in an overseas arrival from Nigeria, Queensland’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said on Wednesday. “I want to give a huge thank you to our forensic [and] scientific services, because it is their work … with the international committee that has led to the … reclassifying of Omicron into two lineages, and we have both of them here in Queensland,” D’Ath said. Infectious disease physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University Prof Peter Collignon said the two lineages are created by the Omicron variant of Covid-19 having different genes. “It is mainly at the moment an issue about the technicalities on how they are picked up,” he said. “If the genes have been deleted, and there’s another lineage where the gene hasn’t been deleted, you may not think it is Omicron when in fact it is,” he said. Collignon said the new sub-lineage was not a new variant. “I don’t think you can call it a new variant, it’s a sub-set. A new variant signifies a major change from what we’ve had already,” he said. He said this sub-lineage was probably spreading across different parts of the globe. “I would be surprised if it hasn’t been in other places.” When identifying the original Omicron variant, labs have indicated that when using PCR tests, one of three target genes is not detected, the World Health Organization says. This is known as S-gene dropout, which the new sub-lineage in Queensland does not have, the state’s acting chief health officer Peter Aitken said. “Normal” Omicron has about 30 different gene changes, while the new sub-lineage has about 14. “So it’s got enough to be able to classify it as Omicron, but we don’t know enough about it as to what that means as far as … clinical severity [and] vaccine effectiveness,” Aitken said. “What we do know is that it’s looking like Omicron is more infectious and more transmissible.” Catherine Bennett, chair of epidemiology at Deakin University, said it was important to understand that this “was not new”, in fact, every variant had different genes. “Seventy per cent or so of Omicron variants don’t have the S-gene dropout. We have variation within strains,” Bennett said. The S-gene was interesting because “it allowed the PCR test to differentiate it”, she said. “The pity is, we miss out on the PCR screening when it would have been nice to distinguish it,” Bennett said. “It just takes longer to do, instead of having a result in six hours, it means you have to wait the extra day.” In the strains Australia has already had – such as Alpha and Delta, there are differences in genes, she said. “Every Delta variant isn’t quite the same. The one we had in Victoria behaved differently to the one that came into NSW – that took off in a very different way. “There’s a bit of variation within strains, even in the early days. It’s a characteristic mutation but it is not what defines it as Omicron.” As Queensland prepares to open its borders to interstate hotspots, Aitken said the arrival of the variant was a reminder the pandemic was not over. “In many ways, the Covid journey has just started,” he said. “We will have cases, it means that we will have to look at mask-wearing … we will have to contact trace, we will have to have quarantine for close contacts.” Queensland is closing in on its 80% full vaccination target, with 79.11% of eligible people over 16 having received two doses. With Australian Associated PressA “tuk, tuk” from the water below draws us to the side of the bridge. We look down through the crown of a leafless willow. Despite weeks of negligible rainfall, the spring-fed Ivel keeps a brisk flow. No amount of scanning the bankside will bring the moorhen – if that is what it was – out of cover. A bird does indeed appear, as if propelled out from under our feet. A young swan that I haven’t seen for weeks has turned a lighter shade of pale, though it might not be in time for a pure white Christmas. In its autumn moult, the bird trades, quill by quill, the unassuming greys and browns of its juvenility for the brilliance of adulthood. And therein lies peril. Dark plumage advertises innocence; whiteness in swan world constitutes a threat in the minds of its congeners. Something in the way this bird sits in the water – perhaps a neck that is raised beyond the habitual bend of relaxation – suggests that it rests uneasy. A second swan bursts out from beneath the bridge, every feather advertising aggression. Who taught a male swan to “make yourself look big”, wings billowed, fanned and arched to present its opponent with a wall of fury? Neck thrown back so that the next move of its loaded head will be a thrust and stab? Though the youngster paddles a retreat, the adult male rises out of the water and extends his neck. Slap! He strikes the surface with both wings. The young bird scrabbles to take flight. Slap! The male has caught up and may be trying to bite. Slap! The juvenile is flying, and the adult is – it seems – deliberately using his wingtips with percussive belligerence. The fleeing bird rounds the bend and the cob settles. What kind of triumph is this? The adult has driven off its young, a bird he tended ever since it was an egg on his female’s nest. She sails up, wings also bowed in anger, a co-aggressor. The territorial pair have banished their offspring, a necessary cruelty of winter. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIt has been a year since the UK became the first western country to license a vaccine against Covid and since then the world has embarked on a battle against the virus. Here is a history of the vaccination development November 2020 At this time, there were a number of Covid vaccine candidates being tested in large phase 3 clinical trials. Among the jabs being considered was the University of Oxford/AstraZeneca one. At the end of the month, analysis indicated its promise – with data showing it was 70.4% effective when combining data from two dosing regimens. Sarah Gilbert, professor of vaccinology at the University of Oxford, said the news took the world, “another step closer to the time when we can use vaccines to bring an end to the devastation caused by Sars-CoV-2.” Pfizer and BioNTech also announced the effectiveness of their jabs this month. The efficacy portion of their Covid-19 vaccine trial had been completed, showing the vaccine to prevent 95% of cases of the disease. December 2020 The UK became the first western country to license a vaccine against Covid, with the first jab approved the Pfizer/BioNTech one. It was authorised for emergency use by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Authority (MHRA) and initially given to the most at risk. Among the first people in the world to receive a jab was 90-year-old Margaret Keenan, who was inoculated at 6.31am on 8 December in Coventry, marking the start of a historic mass vaccination programme. The vaccines were initially administered at 70 hospital hubs around the UK, with patients aged 80 and over who are either already attending hospital as an outpatient or are being discharged home after a hospital stay, being first in line. January 2021 Dialysis patient Brian Pinker, 82, become the first person to receive the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine – which was approved for use in late December. The retired maintenance manager got the jab at Oxford’s Churchill hospital. Health secretary Matt Hancock said it was a “pivotal moment” in the UK’s fight against the virus. NHS medical director ProfStephen Powis said: “The NHS’ biggest vaccination programme in history is off to a strong start, thanks to the tremendous efforts of NHS staff who have already delivered more than one million jabs.” The UK secured 100m doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine. March 2021 Several European countries stopped using the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine amid fears it caused serious blood clots. At the time, AstraZeneca said 17 million people had so far received the jab, and the blood clot incidents were “much lower than would be expected to occur naturally in a general population”. Germany, France and several other countries eventually resumed rolling out the vaccine after finding it was safe. May 2021 The UK hit a milestone of having delivered more than 60 million coronavirus vaccine doses. The news came as a study found the Pfizer and AstraZeneca vaccines are highly effective after two doses against the variant identified in India. Dr Jenny Harries said the study was the “first real-world evidence of vaccine effectiveness” against the variant and the “straightforward message” was for people to make sure they took up the offer of the second jab. June 2021 Half of all adults aged under 30 in England received a first dose of a Covid vaccine this month, three weeks after the coronavirus vaccination programme was opened up to those in their 20s. Vaccines minister, Nadhim Zahawi, praised the “phenomenal achievement”. He added: “It’s fantastic to see so many young people coming forward for their jabs, doing their bit to protect themselves and their loved ones.” As new mutations of the virus emerged, including the Delta one, the jabs remained effective against the most severe outcomes, such as death. July 2021 Changes were introduced that meant double-vaccinated travellers from the US and most of Europe had their jab status recognised and so could avoid quarantine when arriving in England. The government announced a significant loosening of international travel restrictions to let millions more people visit friends and family in the country, as well as boost the struggling tourism and aviation sectors. October 2021 Former prime minister Gordon Brown called on the UK government and other G20 countries to urgently arrange a military airlift of surplus Covid vaccines to poorer countries before they expire, saying it is their “moral responsibility” to do so. He organised a letter from more than 160 former world leaders and global figures calling for richer countries to send 240m vaccines stored in the US, Europe and Canada to countries struggling to vaccinate their populations. November 2021 The government set out a mandate that meant those working in care homes had to be vaccinated. This resulted in around 50,000 care home staff leaving their jobs. During this month, the government also extended the remit of who would get booster jabs. Sajid Javid urged people aged 40 to 49 to come forward for their third dose of vaccine, as the offer of a booster is extended to them. The Covid booster vaccination scheme was expanded to try to combat the spread of the Omicron variant.A government health watchdog is considering legal action against a private health company whose laboratory gave at least 43,000 people potentially false negative Covid-19 test results. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), the successor body to Public Health England, had already commissioned an independent quality audit of work at the Wolverhampton site of Immensa. Subsequently, the UKHSA refused a freedom of information request from the Good Law Project to give details of the audit and who carried it out, citing legal issues. The agency said it was declining to release the information on public interest grounds “on the basis of either or both legal advice and/or litigation privilege”. The response to the Good Law Project, seen by the Guardian, added: “This does not confirm that UKHSA will formally litigate under the contract at this time but allows UKHSA time to investigate in full before determining its final position under this contract, as well as to follow the legal advice that it has received.” Good Law Project has said it plans to challenge the freedom of information decision, saying it believes the audit was carried out months ago, before revelations about apparent failures at the Wolverhampton lab. NHS test and trace suspended testing operations by Immensa in Wolverhampton in October after an investigation into reports of people receiving negative PCR test results after they had previously tested positive on a lateral flow device. Test and trace said about 400,000 samples had been processed through the lab, the vast majority of which were negative results, but an estimated 43,000 people may have been given incorrect negative PCR test results, mostly in south-west England. Later that month it emerged that the Wolverhampton laboratory was continuing to process results for international travellers who bought tests through its sister company, Dante Labs, and that an employee from the joint company was supporting test and trace “in a technical role”. The Dante Labs website shows it still offers travel-type PCR tests for sale, although all of them are currently listed as out of stock. The website says it had “temporarily suspended the sales of antigen lateral flow tests”. Companies House records show Immensa was formed in May 2020, and is run and wholly owned by Andrea Riposati, chief executive of Dante Labs. A UKHSA spokesperson said: “A full investigation into the Immensa laboratory remains ongoing and we will provide an update in due course.” Jo Maugham, director of the Good Law Project, said: “We welcome, of course, any legal action government brings against Immensa. But Immensa’s failures are the consequence of government’s inexplicable decision to give £119m in public funds, without competition, to an unaccredited, box-fresh testing outfit. Government has very real questions to answer and – for the communities that were betrayed – we mean to ask them.” Immensa and Dante Labs were contacted for comment.The mute swan is not so much a bird, more of a national treasure: the avian equivalent of Sir David Attenborough or the Queen. And just like them, swans are widely loved and admired. Yet people also sometimes fear swans: when a territorial male chases after you, hissing and spreading his wings, he can be a fearsome adversary. And at times, people wilfully seek to harm them. Perhaps because they present such huge and obvious targets, swans are regularly shot and killed. Nor are mute swans as silent as their name suggests. When they fly low overhead, their beating wings sound like a pair of bellows; or, as the writer Paul Theroux described it, like a couple making love in a hammock. There are many myths about swans, and they are often untrue. They do not all belong to the Queen, nor can a swan break your arm with a blow of its wing. They do, however, mostly mate for life, and are a classic symbol of beauty, fidelity and purity. Indeed, across the northern hemisphere, the various species of swans are more deeply embedded in ancient cultures than almost any other bird. For most of us, though, swans are simply a familiar and comforting presence on rivers, lakes and park ponds; bringing back childhood memories of our first close encounter with Britain’s largest and most magnificent bird. Stephen Moss’s latest book, The Swan: A Biography is out now. Buy through Guardian Books for £11.04 (RRP £12.99)It’s a winter afternoon and you’re about to begin a video call with Steven Spielberg. The perfect opportunity, then, to make a quick brew in your Gremlins mug (Spielberg produced that devilish 1984 horror-comedy) then brandish it in front of the webcam for the director’s benefit. “Oh, I love that, thank you,” he says, chuckling softly. Then he wags a cautionary finger: “Don’t drink it after midnight!” The most famous and widely cherished film-maker in history is all twinkling eyes and gee-whiz charm today. He is about to turn 75 but first there is the release of his muscular new take on West Side Story, which marks his third collaboration with the playwright Tony Kushner, who also scripted Munich and Lincoln. Spielberg is at pains to point out that this not a remake of the Oscar-laden movie but a reimagining of the original stage musical. “I never would have dared go near it had it only been a film,” he says. “But, because it’s constantly being performed across the globe, I didn’t feel I was claim-jumping on my friend Robert Wise’s 1961 movie.” Spielberg and West Side Story go back further than that. He was 10 when he became obsessed with the Broadway cast album, which his father brought home in 1957. He even got in trouble for belting out the show’s comedy number Gee, Officer Krupke. “With my dad right across from me and my mother next to me, I sang, ‘My father is a bastard / My ma’s an SOB … ’ Oh my God, they got so mad. ‘You can’t say “bastard” at the dinner table! Where did you learn that?’ I said, ‘It’s on your record!’” It was Jerome Robbins who had the idea of transposing Romeo and Juliet to New York’s Upper West Side. Leonard Bernstein provided the score, Arthur Laurents the script and a young greenhorn named Stephen Sondheim wrote the lyrics. Tony and Maria, played in Spielberg’s version by Ansel Elgort and Rachel Zegler, were the star-cross’d lovers, while two warring gangs, the Jets and the Sharks, stood in for the Montagues and Capulets. Which gang did the young film-maker run with during his adolescence in Arizona and California? “Me in a gang?” he splutters. “Yeah, right! No, I was in the Boy Scouts of America. And a movie club. My friends and I made movies on 8mm when we were 12 or 13 so I was just part of that nerdy, geeky little club.” He did, however, come to be known in the 1970s as one of the Movie Brats, so-called because they were the first generation of US film-makers to have absorbed much of their education from the screen and went on to electrify and transform Hollywood. Of that quintet – Francis Ford Coppola, Brian De Palma, George Lucas and Martin Scorsese were the others – Spielberg was the only one who hadn’t made a leap into musicals. “Francis did it with Finian’s Rainbow, Brian with Phantom of the Paradise, Marty with New York, New York. I do think you have to consider American Graffiti to be George’s musical. Which means all the Movie Brats have done it now, and I was the last. I’m proud to be the caboose.” He had some healthy anxiety beforehand. “I work better that way,” he explains. “Fear is my fuel and confidence is my enemy. If I’m on my heels, I get better ideas than, let’s say, coming in to do the sequel to Jurassic Park. It’s a lot better for me not to make the sequel to Jurassic Park.” Musical numbers, such as the dance contest in Spielberg’s wartime comedy 1941 or the dazzling Busby Berkeley homage at the start of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, have cropped up in his films without him ever quite putting more than a toe in the water – or rather, on to the dancefloor. His 1991 fantasy Hook, starring Robin Williams as a grown-up Peter Pan, even began life as a musical. “I chickened out after the first week of shooting and took all the songs out,” he recalls. “It was the biggest paradigm shift I’ve ever had while directing a movie. It just didn’t seem right for some strange reason. Maybe I didn’t feel ready to do a musical. I was OK doing those little numbers in 1941 or Temple of Doom, and later there was a kind of zero-gravity dance to the Bee Gees in Ready Player One. I had a couple of false starts, too, with scripts that I began developing into original musicals. At some point, I decided I had to have the courage of my convictions.” That meant returning to the musical that had earned him a scolding at the dinner table. “It has never left my life,” he says. “I’ve played the cast album to my kids. They memorised the songs growing up. I’ve got videos where I’m running around the place playing Officer Krupke and all the Jets. Those videos prove how West Side Story has permeated my entire life and the lives of my kids and grandkids. It’s crazy!” Is he much of a dancer? “I’m a good faller,” he smiles. “I have a number of left feet. I’ve been tripping over cables on my own sets since I was a television director at 22. It’s harder now at almost 75. You don’t want to be doing that as much.” His feelings for West Side Story are indisputable, but love alone is not reason enough to make a new version of existing material. That much was proved by the negative reaction to Always, his 1989 update of Victor Fleming’s 1943 romantic fantasy A Guy Named Joe. “It was a great love story that really touched me and I’d never made a love story before,” he says. “I used to show the 1943 film to girlfriends when I was dating, and if they didn’t like it I wouldn’t go out with them again. The two that were litmus tests for whether there was going to be another date was A Guy Named Joe and Stanley Donen’s Two for the Road. If they didn’t like those films, that was it!” Fortunately, his West Side Story has urgency as well as affection behind it, introducing a racial and socioeconomic specificity that earlier versions were poorly placed to provide. “What isn’t in the play or the 1961 movie is San Juan Hill being razed by the wrecking ball,” he says, referring to the redevelopment that demolished entire blocks in Manhattan, predominantly displacing low-income families of colour. As Zegler tells me later: “Tony’s script brings out the realities of what it was like for those communities. Lieutenant Schrank says it in the first scene, ‘You’re in the way.’” Several dance numbers now take place among torn metal and piles of rubble, or on splintered piers. “The Jets climb to the top of a rubbish heap,” Spielberg says. “It’s like, ‘That’s what they’re fighting for?’” There is also a new weight and dignity afforded West Side Story’s Latinx characters, whose culture – and the racism they face – is more sharply drawn. When I speak to Ariana DeBose, who plays Maria’s friend Anita, she confesses to mixed feelings about the 1961 film. “It’s a product of its time,” she says. “You realise, ‘Oh, they’re in brown-face.’ That is not my favourite thing about the film. But I do still think it’s a classic.” She made it clear when she auditioned for Spielberg and Kushner that her ethnicity would need to be addressed if she were hired. “I said to them, ‘If you’re not interested in exploring the fact that I am Afro-Latina, that I am a black woman, then I don’t think you should consider me.’ And they were very much not afraid of that. My presence in this film is not stunt casting. It has allowed us to start a conversation around colourism and how it affects Latinx culture.” Young audiences who may never have heard of West Side Story, let alone the shortcomings of any previous version, would expect nothing less. It is for them that the new picture primarily exists. “The majority of young people don’t know what West Side Story is,” says Spielberg. “This will be their introduction.” He also made it for – and dedicated it to – his father, who died last year aged 103. “I didn’t have it finished in time for him to see it. But while I was on set in New York, my assistant was running around with FaceTime on the iPad, and my dad would be sitting at home in LA watching us shoot a lot of the movie, so he felt part of our company.” Another absent figure is Sondheim, who died last month at 91. On set, he was known as “SS1” while Spielberg was “SS2”, a ranking stipulated by the film-maker. They had known each other since the mid-1980s. As well as being present for some of the filming, which was completed before the pandemic, the composer attended every recording session. “Then, during Covid, I discovered he was as much of a cineaste as Scorsese or myself, and that he had seen the most obscure movies. So we began this tremendous back-and-forth on email for almost 18 months and he became a very good friend. We would recommend films to each other, then we’d watch them and get on the phone or email about them.” Did Sondheim pass the Guy Named Joe/Two for the Road test? “No, he didn’t,” he laughs. “He didn’t like either of those movies at all.” Alas, no second date. Just a beautiful friendship. West Side Story is released on 10 December.I wanted to know the exact amount of time I spend ruminating on the inner lives of my cats, so I did what most people do in times of doubt, and consulted Google. According to my search history, in the two years since I became a cat owner I have Googled variations of “cat love me – how do I tell?” and “is my cat happy” 17 times. I have also inadvertently subscribed to cat-related updates from the knowledge website Quora, which emails me a daily digest. (Sample: Can Cats Be Angry or Disappointed With Their Owner?) How do I love my cats? Let me count the ways. The clean snap of three-year-old Larry’s jaw as he contemplates me with detached curiosity is my favourite sound in the world. I love the tenor and cadence of my six-month-old kitten Kedi’s miaows as he follows me around the house. (High-pitched indignant squeaks means he wants food; lower-pitched chirrups suggest he would like to play.) I love the weight of Larry on my feet at night and the scratchy caress of Kedi’s tongue on my eyelid in the morning. But how do I know what these little tykes really think and feel? I fear the authors of online listicles written in cursive fonts are unlikely to provide me with the latest scientific research – and are probably just saying what they think I want to hear. To truly journey into the feline soul, I will have to go to the fountainhead. Despite the fact that cats are the most common pet in UK households after dogs, we know relatively little about them. This, says Dr Carlo Siracusa of the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, “is partly due to practical problems.” Dogs are easy to study: you can take them to a lab and they will be content. But cats are intensely territorial creatures. “The behaviour of a cat is so modified by its environment that if you move it to a laboratory,” says Siracusa, “what you’ll see is not really reflective of what the normal behaviour of the cat is.” But there is another reason that cats are under-researched. “There’s a stigma,” says Siracusa. Cats have been unfairly maligned through much of human history. In the middle ages, cats were thought of as the companions of witches, and sometimes tortured and burned. “They have been stigmatised as evil because they are thought to be amoral,” says the philosopher and writer John Gray, author of Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life. “Which in a sense, cats are – they just want to follow their own nature.” What we do know about the inner lives of domestic cats is usually determined by scientists running studies in their homes. Unsurprisingly, many of these scientists are cat owners. “Of course I am a cat lover,” says Dr Saho Takagi of Kyoto University. “When I started raising cats, I was attracted by their mysteriousness. What are these cats thinking? How do they perceive the world? These are the questions that motivate me in my research.” Takagi is holding a cat in her photo on the professional network for scientists, ResearchGate. She co-authored a paper, published last month, that found that cats mentally track the locations of their owners by their voice, even when they can’t see them. Cats participating in the study were played audio of their owners calling their names. When the source of their owner’s voice moved, they appeared the most startled. “These findings suggest that cats are quite concerned about their owners,” she says. “They may be watching their owner’s every action carefully, thinking about what will happen next.” A common criticism levelled at cats is that these capricious little creatures only use humans for warm beds and a reliable source of protein. But “cats do get attached to people,” says Siracusa. “They get attached to other animals too.” He explains that cats often show affection by proximity, if not physical interaction, “being in the same room as you or physically close to you”. More demonstrative cats will sleep on or near their owners, or other cats. “Cats who have grown up together are more likely to be preferred associates,” he says. “But as a general rule cats do not like to be picked up, hugged and kissed. The great majority of cats don’t like this.” This misapprehension that cats do not care for their owners typically comes from humans who are disappointed their cats don’t behave like other humans, or at the very least, dogs. “Cats are not people,” Siracusa sighs, “and they are not dogs. Humans hug and kiss. Dogs become very excited and jump around. Cats don’t do anything like that. They are much more elegant. They approach us. They bump their heads. Then they have some contact with us and walk away.” This is because they are descended from the African wildcat, a solitary creature. “Cats are not social,” says clinical veterinarian Karen Hiestand of the University of Sussex. “They do not need friends.” Although, in multicat households, cats may choose to exhibit affection by allogrooming – licking each other. Watching Larry and Kedi groom each other is usually the highlight of my day. Cats can feel depressed, says Hiestand. Just don’t call it depression. “There are issues around using mental health terminology on non-human species,” she says. “I have my own views: if it looks like a horse and sounds like a horse, then call it a horse.” The issue when it comes to spotting depressed cats, Hiestand says, “is that cat behaviour is incredibly subtle. We don’t notice when cats are miserable because a miserable cat sits still and doesn’t do much. We think that, if they are miserable, they’ll be hissing and fighting. But that’s an action of last resort for them. There’s a world of misery before then. We just don’t notice.” Changes in behaviour can be a sign of cat distress: when Siracusa started working from home due to the pandemic, his cat, Elsa, was disoriented and upset by the unexpected change in his behaviour. (Look out for changes in their toilet habits, or food consumption.) Fascinatingly, when Siracusa put Elsa on probiotics, this appeared to improve her mood. “Behavioural disorders are influenced by the immune system, and the immune system is influenced by the gut,” he says. Cats also retain memories: I have seen this myself first-hand. When Larry burned his paw on my induction hob last year, he stopped walking on my kitchen units for months. If I picked him up and placed him on the worktop, he would jump off, associating the area with the memory of pain. “Memories related to emotions,” explains Siracusa, “and memories that cause a negative feeling are particularly good for our survival. Cats learn from experience and retain information that will keep them away from trouble or help them to get an advantage.” Cats retain more prosaic memories too. Takagi has conducted experiments in which cats are fed using multiple bowls of food over a period of time. The researchers learned which types of food the cats liked best and served it in a specific bowl (allowing them to create memories of what was served and when), then later switched the bowls. They found that the cats could recall if they had previously searched a given bowl when looking for a particular treat and the circumstances under which this had occurred. “This showed that it was a one-time experience that could be used and retrieved later,” says Takagi. “This type of memory is called episodic memory, and it is equivalent to memories in humans.” They even dream. “In practice,” says Hiestand, “there are some anaesthetic agents we use when operating on cats that are hallucinogenic. I always think, what is the cat hallucinating? Is it giant mice? Sometimes, you see their feet pedalling, as if they are running in their dreams.” She believes these dreams aren’t so dissimilar to the human experience of dreaming: “Going over the day’s events and storing things in their memory banks,” Hiestand says. “There’s no reason to think their brains would work so differently to ours in that respect.” What cats cannot do, however, is project into the future, because their frontal lobes are not developed. “Cats can’t make long-term plans,” says Siracusa. “Some people think that [when] they leave the house, and their cat poops on the couch, it is so that when I return I have a nasty experience. But cats do not have the ability to plan ahead in this way.” That means Kedi isn’t trying to annoy me when he knocks over my laundry rack: he can’t conceptualise that I may respond negatively to seeing fresh laundry strewn across the floor. So what is going on in those catty little brains? “That’s a difficult question,” Siracusa says. “I think most of their thoughts are about how to stay safe. Stay away from predators. Do cool stuff, such as eat a juicy mouse. Because they live in a human world, they most likely have thoughts related to us. That new tumble dryer we bought makes a terrible noise. But most of their thoughts are related to staying safe, and happy.” He pauses, and then laughs: “But I suppose those are my inner thoughts, projected on to a cat’s inner thoughts.” Over the course of the week it takes me to research and write this article, I become obsessed – even more than before – with the happiness and wellbeing of my charges. I observe their pointy little faces carefully, watchful for any flicker of emotion behind their translucent amber eyes. I even send videos of them to the cat behaviourist Anita Kelsey, author of Let’s Talk About Cats. “He’s excited to see you,” she says in response to one video of Kedi accosting me in the morning. “He knows his food is coming soon. There’s a burst of energy shortly after waking. It’s typical behaviour.” It isn’t enough. Sure, I can see what they are doing in front of me: licking their bottoms, jumping at flies, sleeping adorably on their backs, fluffy bellies crying out to be tickled. But the lives they lead when I’m not around remain a mystery. Do they pine for me, or are they unmoved? The answer, of course, is to spy on them. The home security company, Canary, provides me with motion-activated internal security cameras. What do they reveal? The cats flick pens off my desk. They rip chunks out of my overpriced ergonomic office chair. They drink out of abandoned water glasses. They exist blithely, unconcernedly, unbothered by my physical absence. Most cats do not long for their absent owners any more than they will fetch a ball on command, or embrace veganism. They are cats. They do what they want, all the time. “Cats are a window outside the human world,” says Gray, “They are themselves, and they stay themselves. They adapt to human ways. But they don’t adopt human ways.” In other words, we should stop trying to project human attributes on to these inscrutable creatures. “Cats are cats and humans are humans and we can’t become cats,” Gray says. “I think the question should really be, can we learn anything from them that is beneficial to us? I think we can. By looking at something so different to us, that lives alongside us, we can shake the more harmful habits that go with being human. Such as worrying about the future and not living enough in the present, or being content with the life we have.” Also, sleeping a lot. It strikes me, speaking to Gray, that the ancient Egyptians got it right. They worshipped cats: their deity Mut, the mother goddess, was frequently depicted as a cat. “It’s because they are so self-possessed and imperious,” says Gray. “They do what they want to do. And live the way they want to live.” Perhaps a better relationship between human and cat would approximate these ancient ways. After all, you don’t need to understand the ways of a cat to worship it. My week-long journey into the feline soul ends with me unplugging my cameras and returning Larry and Kedi to an unmonitored existence. Before I do, I fire up the camera and watch the footage one last time. I see a little kitten, reaching its paw toward the all-seeing eye of a technological interloper. And me, behind the camera, striving for the felicity that comes to our feline friends so easily.Whenever you watch a documentary about a dictator’s path to power, there comes a moment when you think: “Why didn’t people do something? They could have stopped him while there was still time.” We have now reached this moment. As Boris Johnson rams yet more powers into the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, a vaguely democratic nation is sliding towards autocracy. It was bad enough when I wrote about this legislation last week. After the bill had mostly passed through parliament and could be properly debated, the government slipped in a series of terrifying amendments. By curtailing the right to protest, it already amounted to the most oppressive legislation tabled by a government of this country since the end of the second world war. But now, it’s even worse. In a private letter to members of the House of Lords, the government says it intends “to introduce a new offence of interfering with the operation of key infrastructure, such as the strategic road network, railways, sea ports, airports, oil refineries and printing presses, carrying a maximum penalty of 12 months’ imprisonment, an unlimited fine, or both”. In the previous batch of post-debate amendments, the bill sought, among other measures, to criminalise any protest that might interfere with the construction of new infrastructure. This most recent amendment will apply to existing infrastructure, potentially banning all effective protests, pickets or any other kind of action in places “such as” roads, railways, ports, airports, oil refineries and printing presses. The named infrastructure is bad enough, greatly limiting the scope of protest, but what does “such as” mean? Well, if printing presses are considered key infrastructure – an offering to the Murdoch empire, whose presses were targeted by Extinction Rebellion – this might apply to any corporate or government premises, as well as any public spaces. These are dictators’ powers. Parliament should be in uproar. The press should be in uproar. Yet you could hear a pin drop. There have been roughly as many stories published over the past fortnight in the UK press that mention Nestlé’s Quality Street chocolates as there have been about this massive attack on democratic rights. It’s not for lack of public interest: even before the amendments were introduced, 600,000 people signed a petition against the bill. But apart from columns by Ian Dunt in the i, Kevin Maguire in the Mirror, Camilla Cavendish in the Financial Times and a couple of minor items on remote pages, the mainstream media are whistling loudly while looking the other way. We don’t have to wait for the next stage of the autocrats’ trajectory – press censorship – to kick in. The press has already fallen into line. As for the Labour party, if not now, when? Those who excuse its silence say it’s keeping its powder dry. For what? An election held in the future, when effective opposition is even harder than it is today? Unless it fights these measures, by the time it decides to use its fabled powder, the battle may already have been lost. What about those doughty “freedom warriors”: the people who believe face masks, National Trust brochures and things students say represent an existential threat to our liberties? People such as Steve Baker, Nadine Dorries, Oliver Dowden, Toby Young, Julia Hartley-Brewer and Laurence Fox. So far, none of them, as far as I can tell, have railed against it. You could almost imagine that the only freedoms they value are their own. Opposition is left to a few peers in the House of Lords, the advocacy group Liberty, alternative news sites and self-organised protesters coming together under the Kill the Bill banner. There’s a demonstration in London this afternoon to coincide with the report stage of the bill in the Lords. The revolt within the establishment you might have expected, brave souls in the Tory party and the billionaire press, is shockingly absent. Those with the power and the platforms seem to have reached a tacit consensus: we’ll sit this one out. Johnson is the most dangerous prime minister to have presided over the UK in the democratic era. Electors are disarmed by his impression of bonhomie and bumbling, and imagine he’s in it for the bants. But if the history of the past 100 years tells us anything, it’s beware of the clowns. Again and again we have seen the warning signs: the bumbling is an act, a studied imitation of spontaneity and ineptitude. He will go to extraordinary lengths to grasp and maintain power. When he senses a threat to his position, he moves with brutal efficiency, as the 21 Tory MPs who were suspended for opposing a no-deal Brexit can testify. He has surrounded himself with people who, like dictators’ cronies the world over, appear to be as threatening as they are damaged. He feels unconstrained by rules, let alone by the mythical “gentleman’s agreement” that takes the place of a formal constitution in this country. He senses weakness like a shark smells blood, and knows that our political safeguards are extremely weak. With an 80-seat majority and much of the media in his pocket, he’s now exploiting the failings of our political system, with voter suppression measures, attacks on the Electoral Commission and judicial review, extensions of the Official Secrets Act and threats to the Human Rights Act. If we let this pass, and if one day there are documentaries that cover this moment, our descendants will be astonished. Not because the people who could have stopped this were terrified into inaction, as the opponents of other proto-dictatorships were. But because they couldn’t be bothered. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistA former British local councillor accused of killing his wife by ploughing into her with his car will go on trial in France on Wednesday. David Turtle is alleged to have accelerated his Mercedes at his wife, Stephanie, outside their home in south-west France, crushing her under the vehicle after a row. Turtle has denied the accusations, saying her death was a tragic accident. Turtle, 67, had left his job as a Mercedes dealer and resigned as a Conservative councillor in Bournemouth’s Kinson North ward, and his 50-year-old wife, Stephanie Turtle, left the human resources department of Dorset council in 2016, to move to Prayssac to run a bed-and-breakfast. The couple, who married in 2000 and had no children, were hoping to welcome their first guests in the summer of 2017. Gendarmes were called to their home about 2am on 30 March 2017 to deal with what was described as a “domestic accident”. An autopsy found Stephanie Turtle’s rib cage had been crushed and she had been suffocated by the weight of the car. Jayne Clarke and her partner, Roy Carmen, friends of the couple, told investigators Turtle had called them at 1.30am to say there had been a “very serious accident”. “On my God, I’ve killed my wife, I think. It was an accident,” he said, according to Carmen. Clarke told investigators Turtle seemed “very shocked” and told her he and his wife had argued. Turtle told police he and his wife had rowed after dinner and he had gone to the study while she did the washing up. She then went to bed, he told them, but the row resumed when she came down from the bedroom around midnight to use the toilet and he decided to go for a drive. He said he had no idea he had hit his wife after setting off, but “had a feeling” he should stop. When he got out he found her under the Mercedes, he said. Stephanie Turtle was wearing a jacket, two T-shirts, a bra and trousers at the time she died. During questioning, the investigating judge, Cybele Ordoqui, suggested it was unlikely a woman would get out of bed to use the lavatory in the middle of the night and put on a bra. The police report said there were traces of blood on the ground, on the vehicle and on a beige pullover found inside the house. A forensic report confirmed Stephanie Turtle had been standing in front of the Mercedes when she was run over, with experts suggesting the car had accelerated hugely in order to pass over her body. Her husband had “significantly engaged the accelerator pedal”, the report concluded. Tyre marks in the gravel confirmed the vehicle had set off at considerable speed. The Mercedes’ motion sensors were found to be in perfect working order. “He cannot answer the question why he did not see or hear his wife and has never been able to answer it,” the indictment said. Laurent Bruneau, Turtle’s lawyer, said: “This was a couple who loved each other and had done so for a long time. “David Turtle has repeatedly said it was an accident. At no moment did he see [his wife] when he started the car and he only discovered afterwards she was under it. He had no intention of killing his wife and no motive. “There is no proof of criminal intention. It was an accident.”“Who is Olivia Rodrigo?” At the start of this year, that question would have resulted in a shrug from most people over the age of 20. But by the second week of January, after releasing the lovelorn power ballad Drivers License, she was pop’s shiniest new star. Not since Britney Spears shimmied her way down a hallway dressed in school uniform has a debut single had such an immediate cultural impact: within four days, the song broke Spotify’s record for the most single-day streams for a non-holiday song – days later, Rodrigo broke her own record – and it would spend nine consecutive weeks at No 1 on the UK charts. Like Spears, Rodrigo also got her start with Disney, notably in the television spin-off of High School Musical. However, Rodrigo’s pathway to pop dominance wasn’t built on dance routines and Max Martin-penned bangers but with Sour, her intimate, barbed, anxious and brilliantly crafted debut album about the butchery of heartbreak and the emotional hurricane that is being a teenager. As she utters at the very beginning of its first song, Brutal: “I want it to be, like, messy.” At just over 34 minutes, Sour is lithe but precise. The mess comes from its seething tumult of contradictory emotions: picture Rodrigo swooping in wearing a cheerleader outfit and Doc Martens while brandishing a baseball bat, her face still wet with tears. “If someone tells me one more time / ‘Enjoy your youth,’ I’m gonna cry,” she grumbles over scuzzy power chords on Brutal before fear overtakes angst: “They say these are the golden years / But I wish I could disappear.” The album is full of these dichotomies. “Oh, I hope you’re happy,” she croons on the lullaby-like Happy. “But not like you were with me / I’m selfish, I know, I can’t let you go.” On Drivers License, Rodrigo is a ball of dismissive envy as she lambasts “that blonde girl” her ex is now with, although, she admits: “she’s everything I’m insecure about”. And the twinkling Deja Vu dresses jealousy and childlike bitterness up in a bow: “So when you gonna tell her that we did that, too? / She thinks it’s special, but it’s all reused,” she jabs at an ex-lover before self-doubt begins to creep in. The new girl is “another actress / I hate to think that I was just your type … ” Rodrigo makes no bones about her influences. Clearly a pupil of Taylor Swift, her lyrics are often hyper-specific (take Deja Vu’s imagery of “watching reruns of Glee” and “Strawberry ice cream in Malibu”, or Traitor’s “It took you two weeks to go off and date her / Guess you didn’t cheat, but you’re still a traitor”) and, like Swift, she’s not afraid to show off the stains on her heart. “You got me fucked up in the head, boy / Never doubted myself so much,” she admits on 1 Step Forward, 3 Steps Back, which interpolates Swift’s New Year’s Day. This sometimes brazen reverence for her forebears landed Rodrigo in hot water: the gleefully obnoxious Good 4 U, delivered with a pop of bubble gum and an eye roll, sounds overwhelmingly like Paramore’s Misery Business, so much so that the pop-punk group got a retrospective writing credit. Swift, St Vincent and Jack Antonoff also got credits on Deja Vu for its clear references to their song Cruel Summer. Some, including Hole’s Courtney Love, dubbed this plagiarism, although perhaps this speaks to a generational disconnect between the old guard and the new. Authenticity for Rodrigo isn’t necessarily about originality but how she can manipulate what already exists to fit the contours of her overflowing emotions. “Nothing in music is ever new,” she told Teen Vogue. “There’s four chords in every song. That’s the fun part: trying to make that your own.” Anyway, isn’t the point of being a teenager to try on different guises, stitching together an identity by stealing parts of the people you admire to escape the embarrassment of simply existing? As she sings on the punchy Jealousy, Jealousy: “I’m so sick of myself / I’d rather be anyone else.” Unfortunately for Rodrigo, the success of Sour means a disappearing act is unlikely – that driver’s license could only get you so far. Instead, we’ll have to figure it all out together.Pure evil is all around in this unnervingly subtle, sophisticated movie; it is a conspiracy drama-thriller, shot with a kind of desiccated blankness, about the occult world of super-wealth and things not to be talked about. The title is a Swiss banker’s codeword in conversation for “be silent”. It is set in 1980 in Argentina, at the time of the junta’s dirty war against leftists and dissidents. Azor gives a queasy new perspective on the horror of those times, and there is even a nauseous echo of the Swiss banks’ attitude to their German neighbours in the second world war. Yvan (Fabrizio Rongione) is a private banker from Geneva – elegant, discreet, an excellent speaker of Spanish, English and French – who is making what appears to be an emergency diplomatic visit to soothe his well-heeled and secretive clients in Argentina, in the company of his elegant, supportive wife Inès (Stéphanie Cléau). Yvan’s rich clientele are deeply troubled by the new political regime; they fear that they could find their assets being sequestrated by the government. And what is even worse is that these people were used to dealing with Yvan’s colleague Réné, a genial and exuberant figure who has also now vanished. Part of the chill in Azor is the professional calm cultivated by Yvan and Inés; Yvan affects never to be really upset or distressed about what has happened to Réné and what is happening all around him. There is something dreamlike in the series of social calls that Yvan and Inés make to a succession of wealthy, elderly, melancholy people who sense that their lives and their prosperity are coming to an end but never respond to any sense of emergency. It is a film that continues to echo mysteriously inside my head.The NHS is to hire an extra 52,000 vaccinators and volunteers to “ramp up” its booster drive one year after the national vaccination programme became the first in the world to administer a Covid-19 jab. The huge recruitment push comes as millions more people can book their Covid booster vaccine on Wednesday as the NHS cuts the qualifying time from six months after a second dose to three. Boris Johnson announced eight days ago that every eligible adult in the UK should be offered a Covid booster by the end of January under plans to boost protection against the Omicron variant. “We’re going to be throwing everything at it, to ensure everyone eligible is offered a booster in just over two months,” the prime minister said. More than a week after that announcement, the NHS is today updating its online booking system to enable every adult aged 40 and over and all those in high-risk groups to arrange their Covid booster jab to take place three months after their second dose. A row over red tape that has hampered the programme opening up more widely has also erupted between senior national staff at NHS England and the UK Health Security Agency. Officials at both agencies rubbished claims the booster rollout is stalling. They pointed to global data that shows the UK has administered more booster shots than any other country outside the US and China, and domestic figures that reveal the seven-day average for boosters or third doses – 383,000 – has hit a record high. However, that number still falls some way short of government targets to vaccinate 500,000 a day. Tens of thousands of vaccination workers and volunteers will be urged to sign up and help the national Covid-19 vaccination programme, although it is unclear how long it will be before they are trained and ready to serve on the frontline. The recruitment push comes exactly a year after Margaret Keenan received the Pfizer jab in Coventry, launching the biggest NHS vaccination drive in history. Since then, more than 51m first doses have been given in the UK, along with 46m second doses and 20m extra doses. About 3,000 vaccine sites have been established across the country, staffed by 92,000 NHS staff and 118,000 volunteers who have given 1.9m hours to help protect millions of Britons. Now the NHS is hiring more paid staff and volunteers for the programme as it reaches its “most complex stage”. 10,000 new roles are being advertised include vaccinators, admin staff and healthcare support workers. The NHS is also working with the Royal Voluntary Service and St John Ambulance to drum up the support of more than 42,000 volunteers. Amanda Pritchard, chief executive of the NHS in England, said the rollout would not have been as successful as it had been “without the help of thousands of volunteers”. She said the NHS was now “ramping up its vaccine drive once again as millions more become eligible for their booster, sooner, following updated JCVI [Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation] guidance”. The fresh recruitment drive comes as the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall warned of the deadly dangers of being unvaccinated, urging those who are still hesitant to get their jabs and boosters. They stressed that people who were unvaccinated were much more likely to end up in hospital or die than those who have had two vaccine doses and a booster. “People who are unvaccinated are at least 10 times more likely to be hospitalised or die than those who have had two vaccine doses,” they said. “That is why we urge everyone to get vaccinated and to take up the booster, as we have done ourselves.”Positive 10pm, Sky Documentaries “This government has been dragging its feet on Aids because of your distaste for the whole subject,” remarks a TV interviewer to Margaret Thatcher in the second episode of this brilliant three-part documentary series. The programme retraces the government’s response to skyrocketing HIV/Aids death rates in the mid-1980s, speaking with former health secretary Norman Fowler who was behind the Don’t Die of Ignorance campaign, while Rev Richard Coles, Lisa Power and other LGBTQ+ guests recall the community’s reaction to it. Hollie Richardson Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs 8pm, ITV Tonight’s dose of wholesome doggy goodness includes an overly eager German shepherd puppy who doesn’t know how to calm down, and a terrified west highland terrier that is too scared to step outside the house. HR Grand Designs: House of the Year 9pm, Channel 4 Before the winner is revealed, there’s one more category of shortlisted mega-dwellings to peruse: homes that reinvent old buildings. Ingenious takes on an oast house, a country manor, a school and two London family homes arouse Kevin McCloud’s lyrical pieces to camera. Jack Seale Dan Brown’s The Lost Symbol 9pm, Sky Max For all of the flaws in Dan Brown’s writing style, there’s no denying that his 2009 novel has acquired new resonance in the light of the many conspiracy theories that currently swirl around our global discourse. As this workmanlike adaptation continues, Katherine joins forces with Sato and her search for her father enters a new phase. Phil Harrison Live at the Apollo 10pm, BBC Two Comedians Angela Barnes, Sarah Keyworth and Tim Renkow take to the well-trodden London stage with observations on underachieving childhood sweethearts, being misgendered on dates and the dos and don’ts of breastfeeding. Henry Wong Mobo Awards 2021: Access All Areas 10.35pm, BBC One DJ Target presents highlights from the annual awards show celebrating music of Black origin, streaming in full on YouTube. Nominees this year include Dave – who has continued to inject his wordplay-heavy rap with sharp political commentary on his second album – and the bold and irresistible Little Simz. Hannah J Davies Live sport Champions League Football Zenit St Petersburg v Chelsea 5pm, BT Sport 3 Manchester United v Young Boys 7pm, BT Sport 2.New Zealand police have laid child abuse charges against one of the staff members of the notorious Lake Alice institution, where hundreds of former patients have alleged they were tortured and abused as children in the 1970s. Their investigation has come too late for charges to be brought against the doctor at the centre of the institution, despite police saying there was enough evidence to charge him. Now 92 years old, police said Dr Selwyn Leeks was medically unfit to stand trial. About 200 people alleged in evidence before New Zealand’s royal commission this year they were tortured and abused by Leeks and others at Lake Alice psychiatric hospital. Leeks has previously denied those allegations and said his use of electro-convulsive shock therapy (ECT) was therapeutic. The commission heard evidence from multiple witnesses alleging that Leeks and other staff used ECT without anaesthetic, including on genitals. Many of those testifying to the commission described being electrocuted as punishment for minor misbehaviour. Others allege that Leeks made them electrocute other children. Speaking to the commission, expert witness Dr Barry Parsonson likened the alleged practices to those used by “state organs of terror, namely the Gestapo is a good example”. The criminal investigation into Lake Alice has been running alongside the royal commission, and police said that their investigation included interviews with former staff of the unit, 63 former patients, and over 46,000 pages of documentary evidence. Police said on Wednesday that an 89-year-old individual has been charged with wilful ill treatment of a child. They said in a statement that “Police also found sufficient evidence to charge two other former staff members with wilful ill-treatment of a child. However, both those individuals – including 92-year-old former child psychiatrist Selwyn Leeks – are now medically unfit to stand trial. “It is important to note that this finding does not mean Mr Leeks is guilty of the alleged offence – he cannot be charged as he is unable to defend himself in court.” “Police acknowledge the enormous impact these events have had on the lives of those former patients who were children and young people at Lake Alice in the 1970s, and the frustration of those who have been waiting for us to complete this investigation,” Det Supt Fitzgerald said. “This operation involved unprecedented mass allegations, with complex legal arguments and expert medical evidence, so it was vital that we undertook a methodical and meticulous approach with thorough consideration of culpability.” Over the past 50 years, both the police and New Zealand medical authorities had received multiple complaints about Leeks and Lake Alice, but those complaints did not result in censure or criminal charges. After a settlement between victims and the New Zealand government in 2002, dozens of complainants’ files were forwarded to the police, but only one victim was interviewed, and in 2010, the police announced there wasn’t enough evidence to prosecute. Speaking to the commission in mid-2021, New Zealand police apologised to survivors for that investigation. “Police did not accord sufficient priority and resources to the investigation of allegations of criminal offending” Fitzgerald said at the time. “This resulted in unacceptable delays in the investigation and meant that not all allegations were thoroughly investigated. The police wish to apologise to the Lake Alice survivors for these failings.” Hayden Rattray, a lawyer representing Leeks at the royal commission had said: “Leeks has a right to give evidence and to make submissions. But he is, by virtue of his age and cognitive capacity, manifestly incapable of doing either. “When he was cognitively capable of doing so, [Leeks has] always ardently maintained his innocence,” Rattray said. Additional reporting by Aaron SmaleAbout 40,000 people have been made homeless by demolition works for a major Chinese-backed toll road in Kenya’s capital, Nairobi. Amnesty International Kenya says it believes the roadworks have created a humanitarian crisis, as schools, businesses and 13,000 homes spread across nearly 40 hectares (100 acres) of the Mukuru Kwa Njenga slum have been demolished since October, clearing land for a link to the Nairobi expressway. People lost clothing and other personal belongings, and dozens of families are now sleeping in makeshift tents in the rubble amid open sewage, during the seasonal rains. Left with no way of making money, some told the Guardian they have not eaten in days. At least one person has died in a partially demolished building, with unconfirmed reports of children being injured in the chaos, says Amnesty’s Diana Gichengo. A girl stands among the rubble of Mukuru Kwa Njenga slum, Nairobi, where 13,000 homes were razed to the ground The first round of demolitions in Mukuru Kwa Njenga, which were publicly announced on 8 October, started only three days later. Heavy road-building machinery, some bearing government logos and flanked by Kenyan police, flattened homes and businesses along a 30-metre-wide strip of Catherine Ndereba Road. Named after a Kenyan world champion marathon runner, the road connects Mukuru to the industrial area to the north, the airport to the east and the route of the new expressway to the west. In November, buildings on a large area of adjacent private land were also razed, with people living there telling the Guardian that they had no warning. This land, owned by a private firm, Orbit Chemical Industries, had been at the centre of several complex court disputes. “I got a call [from a neighbour] that my house was going to be demolished,” says Mary Ndhamba, who works in Briton school, next to the cleared area, which is now a landscape of rubble, sewage and scattered personal effects. Ndhamba got a lift on the back of a motorbike and raced home. “There were police beating people and launching teargas. People were scattering and as we approached I could see the bulldozers were less than 100 metres from my house.” She was only able to save her bedframe. Police “started caning people”, when the diggers were just metres away, says Ndhamba, who claims she had to kneel in front of them to beg “not to be hit”. Top: the remains of homes, belongings and a school in the cleared Mukuru Kwa Njenga slum. Above: Emanuel Sikuku, 25, despairs in front of the site of his former home People vacated their properties peacefully in October to make way for the development, but by November there were protests, says Anami Daudi Toure, coordinator at Mukuru Community Justice Center. “In November, resistance to the demolition mounted for a couple of days until hundreds of armed police moved in with riot vehicles mounted with water cannons,” Toure says. “I ran to safety,” he adds. “I was lucky. When I came back to look for my belongings I saved my mattress, but everything else had been destroyed or picked up by street boys to sell.” The 17-mile (27km) expressway will link the international airport to the central business district and plusher residential areas. It is designed to ease the congestion on the city’s A8 main artery, so notorious that it is said to cost the country millions in lost business. As Kenya’s election in August 2022 nears, the race to complete the road is seen as President Uhuru Kenyatta’s wish to complete his legacy project before his term ends. The new elevated toll road will pass above the city’s old, potholed highway The road is financed by the Chinese state-owned China Road and Bridge Corporation, which will use the tolls to recoup their $550m (£410m) investment. But critics point to the fact that the vast majority of people will not be able to afford the road in a city where walking is the dominant mode of transport, accounting for 45.6% of commuters, compared with 40.7% by bus, 13.5% by private vehicle, and 0.2% by rail. People walk because they cannot afford a bus fare. Many people will struggle to afford the tolls, expected to cost between $1 and $15 depending on the vehicle and the length of journey. Critics have branded the elevated route a road for the rich, flying over the old, potholed highway in an illustration of the gulf between Kenya’s rich and poor. Even its bus lane is expected to carry only larger coaches, not the matatus favoured by the poor. Children walk past the construction site of the expressway on their way to school More than half of Nairobi’s population (more than 2 million) live on just 5% of the city’s residential areas in slums lined by rutted, ill-kept roads, while the green suburbs of the large, neat houses in the wealthy suburbs are far better served. Mary Bosibori’s husband, Bernad Mogaka, was killed by falling debris as he tried to salvage belongings from his partially demolished house. “I am hurting,” she says. The grieving Bosibori and her nine-year-old daughter, Virginia, are now staying with 18 others displaced by the bulldozers in a 4 sq metre flat. There is not enough room on the floor for people to lie down, so they must sleep sitting in a row on the sofa. From left: Mary Bosibori, whose husband Bernad Mogaka died trying to salvage belongings from their partially demolished house, and her nine-year-old daughter, Virginia; Samuel Kimonge holds a booklet commemorating the life of his brother Bernad Mogaka “Bernad was the breadwinner, and left behind a young family,” says Geoffrey Onchieku, Bernad’s friend, and founder of the Briton school. “The government should stop dehumanising people – they haven’t told us where the expressway will start and where it will end. They just demolish all over without informing the inhabitants.” Like many in Mukuru Kwa Njenga, which has been settled since the 1960s, Bosibori managed to scrape by in the informal economy, selling avocados by the road. The diggers took out hundreds of roadside businesses as well as homes, leaving many people unable to raise the money to rent alternative accommodation or even the bus fare to reach relatives. Martin Muiruri at the spot where his small grocery shop used to be, in front of a demolished school Martin Muiruri made about $700 a month with his grocery stall. He points to the rubble where it used to be. “They flattened everything mercilessly. I had to run for my life. “My kids are supposed to be going to school. How can we pay for it now?” asks Muiruri, who is staying with a friend. “I have nothing now, nothing. We don’t know the way forward.” Orbit Chemical Industries bought the site in 1987. The firm wanted to build a factory but was unable to, as the land was inhabited. After years of legal wranglings, Orbit Chemical says it decided, in 2008, to try to sell the land off in parts. Orbit Chemical says some plots were donated and given to schools, churches and public facilities but, not wanting to completely lose their investment, the company also tried to sell plots to the existing community. However, rogue landlords were already charging tenants rent. “We came up against massive resistance,” says Sachen Chandaria, CEO of Orbit Chemical. Many of the plots are still in Orbit’s possession but others, outside the company, have their eyes on what could be lucrative land. Questions are being asked about how heavy government equipment and state police were used to clear private and donated land without notice. “Someone, somewhere – and we are still investigating to know who exactly – used that opportunity to actually evict people … who had no indication at all that their settlement would be demolished,” says Dr Nicholas Orago, executive director of Hakijamii, a social rights NGO. The view from the first floor of Kim Potter school, which was partially demolished Orbit Chemical says it is perplexed by the demolition. “We didn’t know. We have no intention to evict and we’ve never had intention to evict. We have been fighting this for 30-plus years,” says Chandaria. “If I really had the power to do this, why would I have been fighting for 30 years? “We are manufacturers, I wouldn’t know who to call to do this. It’s a complete nightmare. I sit here every day wondering how to deal with this.” Orbit Chemical was hoping their division of land would provide a model for the development of proper housing and infrastructure. Jennifer Atiano near her tent where she now sleeps with her baby Jennifer Atiano and her baby are living in one of hundreds of makeshift wood and sacking shelters that have sprung up. Both are HIV positive, but their medicine, documents and ID were lost. “Suicide even came to my mind,” says Atiano, who was sacked for being late for work the day after the demolition. Her boss refused to listen to “any excuses”. The situation is deteriorating. Minoo Kyee, from Mukuru Community Justice Center, says: “With people sleeping outside, there is a lot of sexual and gender-based violence that is not being documented.” Kyee’s community centre was demolished, leaving people unable to report crimes or find social support. “Husbands are beating their wives out of anger and frustration over what has happened,” she says. Abdia Noor, 52, a businessman now sleeping rough with his family, says: “Children are not going to school and toddlers are getting respiratory problems from sleeping in the cold.” A makeshift displacement camp has sprung up in the rubble of Mukuru Kwa Njenga Augustine Nthumbi, Nariobi’s police commander, says he oversaw the demolition and that “no one was injured”. He says the work was done “very quietly and by the time that they started … all those shanties … were already vacated, anyone who sleeps outside wants to sleep outside. There is nothing inhumane that happened there, unless people want to fabricate issues.” Forced evictions happen regularly in slums but rarely on this scale. Gichengo says: “This is the biggest eviction during the pandemic. President Kenyatta had given a moratorium on all evictions and it’s coming at a time when the economy is under duress.” She says although there were meetings about the proposed demolitions, the message didn’t get to the majority of people. People living in the temporary camp burn tyres to keep warm Africa Kiiza, trade policy analyst at the University of Hamburg in Germany, says infrastructure development in east Africa is happening “at all costs, whether that’s environmental or humanitarian”. “This is development for who? You are affecting the people who you are meant to be helping.” Nairobi’s congested roads mean that business people and diplomats sit for three or four hours in traffic to get from the airport to meetings. The new expressway, which has been criticised by environmentalists, is part of a shift towards “emphasising and redefining the colonial trend of infrastructure mapping” says Kiiza, where roads, airports and railways are built in “areas of strategic importance with little consideration of the needs of the locals”. Construction of the new expressway in Westlands, central Nairobi The road will make up part of China’s belt and road initiative, an ambitious agenda to link land and sea trade routes across Asia and Africa. According to Kiiza, African governments often look to China for funding development as the country is less rigid than US or European funders when it comes to human rights or corruption. “China does not care, as long as it’s getting the construction tender,” he says. Kenya is heavily in debt to China. Kiiza describes the relationship between the two countries as “parasitic”. The power imbalance is a “reinforcement of imperialism, where, if a country fails to pay, it is forced to give away access and control to natural and strategic resources like ports and airports”, he says. Nairobi’s governor, Anne Kananu Mwenda, announced that people living in Mukuru Kwa Njenga would be helped to rebuild outside of the expressway’s path and Major General Mohammed Badi, head of Nairobi Metropolitan Services, tasked with carrying out the demolition, told residents that the president would use his own money to help them rebuild. Mukuru Kwa Njenga residents try to register who was living in the demolished area But many are sceptical. “People are desperate, so when you bring the building materials people will fight to get the sheets and it will create violence in the community,” says Kyee. The Kenya Red Cross has handed out tarpaulins for shelters, and church groups have been bringing food. Outdoors in the merciless rain, displaced people burn tyres to keep warm. Pastor Regina Ndinda, 53, sits on a red velvet chair among the rubble of her church and home of 25 years, reading her Bible. “I’m looking for something to comfort me, because my heart is broken,” she says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks: • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.Top story: ‘This is recorded …’ Hello, Warren Murray offering you a little help to get up to speed. Boris Johnson is facing accusations of lying after senior No 10 officials were filmed joking about a lockdown Christmas party that Downing Street insists did not take place. The footage, obtained by ITV, was shot on 22 December 2020. The Friday before was 18 December, the date on which multiple sources have said there was a staff party inside Downing Street, which would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. In the leaked video of a mock televised press briefing, Johnson adviser Ed Oldfield is seen joking with Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. Amid the back and forth, Stratton says laughingly: “This is recorded … This fictional party was a business meeting and it was not socially distanced.” Stratton, who has since become the spokesperson for Cop26, and Oldfield, who remains at Downing Street, have been contacted for comment. Johnson and his aides have repeatedly denied that the event, reportedly held for staff at No 10 in December last year, broke Covid rules or took place at all. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said Johnson had not been truthful: “To lie and to laugh about those lies is shameful. The prime minister now needs to come clean and apologise.” Becky Kummer, spokesperson for Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice said: “There are simply no words to describe how upsetting and shameful it is then to hear Boris Johnson’s team laughing about breaking the rules they had made, whilst others followed them and could only say goodbye to their loved ones through a screen. It’s the behaviour of people who think they’re above us.” Separately, the Department for Education confirmed a report that some staff and the then education secretary Gavin Williamson held an office party on 10 December 2020. A DfE spokesperson said it was “a gathering” of officials already present “to thank those staff for their efforts during the pandemic … While this was work-related, looking back we accept it would have been better not to have gathered in this way at that particular time.” * * * ‘Stealth Omicron’ – Scientists say they have identified a “stealth” version of Omicron that cannot be distinguished from other variants using the PCR tests that public health officials use around the world. It means we now have the standard Omicron, known as BA.1, and this “stealth” variant, known as BA.2. The first can be identified because of a so-called S-gene deletion – but the second does not have that, so while it can still be detected as Covid, it cannot be singled out as Omicron. Separately the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) is considering legal action against Immensa, a private health company whose laboratory an NHS investigation in October found gave at least 43,000 people potentially false negative Covid-19 test results. Immensa and its sister company Dante Labs were contacted for comment. And the NHS is to hire an extra 52,000 vaccinators and volunteers to “ramp up” its booster drive, one year after the national vaccination programme became the first in the world to administer a Covid-19 jab. * * * Ashes to ashes – The Ashes series got off to the worst possible start for England when their opening batsman, Rory Burns, was bowled on the first ball of the first Test – just the second time in Ashes history a wicket had fallen on the opening delivery. Australian fast bowler Mitchell Starc got Burns around his legs in Brisbane overnight to spark joyous scenes around the famous Gabba ground. It didn’t get much better for the tourists as the big wickets of Joe Root and Ben Stokes followed soon after and, despite some brief resistance from Haseeb Hameed, Ollie Pope and Jos Buttler they were bowled out for 147, with new Australian captain Pat Cummins leading the way with five wickets. Rain stopped play before Australia’s batters were able to take to the field, but you can follow any further developments with our liveblog. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Indonesia’s president has visited areas devastated by the eruption of Mt Semeru that killed at least 34 people and left thousands homeless. Joko Widodo vowed that communities would be quickly rebuilt. &gt; A former British local councillor accused of killing his wife by ploughing into her with his car will go on trial in France on Wednesday. David Turtle is alleged to have accelerated his Mercedes at his wife, Stephanie, outside their home in south-west France, crushing her under the vehicle after a row. Turtle has denied the accusations, saying her death was a tragic accident. &gt; Randstad, the Dutch multinational delivering the government’s National Tutoring Programme (NTP), is under mounting pressure after claims that pupil enrolment for subsidised tuition is more than 90% below target. Randstad says it is working hard to deliver the programme. &gt; Australian officials will not attend the Beijing Winter Olympics as they join the United States in a diplomatic boycott of next year’s Games. * * * Deadlock remains over Ukraine – Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin have held their virtual summit but made little apparent headway about the crisis over Ukraine. The Kremlin said Putin accused Nato of “dangerous attempts to develop Ukrainian territory and increase its potential along our borders”. He demanded guarantees that Nato would not expand its territory toward Russia or place missile systems in bordering countries. The US says it is Ukraine’s right to decide its own security arrangements, but officials said Biden offered broader strategic talks between the Nato allies and Russia if the threat of Russian invasion receded. Biden spoke afterwards to the leaders of the UK, Germany, France and Italy by conference call. The Putin administration wants Kyiv to abide by the 2015 Minsk agreement, which stipulates that Ukraine reform its constitution and open direct talks with Russian-backed separatists, both of which are extremely unpopular demands in Kyiv. * * * Olaf Scholz of the party – A new German chancellor is to be sworn in by the Bundestag today, opening a new chapter as the Merkel era comes to an end. Olaf Scholz, the outgoing deputy chancellor and finance minister, will lead a government composed of his Social Democrat party, the business-friendly Free Democrats and the Greens, a coalition of parties never tried before at the federal level in Germany. The alliance brings to a close 16 years of rule by Angela Merkel, who chose not to run again. During her turbulent time in office, spanning eurozone crises, more than a million refugee arrivals and Brexit, there have been four French presidents, five British prime ministers and eight Italian premiers. The new chancellor, an architect of the EU’s coronavirus recovery fund, said his first trip outside Germany would be to Paris and Brussels, as he seeks to ensure that “Europe is secure and sovereign”. * * * Ruined the place – The wreckage of a 1970s shopping centre will form the centrepiece of a £500m Nottingham development that will include a park and leisure space. The Frame is a reimagined wreck of the former Broadmarsh shopping mall, which is envisioned swathed in greenery, and hosting markets, leisure facilities such as a climbing wall and vast trampoline or events space for boxing or music. It is the design of Thomas Heatherwick, creator of the 2012 Olympic cauldron, the new Routemaster bus, and the Coal Drops Yard shopping redevelopment in London’s King’s Cross. About half of the Broadmarsh centre was demolished in a redevelopment before its owner went bust. The lease was taken on by Nottingham city council. Moribund shopping centres around the country might be similarly redeveloped as online shopping and out-of-town retail parks take their place. Today in Focus podcast: Little Arthur and the social work crisis The abuse and killing of a six-year-old in the West Midlands has put a renewed focus on the challenges facing social workers, Patrick Butler reports. Lunchtime read: Covid vaccines, a short history It has been a year since the UK became the first western country to license a vaccine against Covid and since then the world has embarked on a battle against the virus. Here is a history of the vaccination development. Sport Liverpool came from behind to storm into the knockout stages of the Champions League and dump Milan out of all European competition with a 2-1 win at the San Siro. A half-interested Manchester City lost their dead rubber with RB Leipzig 2-1 as Kyle Walker managed to get sent off and will now be suspended for the last 16. Atlético Madrid progressed as they won 3-1 at Porto in a tense and ill-tempered game in which both sides had men sent off. Magnus Carlsen has all but retained his world chess title after defeating Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi for the third time in four games in the ninth encounter of their showdown in Dubai. Three weighing-room valets who gave evidence last week to the disciplinary hearing in which Robbie Dunne is accused of bullying and harassing his fellow rider Bryony Frost refused to work for Frost when she took two rides at Fontwell Park on Tuesday. Tracey Crouch is braced for the Premier League to “push back very, very hard” against her recommendation that English football should be subject to independent regulation. The Champions Cup has been rocked by the coronavirus pandemic before the opening round of fixtures this weekend with Scarlets forfeiting their match and Cardiff preparing to field a “misfit” team including semi-professionals. Ryder Cup-winning golfer Thorbjørn Olesen has said he was “embarrassed and felt horrible” after being accused of drunkenly groping a woman on a flight. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) has said that it respects the United States’ decision to diplomatically boycott the forthcoming Beijing Winter Olympics. And Tennis Australia has hit back at suggestions it is seeking to exploit a “loophole” in border entry rules so unvaccinated players can compete in the upcoming Australian Open, amid speculation about Novak Djokovic’s ability to enter the country. Business The “race for space” that characterised the booming property market during the pandemic could be starting to slow, according to Halifax, with the focus moving from bigger houses in the country to city flats. Property also remains a big story in China where Kaisa looks like the latest developer to fall foul of the government’s crackdown on reckless borrowing. Its shares were suspended in Hong Kong today after failing to stump up $400m in bond repayments and looks like following Evergrande into default. FTSE100 futures are up 0.4% and the pound is on $1.325 and €1.173. The papers Imagine being Allegra Stratton today, finding yourself on the front page above the headline “A sick joke”, as the Daily Mail puts it. The Metro says “No. 10 party clowns”. Our Guardian headline is less blunt, more explanatory: “PM accused of lying after No 10 team filmed joking about party”. The second story on the Guardian’s front page is “Letter links Johnson to airlift of animals”. The letter suggests Boris Johnson and the Foreign Office may have covered up the prime minister’s involvement in airlifting more than 150 dogs and cats from Afghanistan, a senior MP has said. It comes after a Foreign Office whistleblower’s evidence triggered claims that animals were prioritised over people. Boris Johnson has called such claims as “complete nonsense”. The Mirror is most concerned with the Gavin Williamson gathering – “Another top Tory broke Covid part rules”, it says – Stratton also appears, as she does as well on the front of the Express in a puff box pointing to the story inside. The splash in the Express, though, is “We need a shot in the arm now!” encouraging everyone to get their boosters. The Times leads with “Cabinet rift over plan for vaccine passports” while the Telegraph’s top story is “Plan for Christmas work from home order”. The i has “2021: it’s beginning to look a lot like last Christmas” as work from home comes back into the realm of Omicron possibilities. And prime position in the Financial Times goes to “US urges Berlin to block Russian gas line in event of Ukraine strike”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend • In yesterday’s briefing, the section on the papers misspelled “Grenfell” as “Greenfell”.Tennis Australia has hit back at suggestions it is seeking to exploit a “loophole” in border entry rules so unvaccinated players can compete in the upcoming Australian Open, as it included Novak Djokovic in the draw for the January grand slam. Djokovic’s inclusion in the tournament draw, which was released on Wednesday afternoon, followed intense speculation about the world No 1’s ability to enter the country. Earlier in the day, Victoria’s deputy premier, James Merlino, responded to a report that Djokovic had the backing of Tennis Australia – the organisers of the Open – to apply for an exemption on medical grounds after repeatedly refusing to reveal his vaccination status. Government officials have previously said only fully vaccinated players, their entourages, staff and fans will be granted entry to Melbourne Park for the season’s first grand slam from January 17-30. Djokovic was this week announced as part of the Serbia team competing in the ATP Cup in Sydney in early January, fuelling speculation he could seek to enter the country via New South Wales, and may seek a medical exemption to circumvent the rules that apply to unvaccinated travellers. “My view on this is really clear and really simple,” Merlino said on Wednesday. “Everyone’s looking forward to the Australian Open and everyone who will attend – spectators, players, officials, staff – everyone is expected to be fully vaccinated.” “They’re the rules. Medical exemptions are just that – it’s not a loophole for privileged tennis players … It is a medical exemption in exceptional circumstances if you have an acute medical condition,” Merlino said. Merlino added that decision-making powers to issue exemptions are ultimately made by the commonwealth. Tennis Australia, in a statement released later on Wednesday that did not mention Djokovic by name, said “all players, participants and staff at the Australian Open have to be vaccinated”. “Any suggestion that Tennis Australia is seeking ‘loopholes’ within this process is simply untrue. Adjudicating on medical exemptions is the domain of independent medical experts. We are not in a position to influence this process and nor would we. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Any application for a medical exemption must follow strict government guidelines based on Atagi (Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation) clinical advice. This is the same process that applies to any person wanting to enter Australia,” the Tennis Australia statement said. Last month, Djokovic’s father, Srdjan, said his son was unlikely to play at the Australian Open if rules on Covid-19 vaccinations were not relaxed. To play without being vaccinated in the ATP Cup in Sydney, the NSW government would have to apply for an exemption and the 34-year-old would have to undergo 14 days of quarantine upon arrival. If unvaccinated, Djokovic would have to arrive in Sydney by 16 December in order to complete the mandatory 14-day quarantine for unvaccinated travellers before the competition starts on 1 January. The Guardian contacted the NSW government for comment. - with Australian Associated PressAustralian power company Alinta Energy hopes to build an offshore windfarm off the coast of Victoria to help Alcoa’s Portland aluminium smelter go green. Though the project is in its earliest stages, a 500 sq km patch off the coast is being considered for the 1,000MW windfarm, dubbed Spinifex. Spinifex is expected to cost $4bn and would connect to the grid through Alcoa’s Portland smelter, ensuring the operation – which is the state’s largest energy consumer – draws its power from 100% renewable energy. Alinta’s head of project development, Kris Lynch, said the company believed it had identified an “excellent wind source” and preliminary work would begin next year. “The area we’re investigating is around 500 sq km and about 10 kilometres from the shoreline, and the great thing about this proposal is that we can connect to the grid via the smelter and won’t need to build new powerlines on private land,” Lynch said in a statement. “We think the windfarm would need to be around 1,000 MW to be viable.” Lynch said the announcement had been made early in order to ensure transparency as it goes forward. There are more than 10 proposed offshore wind projects scattered around Australia, with the potential to generate 25GW of renewable energy, but none have been built. This has largely been due to a lack of clear regulations or direction, a situation the federal government sought to address last month when it passed initial legislation to begin setting up a regulatory framework. Should it go ahead, Spinifex could take up to 10 years to construct and would be smaller than the proposed 2.2GW Star of the South offshore windfarm, which has served as a flagship for the industry in Australia. Earlier this year Alcoa’s Portland operation was given support by the Victorian state government and signed a deal with three major energy providers – AGL, Origin and Alinta – to supply it cheap power. Portland smelter manager Ron Jorgensen said the project may ensure the long-term viability of the operation. “This proposal offers an ability to make a step change impact to Portland Aluminium’s carbon footprint and we welcome the opportunity to be involved in supporting the early phase investigations of this exciting renewable project on the Australian energy landscape,” he said in a statement. Like steelmaking, aluminium production is an energy-intensive activity that is a major source of emissions, as most operations around the world draw their power from coal. As countries look to reduce CO2 emissions, demand for green aluminium is expected to grow, with Australia’s two other aluminium smelters already looking to draw all their power from renewable energy by the end of the decade. Alcoa has previously announced it is working on developing the next generation of carbon-neutral aluminium smelters.Xi Jinping has created a “nightmare” of media oppression worthy of the Mao era, and Hong Kong’s journalism is in “freefall”, according to Reporters Without Borders (RSF). In a major report released on Wednesday, the journalism advocacy group detailed the worsening treatment of journalists and tightening of control over information in China, adding to an environment in which “freely accessing information has become a crime and to provide information an even greater crime”. “No matter the topic, those who refuse to comply with the official narrative are accused of harming national unity.” In the report’s forward, RSF’s secretary general, Christophe Deloire, said before Xi came to power in 2013, there was an emerging trend of improvements in press freedom, but he had “put a brutal end to this partial opening and restored a media culture worthy of the Maoist era”. “This ‘great leap backwards’ of journalism in China is all the more terrifying given that the regime has immense financial and technological resources to achieve its goals,” Deloire said. The report listed a growing number of “obstacles” to journalism, including online censorship and surveillance, paid amateur propagandists known as the “50 cent army”, increasing use of detention without trial, Hong Kong’s national security law, forced televised confessions, daily instructions from the Communist party to newsrooms and other platforms, use of allegations ranging from “picking quarrels” to espionage to silence journalists, and the weaponising of exit bans. As well as advances in surveillance and technology, the report also described a ruling introduced in October 2019 that all Chinese journalists must use a smartphone app called “Study Xi, Strengthen the Country”, which cybersecurity experts had found could enable collection of personal data and remote access to the device’s microphone. Harassment and intimidation of reporters both local and foreign has markedly increased, according to RSF and the Beijing Foreign Correspondents Club, in particular during coverage of the Henan flood disaster earlier this year. The Henan provincial government put out a tender for a journalist-specific surveillance system after the flooding. In 2020 at least 18 foreign correspondents from US outlets were expelled, while others were forced to flee, including the BBC’s John Sudworth and Australian reporters Bill Birtles and Mike Smith, who had been investigating the national security arrest of Australian CGTN anchor Cheng Lei. Several citizen journalists were arrested for attempting to report from the Wuhan lockdown, while others have been targeted for their work on #MeToo cases. Until crackdowns in 2020 and 2021, Hong Kong’s media had been considered free and separate to the mainland’s controls, however RSF said that was no longer the case, and the sector was in “in freefall”. The report cited the arrest and jailing of journalists and media proprietors such as Apple Daily’s Jimmy Lai, the raiding of newsrooms, wholesale changes at public broadcaster RTHK, and lack of consequences for police violence against reporters. “The repression no longer spares Hong Kong, once a champion of press freedom, where a growing number of arrests are now conducted in the name of national security,” said Deloire. The report made several recommendations and appeals to authorities to improve the situation, but also listed detailed advice for journalists to protect themselves and their sources from technological surveillance and intimidation. It called on global democracies to “identify all appropriate strategies to dissuade the Beijing regime from pursuing its repressive policies and to support all Chinese citizens who love their country and want to defend the right to information”.At noon on 29 April 2015, I was under the cathedral-like ceiling of the magnificent Waterstones building in Bradford, my phone ringing again and again. I ignored it. I was a journalist for the city’s Telegraph &amp; Argus, and was judging a children’s book review competition I had organised. I can’t even remember my job title – it was assistant editor (something something). I had ignored the sage advice of an editor from aeons earlier – “Never take a job title with brackets in it” – and slid into a role involving admin, meetings, competitions, and lots and lots of dealings with the commercial side of newspapers, rather than editorial. For that reason, I thought I was fireproof. Of course, I was wrong. When I finally answered my phone, I was told to get back to the office immediately. I imagined there was some huge breaking news story that required all hands on deck, something perhaps even of 9/11 proportions. Until the deputy editor said: “Don’t go to the newsroom, come to HR.” The world of newspapers had seduced me when I was 14 and – don’t laugh – saw All The President’s Men on the TV. I would never be a Woodward or a Bernstein. But being a Barnett in the local press was enough for me. The height of my ambition was to work not for the Washington Post, but for my home town paper, the Wigan Evening Post. This was a glamorous prospect after being educated in a working-class comprehensive school where the teachers did their best, but the major career paths were still the pit, the army and jail. I eschewed university and, at 18, started a nine-month course by the National Council for the Training of Journalists at Lancashire Polytechnic in Preston (now UCLan). In May 1989, at 19, I started my first job, as a trainee reporter at the Chorley Guardian. Over the next 26 years, I worked constantly in local newspapers in the north of England, including the Wigan Evening Post. In my 20s, journalism was my work, my social life and my found family, all wrapped up together. I loved local journalism unconditionally, even when it treated me badly, with low pay, long hours and often unreasonable requests: five ‘“death knocks” (the journo term for contacting relatives of the deceased) in one day? Walking around Preston in a Dorothy Perkins skirt? I had developed a form of Stockholm syndrome. Local papers had kidnapped me from what most people would consider a normal life, yet I adored them for it. Until the day I was told it was over. I stood outside the office, chain-smoking and cycling through an emotional roulette wheel. I was angry, because I worked hard and I was an award-winning journalist. I was devastated, as if a partner I had devoted myself to for more than a quarter of a century had suddenly told me they didn’t love me any more. I felt a crashing sense of impostor syndrome. Had I been fooling myself all these years? Was I not as good as I thought? Had I finally been found out? While everyone who worked in newspapers agreed the job was shit, we didn’t really mean it. I felt as if I had been kicked out of the best game in town. But more than anything, I was terrified about the future. On one level, I had become institutionalised, while local newspapers were slimming down their staffing levels across the board. I was 45 – what was I going to do for the rest of my life? On a more practical level, what was I going to do for the rest of the year? Although being assistant editor (something something) brought with it a relatively decent salary in local newspaper terms and my wife was working full-time, we had a mortgage and two small children. Also, my generally chaotic financial management, which meant we usually lurched from payday to payday, had come back to bite me on the arse with the unrelenting grip of a doberman. My wife was more upbeat. “Now you can do what you’ve always wanted to do,” she said. “Go freelance. Work for the nationals. Do what you love: write.” So I did. I worked for another month, drifting like a ghost around the newsroom, feeling like people were avoiding me, as though redundancy were contagious. I almost crumbled under the weight of self-doubt. I knew the decisions leading to my redundancy were financial ones, but still the thought remained: if I was any good, if anyone actually liked me, then surely someone would have fought to keep me in my job? There was only one way to crawl out of that particular hole, and it was what my wife had told me to do: write. So I finished work on the last Friday in May and sat down at the kitchen table on the first Monday in June and wrote. For the Guardian, the Independent, the Telegraph, magazines, websites, the BBC, pretty much anyone who would take my words. It worked well. And I did love it. But that wasn’t the life-changing thing brought on by the day I was made redundant. In January 2016, an editor at the book publisher Orion, Sam Eades, emailed me saying she had been following my freelance journalism career with interest. She especially liked the pieces I was writing for the (now defunct) website the Pool and wondered whether I could apply the tone and voice of those pieces to a novel. Of course, I said yes. I went away and put together a proposal, about a curmudgeonly man who ends up on the first solo, one-way flight to Mars by a combination of accident and circumstance, and how his erroneous contact with a family in dire straits in Wigan brings redemption and triumph and leaves not a dry eye in the house. It was a weird, funny and sad little book When I had finished the final draft, I asked Sam: “Is this actually any good?” “I don’t know,” she said. “But I like it.” Calling Major Tom sold to 12 foreign territories, became a word-of-mouth hit and racked up some good sales. It led to a new career writing commercial fiction. My fourth book for Orion, a darkish sort-of romcom called The Handover, was published in the UK this year and will appear in the US next year, along with a novel I have just written in the Alien franchise universe. It is a terrible old cliche to say that redundancy was the best thing to happen to me, but I am an old-school hack at heart, so there it is.Elon Musk, it seems, prioritises building spaceships over maintaining relationships. In September, the thrice-divorced billionaire told reporters that his work at SpaceX and Tesla was a big reason why he had split from Grimes, his musician girlfriend. In her latest single, Player of Games, Grimes appears to have confirmed this. “I’m in love with the greatest gamer,” she sings, “but he’ll always love the game more than he loves me … Sail away to the cold expanse of space, even love couldn’t keep you in your place.” The lyrics have prompted headlines about her “shading” Musk with a “spicy dig”, but I reckon the guy got off lightly. She could have been far ruder, particularly considering Musk’s record with dishing out insults. It wouldn’t have been the classiest of moves, but I’m sure Musk would have been the first person to argue that nobody could possibly take an insult literally. She could have echoed Musk’s recent comments to Bernie Sanders and written something like: “I keep forgetting you’re still alive.” She could have mentioned his bizarre new haircut: the billionaire looks as if he got a child-sized toupee from the pound shop and glued it to his head. She could have made a dig about the size of his rockets. She could have pulled a Justin Bieber and sung: “My mama don’t like you and she likes everyone.” I’m not auditioning to be Grimes’s assistant songwriter here. I’m just saying that everyone knows that if you date a musician you run a risk of finding yourself unflatteringly immortalised. Musk, by comparison, has been treated generously. No doubt he’s playing the song on repeat. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistThe US supreme court will hear arguments from two Arizona death row inmates on Wednesday in a case that could have devastating consequences for prisoners attempting to prove their innocence before they are sent to the execution chamber. State officials in Arizona are asking the nation’s highest court to bar the two condemned prisoners – one with a strong claim of innocence, the other with a history of intellectual disability and family abuse – from presenting evidence in federal court that could save their lives. The Arizona officials argue the prisoners should not be allowed to put forward the evidence because they failed to do so in state court at an earlier stage in their legal proceedings. But the prisoners protest they had no chance of seeking redress at state level because the lawyers they were assigned by Arizona were so woefully incompetent at trial that they failed to uncover crucial evidence that could have spared them from death row. After conviction, they were assigned a second set of lawyers who were equally ineffective and who as a result made no challenge to the gross mishandling of their defense at trial. Death penalty experts warn that if the country’s highest court sides with Arizona it would erect new hurdles that could impede all convicted prisoners, including death row inmates, from seeking redress in federal court for possible miscarriages of justice. At its most stark, individuals who should have been exonerated or who should never have been put on death row because of their intellectual disabilities would face increased risk of being unjustly executed. “An adverse resolution in this case could present crippling obstacles to wrongfully convicted prisoners in proving their innocence and winning their freedom,” said Robert Dunham, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center. Almost 3,000 prisoners have been exonerated in the US since 1989 – including 186 innocent people who were condemned to death. Christina Swarns, executive director of the Innocence Project, estimates that between them they spent more than 25,000 years behind bars for crimes they did not commit. Swarns said that if Arizona prevails, “untold thousands of wrongfully convicted innocent people will be left in the nightmarish situation of having no court to whom they can turn for justice.” At its most visceral, the Arizona case, Shinn v Ramirez and Jones, is a matter of life and death. But the hearing is also being seen as profoundly important by close observers of the supreme court as a litmus test of how radical the new court is intending to be. The supreme court is in the first full term with its new six to three conservative majority seated. That rightwing composition is the product of Donald Trump having remolded the court by appointing three new justices under highly contentious circumstances. “This is a bellwether case for how extreme this supreme court might be,” said Leah Litman, a constitutional law scholar at the University of Michigan law school. Last week the court sent jitters across America when it heard arguments in a case that could overturn Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 ruling that established the constitutional right to an abortion up to the point of fetal viability. Conservative justices indicated that they are contemplating restricting or even abolishing abortion rights. Critics have warned that if the new supreme court curtailed abortion it could severely damage the legitimacy of the court by giving the appearance that it is swayed by partisan politics – in the abortion case from extremist Republicans in Mississippi. The Arizona death penalty case carries similar dangers for the standing of the court and with it the state of American democracy. Were the conservative justices to rule in Arizona’s favor they would be backing a radical partisan move by Republican state lawmakers. In 2012 the supreme court ruled in Martinez v Ryan that prisoners should be allowed to present claims in federal court that they had ineffective lawyers at trial and post-conviction stages of their cases. That precedent has never been questioned by an appeals court or by any justice on the supreme court. Now Arizona Republicans are trying to impose a new impediment. Prisoners can present claims that their lawyers were ineffective as Martinez requires, but they can’t produce any evidence to back up those claims. “Obviously, presenting a claim with no evidence at all isn’t much of a claim,” Litman said. She added: “It is important to understand that the antics in this case are the same antics that are happening elsewhere on the court’s docket this term, asking for extreme aggressive maneuvers that threaten the court’s institutional integrity.” Barry Jones, one of the two death row inmates at the centre of Wednesday’s arguments, has always claimed his innocence. He was sentenced to death for the May 1994 killing of his girlfriend’s daughter, aged four, in Tucson, Arizona. In 2017, a federal judge ruled that there had been a “rush to judgment” in prosecuting Jones. Prosecutors had relied on junk science, telling the jury that the victim’s injuries could scientifically be shown to have been inflicted a day before her death when she was in the sole care of Jones. Jones’s trial lawyer did not challenge that testimony at trial, which in effect amounted to an admission of the defendant’s guilt. But in the federal hearing in 2017 the court was told by a medical expert who had reviewed the forensics that the girl’s injuries “could not possibly have been inflicted on the day prior to her death”. The judge ordered that Jones be released or have a new trial. But Arizona is so determined to execute its prisoner that the state has appealed all the way to the supreme court. Cary Sandman, one of Jones’s legal team, said that his client had spent “over 25 years on death row despite never having got a fair trial. Arizona is now arguing that Jones must suffer that wrongful conviction without recourse to federal courts.”The Victorian viaduct is lit by a pink and orange sunset. The sky deepens to cloud-studded red and violet during the 10-minute walk to my B&amp;B along Berwick-upon-Tweed’s old town walls. On countless train journeys between London and Edinburgh, I’ve looked out of the window near the Scottish border and been drawn to Berwick’s long, arched bridges, its polygonal town hall spire rising over the rooftops, and the river widening to meet the sea. Finally, I am stepping off the train here rather than hurtling past, ready for castles, boat trips and wintry waterside walks, full of wildlife and history. Berwick’s border location meant for centuries it was the scene of Anglo-Scottish skirmishes. Before you leave the railway station, a sign announces that here, in 1292, “the claim of Robert Bruce to the crown of Scotland was declined”. The town and its castle, whose ruins are right next to the platform, changed hands 13 times in the next 200 years. Britain’s only bastioned town walls now form a mile-long amble around the major sights, with medieval ramparts overlooking the Tweed, and Elizabethan fortifications towering above cave-backed beaches. A car-free winter weekend by the sea, with late sunrises and early twilight, has many moments to savour: window-gazing in all weathers, windy clifftop walks, and lingering fireside pints. An incandescent dawn lights my first circuit of the town walls. The air smells of kelp and roasting coffee. The beaches below are empty of people and alive with wading birds: noisy oystercatchers, stilt-legged redshanks and seaweed-brown turnstones. Grebes are diving under the Old Bridge, herons stand guard on grassy cliffs and ogee-shaped threads of geese patrol the skies. The afternoon brings more coastal wildlife, including eider ducks, cormorants and seals, as well as views of the town walls from the water. Berwick Boat Trips now operates cruises on the smart new Border Belle into the winter months and visitors regularly spot dolphins near the estuary (from £9 child/£12 adult). “Pesky dolphins, we call them,” says the skipper, David Thompson. “You never know what they will do, when they will do it, or how fast, but we’re always pleased to see them.” Several streets in Berwick have clusters of independent shops. My favourite is Bridge Street: there’s bike hire, a Green Shop (organic, fair trade, eco-friendly) and the Curfew micropub, where I drink a creamy oatmeal stout from Cheviot Brewery. Atelier, opposite the pub, is a good wine bar and bistro. A generous bowl of Sri Lankan vegetable soup (£5) is full of spice and coconut, and the vegan platter (£9) is heaped with artichoke hearts and aubergines, roast peppers, home-pickled fennel, gingery chutneys and stuffed vine leaves. Next morning, I catch bus X18 to Seahouses (day ticket £6.70). Coastal views from the bus windows include Lindisfarne’s hilltop castle and plovers on the shining mudflats of Budle Bay. There are dozens of curlews in the stubbled fields, and cows roaming the dunes. Just outside Seahouses harbour, gannets are diving headfirst into the sea at speeds of up to 60mph. Fulmars and glossy green shags are sitting on dolerite pillars, while rock pipits scurry over the outcrops. From Seahouses I take a boat trip to see the grey seals of the Farne Islands (child £15, adult £20). Thousands of grey seals live here, and the birth rate of pups in the huge colony grew by 62% between 2014 and 2019. As we cruise past, they are everywhere: curious, whiskered faces surface just metres from the boat, while scarred bull seals rest on the rocks. There’s a drone hovering near the red and white lighthouse: it’s used by rangers to count the thousands of pups. Heading back to the harbour, we pass puffins swimming, and surreally beautiful vistas of the castle-spangled coast. Ten minutes back towards Berwick on the bus, Bamburgh castle (child £6.95/adult £14.10, 20% discount when you show your bus ticket), on its volcanic headland, towers over a wide beach. It’s one of several local attractions offering 20% off for visitors arriving by bus. I climb a sandy path through banks of honey-pungent flowering ivy to the castle gatehouse and explore nine acres of towers and terraces. Christmas decorations are up, there are carols playing in the King’s Hall and sparkling greenery decks fireplaces and stairways. Up the road in the vaulted sandstone crypt of St Aidan’s church (free), rows of zinc boxes house the bones of people who lived in cosmopolitan Anglo-Saxon Bamburgh. Winter storms in 1816 ripped open the nearby sand dunes to reveal a seventh-century graveyard; recent analysis of bones and teeth show that many of the people buried here came from what are now Scotland, Ireland, Scandinavia, Spain and even north Africa. Back on Berwick’s Castlegate, I have haddock goujons and colourful salad (£10.95) at Coull’s, which opened six weeks ago. Owners Bob and Natasha Coull have run the chippy next door for decades. This place was until recently an old-school model shop. Now, there are old photos of Berwick on exposed brickwork, bright, fish-themed wallpaper in the loos and palm trees on the outdoor deck. The Walls B&amp;B (doubles from £90 B&amp;B), in a quayside Georgian townhouse, has a log fire and an honesty bar in the lounge, and fresh milk for coffee. Breakfast options include a great fruit salad, homemade potato cakes or smoked fish from Eyemouth with local stottie loaf. Three big rooms look out over the River Tweed, so you can seal-watch from the upstairs windows, and the pink front door opens on to a pedestrianised stretch of medieval ramparts. The Granary gallery, in the old Maltings next door, has an exhibition of quilts until February (free). Five minutes east along the walls there’s a Russian cannon, complete with double-headed eagle, captured from Sebastopol in 1856, in the Crimean war. Nearby is an 18th-century barracks originally designed by Nicholas Hawksmoor, which houses the town museum (closed until spring, £5). Earlier this year, the museum bought a local beach scene by LS Lowry, who also painted the cobbled alleys and townscapes nearby; one of Berwick’s many trails follows in Lowry’s footsteps. The next day, there are roses still flowering in Alnwick Garden (child free, adult £9.35), a leisurely ride from Berwick on bus X15, past views of the misty Cheviots and sheep grazing on ridged medieval farmland. I wasn’t sure how much any garden could be worth a trip in late November, but Alnwick’s formal fountains and neatly clipped hedges are as much about shape as colour. Brainchild of Jane Percy, Duchess of Northumberland, the garden opened 20 years ago and now features a bamboo maze, the world’s biggest Taihaku cherry orchard, with 50 swing seats, and a macabre collection of toxic plants. Scarlet rose hips and butterball crab apples shine like natural Christmas baubles in the ornamental garden; tiny wrens and robins are hopping under dense, pink Joie de Vivre roses, wine-dark Burgundy Ice, and subtly scented Maria Theresas. I take refuge from the serpentine beech walks in the fairy-lit Treehouse restaurant with a pot of North Shields mussels. Revived, I walk on down the road, across the Aln, and through the fields to the Lion Bridge, with views across the river to the gothic magnificence of Alnwick Castle. My last morning’s hike is a couple of miles along the Tweed, under the viaduct, for coffee and a homemade fruit scone in England’s most northerly garden centre. Crossing the river to head back through coppery beech woods, I spy a boat made of driftwood near the castle ruins. In the afternoon, I take a trip to Scotland before my train leaves. Bus 235 heads 20 minutes up the coast to Eyemouth, where fishers are busy in the harbour. The nature reserve at St Abb’s Head is a four-mile walk along the coast path, but the sun is already setting, turning the sandstone cliffs still redder. Herring gulls cry plaintively over the crash of the breakers and the water glows like rose quartz in the gloaming. • Train travel was provided by LNER (advance tickets from London to Berwick-upon-Tweed start from £33.80 one way, booking recommended). Accommodation was provided by The Walls B&amp;B. For further information see Visit Northumberland and Northumberland AONB • This article was amended on 8 December 2021. It was the throne of Scotland that was claimed by Robert Bruce, not the throne of England, as an earlier version said.There are few commercial principles more reliable than this: there will always be another James Bond movie. It isn’t always easy to see how he’ll get to where he’s going next – and the franchise’s producer, Barbara Broccoli, isn’t sure either. Speaking earlier this week, she admitted she hadn’t settled on how to reconcile the final scenes of No Time To Die – those who haven’t seen the film should turn away now – with the promise in the final credits that “James Bond will return”. With that in mind, the Guardian turned to some expert writers to see how they would revive 007. None of them suggested amnesia, evil twins, or even having been a dream. A miracle recovery – and a quest to save his daughter John Banville, the revered Irish literary novelist with his own crime-writing twin under the pseudonym Benjamin Black, hadn’t seen the film, but was surprised to learn of Bond’s apparent demise. “I wonder why they killed him.” As for a resurrection, he sees little to fuss about: why shouldn’t the most indestructible secret agent of all time be granted a miracle recovery? “It’s always easy to bring a character back. Oh, he got blown up by a missile – well, just say, he’s been in hospital for nine months, and now he’s safe and well and ready to go out and kill again. “Somehow he’s blown aside rather than blown up – it does happen. I knew someone who was standing over an IRA bomb when it went off, and he survived, even though the people around him were killed.” Informed of the other big Bond news – the existence of his daughter – he incorporates it seamlessly: “Well, someone has stolen his child, and off he goes to rescue her. There you are, you have the plot.” A daughter in search of revenge To Charlotte Philby, author of acclaimed thrillers including The Second Woman and Edith and Kim, to be released in March next year, Bond’s death is “the most brilliant opportunity to flip the Bond mould, subverting some of the more dated tropes whilst retaining what is best about the franchise.” Her solution? “If it were down to me I would make the new main character of the next instalment Bond’s daughter (played by Florence Pugh?),” she writes. “She has the ideal genetic makeup – with a healthy dose of childhood trauma – to take up her father’s mantle, and the quest to avenge his death.” “In terms of tone, I would like a heady mix of the more cerebral – perhaps starting with her in her early 20s, studying psychology at Cambridge and being approached with a message that is a call-to-arms. Taking advantage of the scope for familial betrayal, young love, and the revelations of until-now secret Bond history, in my imagined revival – where the action, the far-flung destinations, and the sexiness that makes Bond, Bond, is carefully retained – the usual stereotypes are turned on their head, making the film something fresh, new, chilling and ludicrously entertaining, and – crucially – wholly recognisable.” Make way for a new generation Manda Scott, the Edgar-award nominated author of A Treachery of Spies sees the denouement of No Time To Die as a very deliberate break with the past. “Bond didn’t accidentally get blown to a million tiny pieces,” she writes. “This is the end of an era and we need to show its ending unequivocally so there is absolutely no way back.” “But the old hierarchical, patriarchal, ghastly colonial order for which Bond was always the figurehead can step back now, which is glorious – yay for the old guard knowing when it’s time to let go of the reins of power and doing it with panache and flair (for which he was also always rather well known). He can give way graciously to a younger generation that knows the old rules don’t apply. “So now 007 is part of the youth insurgency: she’ll be young, perhaps mixed race, definitely gender fluid and she’ll focus on the things that matter most: the climate and ecological emergency and how to wrest from the chaos that’s coming a future she’ll be happy – even proud – to leave to her kids. She might choose to embed deep in her father’s old structures, the better to topple them in the time frame we need, but whatever she does, she’ll have the charisma and self confidence of her heritage, and the wild, beautiful inspiration of youth. This will be a new Bond, utterly different, and utterly compelling. “It will also, I suspect, be quite a hard journey because not all the old order will give way with such grace: those who fight back will do so with the full weight of their considerable armament. Those who strive for change will not do so unscathed. But then every heroic journey has its challenges: even the old, late Bond knew that. RIP.” …or just get on with it “You could do an origin story with Bond coming out of the Royal Navy as a ‘Commander’ and applying to join MI6,” suggested Charles Cumming, author of internationally bestselling spy thrillers including Box 88 and Judas 62. “Or he might be a young, trainee spy who becomes a Double-O and takes on the name ‘James Bond’ as a permanent alias.” Plausible though these ideas are, Cumming argues, “all that might take up a lot of unnecessary screen time. The producers could just as well make no reference to what happened at the end of No Time To Die and introduce a new James Bond to a new generation. Audiences won’t care how or why 007 has come back into their lives as long as the script is entertaining and Barbara Broccoli has cast the right actor to play him. Bond is like Hamlet or Sherlock Holmes. He’s eternal.”At least 30,000 ash trees are due to be felled by the National Trust this year at a cost of £3m due to dieback, as the charity warns of a “catastrophic” increase in tree and plant disease because of climate breakdown. Changing weather patterns are expected to cause pests and diseases that destroy trees to thrive, which could bring dramatic change to British landscapes. The charity has released aerial images showing how this is already happening with some species. For example, tens of thousands of larch trees will be felled due to Phytophthora ramorum, affecting views such as Tarn Hows in the Lake District. The spread of the fungus-based pathogen is accelerating across the Lakes and in some sites it is predicted that 75% of larch in the woodland will be lost. Foresters in the area expect 95% of their time will be spent dealing with the disease. Just this autumn, two fresh threats to plant health have been identified in the UK – a new disease, Phytophthora pluvialis, and a new outbreak of the eight-toothed spruce bark beetle has been found in south-east England, meaning restrictions have been placed on the movement of trees, bark, wood chipping and cut foliage in various parts of the country. Phytophthora pluvialis was discovered last month in an area of Cornwall – the first time the disease has been identified in Europe. The disease has since been found in Devon and Cumbria. Although it has not yet been found on National Trust land, experts are keeping a close eye on western hemlock, Douglas fir and several pine species. The National Trust says it is trying to build “woodlands of the future” that are resilient to climate change, including using species from warmer climates, which are less likely to be affected by disease – for example, by replacing ash trees with walnut. Ash dieback is also taking up resources, with the cost of removing diseased ash trees having risen from £1m to £3m over the past year. It is expected that 75–95% of the UK’s ash trees will be lost in the next 20 to 30 years. Scientists are also braced for an outbreak of Xylella, an incurable plant disease that can cause serious stress and death in over 150 species including oak, cherries, hollies and walnuts. It has not yet hit the UK but there have been major outbreaks elsewhere in Europe, with olive groves ravaged. It is likely that the disease will come to the UK on an imported plant, much like other pathogens that have been brought over by the horticulture trade. The National Trust has also warned that an increase in the incidence of storms such as Arwen last week is disrupting disease management efforts and costing millions of pounds to clear up. Thousands of trees are also being lost to the extreme weather events, further adding to decimation of the UK’s woodlands. Trees lost due to disease and pests need to be replaced to help Britain meet its climate change commitments, the National Trust argues, as they are crucial in effectively sequestering carbon as well as continuing to provide homes for wildlife and public access to nature.From the driver’s seat of his pickup truck, Jake Fiennes points to the dark green strips of grass that betray the location of a dried-out saltwater creek system on the Holkham estate in Norfolk. If the early autumn rains allow, a rotary ditcher dragged by a tractor will soon score shallow channels in the sandy soil to excavate many of the old waterways. Fiennes, the estate’s conservation director, and his wardens, Andy and Paul, will then fill them with standing water from the site’s chalk aquifers, part of a plan to transform dozens of fields into grazing wetlands on the 10,000-hectare (25,000-acre) farm and nature reserve. Fiennes is certain that next spring will see yet more lapwings, avocets and other rare wetland birds thriving in the mud on the edges of the channels – known as field drains – in the habitat they share with a herd of about 800 cattle. “It’s all about wet mud,” Fiennes says from his office before heading out into the fields, using his finger to trace the labyrinth of old creeks he wants the machinery to uncover on a Google Earth map. “I’m known for edges and hedges but it’s as much about the length of water adjacent to mud. All those little black flies: that’s chick food.” Fiennes, whose five siblings include actors Ralph and Joseph, is a maverick well-suited to British farming’s post-Brexit environmental reformation. With slicked-back white hair interrupted in places by alopecia, he speaks in monologues about the potential for change in agriculture, scanning for the impact of his words with piercing cerulean eyes. He took charge at Holkham almost three years ago, after more than two decades running Raveningham estate in south Norfolk, maintaining yields on the 2,200-hectare farm while dedicating large areas to nature. Early in his career, he worked on the Knepp estate made famous by Isabella Tree’s book Wilding. At Holkham, Fiennes wants to show his approach is available to everyone, as farmers wait for what follows the EU’s common agricultural policy, which could see them paid for their stewardship of biodiversity. He is a bridge between farming and conservation: a regional National Farmers’ Union environment representative and a member of the RSPB’s England advisory committee. Last year, he was the subject of a profile in the New Yorker, where, commenting on the 51-year-old’s uniqueness, former journalist Julian Glover, who led a review of England’s national parks system, said “there’s an element of Jake which looks like he could have taken up farming or heroin”. Contrary to the warnings of many, Fiennes insists the natural world in Britain is “not as fucked as everyone says”. He unapologetically farms wildlife in the nooks and crannies of unproductive land and adapts incumbent methods. In just three years, Holkham’s lapwing population has returned to numbers last seen at the beginning of the millennium. In 2020, western cattle egrets successfully bred in Norfolk for the first time on the estate. This year, Fiennes imposed new rules for hundreds of thousands of dog walkers on Holkham beach – one of Britain’s most beautiful – which is visited by nearly a million people every year (“800,000 people in 500,000 cars with 300,000 dogs”), to counteract the fall in numbers of breeding shorebirds. “We’ve just had a record breeding season for spoonbills. It’s the largest colony in the UK,” he beams as we tour the fields. “We’re smashing it out of the park.” Fiennes has invited me to north Norfolk to see the rotary ditcher in action, the only one in the country, as it works its way along a 50km stretch of coastline at eight sites from Cley next the Sea to the 1,600-hectare Ken Hill rewilding project. It spews mud high into the sky as it is dragged along by a tractor, carving out channels in the earth. Despite the cost of hiring specialist machinery at £25,000 for 100 hours of work – paid for by a grant from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs for farming in protected landscapes – it digs the channels at an impressive rate. The new footdrains, once a feature of wetland management on farms, are a perfect breeding habitat for lapwings, redshanks and their chicks, which feed on invertebrates in the mud, according to RSPB research. The expanded wetland habitat across the sites will help more wetland birds successfully breed across the north Norfolk coast, Fiennes hopes. “Low-lying ground is not very farmable. You’re better off trying to put it into these kinds of schemes and getting more for nature and wildlife,” says Martin Fox, the operator of the rotary ditcher, before taking instruction from Fiennes about where to go next. “We take out [from nature] all the time but we’ve got to put something back in.” The machinery has been used on high-profile schemes such as Wallasea Island in Essex, Europe’s largest coastal habitat restoration project, where an expanse of salt marshes, lagoons and mudflats was created using more than 3m tonnes of London clay excavated from the Crossrail tunnel. Typical of his approach to choosing areas of farmland to leave for nature, Fiennes uses signs in the landscape to show him where to put the channels. “See that strip of deeper green,” he says, pointing to an adjacent field as we drive back to his office. “That is telling me that’s where the water wants to go. That’s where you want your foot drain to go.” Later that day, Fiennes has meetings scheduled about beaver reintroductions, chalk stream restoration and improving hybrid jobs in ecology and agriculture. He tells me I have picked a bad time of year to visit, despite the recent arrival of up to 60,000 pink-footed geese from Greenland. “Come back in May” to see the results of the rotary ditcher, he says, insisting once again that it will be another great year for lapwings, spoonbills and Holkham’s wetland birds. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresI have to travel to Poland for work in a fortnight. New travel rules mean I will have to take a Covid PCR test on day two of my return. However, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) website states that PCR tests can’t be taken within 90 days of testing positive for Covid. I had the virus a month ago. I can’t find any guidance on what I should do. RD, Hastings, east Sussex You raise a question that affects hundreds of thousands of people, and the DHSC guidance for international arrivals is silent on the issue. Test and trace advises against taking a PCR, or lateral flow test, within 90 days of a Covid diagnosis, because residual inactive viral fragments may give a positive result for up to three months after the infection risk has disappeared. Only on Wednesday did the UK Health Security Agency, which replaced Public Health England in October, shed light on the problem, but only near the end of guidance for those who have come into contact with someone who has tested positive. It states that while the 90-day advice usually applies to recent Covid sufferers, they have to take a PCR test when returning to the UK from overseas. This could mean 10 days of quarantine if they test positive on arrival, while those who have already travelled overseas could potentially be stranded there for up to three months awaiting a negative result now fit to fly tests have been introduced. The NHS Covid pass app records natural immunity, which is thought to last up to 180 days following infection. Although this should be acceptable in places such as care homes, which usually require a negative test result, it carries no weight for new arrivals in the UK. Your trip could leave you stuck at home until next year so, if at all possible, I’d cancel it. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to reflect new rules requiring travellers to the UK to take PCR tests before they fly.“She was very complicated, she was very loving and she was very mercurial. She was very generous but she came from the Depression and she was very guarded about money. She was a conundrum. She was a paradox of things. But she made me feel like I was the only person in the room, even in a crowd, and she made me feel authentic.” Lee Tannen, author and playwright, is in full flow as he reminisces about his intense decade-long friendship with Lucille Ball, once the funniest and most famous woman in America. Her 1950s sitcom, I Love Lucy, pulled in 60 million viewers and became part of the country’s cultural DNA. Thirty-two years after her death, the legend is about to be burnished by Being the Ricardos, a biographical drama starring Nicole Kidman as Ball and Javier Bardem as Desi Arnaz, her husband both in real life and on screen. It explores the couple’s personal relationship – they divorced after 19 years but are said to have remained soulmates – and a professional crisis in which their careers were nearly derailed by the “red scare” in Hollywood. This chapter of Ball’s career is so little known that writer and director Aaron Sorkin was unaware of it when he took on the project. She was 24 when, in 1936, she registered to vote as a member of the Communist party to please her cherished grandfather (her father had died of typhoid fever when she was three). She thought little more of it, or about politics at all, but was hauled before the US House of Representatives Un-American Activities Committee in 1953. When the influential columnist and broadcaster Walter Winchell broke the news, and newspapers followed up, Ball seemed doomed to the same fate as other Hollywood stars and screenwriters blacklisted by the communist witch-hunt. She braced herself for booing from the studio audience at the next recording of I Love Lucy. But before she walked on set, Arnaz warmed up the audience by quipping: “And now. I want you to meet my favourite wife – my favourite redhead – in fact, that’s the only thing red about her, and even that’s not legitimate.” (Ball had gone from brunette to blond to red.) Arnaz had saved the day. The crowd cheered. And the corporate powers behind I Love Lucy declined to kill the goose that laid the golden egg. Speaking by phone from Stuyvesant, New York, Tannen says: “Lucy was the most apolitical person I know but it was a big deal and the only reason why her career was not ruined was because she was so beloved and Desi helped her through that point. There were people that committed suicide over this. This was a horrible, horrible, horrible time in America’s history.” Ball had a previous career in Hollywood, making 75 films over 18 years at almost every major studio. She married Arnaz, a Cuban-born musician and actor who became a naturalised US citizen, in 1940. A decade later they went on a vaudeville tour, formed their own production company, Desilu (which produced Mission: Impossible and Star Trek), and conjured up the era-defining I Love Lucy. Ball played Lucy Ricardo, a zany housewife with big dreams, while Arnaz (the first person to call her “Lucy” rather than “Lucille”) took the role of Ricky Ricardo, a Cuban-American bandleader. The show gained a huge national audience that would now be unthinkable in the fragmented era of streaming and continues to have a devoted worldwide following. Tannen reflects: “It’s timeless. It’s endless. It skirts parody. It skirts politics, it skirts racism. It skirts everything. It’s just damn funny. The writers were in their 20s – they were kids – and they knew how to write and it was a new medium and we laugh at it today. Funny is funny. Lucy always said, you don’t cut funny, and she’s right. It’s just funny.” Ball and Arnaz had two children, Lucie and Desi Jr, but could not hold the family together. They divorced in 1960 after she could no longer bear his alcoholism and extramarital affairs. Tannen continues: “To me, the more successful they became, the more unsuccessful they became, meaning professionally and personally. “She told me that she never would have left him if they weren’t so famous and so in the public eye. The looks that she got from all the people in Hollywood and the women who were her friends who he fucked: she couldn’t take it any more. It was really the womanising and the drinking and he couldn’t deal with the success.” Ball took over as head of Desilu Productions, becoming the first woman to lead a major studio. She married standup comic Gary Morton in 1961 and remained his wife until her death from an aneurysm in 1989. But Tannen, a distant relation of Morton, is convinced that Arnaz was the great love of her life. “Oh, not even close,” he says. “I say in my book that the day Desi died was the day she started dying. It was such a love affair that unquestionably she loved him until the day she died. And I believe he loved her.” Tannen first met Ball briefly when he was very young, then again in 1980 when they hit it off and became inseparable. “It was this kind of kismet relationship. She became like a surrogate mother and I became like a surrogate son because you don’t have all that baggage – although we had baggage. “I was probably with her more than her children in those years, 1980 to 1989. It’s a very bittersweet last decade, a few triumphs, a lot of disappointments and heartache. She died too young as far as I’m concerned and I still miss her every day.” Tannen turned his decade with Ball into memoir, I Loved Lucy, which he adapted into a play of the same name and which, he hopes, might yet become a film. He indulged her love of backgammon, travelled with her and was in the audience when she received a Kennedy Center Honor in 1986 – five days after Arnaz’s death. “That was my first decade of coming out as a gay man and she was coming into the last decade of her life, not that she knew it at the time,” he says tenderly. “I was unsure about my sexuality and she was unsure about a lot of things and so we sort of saved each other. “I told her about being gay before I told my parents and I was so nervous about telling her and she was like, ‘What the hell? Why the hell didn’t you tell me in the first place that you’re gay?’ She was around gay men her whole life. So I loved how authentic she was with me and how authentic I was with her. That word keeps on cropping up.” In a recent interview in the Hollywood Reporter, Sorkin was forced to defend his casting of Kidman and Bardem and raised eyebrows among Ball devotees by asserting: “It’s not a show that if we took a fresh look at today, we’d think was funny.” Being the Ricardos is likely to raise the question: has I Love Lucy stood the test of time? Kathleen Brady, who interviewed Ball when she was 74 and wrote a biography, Lucille: The Life of Lucille Ball, says: “The show is still part of American culture. I meet some people who are sophisticated and when they hear that I met Lucille Ball, they get so excited. I think the fact that show gives us so much joy means that yes, it is still relevant.” Brady, whose latest book is Francis and Clare: The Struggles of the Saints of Assisi, adds: “She seems to be an oppressed housewife but this is about the struggle against power, which is a classic comic device, and it is about upending power, which, Lord knows, she was able to do. “Before she would go on to ride the New York City subways and get a loving cup stuck on her head, she would vacuum the house, she would make sure little Ricky was taken care of – she was a really good housewife. I suppose if one wanted to be very serious, one could see Lucy Ricardo as a tragic figure but nobody wants to be serious when they are dealing with I Love Lucy because they’re just laughing too hard.” A new generation of Ball fans includes Carrie Cooke Ketterman, a 35-year-old singer and author who lives in Corydon, Indiana, who started watching I Love Lucy at her grandmother’s house when she was five or six. “I was being nosy one day and I was going through her VHS tapes and I was like, ‘What is this I Love Lucy?’ and I popped a tape in and I was hooked,” she recalls. “I thought she was so funny. I guess it was mostly her expressions that drew me in and these zany situations that she would get herself pulled into. I became a lifelong fan after that.” Ketterman, a natural redhead, and her husband Jeff play Ball and Arnaz in a tribute show, touring festivals around the country. She adds: “Theirs was a very unique relationship. You can see in the photos and some of the home videos and what you’ve read about them, they genuinely loved each other. “Of course it wasn’t perfect by any means. They both were so passionate and creative it’s normal for them to butt heads. They were under so much stress to keep Lucy going, especially once they saw what they had. “But I think that love was real. It was always there, even if it wasn’t always the best at times. They were meant to be together and, as much as you want that happy Hollywood ending – they stayed together forever and ever, the end – real life doesn’t work like that sometimes.” Being the Ricardos is in cinemas on 10 December and Amazon Prime on 21 DecemberIt wasn’t entirely a novelty, seeing crowds roll up to fill Brisbane’s Gabba ground, given that life in the state of Queensland has proceeded largely as normal throughout the pandemic years. There was still some novelty, though, given it had been nearly a year since the Australian men’s team had last played a Test match. That had been in the middle of January at … the Gabba, meaning the ground has hosted back-to-back Tests for the first time in its history, despite the long break in between. Nor was this first day of a Test an entirely normal one, given that travellers from interstate and overseas were still prohibited from entering the state without doing a fortnight’s quarantine. But it was normal enough in having a full house for an Ashes contest, vocal and voluble in response to the action on field. It was also normal that the Gabba could not get enough of the crowd in on time. When Steve Harmison bowled the first ball of the series to second slip in 2006, the seats were about a third full with huge queues outside. When Mitchell Starc curled the first ball of the current series into Rory Burns’s stumps, the situation in the stands was much the same. People were lining up outside the gates two hours before play, but did not start being admitted until there was an hour to go, while the lines moved slowly with bag checks, vaccination checks, and government-mandated smartphone check-ins. Those who did make it inside were ready to go, though. There was a mighty cheer when Patrick Cummins walked to the middle wearing a captain’s blazer for the first time, fortuitously losing the toss to Joe Root and avoiding the pressure of making a decision. There was a pantomime boo followed by a pantomime cheer when the England team ran out for the national anthems a few seconds ahead of the Australians. All of which were nothing compared to the noise after Starc’s first delivery. The tall left-armer has been a target of criticism from one or two former players whose opinions prove inflexible when infused with ego. His delivery was not an unplayable one, but it was fast and full enough and swung: from left-arm over the wicket, into the left-hander. Burns has built his technique around walking across his stumps, but walked too far. A ball angled down the leg side instead swung back, past his ankle straps and into his leg stump. Most people watching probably didn’t clock exactly what had happened. They just saw the stumps tilt and the bails fly, and knew the match had started in the most dramatic of fashions. The noise that greeted it was less one of triumph than of simple exclamation, of surprise and delight in that surprise. Starc joined it with his own roar, riding the wave of sound across the turf and into a convergence of teammates. It was only then, a few seconds later, that the significance of the blow began to sink in. No one summarised it better than the novelist Robert Wilson, emailing the Guardian’s over-by-over coverage. “It’s starting the gig with your best joke, it’s showing the butler doing it in the pre-credits sequence. It’s neither omen, nor harbinger, it’s a notarised contract. It’s literal genius, because all genius has always shrugged its shoulders and said the same thing: ‘There’s more of this to come.’” Not much went England’s way after that, while plenty went for Australia. But the local English contingent did their level best to compensate for the many thousands of Barmy Army regulars who were this year stuck back at home. The headcount might have been anywhere from a few hundred to a couple of thousand, over in the ground-level bays on the southern side of the ground, but they made the noise of many more – though would not have anticipated having to pull out The Great Escape song by lunchtime on day one. In the meantime, the Australian crowd was less creative. There were repeated unsuccessful attempts to get a crowd wave going. “You’re next, Rooter!” was the choice witticism loudly directed at England’s captain as he went out to bat after two early wickets. The heckler was, ultimately, correct. The wickets kept falling and, by the time England’s innings was drawing near an end for 147, the storm clouds were bringing in gloom literally as well as figuratively. Brisbane rain came heavily but briefly, as it does, and cleared before the end of the day. Like ants from a log, members of the crowd emerged to take their seats again. There will be more interruptions in the days to come, but the first innings being completed has set this match sufficiently into fast-forward that a result can be had regardless. The home crowd did not mind. Cummins joined the 1800s operator George Giffen as the only Australians to take a five-wicket haul in their first Test as captain. Starc thrilled. Josh Hazlewood bowled like a dream. Cameron Green got his first Test wicket. The only thing to wait for was Nathan Lyon’s 400th. There was plenty of opportunity to make noise, and exactly the right context in which to do it.What happens when words spoken on Capitol Hill make us shiver? Amanda Gorman’s luminous poem The Hill We Climb was addressed to Joe Biden and “the world”. Inaugural poems are a fiendishly difficult genre, attempted only six times since JF Kennedy’s ceremony. However, such “occasional” poems play an important cultural role, especially in our time when no public rhetoric and few common values can be taken for granted, as the poet addresses and repairs the damaged foundations of the state itself. A soaring sense of history and solidarity pervades Gorman’s debut collection. Part elegy, part documentary record, and part witness statement, Call Us What We Carry is first and foremost “a letter to the world”, a phrase she borrows from Emily Dickinson. Like Dickinson’s, Gorman’s poetry puts immense pressure on our present moment, committing itself to an archaeology of our past and conservation of our future. It urges us to revisit the chequered history of intersectional injustices and re-evaluate our fragile species, systems and planet, engulfed by the pandemic, personal grief and public grievances. “What happened to us”, Gorman writes, “Happened through us.” One of the most haunting things about her book is its retreat from the first-person singular. “I” exists sparingly, peripherally. By contrast, the all-inclusive trio “we”, “us” and “our” occur more than 1,500 times in her shape-shifting poems, a rare feat in the age of overwhelming selfhood. Gorman’s affirmative choric we echoes Martin Luther King’s memorial dream and John Lennon’s utopian lyricism, but her music also draws on the new dimension opened up by trailblazing poets such as Elizabeth Alexander, Anne Carson and Tracy K Smith. She challenges Walt Whitman’s “I am large. I contain multitudes.” In her book, it is we who contain multitudes, and a shared vision, grief and responsibility, as she affirms that “This book is awake. / This book is a wake. / For what is a record but a reckoning?” Indeed, Call Us What We Carry is wide awake to the complex strata of human history and restlessly original in its poetic form. In a poignant sequence, The Soldier (or Plummer), Gorman excavates archival materials to repossess the voice of Corporal Plummer, an African American who served in France in the first world war during the Spanish flu. Superimposing her typewritten words on to the scanned, empty pages of Plummer’s diary, Gorman evokes racial discord, military violence and the “loaded silence / of coughing”. In addition to keeping history alive, Gorman puts her finger on the pulse of the current pandemic, reporting on the ground the subtle changes in human sociability brought about by our new age of anxiety. Mapping “each sneeze &amp; sniffle”, she notices that “Every cough seemed catastrophe, / Every proximate person a potential peril”. As the world counts deaths and we withdraw into ourselves, Gorman challenges the pervasive narrative of erasure and focuses instead on the power of collective memory. Her poems loosen up a centrifugal elegiac force surrounding the individual and insist on bringing us closer together, as she notes that “Some distances, if allowed to grow, / Are merely the greatest proximities.”. On the politics of mask-wearing, for example, her quietly engaging lines describe our ultra-fine facial movements when smiling behind masks; how we “Scale up our cheeks, / Bone by bone, / Our eyes crinkling / Delicately as rice paper”. She concludes that “Our mask is no veil, but a view. / What we are, if not what we see in another.” This is poetry rippling with communal recognition and empathy. In Monomyth she remoulds another medium, a heroic epic on Imax, turning the pandemic and tail end of Trump’s presidency into a saga of irresponsibility and disaster, scripted with the satirical precision of Armando Iannucci or Michaela Coel. Gorman is an erudite absorber, resister and recreator of vocal, textual and etymological legacies. Without being overburdened by references, her poems allude to multilayered sources. We find Rihanna, Drake, Shakespeare, Homer, Plato, health economics data, a Dictionary of English Etymology, and the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act. As she says, “Heritage is passed not in direct recollection but through indirect retelling.” Directly and indirectly, grief as ubiquitous as light holds Gorman’s book together. “Grief commands its own grammar”, she writes. In addressing “the pain both private &amp; public”, the book doesn’t overplay the language of trauma but seeks to heal and repair. Such a recuperative project risks being seen as consoling “wisdom literature”. Still only 23, Gorman is unafraid of grand words and gestures, but articulates loss and grief in a unique grammar that is self-aware without being inward. There is infinite jest and candour in the music of her wordplay: “America, / How to sing / Our name, Singular, / Signed, Singed.” There is also profound and rebellious meditation on contemporary culture framed across the book through the branching hierarchy of trees, in which the Darwinian metaphor is used to question the vertical organisation of our society when confronted by human inequality and climate emergency. “It is the carrying”, the poet claims, “That makes memory mutual”. In Call Us What We Carry, Gorman has written a mnemonic symphony of hope and solidarity in the face of the “vanishing meaning” of our time, speaking eloquently with “the lip of tomorrow”. • Kit Fan’s latest poetry collection is As Slow As Possible (Arc) and his debut novel is Diamond Hill (Dialogue). Call Us What We Carry by Amanda Gorman is published by Chatto &amp; Windus (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Some more reading to further digest events. Ali Martin’s report: and Geoff’s colour: The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, you can do so here. One swallow does not a summer make and all that, but this was a limp opening act by England. That first-baller for Rory Burns - an anxiety dream made real- kick-started a doddering batting performance, sparked into life only when Ollie Pope and Jos Buttler went on the counter-attack, with bit parts for Haseeb Hameed and Chris Woakes. Australia’s bowlers were brilliant: ruthless, attacking, relentless, led by Captain Midas himself, Pat Cummins. And the weather prevented England from making any headway with the ball. Tomorrow, play starts at 9.30am at the Gabba, 11.30 GMT, with dampness in the pitch offering England’s bowlers hope. Do join us. Thanks for all the messages, sorry we couldn’t answer them all. With a brand new entry in the Ashes first-ballers history book, it is time for breakfast. Good evening/day! And so endeth the first day. Not the TMS link, but a great tip from Mark Putt, thank you! “I live in Singapore.....a friend alerted me to the fact that the ICC are streaming the Ashes, outside the UK I suspect. It’s $19.99 for the series!” Not too hopeful. Can anyone help Matt Dale? For any bleary-eyed readers just waking up in the UK, allow us to bring you up to speed: England win the toss and chose to bat first at the Gabba. Mitchell Starc bowls Rory Burns around his legs with the first ball of the day. Big wickets of Joe Root (0) and Ben Stokes (6) follow shortly after as England fall to 29-4. Jos Buttler top scores for England with 39. Just three other players reach double figures. England bowled out for 147 as new Australia captain Pat Cummins takes five wickets. Rain hits Brisbane and play is halted. Reasons to be cheerful number one: the Kookaburra has a more prominent seam. We think they’ll be back on in another 20-30 mins, if there is no further rain. It does, though, still look rather dark. “You can say I carried on because I probably did. That is Ashes cricket, a heightened sense of everything. It was great to have, close to a full house, sounded like it was. You are playing at home in front of a crowd to kickstart the Ashes Series, A few emotions going around and a lot of smiles. Nice to get that first one out of the [way] and we’ve had a pretty decent day. “A yorker is a big part of my game, to be fast and swing it and attack the stumps. To have some luck and get him around his legs was nice to see. “[Pat] has been great. He hasn’t changed much from the Pat Cummins the bowler. He is calm and collected, simple messaging. He didn’t say too much when we came out to start the innings today, do what we need to do and stick to our guns. He has been awesome, pretty chilled which showed in all its cricket since he started and I’m sure he will keep doing the same. It’s easy when the day goes really well but at the same time he’s been sensational this week keeping the messaging simple. He has great people around him, Steve has done it for a long time, a pretty settled group or guys who have known each other for a long time and amongst the bowlers as well which is fantastic.” The covers are soggy but the umpires are inspecting. Glenn McGrath thinks England will be split as to whether they want to have a quick bowl this evening: nothing to lose v the ball going soggy. Pat Cummins is huddling, arms folded, under an umbrella. Coffee-fuelled optimism - that’s exactly what England need. I’m a bit worried though that Wood’s pace could be dented by a damp pitch if they get on later today. “Root’s decision to have a bat at the Gabba is like the antimatter version of Nasser Hussain’s decision to have a bowl,” writes Yum. “If those two decisions ever come into contact the Gabba could be obliterated.” Very good! Though, there is a chance, isn’t there, that Australia might do their own impression of a folding chair against Wood and Woakes? The dog, who has now stolen the blanket, sighs next to me. IF you’ve just hauled yourself out of bed early, you can probably safely crawl back for another half hour. It is raining at The Gabba, the umpires are examining the puddles under umbrellas and - despite its excellent drainage - we could be off for the day. I’ve been rather enjoying Steve Harmison’s dissection of fast bowling on BT sport - he’s not a natural but is very enthusiastic explaining his craft. And an excellent explanation comes in on Alastair Cook’s still-cherubic looks. Meanwhile Ali Mitchell is doing a mini tinkly-piano documentary on the history of The Ashes. She’s excellent - I see her with her own Michael Portillo-esque travel show ahead. The rain, it poureth. “Morning Tanya.” Hello Kerrith Britland! “I’ve been up watching since Butler and Pope were together. Nice of England to help Pat ease into the captaincy role. However stupid this might sound, i think the England bowling attack is up there with the best in the world right now. At least we get to bowl twice!? Right!?!? Right! The only thing is, we aren’t playing two of them.... Fair play to Pat Cummins though. A lovely guy, smiley, handsome, brilliant, outspoken about climate change, thrust the captaincy, loses the toss, takes his first Ashes five-fer. Many thanks to our OBO’ers on the ground who are reporting back on the conditions. It doesn’t look great, to be honest. and I want to know what Alastair Cook’s beauty secret is. He doesn’t seem to have a single line. Anyway, Don E writes: “The only thing missing for Australia in that innings was Lyon not getting his 400th wicket.” I just had to check that - I didn’t think it could possibly be true . It is! Dan Ellis-Jones writes of ex-pat pain: “So I pop out into the staff car park at lunch, here in Perth, where the sun is beating down on a 40C degree day, only to find the English team struggling against an Aussie side that should be in turmoil. “My question is: Doesn’t the English team consider the poor British ex-pats in Australia who have to put up with all sorts from their Australian cousins at times of English cricket frailty? My usual retort, especially being in Perth is… yeah, but how many F1 titles has Lewis Hamilton won, and how many had Danny Ric won??? “I hope the pitch turns out to be a great bowling pitch and we bundle the Aussies out for 56.” They’re so unthinking aren’t they? One of my brothers lives in Sydney and he has already said that he is very grateful for home working right now. Still, you did get to escape the wind and rain of a British December.. though as I say that, we flash back to the Gabba, where the covers are on, the rain is spearing down and the puddles are building. I’ve just heard our OBO’er Geoff Lemon on the radio say that there is electricity in the air and a storm approaching. Glenn McGrath, who doesn’t look like Glenn McGrath, is reporting from underneath an umbrella and is struggling to hold it straight against the wind. We will have a pause to gather our thoughts/lick our wounds. Do send me any musings. What a morning! Losing the toss turned out to be a masterstroke for Cummins, who would also have batted. The conditions were helpful, his bowlers on song, and England under-cooked. The fifth lowest total batting first at the Gabba is not the start Root was looking for. Alastair Cook thinks it was a 300 wicket, Steve Harmison thinks Australia’s success came from whacking the deck, not kissing it. We watch and wait. Kudos to Jos Buttler and Ollie Pope though, and to the early stonewalling from Hameed and a late flurry from Woakes. Time to quickly boil the kettle. Woakes takes on the bouncer, Cummins has his five-fer! Another great smash-and grab catch on the boundary by Hazlewood. Cummins pulls on his baggy-green, holds up the ball and is carried off the field on a sea of applause. 50th over: England 147-9 (Leach 2, Woakes 21) Lyon, chewing gum, shaven headed and long-sleeved, tempts and twirls, but no gold. “Morning Tanya.” Morning Kim Thonger! “Thrilled to join the fun as I wake up and find these two in with a good shot at exceeding England’s all time highest tenth wicket partnership of 198 by Root and Anderson” https://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/content/records/283526.html Ha! 49th over: England 146-9 (Leach 2, Woakes 20) Cummins has three balls to try and pick up his five-fer but Leach isnt playing. RESOLUTE. I bet! Sounds wonderful. Snaffled at short leg, fending off a snorter aimed at the ribs. 48th over: England 143-8 (Wood 8, Woakes 19) The camera pans to Stokes, who is looking pensive and freshly shaved. Hazlewood, all arms, legs and ears, drags his body through another over. Woakes leans back into a huge hook, but doesn’t quite reach the boundary. 47th over: England 140-8 (Wood 6, Woakes 18) These two making it look relatively easy. Another four for Woakes - stylish, through mid-off - while Wood snorts a couple. Cummins looks slightly put out and sends down a couple of short ones. “G’Day from the Pacific North West,” writes David Gilbank. “Went fishing today off the coast South Beach in Newport Oregon and caught 5 Cod and snagged what the locals call Dungeony Crabs. They were delicious.Was hoping someone somehow could link my crab success with England’s performance today?I’m at a loss...” 46th over: England 134-8 (Wood 0, Woakes 18) Woakes nonchalantly hits Hazlewood for three successive boundaries - the third a clever play on angles over the slips. I reach for my forgotten tea -i t’s gone cold. “ I was going to copy your thoughts, having let the cat out into a stiff pyraneean breeze an hour ago and remembered that England were being slaughtered on the other side of the world, but then retreaving some sense of order but .... heyho, somebody decided to make you the bearer of snotty news! One hopes things will improve a little, including for you, your back-up team and dog!” Thanks Tone White! The dog’s has joined me in her basket, just stirring every now and then to sniff the runes. 45th over: England 122-8 (Wood 0, Woakes 6) Wood can find a smile as he wanders up to have a chat with Woakes at the end of another successful over from Cummins. Perhaps they fancy the pitch? The cameras have not found Root - what a crushing of dreams on the first morning. Still - remember how India started their triumphant tour down under at the start of the year. Australia’s big men doing the business! A third for captain Cummins as Robinson pulls out a leaden-footed prod away from his body. 44th over: England 122-7 (Robinson 0, Woakes 6) Woakes grabs some skin back for England with a velveteen cover-drive, but things are suddenly looking rather more ragtag for Root’s men. A first Test wicket for the mountainous but baby-faced Green, with his first ball of the series! Pope is top-heavy on a hook and the edges flies down to Hazlewood who watches from just inside the boundary and propels his body forward to gather the ball off the ground. Great catch. 43rd over: England 118-6 (Pope 35, Woakes 2) Woakes gets his reflexes tested with a snifter from Starc; Woakes nobly bends his front knee and dips his head. “Well, there’s a welcome to the blog for you. (Guessing you’re recapping Buttler’s wicket now.)“ writes Meghan Purvis. “I’m watching from east London but regret to inform you I’m an Australia supporter, so soaring on caffeine and unbridled joy. Odds of us seeing Australia start to bat by the time the rest of London’s waking up?” Oooh, they’ve got to be high, I bet you my first steaming cup of coffee that Labuschagne is strolling in before the close. 42nd over: England 117-6 (Pope 34, Woakes 2) The skies are still cloudy above the Gabba but there are slithers of shadow following the fielders around. Pope keeps things moving with a drive through the covers off Lyon 41st over: England 114-6 (Pope 31, Woakes 2) Woakes picks up a couple to get off the mark with a smart looking drive. Super bowling from Starc that brings that mini England fight-back to a flowery full stop. Root must be relieved that he’s got Woakes coming in at eight, not Ollie Robinson. The ball after sending Starc spinning square for four with a sublime bit of wristiness, Buttler gets an edge on a beauty edging away from him, which is calmly gathered behind the stumps. 40th over: England 108-5 (Pope 31, Buttler 35) Thanks Geoff! Fantastic stuff. Well, as Nathan Lyon reels through a maiden, this is significantly more cheerful than when I dozed off at a sniff and a snort for four. Anyway, that’s me for the day. England supporters, I hope you’re feeling a tiny bit better, though I’m sure you’ll still be made mostly of worry and fear. On which note, let me hand you over to Tanya: All Dread. A quick mention: Adam Collins and I make a podcast called The Final Word, and the Guardian has brought us on board for the Ashes. So we’ll making an Ashes Daily show, along with Emma John, at stumps each day. Fifteen minutes of talking through the day that has been, mostly for the benefit of people who can’t sit down and watch it all, or can’t stay awake to do so. It’ll be in the Guardian podcast feed, or on this page here. Below is a sample of the show, if you’re interested. Our episode from the T20 World Cup final. Similar format. 39th over: England 108-5 (Pope 31, Buttler 35) Starc bowls his third over since lunch, with Buttler happy to duck and defend before drinks. 38th over: England 107-5 (Pope 30, Buttler 35) Driven through long-on by Pope, and a good chase from Head is required to drag the ball back and save Lyon a boundary. Three runs instead. But Buttler takes strike and gets all four with a drive through extra cover, waiting for the ball to dip and then driving alone the ground. Top shot to a delivery too full. 37th over: England 100-5 (Pope 27, Buttler 31) Rapturous applause from segments of the ground as Pope slides Starc down to fine leg for the run that raises England’s hundred. Then Buttler is nearly caught at short cover! We foreshadowed that, and he does exactly what he does, reaching for a drive and hitting it low but aerially. It bounces just in front of Labuschagne, into his hands on the half-volley. 36th over: England 98-5 (Pope 26, Buttler 30) Nathan ‘Nathan’ Lyon gets another crack at bowling. Pate nude and polished, limbs gangly, he approaches the crease like a windchime in a stiff breeze. Pope whips a single. This next contest will be interesting. Does Buttler try to take down the spinner? Not in the first instance, having a few looks before driving one run down the ground off the back foot. 35th over: England 96-5 (Pope 25, Buttler 29) Baby’s first review! Cummins and Carey each take their first DRS appeal upstairs as Buttler can’t catch up with a ball down the leg side. Starc appealed but then didn’t look convinced about reviewing it. The others were. Nothing on it. Outside off stump might be more likely to be where Starc gets Buttler, with pace sliding a top edge from an angled bat into the cordon, that sort of thing. Buttler plays it out, driving the last ball back to the bowler who fields well. 34th over: England 96-5 (Pope 25, Buttler 29) Josh Hazlewood, which is of course French for Josh Has The Wood, takes the Kookaburra from the Stanley Street end. Pope nudges a run into the covers. Buttler and Josh, this is a good battle. Hazlewood gives him a straight enough line for Buttler to whip three runs through midwicket. Gosh he looks good today. The sun is peeking out again. Batting is possible. Had the top order been able to scrap through for long enough that Root was batting now, for instance, the call to bat would have been paying off. “I still reckon batting was the right call,” writes Luke McLaughlin. “Burns jumped out of the way of a leg-stump half-volley and Malan never needed to play his one. OK, Root and Stokes, brilliant bowling, but the very, very impressive Hameed showed that batting isn’t impossible.” Confirmation bias is a hell of a drug. We’ll hear endlessly from people today that obviously England should have bowled, because England lost wickets batting. Rather, England didn’t bat well, but that doesn’t mean that they shouldn’t have taken the opportunity to try to bat well. 33rd over: England 92-5 (Pope 24, Buttler 26) Buttler! You cad! Rocks back and sashays Cummins away through backward point with a leaning cut shot. Lots of flourish there. That’s 26 off 26. If he can just keep this up for another 150 balls or so they’ll be well placed. 32nd over: England 87-5 (Pope 23, Buttler 22) Again Buttler goes through extra cover, taking on Hazlewood. Picks up three runs as Head slides near the boundary to pull the ball back. The field changes for Buttler. Third slip goes to cover. He does have a tendency to be caught there, so it’s not exactly a defensive move. When he gets strike back from Pope, though, he drives through midwicket for two. This is good stuff, 22 from 23 balls now. 31st over: England 81-5 (Pope 22, Buttler 17) Australia attacks, Buttler counterattacks, Cummins counter-counterattacks. Bowls a beauty, past the outside edge as the wicketkeeper pushes at nothing. Buttler counter-counter-counters by getting up on his toes to punch through point again, three more runs. He’s got 17 at basically a run a ball. Pope clips a brace, then gets some ice on his arm where he took that impact. 30th over: England 76-5 (Pope 20, Buttler 14) Shot from Buttler! The field is up - the only player in the deep is fine leg - and there is no one at cover. So there is no need to keep the ball down, and Buttler steps into Hazlewood’s length ball and drives it lofted, on the up, over extra cover for four. Deciding that felt good, he aims to end the over with another, this time over mid-on. The bat turns in his fist and the ball goes straighter, and very high. Entirely safe though, and it pitches just inside the rope and stops to yield three runs. 29th over: England 69-5 (Pope 20, Buttler 7) At least there’s some busyness at the crease between Pope and Buttler. Zipping up and back for a couple of singles. Cummins doesn’t like that, so he gives Pope a bouncer, then bowls a mid-length short ball that crashes into Pope’s back arm around the bicep. Flex it off, buddy. 28th over: England 67-5 (Pope 19, Buttler 6) Softly spoken but carrying a big stick, Buttler can do damage. He just hasn’t done it all that often in Test cricket. He almost nicks off for nought here, playing a big drive at Hazlewood that misses the ball completely. Undaunted, he goes for another from a slightly fuller ball, a cover drive with a wristy flick to it for four. Then rides the bounce to push two through point. If you can score like that from Hazlewood’s optimum length, you’ll go a long way to succeeding against him. 27th over: England 60-5 (Pope 18, Buttler 0) Last chance saloon then, with Buttler and Pope together. A 200 partnership sounds about right. Cummins has 2 for 17 in his first innings as captain. “I’m sorry. Did I break your concentration?” In this scene, the lunch break is played by Samuel L. Jackson. Straightforward quality stuff from Cummins. Full enough to draw the feet, tight enough line to draw a shot, movement enough to draw the edge. Hameed probably doesn’t need to play at this, but only just. He edges to second slip. Apologies to Tom Kirkpatrick, from a couple of minutes to go. “I’m in Guatemala, not England, but I’m still with you. I’ll be up for a few more hours to see if Hameed and Pope can make a start on the 200 partnership we need from them. You never know.. they could do it.” Here we go after lunch... “I was sitting in the stand at the Stanley Street end behind the bowler watching Harmisons first ball,” writes Scott Flavell. “It was worse than today’s first ball. There was such anticipation that was immediately deflated. Today was a hard one for Burns first up.” I don’t feel that Burns was too hard done by. A fast swinging full ball is tricky, but walking across so far that you expose your leg stump is a technical failing. He could have survived it otherwise. Righto, I’ve got a plate, the lunchtime kids’ matches are happening, and there’s time to take a breath. Is anyone in England still with us? You’ve got to stay with your team no matter what... Could be a comeback on the cards. Here are the collected Australian commentary services on the first ball of the match. Jim Maxwell 4 Eva for me, obviously. What an extraordinary session. A wicket with the first ball of an Ashes series? How often has that happened? Starc bowled fast and curled the ball onto the leg stump of Rory Burns. Moving across his crease was his downfall. The three after that were all nicked off, Hazlewood and Cummins bowling their hard length immaculately and landing it on the seam. Basic fast bowling, but top quality as well. Hameed and Pope have played in a way that suggests that the degree of difficulty is easing, and now it will be up to them and once again England’s lower order to fashion some sort of total here. Time for a break. 26th over: England 59-4 (Hameed 25, Pope 17) Hameed gets back to Lyon’s off-break and punches it away through point for a run. Pope tries to sweep and gets hit on the pad, Lyon sinking to one knee in appeal, but nothing doing. In response Pope charges and drags a ball through the leg side for one. Was looking for something bigger and didn’t make good contact. Would have been hell to pay if he’d holed out three balls before lunch. Luck is with him, and the break arrives. 25th over: England 57-4 (Hameed 24, Pope 16) Green continues without looking very consistent or threatening, and Pope tries to score in about six different ways but can’t get more than a couple of runs from a glance. 24th over: England 55-4 (Hameed 24, Pope 14) Lyon completes his third over, frustrated when Hameed pushes at a ball with an open face, despite having a slip in place, and guides it very fine for four. 23rd over: England 50-4 (Hameed 20, Pope 13) The sun comes out for a couple of minutes, then goes in again, as Cameron Green gets his first over. A big team appeal for a catch down the leg side from his first ball, everyone except the bowler who isn’t interested and just walks back. Hameed tries a couple of shots, to cover and midwicket, but can’t get past the field. No run from the over. 22nd over: England 50-4 (Hameed 20, Pope 13) One run from Lyon with a scrambled single taken by Hameed. Dicey run. Pope tries to clatter a pull shot away but pulls it into Labuschagne at short leg, denying the run by accident. Some luck for Pope that the ball doesn’t bounce up for someone else to catch. England’s 50 is up. Pop the corks then. 21st over: England 49-4 (Hameed 19, Pope 13) You wouldn’t exactly call this dynamic batting, though they scrape a couple of singles from the Starc over. But it has at least settled for England, as was likely to happen. 20th over: England 47-4 (Hameed 18, Pope 12) Alright, now it’s Nathan Lyon time. He’s on 399 Test wickets, remember, and seemingly has ben for about ten years. He bowls really nicely to Hameed first up, big turn into the right-hander who steps across and jabs the ball down to short leg. Then teasing flight from Lyon that makes Hameed wait before pushing to the off side. No run from the over. If you see any errors in the scores, hit refresh on your page. We’ve fixed a couple of things as we go. 19th over: England 47-4 (Hameed 18, Pope 12) Another over from Starc, another boundary for Pope. Drives down the ground this time, reaching the long-off fence. 18th over: England 43-4 (Hameed 18, Pope 8) No spin as yet, Hazlewood continues his spell and Hameed keeps leaving him. Australia will get through about 20 overs in the first session at this rate. 17th over: England 43-4 (Hameed 18, Pope 8) Starc replaces Cummins, bowling left-arm around the wicket at the right-handed Hameed. Creates an angle in at the body that looks quite uncomfortable. Hameed is finding ways to turn over strike more readily now though, and after he works a run to square leg, Pope reaches out at some width from Starc and steers it behind point for four. 16th over: England 38-4 (Hameed 17, Pope 4) Young Pope is very happy to leave Hazlewood alone as much as he can. Eventually it makes Hazlewood bowl a bit closer to the stumps, to least draw defensive shots. “Those of us in Asia have got up rather than stayed up for this moment - though I guess it’s equally depressing whether you’re in Birmingham or Bangkok,” writes in Leo Phillips. “Is there perchance a TMS link to give our misery an audible aspect?” There is not, today. The BBC haven’t posted one, which they usually do. Might be a rights thing, with various stations owning Australian rights. I don’t know if anyone owns those for other territories. 15th over: England 37-4 (Hameed 16, Pope 4) The current pair show a bit of willingness to take on Cummins. They might as well try to score a few. After a Hameed single, Pope pulls away a half-short ball for three, then Hameed flicks away three more into the empty acres on the leg side. 14th over: England 30-4 (Hameed 12, Pope 1) Hazlewood replaces Starc, as ever getting the ball to cut back into the right-handed Pope. Mid-on, midwicket and fine leg the only three fielders on that side. Pope leaves everything that he can. 13th over: England 30-4 (Hameed 12, Pope 1) Ollie Pope to the crease. Gets going first ball, a single to cover. That won’t help Josh’s mood. Stokes plays his first confident shot of the innings, slamming an off-drive for four. But three balls later, Cummins gets him with fierce bounce. Not a bouncer, just back of a length, and Stokes tries to defend it off the back foot. But it moves away a touch after angling in at his midriff, takes his edge, and skews wide of third slip. Labuschagne dives across and takes it above the turf. Good catch, great bowling, and Cummins has his first wicket as captain. “I stayed up for this?” asks Josh Collis. “Seemingly yes. Total England first innings prediction = 68.” Spare a thought for the UK-bound Tanya Aldred, who is staying up to take the second half of the OBO, and texting me forlorn thoughts in the meantime. 12th over: England 24-3 (Hameed 12, Stokes 1) Starc tries something short, but the line is awry and it clips Hameed’s hip on its way to fine leg for four. He bowls better to get one past the outside edge, then draws Hameed into an off-drive that is stopped. The drinks break arrives. Robert McLiam Wilson puts key to screen. “Old-school, hall-of-fame ouch. The notion of ‘statement’ deliveries, shots or catches is massively overplayed, more journalism than history, but a first nut castling behind the legs is a genuine sphincter-shrinker. It’s starting the gig with your best joke, it’s showing the butler doing it in the pre-credits sequence. It’s neither omen, nor harbinger, it’s a notarised contract. It’s literal genius, because all genius has always shrugged its shoulders and said the same thing - ‘There’s more of this to come’.” 11th over: England 20-3 (Hameed 12, Stokes 1) Happy to hang in there, is Stokes. Plays one shot at Cummins in the over, but again Head at mid-off stops any score. Otherwise, Stokes is content to leave on length and defend on merit. “England’s brittle top order being fully exposed here. Have to think that it won’t be long now before Harry Brook is handed an England cap - and after all he is now in Australia playing in the Big Bash - which might turn out to be very convenient.” I think you have to give them more than one innings, Peter Rowntree. Malan in particular has been picked to counter Australia on tracks with bounce and not much sideways movement, rather than when there’s some seam around on morning one. 10th over: England 20-3 (Hameed 12, Stokes 1) Starc returns, swung around to the Stanley Street end after his wicket first ball coming from Vulture Street. Interesting. And nearly another, second ball of the over, as Hameed carves over the slips for four! Sees width, throws his hands at it, and his attempted square drive ends up at deep third. Some serious carry for Starc as he responds with pace. 9th over: England 16-3 (Hameed 8, Stokes 1) Another Cummins over from the Vulture Street end, Hammed glancing a single. Stokes is stepping across his stumps and being beaten on the inside edge, perhaps a bit of a box shot from Cummins bowling around the wicket to the left-hander. It may only have grazed the box - but as Eddie Murphy spoke in truth, it only needs to graze. Stokes with his wide stance awaits Cummins, digging out a full ball. Then steps into a drive but doesn’t nail it, and Head is able to dive across at mid-off to stop the shot. 8th over: England 15-3 (Hameed 7, Stokes 1) Thus England turn to Ben Stokes and, Bernie Sanders style, once again ask him for a miracle. He at least survives a Hazlewood over, blocking and leaving and nudging a single. Hameed takes a run off his hip to leg slip, which interests the Australians with a short leg in place. It was off the thigh pad, so a leg bye. 7th over: England 13-3 (Hameed 7, Stokes 0) Cummins carries on to Hameed, bowling the first bumper of the innings that the England opener calmly ducks under Hameed has looked quite good so far this morning, though as I type he strides forward and is beaten by Cummins. Strides again, and drives clunkily as the bat twists in his hand, the ball skewing through extra cover for two runs. 6th over: England 11-3 (Hameed 5, Stokes 0) A calamitous start for England. The pessimists were right. Hazlewood has gone pretty well against Root in the past too, and he has the England captain hopping with that hard bounce. Then beaten! Pushing forward in defence, some seam away from the bat and it just sneaks past the edge. This is quality stuff. Decks back in, the next ball, making Root fall over to the off side and striking his pad. Too high to be worth an appeal, but it beat him. Root prods at a spot on the pitch. Faces up for the fifth ball... And he’s out! The same as a couple of balls earlier, nipping away at pace. He has to play at it, angled at his off stump, but the movement takes the edge to first slip, where a jubilant Warner hurls the ball away! Nine balls faced for Root without adding a run to his storied 2021 tally. He stays on 1455 for the year with five hits remaining. 5th over: England 11-2 (Hameed 5, Root 0) Here comes Captain Cummins! Quite a move. Starc has bowled two overs, but Cummins knows that he himself has been a great match-up against Root in the past. So he takes the ball with the biggest English wicket now a possibility. Has to bowl his first over to Hameed though, who handles the high bounce pretty well and defends the fuller ball well too. 4th over: England 11-2 (Hameed 5, Root 0) “You’re next, Rooter!” is the cry from the crowd in a broad Australian accent as England’s captain walks out. Hazlewood tests him, cutting a ball back in that thunders into his thigh pad. Another one goes! Hazlewood’s bounce does the trick, as so often before. Perfect line, draws Malan into a defensive shot on his off stump, then the ball kicks up after pitching, squaring him up as he tries to get enough bat on it. He only gets a sliver through to the keeper, and Alex Carey is on the board in Test cricket. 3rd over: England 11-1 (Hameed 5, Malan 6) The obligatory trumpeter is already playing The Great Escape music. Hameed defends or leaves three Starc balls outside off stump, but steps into the fourth, fuller pitched, and drives it handsomely down the ground. No flourish, but a straight hit through the ball. 2nd over: England 7-1 (Hameed 1, Malan 6) Josh Hazlewood from the Stanley Street end starts off to Haseeb Hameed. Beats him with a beauty, plenty of steep bounce for JH early on. Hameed gets off strike after a few ball with a nudge to leg. Starc moves over in front of us to become fine leg for the left-hander, and gets a huge cheer from the crowd just below the press box on arrival. “Have I missed anything?” writes Chris Purcell. 1st over: England 6-1 (Hameed 0, Malan 6) Second ball of the innings? Edged for four! Dawid Malan pokes at is, producing a thick low edge through the gap in the cordon. Three slips, a gap to gully, then Lyon at point. Cover is open. Mid-off in position, mid-on, square leg. Malan guides again, with more control this time, between gully and point for a couple. What a start. A WICKET WITH THE FIRST BALL OF THE ASHES! Bowled around his legs! Extraordinary. Starc bowls left-arm over the wicket. Angling towards leg stump. Burns, as he does, has moved across to off stump. He aims a flick at the ball, missing. It swings back a little, scoots behind his ankle and takes his leg stump. A more extraordinary first ball in Brisbane than Harmison’s? We have a contender. We’re about to start. Mitchell Starc with the new ball, not Pat Cummins... Welcome to Country is led by Deborah Sandy, then the anthems. A very loud segment of the crowd in the lower deck on the southern side of the ground joins in with God Save the Queen - so that’s where the English have gathered. Advance Australia fair gets a few more voices joining in. We’re set up for the anthems, with theatrical boos as England walk out and cheers for the Australians. The ground is still nowhere near full, looks like most of the crowd won’t get to see the first ball. “As much as Ollie Robinson appears to be a good fit for Aussie conditions and a fit Mark Wood feels almost like a necessity given the awful absence of Archer, I wonder if at least a little part of the reason for not picking Broad for this Test is that England are going to rotate their quicks more than they normally would over an Ashes in Oz and the last time Stuart Broad was snubbed for the start of a series he took it personally and came back bowling with the fire of a thousand English suns over the rest of that series. Perhaps England are hoping for a repeat of that this time around.” It’s as compelling a theory as any, Michael Jenkins. I can buy the argument for Wood and Robinson in these conditions, but I’m not sure how Woakes (as good as he is) gets the nod ahead of Broad, given how the latter has torn up Australia’s left-handers before. Different country, different conditions, but if the chance was there to punch the bruise, it was going to be in England’s first bowling innings of the series. Richard writes in from Kuala Lumpur. I used to live there for a time, a tremendous city. Please have some roti pisang for me. “A very good morning from Malaysia! Hoping for a bat first and a decent return from our top 4. Sobers scored a 132 on this day at the Gabba to kick off the 1960s WI tour of Australia - it’s possible! Quick shout out to my brother, who reached 49 not out this week... happy birthday Nick Rodwell.” Kevin Plastow is corresponding with me from outside the Gabba. “The crowd are all outside waiting patiently to go through security, check in, and then the gate. Patience required.” “Slightly delirious with excitement, or perhaps it’s the booster jab I had earlier. Half an hour ‘til all our dreams are crushed, yay!” Ah, English pessimism. Enjoy it, James Walsh. England Rory Burns Haseeb Hameed Dawid Malan Joe Root * Ben Stokes Ollie Pope Jos Buttler + Chris Woakes Ollie Robinson Mark Wood Jack Leach Australia David Warner Marcus Harris Marnus Labuschagne Steven Smith Travis Head Cameron Green Alex Carey + Pat Cummins * Mitchell Starc Nathan Lyon Josh Hazlewood Pat Cummins says he doesn’t mind the result - Australia would have batted but he reckons it’s a 50-50 call anyway. So, we could have skipper vs skipper pretty soon into the series. An early minor victory for the English, in that they don’t have to face the prospect of conceding 500 in the first innings. They will have to bat well initially, but surely there are runs to be had if they manage that. Root has no hesitation. Here comes Patrick Cummins in his green blazer, and the crowd breaks out into applause as he walks to the middle for the first time. I’ll tell you what, I didn’t see Broad warm up with the others, he was hanging out with Bairstow, who isn’t playing. For a visual reference... We’ve had a lengthy and meaningful barefoot ceremony in the middle, led by Aunty Deborah Sandy with the teams standing barefoot around the Walkabout Wickets artwork. The players are told about this land, the rivers that run through it, the languages spoken, the indigenous people who have lived and do live here. The best part is that one of the TV producers keeps trying to signal to her to wrap up, and she serenely ignores them and sails on, telling the story. A power move. There is intrigue around the England lineup, with suggestions swirling around the Gabba that Stuart Broad will miss out and spinner Jack Leach set to get the nod. It would mean an England team with no Jimmy Anderson and Broad together for the first time in five years. Stand by for the toss, coming up shortly. It’s being billed as something of a new era for Australian Test cricket, with debutant captain Pat Cummins in charge. Here’s a nifty guide to the players who are going to shape the series. Greg Bradley emails in. “Have a great Ashes series or at least have a great Ashes first Test, or maybe first innings, or maybe first morning? Lovely to see your intro but the stadium is empty. No crowd? Weird. I’ve gotten used to crowds at the footie again.” Well, the crowd is coming in. Still almost an hour until play. It’s allegedly a sell-out today. The Gabba can take over 40,000. How about the pitch? It looks green, yes. But the Gabba pitch always looks green on day one. It’s not usually grass that does a whole lot. I’m willing to bet it will be very decent batting surface, after perhaps a little hard work early. The big question: will we get play? Well, probably. The forecast for Brisbane entire says that rain may be around from exactly 10am local time, which is the first ball. But that doesn’t mean it will fall here at 10am. There are thunderstorms forecast for the afternoon, but hopefully that means they will rain intensely but briefly and then clear off. The Gabba drains better than any other ground in the world, and we’ve seen the ground staff here perform miracles before. So, be optimistic. Good morning from Brisbane! I happen to know that it is already late at night in the UK, and any other number of times in other zones around the world, but here from the Gabba it is a fresh new day with a fresh new pitch in the middle. The Ashes! That old thing. Thank providence that it is beginning, so that I don’t have to write, nor do you have to read, any more preview pieces. From now on, we will have views and reviews only. Everyone is out there on the ground: players, whole squads, coaches, umpires, ground staff, tractors, camera operators. There’s Haseeb Hameed with a bat under each arm, just in case. Cap backwards. Strutting. There’s Danny Reuben, talking media with the Channel Seven broadcast managers. Mike Hussey is out there in a suit, Adam Gilchrist in shirt sleeves. There are nets strung up for throw-downs. Eskies full of drinks. Hurdles and medicine balls. A circle of England players are heading a football around. There are strings of orange flags around the centre square. David Warner is standing on the centre wicket about where the stumps will go in, facing up with his bat and visualising. It’s warm, it’s sweaty, it’s overcast, and it’s happening. I’m Geoff, hello.There is one thing that Boris Johnson and I actually agree on, and it is that courts and judges should never be used to “conduct politics by another means”, as he said in his election manifesto and again in a 2020 speech. But what Johnson proposed on Monday with his interpretation bill – which would make it possible for the government to strike out findings from judicial reviews that he and his ministers disagree with – would make our courts overtly and dangerously political. A judicial review allows judges to examine the lawfulness of an action taken by a public body, they are often initiated by citizens or civil society groups to hold government to account. The cases that I brought against Johnson’s and Theresa May’s governments, challenging their right to make policy without parliamentary approval, and further to prorogue parliament, were cited as his excuse for asserting “parliamentary sovereignty” over “an unelected judiciary”. This is an outrageous lie, as both cases were about upholding parliamentary sovereignty against an overbearing executive which was frustrating and preventing our elected representatives from carrying out their constitutional function in parliament. The fact that the supreme court found in my favour in the prorogation case 12 – 0, and that Johnson’s advice to the Queen was unlawful, void and of no effect, allowing parliament to reconvene, is what appears to be fuelling his vengeful “war” on judges. In the Conservative party’s 2019 manifesto, Johnson’s government made it clear that it intended to pursue a broad review of the UK constitution, including “ensuring that judicial review is not abused to conduct politics by other means or to create needless delays”. Many of us nervously awaited the report from the appointed independent review of administrative law, chaired by the former justice minister Lord Faulks QC, hoping it would be fair and support the rights of citizens to challenge decision by public bodies, regulators and the executive. In submission to the review, independent bodies were queueing up to sing the praises of the current judicial review system. It is very carefully calibrated so people cannot just turn up at courts or bring cases – there are stages to sift out weak cases, politically overt cases and cases that do not meet the legal threshold – all acting as essential failsafe mechanisms. The Law Society of England and Wales said the system was “working well and achieving its purpose”. The Bar Council of England and Wales rejected the suggestion that there was a conflict between judicial review and the “proper and effective discharge of government functions”. Indeed, they described judicial review as a “critical mechanism” for securing proper and effective government functions. Dame Vera Baird QC, the victims commissioner, said that judicial review was a means of enhancing the effectiveness of government and not undermining it. Faulks had little choice but to conclude, in March 2021, that only modest changes were needed for judicial review. This was not what the government wanted to hear, and so the then justice secretary, Robert Buckland, was charged with coming up with recommendations that were more in tune with the government’s wishes. Buckland also declined to recommend curbing the power of judicial review, and he was sacked in favour of Dominic Raab in September. Part of the government’s strategy in its “war” is to pigeonhole judicial review as only being against ministers, but the judicial review process is largely about vulnerable, ordinary citizens’ access to justice. The process is credited with quashing the original inquests’ verdict of “accidental death” at Hillsborough and ordering new inquests. It provided an avenue for justice for the three women serving in the armed forces after the then defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said in February that he was ignoring a recommendation that rape and other serious cases involving the military in the UK should routinely be handled by the police and Crown Prosecution Service. There was also the judicial review of arms sales to Saudi Arabia, which resulted in the court of appeal concluding in June 2019 that the government’s decision-making process for granting export licences was “irrational” and therefore “unlawful”. More recently, the government has also faced several judicial review challenges over its award of contracts during the Covid-19 pandemic – with, no doubt, more to come. In 2020, the then attorney general, Sir Geoffrey Cox, since replaced by Suella Braverman, insisted that the government wouldn’t compromise the “fundamental principle of the independence of the judiciary”. He said there would be “no question of weakening judicial review”. But that is precisely what is now being proposed by the anti-democracy trio of Raab, Braverman and Johnson. Our British judges have never been, as they were so maliciously characterised, the “enemies of the people”. An independent legal profession and a government accountable to the people are a fundamental pillar of our democracy. Responsible politicians should be insulating the judiciary from politics and executive power, not making it an ideological stick to stir a populist fervour that ultimately damages our country. Gina Miller is a businesswoman and transparency campaigner who took legal action to prevent Boris Johnson proroguing parliamentIt has been about 18 months since Alix Popham got his diagnosis, and a year since he spoke about it in public. He’s doing well. Popham, who played 33 Tests for Wales, takes life the same way he played rugby: head on. In that time he has helped to launch a lobby group, Progressive Rugby, who have pulled together experts from across the sport to find ways to make it safer, and he has also set up a foundation, Head For Change, to provide support to athletes, and families of athletes, who are, like him and his, living with early onset dementia, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or other degenerative brain diseases caused by sport. It helps to keep busy. He has started competing in triathlons, and plans to do an Iron Man next year, even though the shoulder injuries he sustained in his career mean he can only swim breaststroke “so I’m at the back with all the older people”. And it helps to stay positive. When our talk becomes maudlin he and his wife, Mel, catch themselves and turn the conversation on to something more optimistic. “Both of us are glass half-full people.” Hope copes. They have faith that there are things they can do to mitigate the worst effects, and faith, too, that they can force the sport to do more to help other players suffering from them. There are times when that faith is tested. Popham is one of a handful of former players who have spoken out about what they are going through along with Michael Lipman, Steve Thompson, Carl Hayman, Dan Scarbrough, Neil Clarke, Tim Cowley, Jason Hobson, Neil Spence and Adam Hughes. There are dozens more out there who are struggling in silence. The law firm they are working with now represents 150 former union players, and 75 former league players, who are all showing symptoms of brain damage. The game rolls on, through endless rounds of international and domestic matches, but this problem is there in the background, growing bigger. “Another 10 players got diagnosed just last week,” Popham says, “some big names among them, British Lions, England internationals, this number is just going to keep on growing.” Many of them have reached out to him to ask for help, and advice. Recent research by the UK Rugby Health Project at Durham University provided evidence of the association between brain trauma and depression and anxiety among elite rugby players in later life. It was no surprise to Popham. He knows about this problem as well as anyone. He has been living with it every day for the past year, the evidence is there on his phone, among his WhatsApp chats and text messages. There are former players in that group who are on suicide watch. There have been cases where he, personally, has had to arrange an emergency clinical intervention for a player after they reached out to him in desperation because they didn’t feel they were able to talk to anyone else. “I haven’t said this before, I’ve spoken to about 20 players who are still involved in rugby who are scared to talk because they’re worried they’re going to lose their jobs,” Popham says, “players, coaches, agents, people who need to be able to go and get tested, because their symptoms need diagnosing, but who are worried they will lose work if they do.” This is one of the problems Head For Change wants to solve. They have launched a new partnership with a not-for-profit organisation called Beyond The White Line, and are now able to provide current and former rugby players with access to the Thrive mental health app free of charge. Thrive is backed by the NHS. It is entirely anonymous, and, crucially, it provides quick access to clinical support. It means expert help people need is right there in their pocket. “There are a hell of a lot of people who are suffering but are nervous to speak out,” says Mel, “people we are supporting through Head For Change who aren’t ready to go public, so this is for them, and others like them.” She understands. It took a long time, and a lot of persuading, for her to talk about it herself. “I didn’t want to speak out because it felt so exposing, it took Alix months to convince me. But I don’t regret it one bit. It was only because Alix spoke out in your article that these players felt able to reach out to Al and talk about what they were going through. I’m really proud of what we’ve achieved since, I know we’ve helped quite a few people already, and we’re going to be able to help even more. We’ve taken what was a tragic situation in our life, and we’ve turned it into something positive.” Midway through this interview, Mel mentions an ex-player they knew who killed himself. Alix steps away, overcome for a moment. “Speaking selfishly I’m very conscious of the emotional burden that comes with this,” says Mel. “The frustration for Al is that he wanted to be able to do more for these people, so this is about delivering that.” Popham talks about former players, men he played with and against “who are struggling to get off the sofa” because they are so depressed, and how he wants “to be able to go over with a bike and say ‘let’s go out for a half-hour ride, nothing too crazy’, because once you’ve made that first step you can build it up”. He is evangelical about the power of group exercise. “That part of him was conditioned by rugby,” says Mel. “I’ve definitely noticed the amount of physical training he’s been doing has hugely helped his wellbeing. I’m not saying he still doesn’t have bad days, and low points, but living with him there’s a visible difference in his symptoms, because of his focus on his exercise.” Head For Change runs regular online bike races on Zwift. “We’re hoping we can get people to break through that first barrier and start building a life, with a community around them, bringing them back to that sense of being part of a team that they had in rugby.” Not everyone is on side. They try to ignore what Mel calls the “keyboard warriors”, but some of the comments from ex-pros have stung. “The day the article came out there was one ex-pro who just said ‘we signed up’ or something like that,” says Mel. “And that made me feel sick to my stomach. I know Alix didn’t sign up to have dementia at the age of 40.” That same ex-pro later invited Alix on his podcast. He said no. “‘I’m not going down that road.’ I’m not here to argue. I’ve seen the brain scans, I’ve lived this situation.” In the main, though, the support has been overwhelming. It has come from all over, from people they know, and people they don’t, such as the group of schoolmates who got in touch because they wanted to raise money to honour a friend who died in a farming accident when he was 18. “Alix was his favourite player. Apparently he used to shout ‘Release the Popham!’ when he went in for a big tackle.” Popham is doing a 500‑mile bike ride for the Doddie Weir Foundation, “in bloody February”, and he has been in touch with Kevin Sinfield, who has just run 101 miles in 24 hours to raise money to fight motor neurone disease. “This is the positive side of rugby, people coming together and supporting what we’re all trying to do.” It is hard to hear all this without feeling angry that cash-strapped charities are having to provide support that should really be coming from the clubs and governing bodies. Popham says they are still moving too slowly. “Most of the changes we want to see are about what happens in training, Monday to Friday.” World Rugby has said it is going to introduce guidelines to limit contact training to 15 minutes a week. “OK, but why not make it mandatory? And why not do it immediately?” Recent research by the Drake Foundation has shown evidence of brain damage in current players. He says it is proof the current protocols are not safe enough, especially the six-day return-to-play protocol, which means a player can be back playing within a week of a brain injury. He says Harlequins are the shining example. “Last season they reduced contact training by 70%, they had more players available because they had fewer injuries, and more success because they won the league. It’s not rocket science. These are simple things that need to happen ASAP because every day, every week, every month that goes by there’s more impacts happening, and more people suffering.” A year later, people seem to understand the sport has a problem. Talking to Alix and Mel, I’m less convinced that everyone understands how big it is. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Tara Brach was four months pregnant when she miscarried at a women’s retreat in Española, New Mexico. She was 30, and had spent the last eight years as a devoted member of 3HO, a community promising spiritual awakening. The loss devastated her. She believed that extensive physical activity in the desert summer heat might have contributed to her miscarriage, so she wrote a note to her spiritual leader, Yogi Bhajan, suggesting they exercise care with pregnant women in the future. Bhajan waited until the next public gathering to respond. In front of a roomful of her peers and without previous warning, he sternly declared that no summer was hot enough to cause a woman to miscarry. He then called on Brach to stand up and “hear the truth”. She had lost the baby, he said, because she was too worried about her career – and “motherhood is not a profession”. Now shouting, he accused her of being a liar; he could tell she was one from her aura. “You wanted to have a child, that is true. Everyone knows that. Otherwise you would not have spread your legs,” he spat. “But you got it, and then what?” He told her she needed to go sit and “work it out”. Brach, in shock from the public humiliation, retreated to a little one-person meditation hut called a gurdwara, where she spent most of the night. Meditation in her ashram – which she practiced for several hours after meeting the day at 3.30am with a cold shower – focused on cultivating a “state of peacefulness, energy or rapture”. This practice usually made her feel less distressed or anxious, if only temporarily, by pulling her out of her feelings. That night, she decided to try something else and forced herself to sit with her feelings of shame, sorrow and fear, instead of trying to escape them. After several hours of doing this, she asked herself if she was feeling bad because, as Bhajan said, she was bad, or because she had lost a pregnancy and had been abused by her spiritual teacher in front of her community. That moment changed everything. She started to listen to her body and her intuition, and came to the realization that the world of meditation had a serious problem with sexism and patriarchal practices. So she decided to do something about it – starting with self compassion. ••• In late September, I visited Brach at her home at the end of a dead end street in Falls Church, Virginia. Brach, 68, wore all black on her petite frame. Her wavy hair is the blond of a kid who spent the summer at the pool, evidence of her daily morning swim. Her simple appearance and earnest demeanor doesn’t suggest the meteoric level of success she has reached as of late. Brach has become a spiritual leader trusted by members of the US Congress, where she has taught a workshop, and celebrities like Naomi Watts and Tamu McPherson – who both told Vogue that Brach saved them during the worst of the pandemic. She releases one guided meditation and one dharma talk weekly; more than 2.5 million people listen every month. As I settled in her screened-in gazebo, Brach wrapped me in a big white blanket, not wanting the morning chill to prevent us from being fully present with each other. It’s important to pay attention to our bodies, she explained. We usually try to ignore cues because we live in a culture where success means conquering bodily and emotional experiences instead of listening to them – but the feelings never really go away, no matter how we try to cover them. If we were cold, we would spend the whole interview wishing to be somewhere else. She first experienced the stickiness of feelings in childhood, which she spent trying to save her mother from depression and alcoholism. Brach’s mother appeared to be a high-achieving woman: she had graduated from college, traveled abroad and spent years working in advertising. But after getting married, she moved to East Orange, New Jersey, and had four children. As her world shrank, she retreated inside herself, armed with gin and murder mysteries. No one really paid attention to her sadness and self-loathing until Brach, by then a teenager, started drawing lines on her mother’s bottles to track how much she drank. It took a couple of years before she was willing to go to rehab, and a few more before she managed to stay sober with the help of Alcoholics Anonymous. By the time Brach left home, she had done her job and saved her mom – but she’d also internalized some of her self-loathing, which she tried to fix with food, alternating between binging and dieting. In college, her plan was to become a civil rights attorney like her dad, but the reality of rallies and protests disappointed her. “They were adversarial and aggressive,” she said. Instead, she found herself pulled towards the calm she experienced after her weekly yoga classes, which were taught on campus by 3HO members (the acronym stands for Healthy, Happy, Holy Organization). On her way home from yoga one spring night, Brach stopped to admire a fruit tree beginning to blossom, and realized that her body and mind were in the same place at the same time. Outside of experiences she’d had consuming psychedelic drugs, she’d never felt anything like the overpowering sense of belonging, connection and acceptance she felt under that tree. It was there that she realized where societal change needed to come from – not from courts, not from politics, but from our consciousness. She officially joined 3HO shortly after, and moved into an ashram outside Boston once she graduated. ••• 3HO was started by Indian-born Yogi Bhajan in 1969. A charismatic leader, Bhajan was responsible for an array of rules that had to be followed by his disciples. Full members wore turbans and all white clothing (although members call themselves Sikhs, the group bears little resemblance to Sikhism). They had to practice several hours of yoga and meditation a day. They also took a vow of celibacy until they married, and were eventually given a spiritual name. Most also entered into marriages arranged by Bhajan himself. “None of us could see a reason for the matches he made,” Brach told me. Even at the time, she balked at the hierarchy and the rigidity of having to marry someone chosen by a male guru, but she decided she couldn’t say no; it was “what the path required”. In a ceremony held at the Española ashram, she married a man she barely knew alongside eight other couples. Two years after Bhajan told her that something was wrong with her for losing her pregnancy, Brach finally left. It was the only adult life she’d ever known. Bhajan called and begged her to come back. When she refused, he became cruel, telling her she would be barren if she disobeyed. She did not tell him she was already five months pregnant. Her husband left with her. They had a boy they named Narayan. She taught meditation classes and finished a clinical psychology doctoral program; he worked for a landscaping company. They lived together for another five years before divorcing. “He’s a wonderful person, but one I never would have chosen for myself,” she says. Brach managed to escape 3HO, but many were not so fortunate. In 2019, 15 years after Yogi Bhajan’s death, his longtime secretary, Pamela Dyson, published a memoir outlining his abuses. Dyson, who left the organization in 1984, sued Bhajan two years later, at the same time as Katherine Felt, another former devotee. Felt’s testimony states she suffered imprisonment, rape and assault by Bhajan. The suit was settled out of court and followers were largely dismissive about the allegations until Dyson’s book about her ordeal, published more than 30 years later, prompted others to come forward. 3HO commissioned an independent investigation that concluded that Bhajan had abused – sexually, physically, emotionally – dozens of members. (Leadership has said they won’t erase Bhajan from their history, but he is no longer their moral and spiritual guru.) Brach became a Buddhist lay priest in 1988. Eventually, she joined the ranks of Buddhist meditation teachers with psychological training – and vowed to reclaim the intelligence of the body and the heart from what she experienced in the ashram, and from a patriarchal society that teaches us to dissociate from our bodies. ••• It’s easy to see the problems with male-led religious groups like 3HO, but the secular Buddhist world that Brach transitioned to was not free of sexism or hierarchy either. More complicated still was the treatment of women within the Buddhist religion. The 14th Dalai Lama did say that a woman could be chosen as his replacement, but also, jokingly, that she would need to be “attractive”. He apologized for the comment in 2019, but it’s a line he has gleefully repeated over the years. In 2010, he told a reporter that the first time someone asked him about the possibility of a female Dalai Lama 20 or 30 years before, he had said yes but then added that “if she is an ugly female, she won’t be very effective, will she?” An apology written on his behalf said that he had always been supportive of women’s rights, missing the point that repeating this joke for decades affected the tone and culture of Buddhism, both religious and secular. As the late Buddhist feminist scholar Rita Gross wrote in a 2014 paper titled The Suffering of Sexism: Buddhist Perspectives and Experiences, Buddhism has a real problem with “the sexism of male dominance”. “Traditional Buddhists ... readily admit that women are disadvantaged in general and in Buddhist institutions. That is because to be born a woman is an unfortunate birth, the result of negative karma from previous lives. Thus, it really isn’t unfair that women are so disadvantaged and nothing can be done about it except for women to be good girls.” Even the story of the Buddha perpetuates patriarchal gender dynamics. In order to achieve enlightenment, the Buddha had to leave behind all his earthly attachments, including his wife and son. Enlightenment, then, is not available to women who create and care for children, as spiritual awakenings are separate from daily life. While some types of meditation require practitioners to completely detach from earthly concerns, “mindfulness meditation in the West has never been that”, Christopher Germer, a clinical psychologist who lectures at Harvard’s Medical School told me. “As it is understood in the US, it is primarily the practice of regulating attention.” This often takes the form of focusing on one thing – like our breath, or counting to 10 repeatedly – and returning to it every time attention wanders. Stepping outside the stream of emotion, and focusing on the present moment, helps one to return to life calmer and better equipped to deal with distress. Brach’s brand of meditation focuses on compassion towards emotions during meditation. Germer explained the difference between the two approaches like this: “Mindfulness helps us regulate emotions through regulating attention, while compassion regulates difficult emotions through care and connection.” Emily Tanner, a 34-year-old international affairs professional living in Charlottesville, Virginia, found Brach after her husband came home one night and unexpectedly told her that he wanted a divorce. In her desperation, she read and listened to anything she could find tat might help. Brach resonated most. “I always thought I was supposed to feel completely better after meditation, but Brach’s approach taught me that meditation does not have to mean a calm response to emotions,” Tanner told me. She primarily learned this through Brach’s “little acronym” Rain, which moves through four steps – recognizing difficult emotions, allowing them to be there, investigating them with curiosity and nurturing them with love. During these meditations, Tanner sat on her bed or couch and brought feelings of despair, shame, failure and rage to mind when Brach asked her to. She then told herself they were valid: “I stopped fighting them and really started feeling them.” When prompted to examine where they lived in her body, she found that anger and fear manifested as tension in her upper arms, shoulders and chest, and sadness as a hollowness and pressure in her chest and shoulders. The final step of nurturing was usually the most difficult – and the most powerful. She put her hands on her heart, or sometimes wrapped herself in a hug and whispered aloud, “It’s OK, it’s OK, it’s OK, you are OK, you are OK, you are OK.” The practice not only helped her understand her situation intellectually, but also showed her a way to start healing from her pain. ••• Self-compassion as the approach to mindfulness, rather than a result one gains from it, is a relatively new concept. In 2003, Kristin Neff, professor of educational psychology at the University of Texas, published the first empirical study on self-compassion. It may sound obvious now, but the study found self-compassion to be a good alternative to self-criticism, which tends to make people feel worse about themselves, and self-esteem, which often includes more of a false puffing up. Self-compassion, a term most participants had never heard of, allowed them to see their flaws clearly and move towards addressing them. “At the time there was very little written about it, so I based my work on Buddhist models of compassion and then turned it inward for self-compassion,” Neff told me. That same year, Brach published her first book, Radical Acceptance. When Neff read it, she thought: “She’s the one, she’s the spiritual teacher who totally gets what I’m talking about.” Neff says there was a lot of resistance to the concept of compassion in the male-dominated mindfulness world – something she experienced first hand. About 10 years ago, a prominent mindfulness researcher humiliated her at a conference. “He was so dismissive. He said, ‘Mindfulness already includes the heart, you know, it’s already there.’ But it’s different when you make it explicit, when you put your hand on your heart and you say, ‘I’m so sorry you’re hurting. Is there anything I can do to help?’” Brach and Neff paved the way for women like Emma Seppälä, author of The Happiness Track and the science director of Stanford’s Center for Compassion and Altruism Research and Education. In her role as faculty director of Yale School of Management’s Women’s Leadership Program, she focuses on teaching self-compassion because women in the male dominated world of business often view themselves with self-criticism, “which they falsely believe leads to self-improvement”. David Saunders, a psychiatrist who has a PhD in Buddhist studies, told me that all types of mindfulness share the goal of reducing suffering. Whether the best way to do that is by cultivating compassion first with awareness following naturally, or attention first with compassion following naturally, is one of the questions that has been “wrestled over and wrestled with since Buddhist thought and practice began”. These approaches are not at odds. Mindfulness (or awareness, or wisdom) and compassion (or love, or warmth) are often thought of as two wings of one bird in Buddhist philosophy, Brach told me. You need both to fly. “We all have the same foundation. We’re training our mind to notice what’s happening and regard it with compassion. The difference is what we’re emphasizing,” she said. Brach and Neff also emphasize connection – with our hearts, minds, bodies and each other. “We are wounded in relationship, and we are healed in relationship,” Brach said. For a long time, Brach’s relational healing came through family, friends, clients, students, peers – and her son. Only at 50 did she find a healing romantic relationship. She met Jonathan Foust at a conference where they were both speaking. He sat near the front while she led a meditation and found himself distracted by how attractive she was. He recalls her saying “whatever thoughts you’re having, make room for them, they’re OK.” So he did. They have been together since. Healing has been a byproduct of their relationship – they have remarkably similar pasts, which includes ashram living, arranged marriages, and having to readjust to regular life. But their healing is also an explicit and ongoing practice. They meditate together twice a week and discuss what feels good about their relationship, and what needs attention. Foust told me he used to feel terror when Brach would look at him and say “we need to talk”, even though he knew it would be good for them. For her part, Brach knew that she sometimes used language indicating a serious talk as a controlling move. The regular check-ins have changed everything. Like formal meditation, it’s a way to hold space for “whatever presents itself”, she said, before going back to being tender and open. “When we really listen in order to understand, we end up with more intimacy, more care.”One thought is a constant in my head: “I have kids at home, I cannot go to jail, I cannot go to jail.” The politics are beyond my reach or that of the victims on the Poland-Belarus border. It involves outgoing German chancellor, Angela Merkel, getting through to Alexander Lukashenko, president of Belarus. It’s ironic that this border has more than 50 media crews gathered, yet Poland is the only place in the EU where journalists cannot freely report. Meanwhile, the harsh north European winter is closing in and my fingers are freezing in the dark snowy nights. The border situation shows the chasm between what is legal and what is moral. It trumps the endeavours of those acting to save lives. All that we activists in the forests on the Poland-Belarus border can do is to bring water, food and clothes to desperate people. Yet to perform this basic humanitarian act requires stealth. We have to hide and sneak through the forests. Attracting the attention of the border guards, police or army would force another pushback. I’ve met diverse groups among the trees: families, mothers with kids, fathers with disabled kids, elderly people and people from the world’s most vulnerable groups – ethnic, religious and LGBTQ+. They sought freedom, but find themselves being pushed backed into Belarus five, 10 and even 15 times since August until now, December. On my night walks, I’m equipped with a big backpack full of flasks of warm soup, socks, boots, jackets, gloves, scarfs, hats, plasters, medicines and powerbanks. I walk in the darkness and hide behind trees when I hear helicopters or see the bright touches of the police. I hear the splash of the soup in the containers on my back, I hear the shortness of my breath – nobody taught me to be stealthy and invisible like a professional soldier. I have worked in human rights for years, visited most of the EU’s borders and refugee camps, but I was never afraid of crackling sticks underfoot or rustling the trees above my head as I move. From personal stories and evidence collected by Minority Rights Group International with colleagues at Grupa Granica, an alliance of 14 Polish civil society organisations responding to the crisis, we know at least 5,000 people have been in the forests and that at least 1,000 are there currently. We’ve been in touch with all: desperate victims of a disgusting power game between states. Every time we respond to a call from someone in need, or their mother still in Iraq or Afghanistan, or a cousin in Berlin, we shoulder our backpacks and go. Day and night – long after the world has lost interest. Sometimes, we look for people for hours. Sometimes, because of security issues, they change their location many times Sometimes elderly grandmothers or the little kids with no more energy to walk are stranded in Polish swamps. Now, since snow covers the forests and people cannot call us, because their phones have been destroyed by the Polish army, we use thermal imagers. We meet scared eyes, exhausted faces, bodies destroyed by the cold, desperately short of immunity after weeks in the icy, wet forest. Freezing, thirsty, hungry humans. I had no idea what hunger meant. I’ve given a piece of chocolate to my kids when they complain before dinner. I’ve read poverty statistics and history books. I knew nothing about hunger. People on the Poland-Belarus border have not eaten for weeks. Every few days, after a violent pushback over the barbed wire fence, they may get an old potato from a Belarusian soldier, if they have money. They will share that with the kids. They have nothing to drink for days. Or drink swamp or rainwater, which causes stomach cramps and a deadening headache, further weakening them. We wish them care and luck at the end of our interaction. Leaving them with enough food and water supplies for a few days is impossible: no one has the strength to carry that much. We cannot take people with us or drive them to a safe place. That would be a criminal act. But it is not a crime to leave these people to their slow death. Where is the Red Cross, the UN’s International Organization for Migration and the UN refugee agency? Those organisations that operate even in war zones? That take food and water to the most dangerous criminals? Is Elina, 5, more dangerous or less worthy? She has epilepsy but no medicine. I met her in the forest with nine other Kurds, all without boots. They survived wars and airstrikes back home but may freeze to death in the Polish forest. During every pushback Polish and Belarusian officers take away everything: money, clothes and footwear. There was the group of nine women from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, probably trafficked. When I explained the situation to them, they just cried and cried . Or the Yazidi sisters, who escaped genocide in Sinjar, Iraq seven years ago, but are still trying to find a safe place. Or the boys from Yemen, speaking perfect English. Or the three gay men from Iran, desperate not to be sent back to Belarusian soldiers. We stay in touch. If they manage to hide their phones, we can communicate after a pushback. They share pictures and videos of Belarusian dogs. Show me bite wounds if we meet on the Polish side. They cry. They ask for advice. They don’t want to tell their families about their plight, but they need somebody to talk to. “The fifth pushback. At six, I’ll kill myself.” “I lost my son, he has asthma. [The] last time he called [was] three days ago. Do you know where he is?” “When do you arrive? Do you have water? Even a drop?” Subjected to a disinformation campaign, the refugees receive conflicting reports from Belarusian services, which distribute forms about the settling in Poland or Germany. This fosters hopes for a safe journey. But the real aim is to camp them on the Polish border to put pressure on the EU. Some disturbing reports suggest migrants are being forced to participate in violence as part of Belarusian attempts to provoke Polish officials. With the risk of an escalation of violence, we, the activists in the forests, would like to remind the world that refugees are not aggressors. They are hostages to the Lukashenko regime, which is using them for its agenda. Poles send me messages: “Where should I send warm and dark clothes?” “How is the situation on the border? Media shows us only videos by [the] Polish ministry or Belarusian authorities.” “I cry when I put my children to sleep. Please, write something that can help.” Dunja Mijatović, the Council of Europe’s commissioner for human rights, spent four days in Poland and came to the field with us. She said: “The greatest strength of the aid movement for refugees and refugees from the Poland-Belarus border are the inhabitants of the neighbouring towns – in the zone of emergency and next to it. It is their compassion and empathy that prolongs the life of people in the forest. Their courage and selflessness. Their good saves lives.” Of course, others see it differently: people helping on the border are “enemies of the nation”, “agents of Lukashenko”, “guilty of destroying European values”, “inviting terrorists here”. We are guilty of leaving water packs in the woods for the thirsty. We are guilty of sharing soup. Of putting shoes on cold feet that couldn’t move any more. If helping is illegal, do we even understand what crime is? • Anna Alboth is volunteer at Minority Rights Group • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:“What’s the earliest goal scored in a game that finished 1-0?” tweets AgaTieFan. This is a cracking question, and thanks to everyone who wrote in with suggestions and answers. In the spirit of Countdown, or possibly Richard Osman’s House of Games, we’ll go through the list in reverse order: 20 seconds Theo Walcott (QPR 0-1 Arsenal, Premier League, 2012-13). “It was especially sweet because already-relegated QPR had four ex-Spurs players in the team,” writes Rael Roberts, “and a couple of weeks later we ended up pipping Spurs to fourth place by just a point.” 19 seconds Joey Sleegers (FC Eindhoven 1-0 Jong AZ, Eerste Divisie, 2021-22). 15 seconds Steve Bould own goal (Sheffield Wednesday 1-0 Arsenal, Division One, 1989-90). 15 seconds: Scott Murray (Bristol City 1-0 Millwall, League One, 2006-07). 12 seconds: Ian Bogie (Port Vale 1-0 Stoke, Division One, 1995-96). 12 seconds: Bryan Hughes (Birmingham 1-0 Huddersfield, Division One, 1999-2000). 11 seconds: Byron Moore (AFC Wimbledon 0-1 Bristol Rovers, League One, 2016-17). 9.6 seconds: John Hewitt (Motherwell 0-1 Aberdeen, Scottish Cup, 1981-82). 9 seconds: Muhammet Demir (Gaziantep v Basaksehir, Turkish Super Lig 2021-22). “A couple of weeks ago, the striker scored against his former club,” reports Emre Ozturk. 9 seconds: Peter Lorimer (Vancouver Whitecaps 1-0 Malmo, Spring Cup, 1982). Lorimer’s goal, from inside his own half, would have been a worthy winner. But he was pipped by a more prosaic, if still well-taken, goal in Slovenia a few years ago … 8 seconds: Marcos Tavares (Maribor 1-0 Domzale, Slovenian PrvaLiga, 2016-17). Goalkeepers sent off in shootouts (redux) “In last season’s (Northern) Irish Cup semi-final between Crusaders and Larne, the Crusaders goalkeeper was sent off during the penalty shootout,” recalls William Hanna. “He was warned about encroaching, then yellow-carded for a second offence and then red-carded on the third. Have any other keepers suffer a similar fate?” Indeed they have, William. We first visited this subject way back in 2005 to remember the story of Botswana’s Modiri Marumo, who was dismissed during the Castle Cup clash against Malawi in 2003 after collecting two bookings during the shootout. Famously … Having been booked for time-wasting before Malawi scored their third spot-kick, Marumo reacted to a pat on the shoulder from opposite number Philip Nyasulu by punching him in the face and got a red card. Malawi went on to win 4-1 and reach the semi-finals. “I over-reacted in an exchange of words between myself and my counterpart,” admitted Marumo. More recently – in 2018 – the Republic of Ireland’s Under-17 European Championship quarter-final shootout against the Netherlands ended in acrimony when James Corcoran was sent off. As our report at the time explained: Referee Zbynek Proske issued Corcoran with a yellow card after he was penalised for coming off his line while saving Daishawn Redan’s penalty. The save would have levelled the scores at 4-4 and sent the shootout into sudden death. The yellow card was Corcoran’s second, and the 16-year-old was duly sent off. Teammate Oisin McEntee put his shirt and gloves on and went in goal to face the re-take, which Redan scored to send the Dutch through. But for sheer chaos, Orlando City’s MLS play-off win over New York City FC in 2019 takes the cake. Their keeper Pedro Gallese was shown a second yellow for encroachment during the shootout before replacement goalie Brian Rowe was deemed an illegal substitution and blocked from coming on. There was still time for a premature victory celebration and Orlando defender Rodrigo Schlegel saving the decisive penalty. Here’s the full MLS site rundown and highlights of it all. An Icelandic history lesson Last week, we asked if you had any more local, historical peculiarities to report. Kári Tulinius does … “The first Icelandic football championship was held in 1912, in what was meant to be a three-team single-match round robin, but ÍBV had to withdraw after suffering too many injuries, reportedly because the tournament was held on a gravel pitch, and ÍBV were used to playing on grass,” begins Kári. Since KR and Fram had drawn their match, they contested a final, with KR the victor (incidentally, the trophy was handed to the captain by my great-great-grandfather, Axel Tulinius, who was the chairman of the Icelandic Sports Associations). However, after a dispute over when to hold the 1913 tournament, only Fram registered for the competition. The same thing happened in 1914, so Fram were awarded the title both years. As far as I know, these are the only national football championships won by default in the world. ”Fram went on to successfully defend the title in 1915, 1916, 1917 and 1918, by which point it was a four-team tournament. Every game in the Icelandic championship was played on that same gravel pitch, Melavöllurinn, until 1958, when they played one game on grass in the newly-built Laugardalsvöllur, which they liked enough to gradually phase out Melavöllurinn from all competitions. The last cup final played there was in 1972, and the last time it was used in the league was the year after.” Do you have any more random stories of local footballing peculiarity? Or the use of gravel pitches at high levels? You know where to mail. Knowledge archive “Has a physio ever been sent off?” wondered Dave Griffiths in 2006. In 1989, the mild-mannered Gary Lewin managed to attract the ire of the ref during a pre-season friendly between Arsenal and Independiente in Miami. When Gus Caesar went down injured, Lewin – thinking he’d been given permission by the ref Paul Dominguez – ran on to treat him. Unfortunately, Dominguez saw this as a threat to his authority and banished Lewin to the bench. As it turned out, Lewin needn’t have bothered: Caesar was sent off shortly afterwards, but Arsenal still managed to win 2-1 and lift the coveted Zenith Challenge Trophy. Can you help? “Sort of a Christmassy question … has there ever been a game called off because of snow earlier in the season than the Burnley v Spurs game?” muses Alan Rogers. “Reading the obituary of Colin Flatt in the latest issue of Backpass reminded me that, back in 1967, he paid his own transfer fee (£200) to join Romford from Wisbech,” writes Chris Grant. “Unusual, but does anyone know of any others who’ve done that?” “Lazio and Udinese played out a 4-4 cracker recently,” notes Joe Holt. “Udinese made five substitutions, and another two of their starters were sent off, meaning only four of their starting XI finished the match. I’m wondering has a team ever finished a match (without it being abandoned) with fewer of its starting XI still on the field?” “Doncaster Rovers play at the Keepmoat Stadium, and have scored eight league goals there this season (plus two in the EFL Trophy),” reports Joe Reaney. “Last Tuesday, England Women scored 20 in the same venue. Has it ever happened that a season’s top scorers in a stadium were not the home team?” Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU. And be sure to send in any festive-themed ones too.Peter Dutton will not receive his full legal costs from refugee activist Shane Bazzi, who he successfully sued for defamation, because it would have been more appropriate to pursue the case in a lower court, the federal court has decided. Justice Richard White on Wednesday agreed with a bid by Bazzi’s lawyers to trim the costs down, ordering him to pay them as if the case had been run in the Queensland magistrates court. In November, the defence minister won his defamation case, with damages of $35,000, over a tweet labelling him a “rape apologist” which the court agreed did convey the defamatory imputation he “excuses rape”. Bazzi’s lawyers asked for the costs bill to be reduced, citing a discretion to do so if the win was worth less than $100,000 or the court decided the case could more suitably have been brought in another court or tribunal. Dutton’s lawyers argued his important national position as defence minister warranted seeking vindication of his reputation in the federal court. But the judge said it would not be appropriate to exercise the discretion more favourably to Dutton “simply because of the important national office he holds”. “All people are equal before the law irrespective of the position they hold,” he said. White also observed that “just because a case involves a national figure does not mean it is of national importance”. In June, the judge warned the parties the case was not among the court’s biggest and could be settled pre-trial, a warning he repeated with reference to the cost reduction rule at a hearing in November. White noted that Dutton had sent a concerns notice to Bazzi in March asking for an apology and a concession the tweet was without foundation and published with malice. The notice stated that even if Bazzi agreed to Dutton’s demands, the defence minister could push on with a case seeking to be “significantly compensated for the damage suffered by him”. The judge noted this invited Bazzi to “to fall on his sword” and still “face a damages claim”, which could not reasonably be regarded as a settlement offer. Dutton’s only settlement offer came four working days before the trial when almost all the costs had already been incurred, he found. White said the timing of the offer “concerned” him and Dutton’s lawyers had given “no explanation” as to why it wasn’t made earlier. The judge noted that settlement offer sought an apology, including for an imputation the court later found was not conveyed – that Dutton condones rape – and a retraction of subsequent criticism Bazzi made of Dutton for bringing the case. Bazzi made a settlement offers at mediation to drop the case with no order as to costs, a deed promising not to republish the imputation, and a statement that he did not intend the tweet to mean Dutton excused or condoned rape. Bazzi had already deleted the tweet. In September, Bazzi added an offer of an apology to Dutton “if anyone interpreted [the] tweet to mean Dutton excused or condoned rape”. White rejected Dutton’s arguments that Bazzi’s failure to accept the settlement offer was unreasonable, and found there were no “special circumstances” justifying Bazzi paying Dutton’s entire legal bill. The judge said the case was not unusually complex, likening it to matters dealt with in a magistrates or district court, and approved Bazzi’s application to reduce costs. He cited the “public policy” goal of encouraging parties to bring a case at the most appropriate level of the court hierarchy.A woman with cerebral palsy and a moderate intellectual disability nearly died when a bowel condition escalated catastrophically after support workers at her group home failed to follow her nutrition and care protocols properly, the disability royal commission has heard. The royal commission is examining matters of violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation in disability services, focusing on two disability group homes run by an NDIS provider. On Wednesday, the commission heard extensive evidence from Jennifer*, mother of Natalie*, who has cerebral palsy and a moderate intellectual disability. Natalie also uses a wheelchair, hearing aids and has glasses. She was described as “cheeky, sociable” and “very trusting”. Jennifer gave evidence via a written statement that was read aloud by counsel assisting. In it, she detailed her concerns regarding management of Natalie’s health, her finances, and allegations that Natalie was indecently assaulted by one of her support workers in a group home run by Life Without Barriers. In 2020, Natalie had surgery to remove a calcified faecal mass in her rectum that had changed the shape of her uterus, possibly permanently, and was on the verge of rupturing her bowel, Jennifer said. Natalie had bowel issues prior to moving into the group home in 2012, and had been taken to hospital with a bowel obstruction early in her time there. Jennifer said she was informed that Natalie was in hospital on that previous occasion only when she was called by Natalie’s father. Jennifer said she called an LWB staff member to ask why she hadn’t been informed that Natalie was being taken to hospital. “She said she didn’t tell me because she didn’t want to tell me,” Jennifer said in her statement. Natalie was given mealtime management, nutrition and exercise plans by health professionals to help manage her issues. Life Without Barriers staff were supposed to keep records of her daily food and fluid intake, as well as her bowel movements. On 9 March 2020, Natalie was taken to the hospital emergency department by a non LWB carer. She was later operated on. The family was told that Natalie had been close to having a ruptured bowel and sepsis. “The doctors also said they were not sure how things had gotten so bad with respect to Natalie’s bowels,” Jennifer said. “Natalie nearly died because of this incident.” LWB staff could not produce more than five days’ worth of Natalie’s bowel charts from the months prior to the hospital visit, the inquiry was told. “I believe that the LWB staff did not manage her properly, despite me raising the importance of her bowel management with disability support workers and the team leaders on a number of occasions,” Jennifer said. Jennifer said she had given explicit directions to Life Without Barriers upon Natalie’s entry into the group home that her daughter’s personal care ought to be performed only by female staff, as that was what Natalie preferred. Jennifer later discovered that Life Without Barriers was not adhering to this request. In August 2015, Jennifer was told a male support worker had been charged with the assault and sexual assault of Natalie. Jennifer said she understood that Life Without Barriers had only reported the alleged assault on Natalie to police after they had conducted their own internal investigation. The male support worker was found not guilty in September 2017. He was later dismissed from Life Without Barriers. After the alleged assault, Natalie developed anxiety and would lose her temper in a very uncharacteristic way. During a later counselling session, the counsellor told Natalie that she would never have to see the male disability support worker who had allegedly assaulted her again. “[Natalie] started chanting ‘never, ever, ever’. Natalie is mostly non-verbal and had never done anything like that before. Anna [Natalie’s sister] and I started crying because at that point we knew what had happened had deeply affected Natalie emotionally,” Jennifer said. Over the nearly 10 years that Natalie was in the home, Jennifer said she attempted to raise concerns repeatedly about what she perceived as failures in Natalie’s care and inappropriate actions of the staff. These included the management of Natalie’s finances, which LWB had effective control over for three years, as they alone had access to her keycard. “LWB was in practical terms controlling her money,” said Jennifer. “Sometimes, if Natalie wanted to purchase something or go out I would tell her to ask LWB staff to give her some of her money. Natalie would tell me that she had already asked, but that they would not give it to her. “I’m not really sure how LWB was using Natalie’s money. I was still paying for many of Natalie’s lunches out, pharmacy bills and new clothes.” Jennifer said she made many complaints to Life Without Barriers during the period Natalie lived there. “The only time LWB appeared to take any of my complaints or concerns seriously was around the time that the indecent and sexual assault allegations concerning Natalie came to light in 2015,” Jennifer said. Life Without Barriers will give evidence later in the inquiry. * Names are pseudonyms used by the commission for privacy reasons Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636Queensland Liberal MP Andrew Laming has challenged federal government vaccine advisers over state-imposed mandates, saying a more “nuanced” approach is needed to address the risk of Covid-19 transmission. But in response to a barrage of questions about the proportionality of state public health orders from the Bowman MP, representatives from the Australian technical advisory group on immunisation (Atagi) likened the rationale for vaccine protection to a “hard hat on a construction site”. The issue of state vaccine mandates continues to divide the Coalition, with Liberals Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic withholding support from government legislation over the issue, and other government MPs publicly backing freedom protests across the country. In a hearing of parliament’s employment and education committee on Wednesday, Laming questioned representatives of Atagi on what he called a “farrago” of vaccine mandates across a range of different sectors across the country. Posing an “omnibus question” that canvassed mandates across various sectors, including education, the public service, real estate, hospitality, finance and hair and beauty, Laming asked “whether it was possible to start to search for evidence that might inform a more nuanced approach in each of those sectors”. In response, Atagi’s co-chair Allen Cheng outlined the risk for workers in particular settings, saying there were three key reasons for getting vaccinated – the prevention of contracting the disease, the prevention of severe Covid, and prevention of transmission. “I think what you’re trying to get at is about the proportionality of vaccine mandates in each of these specific settings, and that is properly a matter for jurisdictions to consider in their own context, and particularly in their own legal framework,” Cheng said. He said preventing severe Covid infections and limiting transmission “can be the rationale for a mandate”. “For example … for someone who is at an occupational risk of having exposure to infection, so staff on a Covid ward for example, that’s an occupational health and safety consideration, it’s like having a hardhat on a construction site as part of a suite of protections.” He said limiting transmission was important particularly for elderly people in aged care and “therefore to have a vaccine for the people that they come into contact with is reasonable to protect both the worker, as well as the person that they’re looking after, caring for, in that setting”. “So I’m not sure that I can answer your question specifically about the validity or proportionality of employment vaccine mandates in each of those settings, but would note that that the vaccine does have an effect and one of those effects is to reduce the transmission of Sars-CoV-2.” On the public service, Laming suggested there was a need to “tease out the relative risks to see whether our recommendations around encouraging or mandating vaccines might be able to be more nuanced than simply a decision that’s public service wide”. Laming also questioned Cheng on how reliant the group had been on overseas data in assessing the risks and benefits of vaccines in Australia, and asked how it would assess vaccine response to new variants, such as Omicron. In response, Cheng said the task was difficult, but the group was constantly assessing direct and indirect lines of evidence which “give us a clue as to what we think the vaccine effectiveness will be”. Moncrieff MP Angie Bell also asked the Atagi representatives about vaccine mandates, which have become a hot-button issue across the country, asking “why the state mandates for businesses are necessary if 80% to 90% of the population is vaccinated”. “I don’t think that’s Atagi’s role to answer that question,” Atagi co-chair Chris Blyth said. “We provide technical advice, and we believe in the benefits and safety of vaccinations but how they are implemented and rolled out is absolutely up to the state’s public health orders. “Atagi has not provided a recommendation for mandates at any time point.”And with that, we’ll wrap up the blog today. Here’s everything that went down today: Australia will impose a diplomatic boycott on Beijing Winter Olympic games. Prime minister Scott Morrison said George Christensen “should quietly go into retirement” after appearing on a far-right podcast. The PM also said he suspects former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian may not run for the blue-ribbon seat of Warringah at the forthcoming federal election. The prime minister’s office condemned the actions of a staffer working for federal Liberal MP Andrew Laming, calling his choice to dress up as Kyle Rittenhouse “completely inappropriate”. NSW recorded 403 new Covid cases and one death, Victoria recorded 1,312 new cases and five deaths. The ACT recorded eight new cases and one death. South Australia also recorded three new Covid cases today. Victoria recorded its first case of the Omicron variant today, with two further cases awaiting genomic sequencing. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath said the state had found two lineages of the Omicron variant in returned travellers, both currently in hotel quarantine. The TGA has provided provisional approval for Moderna booster for over 18s, with approval from Atagi still required. Novak Djokovic has been included in the Australian Open’s draw, amid speculation about the Serbian’s eligibility to enter the country. Australia has reported another annual drop in the number of registered births, with a 3.7% decline in 2020 from the previous year to 294,369 new bubs. Junkee Media, publishers of Junkee, has been bought by the RACAT Group, a digital publishing business headed by media entrepreneur Piers Grove. A $4bn offshore windfarm in Victoria could allow the Alcoa Portland aluminium smelter to go completely green. Australian power company Alinta Energy is hoping to build the windfarm off the coast of Victoria, with a 500 sq km patch being considered for the 1,000MW windfarm, dubbed Spinifex. Alcoa’s Portland smelter is the states largest energy consumer, and the hopes are the windfarm would allow it to draw its power from 100% renewable energy. You can read more on the story from Royce Kurmelovs at the link below: The Victorian government earlier today announced it would invest $16.3m into youth mental health infrastructure. The Andrews government will work towards providing one-on-one mental health support to young people, saying that more than 560 additional Victorians between 12 and 25 years old will be helped by mobile outreach teams. The hopes are that mobile teams will meet young people where they feel comfortable, to reach them instead of asking them to seek services themselves. Deputy premier and mental health minister, James Merlino, said the investment reflected the challenges facing young people, especially with the disruption caused by the pandemic. I want every young Victorian who is struggling with their mental health to know that support is available. This is a profound investment in young Victorians with complex needs – with outreach support to make sure nobody falls through the cracks of our mental health system, no matter what their life circumstances. Western Australian premier Mark McGowan has dismissed the idea his state needs to rebuild its reputation with the east coast, labelling any such ideas as a “rubbish argument” perpetuated by commentators “trying to find column inches and create stories”. Speaking to reporters earlier today, McGowan was bullish about his state’s popularity outside of its border, after two years of strict border closures: I think this is all a rubbish argument to be frank, that somehow we have to rebuild relations with the east and so forth. It’s just people trying to fill column inches and create stories. We carry Australia. I know over east I don’t think they get that. A lot of the journalists over east, a lot of the media commentators or politicians, they don’t get it. A lot of them haven’t been here, they wouldn’t have a clue about Western Australia. That’s the fact, and it’s always been that way. So we’ll continue to support them, we’ll continue to carry them, but we don’t really expect appreciation because there never has been anyway. He also addressed the loss of the fifth Ashes test, which was stripped of Perth due to border closures, saying cricket had been unwilling to abide by the states rules: We didn’t want to have different rules for cricketers to everyone else in the community. Cricket didn’t want to abide by that, that was their choice. We managed to work through the issues with football, basketball, a range of sporting codes over the course of the last few years that allowed them to play their sports here with appropriate quarantine. Unfortunately it didn’t work for international cricket. Australia’s fertility rate has dropped again, with new data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics showing a decrease of 3.7% from 2019. It resulted in registered births dropping below 300,000 for the first time in 14 years. The data revealed longer term trends such as a reduction in the number of younger women having children, while the number of those aged between 40 and 44 giving birth has tripled in recent decades. The decline in the fertility rate was largest among women aged 15-19 years, decreasing by nearly two-thirds to 7.8 per 1,000 women. Babies born to women aged 40-44 almost tripled, to 15.2 per 1,000 women. You can read more in Peter Hannam’s story, linked below: On the topic of Djokovic, I just wanted to pull some lines from Elias Visontay’s story, linked below, with Tennis Australia completely denying they would be seeking an exemption for the world number 1, and sticking to their decision to exclude any unvaccinated players or staff. Any suggestion that Tennis Australia is seeking ‘loopholes’ within this process is simply untrue. Adjudicating on medical exemptions is the domain of independent medical experts. We are not in a position to influence this process and nor would we. Any application for a medical exemption must follow strict government guidelines based on Atagi (Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation) clinical advice. This is the same process that applies to any person wanting to enter Australia. Novak Djokovic has been included in the Australian Open’s draw, amid speculation about the Serbian’s eligibility to enter the country. Djokovic’s name features in the Australian Open 2022 main draw player list released by Tennis Australia this afternoon, hours after the organisation hit back at suggestions it was seeking to exploit a “loophole” in border entry rules so unvaccinated players can compete in the January tournament. The world No 1 has repeatedly refused to reveal his vaccination status, and on Wednesday morning, Victoria’s deputy premier, James Merlino, responded to a report that the world No 1 had the backing of Tennis Australia – the organisers of the Open – to apply for an exemption on medical grounds. “My view on this is really clear and really simple,” Merlino said on Wednesday. “Everyone’s looking forward to the Australian Open and everyone who will attend – spectators, players, officials, staff – everyone is expected to be fully vaccinated.” “They’re the rules. Medical exemptions are just that – it’s not a loophole for privileged tennis players … It is a medical exemption in exceptional circumstances if you have an acute medical condition,” Merlino said. Tennis Australia, in a statement released later on Wednesday that did not mention Djokovic by name, said “all players, participants and staff at the Australian Open have to be vaccinated”. “Any suggestion that Tennis Australia is seeking ‘loopholes’ within this process is simply untrue. Adjudicating on medical exemptions is the domain of independent medical experts. We are not in a position to influence this process and nor would we.” On Tuesday, Djokovic was announced as part of the Serbia team competing in the ATP Cup in Sydney in early January, fuelling speculation he could seek to enter the country via New South Wales, and may seek a medical exemption to circumvent the rules that apply to unvaccinated travellers. You can read more about Djokovic and vaccination status for the Australian Open here: Bonza, the new ultra-low-cost airline set to take to Australian skies from mid next year, has unveiled plans to grow to a fleet of eight aircraft within its first 12 months of operating. Speaking at the Centre for Aviation (Capa) summit in Sydney on Wednesday, Bonza chief executive Tim Jordan explained the airline – which plans to establish new routes between larger cities and regional holiday destinations and mostly avoid flights between capital cities – will operate eight Boeing 737-8 MAX planes across 40 different routes in its first year. Jordan said about 40 regional airports had expressed an interest in being among Bonza’s initial destinations, with flights set to begin in the second quarter of 2022 pending regulatory approval. Budgie smugglers and bikinis bearing the airline’s purple branding will be among merchandise sold on board each Bonza flight, Jordan said, noting he expects an onboard atmosphere shaped by “holidaymakers, bachelor parties, leisure and fun”. Jordan said the airline will achieve ultra-low-cost fares by only flying three or four frequencies per week on routes that aren’t currently operated by other carriers, and will target only leisure travellers. “(We’ll be) connecting points A and C without an inconvenient stop at B,” he said. He said the first destinations would be regional councils and airports who can see the “bigger picture” in drawing in new domestic tourists, suggesting Bonza would be seeking to negotiate cheaper airport fees. Jordan, in a discussion about the benefits of the under-construction western Sydney airport, also raised the idea of opening up Bankstown airport – a metropolitan airport in Sydney that caters to flight schools and charter operations – to more passenger operations to become the city’s third airport. “The more airports the better. If there could be three airports in Sydney, beautiful. Beautiful absolutely,” he said. You can read more about Bonza here: Richard Marles, deputy opposition leader and shadow employment minister is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, and is having an interesting conversation on vaccine mandates. He was first asked what he made of the anti-vaccination protests in Melbourne, and how Labor would “engage” with the protesters: People have a right to express their view in a free society. We obviously acknowledge that. I do think it’s important that within politics we engage with this. Having said that, at least some of the demonstrations have occurred in a way which certainly causes me anxiety. The exercising of free speech needs to be done in a way which is peaceful and civil and obviously when you are walking down Spring Street with gallows, that does not meet the criteria and there is absolutely no place for that and that kind of protest should be called out. In terms of the substance of the issue, vaccines is what gets us to the other side of the pandemic. Vaccines are the pathway to getting back to ... We know that based on science but then there is the right. Marles is then asked his thoughts on vaccine mandates in the workplace, and uses the question to condemn the leadership of the government during the rollout: When you think about vaccine policy in the workplace, if I can put it in those terms, the industrial relations, the workplace is a measure a federal responsibility. The federal government has essentially said it does not seek to go into that space. I think that is a failure of leadership. But the point I really want to make is the state as a government needs to, and so the thing I really support at the end of the day, is the right for governments, in this case state governments, to make orders in respect of public health. That is what they have done. I think they have struck the balance in the right way in Victoria, with respect to vaccine mandates and around the country, and so I very much support what they do. But the state governments have done. In that sense, I do not agree with those protesting against them. In what is becoming increasingly common, thunderstorms are forecast for Sydney (again), in addition to potential flash flooding, hail and damaging winds: Brisbane - the host city of the 2032 Olympic Games - says it will not send civic representatives to Beijing. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, earlier said state officials would abide by the federal diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Beijing Winter Games. A Brisbane City Council spokesman said: We will follow the State Government’s approach to sending representatives to the Beijing Winter Olympics. Good luck to all of the Australian athletes. The prime minister’s office has condemned the actions of a staffer working for federal Liberal MP Andrew Laming, calling their choice to dress up as Kyle Rittenhouse, the teenager who was last month acquitted on all charges after shooting dead two Black Lives Matter protesters last year, for a delayed Halloween party as “completely inappropriate”. Today the Guardian revealed that electoral officer Barclay McGain – who was sacked (and later rehired) by Lamming over a controversial schoolies video that denigrated Indigenous Australians – had posted a photo of himself on Facebook holding a gel blaster gun that bears resemblance to an assault rifle, dressed as US teen Kyle Rittenhouse on the night he killed two men during protests for racial justice in Wisconsin last year. Rittenhouse was last month cleared of all charges related to these deaths and the injury of another man after his lawyers argued he acted in self-defence. A federal government spokesman said McGain behaviour was “completely inappropriate and the prime minister’s office has contacted Mr Laming to raise its serious concerns and options for further action”. The employment of electoral staff is the responsibility of individual MPs, and while McGain used to be a member of the Liberal party he resigned after being suspended in relation to the schoolies video. When contacted by Guardian Australia, McGain said he was “not particularly worried” that the costume would affect his employment status, as it was outside work hours and Rittenhouse had been found not guilty. He said that costume was for a delayed Halloween party, was designed to entertain people and that “The notion that I was impersonating a murderer or glorifying a murderer, I just don’t think it stacks up.” In the 2009 schoolies video, McGain interviewed school leavers about whether the Australian flag should be changed and was seen laughing when one school leaver said: “I mean we’ve got to stop celebrating a culture that couldn’t even invent the bloody wheel for God’s sake. We’ve got to start enjoying and living in western culture.” You can read the full coverage of the story below: Federal health minister Greg Hunt has announced the TGA has approved Moderna booster shots for anyone over the age of 18. It still needs approval from Atagi, but Hunt has welcomed the decision: Australians will have two options for boosters very, very shortly. I think this is another important step – every day we are making new strides, new progress with the vaccine program. We have now reached 93% of Australians with a first dose, 88.5% of Australians with a second dose, 580,000 Australians with a booster, and over 99% of those 60 and over have had a first dose. But the booster program is fundamentally important ... Inevitably there will be more variations, we know booster will keep us safe. South Australia has recorded three new Covid cases today, a man in his 60s and two women in their 30s and 50s. Of the three cases, one is locally acquired infection, a close contact linked to the Norwood cluster. Another acquired their infection interstate, while the last case acquired their infection overseas, and has been in hotel quarantine since their arrival. The Chinese embassy has released a statement on the Australian government’s decision to not send any officials to the Beijing Olympics. The statement bemoans the decision, quotes an old saying and blames Australia for the tense relationship: The Chinese embassy in Australia noticed that today the Australian side announced that its officials wouldn’t attend the Beijing Winter Olympics, and also noticed that Australian Olympic Committee president shared information on Australian athletes’ participation in the Beijing Winter Olympics not long ago. We wish the Australian athletes excellent performance at the Winter Olympics and believe they will also witness a streamlined, safe and splendid Olympics in China. According to Olympic rules, dignitaries are invited by their respective National Olympic Committee (NOC) to attend the Olympic Games. It is up to the NOC to decide whether to extend invitations or not. “Mountains can not stop the river from flowing into the sea.” Australia’s success at the Beijing Winter Olympics depends on the performance of Australian athletes, not on the attendance of Australian officials, and the political posturing by some Australian politicians. As we all know, the blame for the current predicament of China-Australia relations lies squarely on the Australian side. China once again urges the Australian side to take practical measures to create favourable conditions for improving bilateral relations. The Australian side’s statement that it will not send officials to the Beijing Winter Olympics runs counter to its publicly pronounced expectation to improve China-Australia relations. Tennis Australia have hit back at suggestions they are seeking to exploit a “loophole” in strict border entry rules so unvaccinated players can compete in the upcoming Australian Open, amid speculation about Novak Djokovic’s ability to enter the country. On Wednesday morning, Victoria’s deputy premier, James Merlino, responded to a report that Djokovic had the backing of Tennis Australia – the organisers of the Open – to apply for an exemption on medical grounds after repeatedly refusing to reveal his vaccination status. Merlino said: They’re the rules. Medical exemptions are just that - it’s not a loophole for privileged tennis players ... It is a medical exemption in exceptional circumstances if you have an acute medical condition. Government officials have been adamant for months that only fully vaccinated players, their entourages, staff and fans will be granted entry to Melbourne Park for the season’s first grand slam, from January 17-30. However Djokovic, the world No.1, was this week announced as part of the Serbia team that would compete in the ATP Cup in Sydney in early January, fuelling speculation he could seek to enter the country via New South Wales and may seek an medical exemption to circumvent the harsh rules that apply to unvaccinated travellers. Tennis Australia, in a statement released later on Wednesday that did not mention Djokovic by name, said “all players, participants and staff at the Australian Open have to be vaccinated”. Any suggestion that Tennis Australia is seeking “loopholes” within this process is simply untrue. Adjudicating on medical exemptions is the domain of independent medical experts. We are not in a position to influence this process and nor would we. Labor senators Penny Wong and Don Farrell have released a statement backing the government’s decision to not send officials and dignitaries to the Beijing Winter Olympics. We hold deep concerns about ongoing human rights abuses in China, including towards Uyghurs and other ethnic and religious minorities, and about athlete safety given questions about the treatment of tennis player Peng Shuai. The Australian government must ensure out team is supported by embassy staff on the ground. Going back to Perrottet, and in a very Sydney discussion he is asked if he really will do something about the Cahill Expressway, which he says he wants to turn into a walkway: We’re knocking down the 70 structures that lurk at the back of Macquarie Street which really disconnect the built environment of the city to the greenery of the Domain and the garden so that impedes an access and it slows down. The reality is beauty deals culture and for too long those older people, your generation in the 60s and 70s, ruined many aspects of our great city and it is the millennials’ role to fix it and as a premier I will. Now, unfortunately, the cost of the Cahill Expressway in tearing it down is pretty substantive and the biggest mistake was that when Paul Keating was offering cash to John Faye to actually do it, he should have done it then and now we would have a much greater Circular Quay. I will commit to a great party on the Cahill Expressway, between announcing the budget this year from two years onwards as we transform the Cahill Expressway ... and eventually when the tunnel comes in, you could dispense with the Cahill Expressway and potentially have one of the great walks in the world from the Cahill Expressway from the Quay or Macquarie Street to Barangaroo. Victoria Health has confirmed it has recorded the state’s first case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Authorities say genomic sequencing found the case, which is in hotel quarantine at the moment. It comes as two other cases are undergoing genomic sequencing to determine if they have the new variant. Both the cases are in the community, sparking concern the variant could be spreading. None of these cases are linked to international travel and their source of acquisition is under investigation. The Department has interviewed the cases and is taking a conservative approach to the designation of their contacts, including in non-household settings. Perrottet is then asked about whether his proposed reforms include wanting states to have more of a say on international relations: As I learnt early on as Premier - I think within a week and said, “We’re getting red rid of hotel quarantine,” I was quickly told by the Prime Minister that he’s the one that controls the borders and I was put back in my place. But we were all impacted by those borders being closed. Our businesses in New South Wales are impacted by labour shortages in this state right now. Many people who rely on international students - our largest service export and our second-largest export overall - there are tens of thousands of people who rely on that great industry here in New South Wales to provide for their families. So we do have an interest in our trading partners. We do have an interest in China. Because it is a significant market in New South Wales, particularly in relation to students going forward. So I wouldn’t see it as an area that would be at the top of the list in terms of the other issues that are more substantive, like health and education. But what we have learnt through the pandemic is that matters in relation to immigration, leading to skills and labour shortage in this state, are substantive and need to be addressed. The government website where Australians stuck overseas throughout the pandemic could register for assistance to return home is being shut down. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade register was initially set up in 2020 to help Australians and permanent residents who became stranded overseas access commercial and government assisted flights into Australia. On its website, Dfat explains the assistance portal is being closed to new registrations because of international travel relaxations and the end to hotel quarantine for vaccinated travellers that came into effect in some states from November. “Following the changes to international travel that came into effect on 1 November 2021, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Covid-19 Registration portal is no longer open for new registrations,” the website states. “This temporary portal was established in the context of Australia’s Covid-19 border settings. The process of expressing an interest in seeking consular assistance has reverted to pre-Covid settings.” Tens of thousands of residents were registered for assistance at any given time over the past year, with the number fluctuating due to progressive changes in border rules and strict hotel quarantine arrival caps. The number of Australians registered as stranded with the government is understood to have peaked at about 45,000, which occurred when Australian states were struggling to contain Delta outbreaks and redirected hotel quarantine staff to the local front line. Australians who had already registered for assistance via the portal can continue to access their accounts. First question to Perrottet is a juicy one: does he agree wth federal MP Jason Falinski, who this week said that most people in New South Wales have discounted the Icac? Does he intend to overhaul it? Has he lost faith? I don’t agree with his assessment. And I think it’s incredibly important that we have strong integrity agencies in our state. Now, I believe the Icac here in New South Wales plays a very important role in preventing corruption and uncovering corruption. Now, there’s probably different levels of that. But ultimately, what we should be doing, particularly in the public, to Jason’s observation, is instilling confidence, not taking it away. There will always be issues from time to time ... in relation to any area of government. But ultimately, I think where the commission is today plays an important role. Always has, and has a strong role to play in the future of our state. Returning to Perrottet, he’s maintained his thesis on the need for states to work together, but shifted to making the case for reform – specifically, reform on GST distribution. He laid out two areas – education and health – both hit hard by the pandemic. But the core of his speech was centred on the need to rethink financial relationships between the states and the commonwealth: Fiscal financial relations in this country stand in the way of good reform. Fixing this problem is long overdue. But we must have the will to look past politics. Politics is what gets you the Western Australian GST deal, where both sides of federal politics continue to openly support it. This is disappointing, to say the least. The distribution of GST is supposed to broadly equalise service delivery and infrastructure across the states. Specifically by taking into account each state’s own revenue-raising capacity, understood as the principle of horizontal fiscal equalisation. But this year’s Western Australian budget made an absolute mockery of that principle. When states like Victoria and New South Wales have had their budgets hit hard by the pandemic, giving WA more GST this year was totally unjustifiable. And that’s why, when all this happened, the Western Australian premier went on the offensive, warning other states off his cash even before we’d become aware of it. Now, I might not have handled that situation in the most diplomatic way, calling him “Mark McGollum”, but sometimes you need a bit of colour to draw attention to the travesty. And the fact is, the current GST settings are a piecemeal arrangement. They are not fit for our federation in the long run, and our people deserve betterment so let’s just get on with fixing it properly. Earlier today Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath said the state had found two lineages of the Omicron Covid variant in returned travellers – both currently in hotel quarantine. Infectious disease physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University Peter Collignon said the two lineages are created by the Omicron variant having different genes. “It is mainly at the moment an issue about the technicalities on how they are picked up,” he said. “If the genes have been deleted, and there’s another lineage where the gene hasn’t been deleted, you may not think it is Omicron when in fact it is.” While they may behave differently, there was no evidence yet that the vaccines wouldn’t work on both lineages, he said. “We don’t have enough data for Omicron, let alone sublineages of it. It’s a technical issue about how you might classify it.” Catherine Bennett, the chair of epidemiology at Deakin University, said it was important to understand that this “was not new” and that every variant had different genes. “70% or so of Omicron variants don’t have the S-gene dropout. We have variation within strains,” Bennett said. She said the S-gene “was interesting” because it could be picked up by the PCR test - which meant health authorities knew it was an Omicron case quicker. “The pity is, we miss out on the PCR screening when it would have been nice to distinguish it,” she said. “It just takes longer to do, instead of having a result in six hours, it means you have to wait the extra day. “If they’re connected cases then we would expect it to be Omicron or Delta. It’s really about what happens on our borders, we should be treating everyone as if they have Omicron.” The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, says her government’s officials will abide by a federal diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Brisbane is the chosen host of the 2032 Summer games and it had been expected that Queensland officials - including Palaszczuk - would attend as guests of the International Olympic Committee to assist in ongoing preparations. Palaszczuk said in a statement: Attendance of government representatives at the Beijing Winter Olympics is a matter for the federal government. The federal government’s decision includes Queensland. We wish our athletes every success. So Perrottet’s thesis today is a relatively interesting one – that state governments should take a more proactive and collective approach to both working together, and towards federation reform. He cites the “success” of the Board of Treasurers as a blueprint for the reinvigoration of the Council for the Australian Federation, which he says last met in 2018. Now, I’m fairly certain it’s met since then, and I’m told apparently that we’re actually meeting again tomorrow. But the lack of visible action says a lot about the prominence of this body in the life of our nation. My priority will be to enhance the council’s standing as a vehicle for proactive, state-driven leadership and reform from the frontline. And I’ll work with my fellow premiers and chief ministers to make this happen. This is not about fighting the commonwealth. It’s about working constructively and bringing more to the table, including at the national cabinet. In my experience, the Board of Treasurers actually improved the working relationship between the New South Wales treasury and the commonwealth treasury, because there is now an expectation that serious, considered ideas are being put forward. Usually, with the buy-in of multiple states so they deserve serious consideration. A reinvigorated Premiers’ Council can have the same effect. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, with thanks to the always brilliant Matilda Boseley for her shift this morning. We begin with NSW premier Dominic Perrottet, who is speaking at the National Press Club this afternoon. He is discussing the “future of federation in a post-Covid world”, beginning by pointing out the pandemic had acted as a “stress test” for the federation. It has demonstrated its many strengths and obvious weaknesses in a way that is tangible to our people. So now, whilst the results are fresh in our mind, we have a rare opportunity and, I believe, an obligation to apply the lessons that we have learnt and make our federation stronger. What the pandemic has put beyond doubt is the importance of strong states to our nation’s fortune. With that, I shall hand you over to the fantastic Mostafa Rachwani who will bring you all the updates from the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s National Press Club speech. Thanks. I hate this. Australia has reported another annual drop in the number of registered births, with a 3.7% drop in 2020 from the previous year to 294,369 bubs. That was a bigger decrease than the 3% decline in 2019. As Matilda Boseley, your blog host, noted earlier this year, 2021 may snap the decrease in births as Covid conceptions kick in, so to speak. Demographers will be crawling over today’s data but some longstanding trends seem clear. The total fertility rate dropped to a record low of 1.58 babies per woman, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics. ABS director of demography Beidar Cho said the low rate may have been linked to the first year of the pandemic: The record low total fertility rate can be attributed to fewer births and birth registrations in most jurisdictions in a year marked by COVID-19 disruptions. The median age for parents is also at a record high, at 33.6 years for males and 31.6 years for females. The two-year age gap between females and males has been pretty much steady since the ABS began releasing figures for both genders in 1975. The total fertility rate has gradually declined since 1990, when it was 1.9 babies per woman. The biggest reduction has been for those aged 15-19 with a two-thirds drop to 7.8 per 1,000 women over the period. The rate for women aged 40-44 has gone the other way, tripling to 15.2 per 1,000. For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, the total fertility rate was 2.25 births per woman, compared with 2.32 in 2019. You can read our full coverage on the newly announced Australian diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympic Games below: Prime minister Scott Morrison says he suspects former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian may not run for the blue-ribbon seat of Warringah at the forthcoming federal election. Berejiklian, who stood down as a result of an Icac investigation which is yet to deliver its findings, is being lobbied by federal Liberals to run for Tony Abbott’s former seat, to win it back from independent MP Zali Steggall. In recent days, a string of senior Liberals, including Abbott and former prime minister John Howard, have publicly backed Berejiklian to make the switch to federal politics despite the incomplete Icac investigation. A Guardian Essential poll published on Tuesday found NSW voters were sympathetic to the former premier, with most agreeing with Morrison’s criticism of the anti-corruption probe. You can read the full report below: A man in his 80s with Covid-19 died yesterday in the Australian Capital Territory, taking the territory’s total death toll during the pandemic to 12. This comes as the ACT records eight new Covid-19 cases overnight. A pause on the return of visa holders to Australia will likely end on schedule next week, the prime minister has indicated, reports AAP. Scott Morrison said it was likely visa holders would be allowed to enter from overseas without the need for a travel exemption from December 15. Their return was delayed by two weeks from the initial date of 1 December, following concerns about the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Morrison told reporters in Sydney on this morning: All of the information we’re receiving points to that, it was a pause. The Australian government will keep moving forward and I think that’s really important. The government estimates more than 233,000 visa holders will be allowed to come into the country under the border reopening plan. While the pause was initiated following worries about the Omicron variant, experts have indicated the new strain causes milder symptoms despite being more transmissible. The prime minister said vaccination rates in every state and territory would likely pass 80% fully vaccinated by the end of the week, while national rates were also set to reach new milestones. We are going into the end of this week where we are going to be very close to hitting 90 per cent double dose vaccination around the country. That is an extraordinary achievement for Australians. Back to Queensland for a second. The health minister, Yvette D’Ath, the second case of the Omicron variant detected in Queensland – a person in hotel quarantine who travel from South Africa – is actually a separate lineage of the virus to the other case. Unlike the conventional Omicron variant, it doesn’t have the “S-gene drop out”. Deputy chief health officer Peter Aitken says this strain lineage will be classified as “Omicron-like”. We now have Omicron and Omicron-like. It’s a reminder to us all that as we open our borders this doesn’t mean that the Covid journey has finished – in many ways Covid’s journey is just starting. Some more flood warnings to note in NSW: Also, I think something big has just happened in the Test cricket! Australia just got a wicket on their first ball against England and from the looks of it on Twitter this is a big deal! If you want more knowledgeable updates about those dudes in full formal dinner attire out on the grass you can follow along on the fantastic Geoff Lemon’s Ashes live blog below: Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath has confirmed that a Nigerian man in hotel quarantine in Cairns is infected with the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Good news for Queensland. The state has recorded no new local cases today, despite fears that a small cluster on the Gold Coast could grow. We should be hearing from the Queensland health minister with a Covid-19 update in about ten minutes. This press conference was delayed by two hours, although it’s unclear if this is due to any big breaking news or just logistical reasons. Stay tuned to find out! Here is the clip of Scott Morrison discussing George Christensen that I mentioned earlier. Shayna Jack is on the verge of returning to competitive swimming after serving her two-year drug ban. Jack has entered five events at the Queensland state championships in Brisbane which start on Saturday and her first competitive swim will be on Monday in a heat of the 100m freestyle. The 23-year-old has also entered the 50m freestyle, 50m backstroke, 1,500m freestyle and 50m butterfly. Jack was initially banned for four years after testing positive to Ligandrol on 26 June 2019, almost three weeks before the world championships in South Korea. The Queenslander appealed her ban to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which reduced her suspension to two years, finding Jack did not knowingly ingest the substance. You can read the full report below: Big battery news for Melbourne: Junkee Media, publishers of youth website Junkee, has been bought by the RACAT Group, a digital publishing business headed by media entrepreneur Piers Grove, one of the men behind the Betoota Advocate. “It will be a huge thrill and responsibility to lead Junkee in the months and years to come,” Grove said. “Our mission at RACAT is to own and operate media companies that in one way or another add something to our world and Junkee does exactly that. “We are huge fans of Junkee’s brands, its loyal audiences and the huge array of content it delivers every day. We value the exceptional team that make Junkee the go-to news and entertainment source for millions of young Australians every month. RACAT’s portfolio includes Australian Geographic, game developer and publisher Runaway Play as well as Northern Pictures, the production company behind TV shows Love on the Spectrum, Hardball and Lukewarm Sex. Junkee Media was bought for $11m in 2016 by Out of Home media company oOh!. All editorial and sales staff will move across to the new owners. Reporter: Coalition members have now appeared in US shows that are riddled with conspiracy theories. Are they undermining public health measures in Australia and for what gain? Morrison: Well, I don’t think it’s a good idea to promote what they’re saying by constantly drawing it to people’s attention. I’m not seeking to do that. I don’t agree with them. We are going into the end of this week where we are going to be very close to hitting 90% double-dose vaccination around the country and hopefully, by the end of the week, every state and territory will have gone past the 80% double dose vaccination mark. That is an extraordinary achievement for Australians and I’m very proud of Australians that we have one of the lowest death rates in the world from Covid, we have one of the strongest advanced economies, coming through this pandemic, and we now have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. OK, we are jumping around a bit, but the prime minister has been asked about the National MP George Christensen’s appearance on the InfoWars webcast. Christensen has already announced he will not contest the next election and the prime minister said he “should quietly go into retirement.” Reporter: George Christensen laughed about a comparison between quarantine and a concentration camp. What do you have to do to be kicked out of the Coalition? Morrison: I thought those comments were appalling and I have spoken to George directly about them. I think they’re absolutely appalling. George is not a candidate for the LNP at the next election and I think George should quietly go into retirement. Reporter: You just painted yourself there as the strong government in terms of China. And how does that play in seats like Banks and Reid, which have large numbers of Chinese-Australians? Morrison: I’m doing it because it’s in Australia’s national interest, it’s the right thing to do. Full stop. Morrison says that any further economic or political sanctions from the Chinese government in response to Australia’s diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympic Games would be “utterly unacceptable”. That would be completely and utterly unacceptable and there would be no grounds for that whatsoever. I’ll always stand up for Australia’s interests and what Australians believe is right, and we are living in an uncertain time. OK we are back to the evergreen topic of if former premier of Gladys Berejiklian (and current subject of an ongoing Icac investigation) would be supported in a run at the federal seat of Warringah. And the prime minister is all in: Morrison: I think she was an outstanding premier. I think she was an outstanding treasurer and an outstanding transport minister. And she has been one of the strong female leaders in our country and so do I think that she has more to offer to Australia in that regard? Of course, I do. If she wished to put herself forward, of course I would welcome her. That’s simply the point that I have made. That’s a decision for Gladys ultimately and she may choose not to go ahead here, I suspect. That’s a matter for her, and I respect her choice. But when the issue was considered, do I think that she would make a continued strong contribution? Of course I do. I think people right across New South Wales would agree with that. I don’t find it surprising, I don’t find it surprising at all that if you had someone of Gladys Berejiklian’s calibre wishing to go forward, that I in any way wouldn’t be anything other than welcoming of that. But if she doesn’t wish to, I equally respect that decision. I know it’s been a very difficult time for her in recent times. She has suffered terribly in terms of things that have been aired publicly and I think that was – that was just awful, awful to watch, terrible. And so I can totally respect that if she didn’t want to go ahead, then that would be totally her choice about what she wants to do and the contribution she wants to make going forward. But don’t worry, Morrison is being very careful not to peeve the International Olympic Committee too much. We wouldn’t want to endanger our 2032 Games now, would we! Morrison: And I also want to wish the IOC all the very best for the Games. Australia will host the 2032 Summer Olympic Games in Brisbane and we’re very committed to that. The Australian government has been – will be more involved in these Games than any other Games. In fact, those Games will not have been secured were it not for the direct role that our government played in securing those Games, together with the Queensland government. It’s been a very good partnership. So I want to wish the IOC all the very best for those Games. I want to wish all the athletes a very successful Games and the officials who make these great sporting events spectacular. Morrison has confirmed that Australia will follow the US’s lead in imposing a diplomatic boycott on the Beijing Winter Olympic Games. Australia’s athletes will attend, however: We have always been open to meet with the Chinese government to talk about their concerns, whether it’s their concerns with our foreign interference legislation or foreign investment rules where Australia takes a strong stand, standing up for Australia’s interest. They have been critical in Australia in our efforts to ensure we have a strong national defence force. Most recently to our decision to acquire nuclear-powered submarines. But the human rights abuses in Xinjiang and many other issues that Australia has consistently raised, we have been very pleased and very happy to talk to the Chinese government about these issues and there’s been no obstacle to that occurring on our side, but the Chinese government has consistently not accepted those opportunities for us to meet about these issues. So it is not surprising, therefore, that Australian government officials would, therefore, not be going to China for those Games. Australian athletes will, though. Australia’s a great sporting nation and I very much separate the issues of sport and these other political issues. They’re issues between two governments. [We would] like to see those issues resolved, they’re not resolved and Australia will not step back from the strong position we had standing up for Australia’s interest, and obviously, it is of no surprise that we wouldn’t be sending Australian officials to those Games. Morrison: Kids growing up today frankly have it a lot harder than we did, my generation. Every generation it’s different. And the biggest change between my generation growing up and these young girls are growing up today, it’s hard to go past the impact of the digital world and digital media and social media and the impact that it’s had on our society for better and for worse and this is such a high priority for us. It’s a high priority because we care about the mental health of our kids. We care about the quality of our society and the way that people deal with each other in a kind way to ensure we can make our country stronger and, for our country to be stronger, all Australians have got to be stronger and that means particularly their own mental health. There is always lots of issues that we need to address as a government, but I struggle to tell you an issue that is probably more important than families today. Morrison is speaking today about the Coalition’s new proposed anti-trolling legislation. It’s a little complicated but if you want to quickly get up to speed you can check out our TikTok explainer below. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now. A Queensland police officer is in a stable condition after he was deliberately hit by a stolen car he was trying to pull over in southern Brisbane, reports AAP’s Marty Silk. Police say the officer had been conducting random speed checks on Orange Grove Road in Salisbury at about 6.30am. When he stepped on to the road to flag down a car, the vehicle was allegedly steered towards him and struck him. The officer is in a stable condition and undergoing medical assessment. The alleged car drove off and was found a short time later abandoned on Eaton Place in Wishart. Police are calling for anyone who saw a white Mercedes sedan in the Wishart area between 6.40am and 6.50am to contact them. Melbourne institution Cherry Bar shuttered its doors for the first time in its history over the weekend as fallout from hospitality staffing shortages continue. “I made a call I never had to make in 15 years and said ‘We can’t open because we don’t have any staff’,” rock promoter James Young said. “We had to close the fucking doors.” The live music venue was due to hold a showcase event on Sunday with rock trio Cross Bones Boogie. But Young took to social media on the weekend to announce the band would be rescheduled. “Everyone worked too hard and too late last night,” he wrote on Facebook. “Staffing is a real issue in hospitality at the moment … this has never happened ever before.” You can read the full report below: Looks like we will have to wait a little while longer for the Queensland update today. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, says the Covid-19 vaccine is safe for children, with a final decision on its approval imminent, reports AAP’s Andrew Brown. Australia’s leading vaccination body is set to hand down its decision to the government later this week on whether to approve the Pfizer vaccine for five- to 11-year-olds. The country’s medical regulator gave the green light to the vaccine for the cohort last weekend. Frydenberg told the Seven Network on Wednesday that vaccine use among children in the United States was encouraging. I think this is a positive development. We are following what has happened in the United States with the rollout of the vaccines to younger kids, and it will provide another line of defence against the virus. The US has already vaccinated more than 5 million children in the age group since regulators approved the immunisation. At a Senate committee hearing on Tuesday, Australia’s chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said data from the US on reported side effects was reassuring. The treasurer was also asked if Australia intended to follow the US’s lead and declare a diplomatic boycott on the Beijing Winter Olympics. We have noted what the United States have done. We have had some preliminary discussions internally about Australia’s attendance at those Games. We will have more to say about that in due course. I will leave that to the prime minister. What I can say, that we are working through it in a considered way. Recognising that we do have some important interests at stake. Sport and politics, they are different realms as well. But we are looking closely at how we are represented. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg has just spoken to the Today Show about these allegations of hacking but is being a little coy on the details. I won’t go into the details of the specific allegations ... We are better resourcing our intelligence and law enforcement agencies. That is why we are working very closely with the private sector. So that they can take their own measures to also enhance their own security. So the cyberspace is evolving. Technology is, obviously, rapidly improving. That is giving whether they are countries or non-state actors, the ability to cause great harm and great damage. A Coalition senator has accused China of acting like a bully, following claims Chinese hackers tried to shut down two Queensland power stations, reports AAP. Queensland’s CS Energy has confirmed a ransomware incident occurred on its ICT network on Saturday 27 November. CEO Andrew Bills said in a statement on 30 November: CS Energy moved quickly to contain this incident by segregating the corporate network from other internal networks and enacting business continuity processes. We immediately notified relevant state and federal agencies, and are working closely with them and other cyber security experts. Bills said the event was another example of a growing trend of cyber-attacks in Australia and overseas. This incident may have affected our corporate network, but we are fortunate to have a resilient and highly skilled workforce who remain focused on ensuring CS Energy continues to deliver electricity to Queenslanders. News Corp publications on Wednesday linked the attack, which could have shut down two thermal coal plants, to Chinese hackers, citing sources familiar with the matter. “This just underscores how important it is to secure Australia and reduce our dependence on China, who are acting like a bully in our region,” Queensland Nationals senator Matt Canavan told Nine Network on Wednesday. “This is not an attack or a suspected attack on an Australian government agency. It’s on a private company in Queensland. It’s important that we as the Australian government ... help private companies protect themselves.” Labor Senator Katy Gallagher has attacked the Coalition leadership’s response to members “spreading disinformation and stoking division”, saying members like George Christensen only receive a “clip around the ear”. She is speaking to ABC now: I am pleased that the prime minister and deputy prime minister finally came out. It took a while and I think initially they would have preferred that it had just been dealt with by the National party here in Australia. This is a pattern of behaviour. It happens again and again and these members of the government, they are members of the government, have been spreading disinformation and stoking division and fear and highly critical of Australia’s response to Covid-19 pandemic for the duration of this pandemic. They get the occasional clip around the ear “Don’t say it” or “Stop saying it” but nothing else happens and it continues to undermine the vaccination program and the public health messaging that has been put in place. I believe the prime minister needs to act faster and stronger and there has to be real consequences for this. If they’re not going to stop doing what they’re doing, which is highly critical of Australia, undermining the government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, they shouldn’t be in the government. This has been going on for the duration of the pandemic. It is not a one-off slip-up, it is a comprehensive and systemic attack on how Australians have been trying to respond to this terrible pandemic and the sacrifices that we have all made over the last 20 months or so. Actor Rebel Wilson has said her own team were opposed to her losing weight because she was “earning millions of dollars being the funny fat girl”. The Australian actor, 41, documented her physical transformation on social media after embarking on a health and fitness journey a couple of years ago. “I got a lot of pushback from my own team actually, here in Hollywood, when I said, ‘OK, I’m going to do this year of health, I feel like I’m really going to physically transform and change my life’,” she told BBC Breakfast. “And they were like, ‘why? Why would you want to do that?’ Because I was earning millions of dollars being the funny fat girl and being that person.” You can read the full report below: Australian and English cricketers have been greeted by blue skies in Brisbane as the threat of rain spoiling the first Ashes Test eased, reports AAP. Persistent heavy rain for the last month encouraged by the La Niña weather pattern had hampered preparations for both sides, while long-range forecasts pointed to a soggy Gabba this week. But only afternoon showers are forecast on Wednesday, with the radar indicating a small amount of rain could fall on each of the next five days. Gabba ground staff have also enjoyed sunny conditions over the past few days to prepare a pitch that, as is tradition on day one, should still offer plenty to the bowlers. Australia retained the Ashes thanks to a 2-2 draw in England in 2019, while the tourists haven’t won a series in Australia for a decade. Wicketkeeper Alex Carey will debut and Travis Head will return to Australia’s middle order after beating Usman Khawaja in the selection race, while England have left out veteran Jimmy Anderson but are yet to settle on their XI. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, is prepared to override local branches to determine who will run in the key marginal electorate of Parramatta, amid allegations of unresolved branch stacking in the seat. The move to replace the outgoing MP, Julie Owens, comes as the party’s left faction splits over whether to allow a rank and file ballot, and as the right faction makes a bid for the seat, arguing it needs compensation after Hunter was given to the left’s candidate, Dan Repacholi. The soft left, or “Ferguson left” named after powerbroker Laurie Ferguson, which controls branches in the seat, is pushing for a rank and file ballot, but their support is said to be split between Granville state Labor MP Julia Finn, and Durga Owen, who ran for the state seat of Seven Hills at the last state election. You can read the full report below: Chester: George will be what George wants to be. They don’t represent me, he doesn’t represent the majority of the National party room. I look at my colleagues, people like Michelle Landry in Rockhampton, a strong record of living and helping that community. Mark Coulton trying to help his community with the floods, Anne Webster, these people are normal people working in their communities, very proud to be parliamentarians, they’re the people we should talk to rather than George’s latest conversations with a discredited conspiracy theorist in the United States. I mention all of this because Nationals MP Darren Chester has been out and about talking to media this morning to attempt to make it clear that George Christensen’s views do not represent every member of the party. He told ABC News Breakfast that he was happy that the party leader had published a statement condemning the comments. Well, I certainly welcome Barnaby’s comments in pointing out that George wasn’t acting – I don’t believe, in any way, shape, or form – in a manner consistent with the National party’s values. He wasn’t acting in the national interest. Members of parliament right across the political spectrum have a real responsibility to not talk Australia down. We have gone through a tough time as a nation, when you think about droughts, floods, bushfires, storms, and the coronavirus pandemic. Our challenge as members of parliament, as parliamentarians, is to try to unite Australians, to work together with our communities to help them recover. We’re in a difficult situation as a nation where a lot of people are hurting, a lot of people are struggling, there’s disaster fatigue in our regional communities. We need to work with the communities to make sure they get back on their feet. Going on these international conspiracy theory talk shows and talking Australia down is not helpful. OK so there is plenty of George Christensen related news this morning. Here is a quick recap in case you missed it. The Queensland Nationals MP used an appearance on US conspiracy theorist Alex Jones’ online show to advocate for protests outside international Australian consulates over the country’s Covid-19 restrictions. At one point during the Infowars interview, Christensen laughed when Jones compared Australia’s quarantine facilities to the Auschwitz concentration camp. Here is what the prime minister had to say about it yesterday: I denounce the comments in the strongest possible terms. The Holocaust was an evil abomination. Respect for the victims requires that it never be referenced in such a trivial and insensitive manner. Nationals leader and deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce tweeted from London that he had been made aware of the latest comments by Christensen. Accordingly, I have contacted him twice in the night to affirm that any parallel of domestic policy with the abomination which was the Holocaust requires an immediate rebuke. I have asked Mr Christensen to be far more aware of any platform he speaks on and to ask himself of the history of those platforms and if participation on it is wise. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you on the blog this morning and I hope you are all feeling well because I have some Covid-19 news for you this morning. According to NSW authorities, it’s likely that at least two of the five people diagnosed with Covid-19 after attending a party boat cruise on Sydney Harbour last week are likely to have contracted the Omicron variant. All cases are isolating at home. NSW Health says “preliminary results indicate two are likely to have” the Omicron variant, but genome sequencing is underway to confirm it. Authorities are now racing to contact the about 140 people who signed in with a QR code before boarding the boat, which left King Street Wharf 9 at 7.30pm and returned about 11pm. Individuals who were on board and members of their households are being urged to immediately get tested and isolate. Now jumping back in time a little bit, the ABC is reporting that new emails, from last year, show an “enthusiastic” Pfizer, hoping to engage with Australia about the purchase of the Covid-19 vaccine, long before the federal government secured their (underwhelming) supply. ABC’s current affairs show 7.30 says it has obtained the email under the Freedom of Information Act. It reportedly shows that, in early July 2020, Pfizer Australia emailed the federal health minister’s office with “some positive early data” from the beginning stages of the vaccine’s trials. My global colleagues are enthusiastic to discuss this further, and possible opportunities in Australia, at a senior level at the earliest opportunity. However, as we know, Australia made the choice to rely heavily on the AstraZeneca vaccine, with supplies of mRNA options extremely limited during Melbourne and Syndey’s deadly Delta outbreaks this year. OK, with that why don’t we jump right into the day! There is certainly plenty to get through.After a video was leaked on Tuesday evening showing No 10 staff joking about a lockdown Christmas party that Downing Street has claimed never happened, most UK newspapers have splashed on the story as the biggest of the day – with some notable exceptions. The story’s wide impact was emphasised on Tuesday night when Ant and Dec joked about the news on I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here!, saying the show’s participants “categorically deny any suggestions that they had a party and this fictional party definitely didn’t involve cheese and wine or a secret Santa”. The Guardian’s story says the footage, obtained by ITV, will add to calls for a formal inquiry into what happened, and notes a tweet by Dominic Cummings, a former aide to Boris Johnson, who said the prime minister lied about the party and said that doing so was “v unwise”. The Daily Mail also splashes on the story, calling it “a sick joke” alongside three stills of Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, who featured in the video of a mock press briefing. The Daily Mirror runs with “Another top Tory broke Covid party rules”, putting the news together with its own story about a Christmas party at the Department for Education. The Daily Telegraph – said to be the paper whose coverage most exercises Boris Johnson – is headlined “Downing St Christmas party faces police probe”. An earlier edition had led with a story about a possible Christmas work-from-home order. The i’s headline reads “2021: It’s beginning to look a lot like last Christmas”, putting the news together with a prediction of 80,000 cases of the Omicron and Delta variants daily by Christmas and Johnson refusing to rule out a work-from-home order. Metro’s pithy headline is “No.10 party clowns”. An earlier edition had run with a story about a winter care crisis. The Daily Express features the story above its main headline calling on its readers to get booster jabs. The story does not make the front page of the Sun, which instead accuses energy bosses of blaming the “wrong kind of wind” for power cuts. It does have a small picture story about a secret party – attended by the Rolling Stones. The Times runs with a picture of Stratton but leads on a cabinet row over vaccine passports. The Financial Times features the news below its lead on the situation in Ukraine. Its story is headlined “Johnson under fire as No 10 video fuels anger over alleged Christmas party”. The Daily Star does not feature the story, instead focusing on Dominic Raab’s actions over the Afghan crisis and suggesting that the former foreign secretary is missing his brain.The travel company Tui has narrowed its annual losses but is reviewing whether to make cuts to the remainder of its winter programme in light of rising coronavirus cases and the spread of the Omicron variant. Posting a €2.4bn (£2.1bn) loss for the year to the end of September, down from €3.5bn the year before, the group said it was close to breaking even in the final quarter of its financial year. The company said the first quarter of its new financial year was 93% booked, based on lower winter capacity projections, although still 31% below pre-pandemic levels. Its chief executive, Friedrich Joussen, expects the holiday market will recover to pre-pandemic levels next summer. “It is still too early to make a real forecast for the 2022 summer season,” he said. “But we are optimistic that tourism will be able to recover to 2019 levels next summer. We want to, we can and we will find our way back to economic strength.” Joussen said the pandemic had caused holidaymakers to book “much later and at shorter notice” but that next summer was looking “very encouraging in all Tui markets”. The company said it had 4.1m bookings for its next winter and summer seasons, 1.4m received since 3 October. However, it added: “The increased media coverage of rising incident rates and the emergence of new Omicron variant has weakened this positive momentum, particularly for winter.” Joussen said there would be “flexibility in deciding whether to offer winter programme capacity at the lower end of the range depending on the so-called fourth corona wave and possible policy decisions with regard to the Omicron variant”, adding: “Capacity plans are regularly reviewed and adjusted.” Tui, which reported a 40% fall in revenue from €7.9bn to €4.3bn in the year to the end of September, said Easter was already running at about 90% of pre-pandemic levels “predominantly booked by the UK”. For summer, the company has so far received 2.2m bookings, an increase of 535,000 since its last update in early October, “reaffirming the intention to travel and continued appetite for a Tui summer holiday”. The company said: “The UK, which is typically the most advanced booked due to the earlier launch of its summer programme, is already 52% sold for May. At this early stage, we believe summer 22 volumes will recover close to normalised summer 19 levels, supported by the stronger starting position and a travel environment underpinned by the continued success of vaccinations.” Despite the positive signs of a recovery, losses narrowed from €3.1bn in 2020, Tui said it would not issue financial guidance for its next financial next year. “It remains difficult to forecast the further course of the pandemic and its impact on customer behaviour,” it said. “In view of the uncertain environment, the executive board believes it would not be appropriate to issue a specific forecast for the new financial year 2022 at this time.”The co-founder of the multimillion-dollar Grill’d burger chain, Simon Crowe, has apologised for wearing a Native American headdress to an end of year staff costume Christmas party. In a social media video that has since been taken down, Crowe appears among a crowd wearing a feathered headdress and a gold jacket, speaking to a man dressed as Sesame Street’s Count von Count. Crowe said he “didn’t give too much thought” to what to wear to the event. “Grill’d had a costume party as part of our end of year staff Christmas celebrations,” he said. “I didn’t give too much thought to what to wear and grabbed a sparkly gold jacket and headdress at the last minute. “My intention was in no way to offend or ‘dress up’ in Native American costume, however in hindsight I understand the offence this may have caused and for that, I’m truly sorry.” Crowe, who founded Grill’d, also owns Australian chocolatier Koko Black. In the original video, the TikTok user posted text saying “my workplace had a Christmas party … and I dressed as an eshay [a slang expression associated with an Australian urban youth subculture] and muzzed [a type of dance] at the company owner”. In the comments of a later TikTok, the user wrote: “The video was posted with no intention to insult Simon or the Grill’d company … I was just having fun at a work Christmas party and Grill’d can’t hold me responsible if someone else chose to wear a ‘questionable’ outfit.” The Native American headdress has been critiqued as an act of racial stereotyping and cultural appropriation with a string of performers from Adele to Kesha seen sporting the costume in the past decade. Several commenters took to social media overnight to critique Crowe, labelling the outfit “absolutely foul” and “racist”. “We hate companies who think cultural appropriation is acceptable,” one user wrote. “Nah guys, why is your … CEO wearing such an inappropriate costume?” another questioned. “Hi, why is the company owner using culture as a costume? It’s 2021 and I’m pretty sure even children know it is wrong to appropriate culture. Shame on you,” a third wrote. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Grill’d was yet to publicly respond to the posts. The Grill’d empire has been subject to controversy in the past. It was embroiled in a wage scandal in 2015 which resulted in a confidential settlement and, later, an enterprise agreement. A year later, 5,000 current and past workers signed a petition suggesting the company’s training program was a form of wage theft, and, in 2019, the burger chain was accused of keeping young workers in underpaid roles through its traineeships program. A Grill’d spokesperson said the company was proud of its traineeships program, which had provided “qualifications and a pathway for thousands of Australians across hospitality and other industries”. The spokesperson said only 31% of Grill’d employees were currently trainees. Grill’d agreed to setting a hard time limit of 18 months for completion of all traineeships as a result of the claims. Last month, a Grill’d advertising campaign was found to have breached standards for its presentation of violence and sexuality. The ad, titled Grill’d v Plastic Toys, depicted McDonald’s mascot Ronald McDonald opening a trenchcoat to children in a darkened alley. In response, Grill’d stated that it would modify the advertisement to take into account the panel’s concerns. A week later, the company released a content series advertising their plant-based Impossible burger on subscription service OnlyFans – used heavily for sexually explicit material – in partnership with Australian comedy duo The Inspired Unemployed. Crowe said of the content series: “We’re fiercely passionate about creating healthy, sustainable and most importantly delicious burgers, so we’re thrilled to be one of the first restaurant groups in Australia to offer Impossible burgers and we can’t wait for everyone to taste it for themselves.”Scott Morrison has urged Gerard Rennick to listen to medical experts after the Liberal senator labelled the approval of the Pfizer vaccine for children aged five to 11 “completely irresponsible”. Rennick has experienced a meteoric rise in reach on Facebook, adding 70,000 followers in a little over a month, as he shared stories of vaccine adverse events he admits he can’t be sure are “100% accurate” and videos of anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne. Since the Therapeutic Goods Administration approved Pfizer for kids on Sunday, Rennick has lashed out over “serious concerns” about the sample size of clinical trials and again refused to vote for government legislation, this time warning he will do so until the approval is revoked. At a Covid-19 committee hearing on Tuesday senior health officials rejected Rennick’s claims vaccinations amount to “experimenting” on children and pointed to the US experience of administering 5m doses of Pfizer to children aged five to 11 as evidence it is “worthwhile, safe and effective”. A spokesperson for Morrison said: “The prime minister and [his] office have repeatedly made clear directly and also publicly that decisions about the health of Australians are made based on the advice of our country’s medical experts.” “The government will continue to listen to the medical experts on these issues and strong suggests senator Rennick does the same.” On 26 November, Morrison told ABC Radio “of course” he takes Rennick to task for misinformation privately, adding that he does so “publicly as well”. “I mean, there’s no doubt about the government’s position on the importance of the vaccination program, and any suggestion otherwise is absurd.” At a press conference in Melbourne on Wednesday announcing Moderna had been approved as a booster dose the health minister, Greg Hunt, said he expected a “positive announcement” next week from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation recommending Pfizer for children, who will be added to the vaccination program from 10 January. Hunt told reporters he disagreed with “views that are at odds with the TGA, whether it’s Senator Rennick” or those he accused of having “trashed” the brand of AstraZeneca. He labelled the latter view “very unfortunate”. Rising social media influence Rennick has experienced a meteoric rise in the number of followers on his Facebook page, from 21,000 in late October to more than 93,000 followers as of Wednesday, according to Guardian Australia’s analysis of data from Facebook’s CrowdTangle social analytics service. The tipping point came after a video he shared from the 6 November rally in Melbourne of a performance of I Am Australian. The video has been viewed over 700,000 times, and shared over 21,000 times. In the following two weeks Rennick’s follower count tripled, expanding his reach with videos of people claiming to have suffered adverse events from Covid-19 vaccines. Rennick posts between two and three times a day. The top six posts, all focused on rallies or alleged issues with vaccines, have all been shared about 20,000 times each. In the past 30 days alone, Rennick has outperformed all of his Senate colleagues on Facebook, with over 992,000 total interactions in the past month, and 3.8m video views. The next closest is One Nation senator Malcolm Robert’s page, with 736,000 interactions, then One Nation leader Pauline Hanson’s page with 662,000 interactions. Prime minister Scott Morrison and Labor leader Anthony Albanese had 371,000 and 520,000 interactions respectively in the same time period. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Australian Medical Association vice-president, Chris Moy, said Rennick’s surveys of adverse events were “as far away from science as possible” because they “force one answer he wants”. He said Rennick sought to “portray himself as a Robin Hood figure while inciting distrust and fear … against the scientists and health professionals who have done so much to protect Australia”. On Tuesday Rennick said he does not intend to stop social media advocacy on adverse events and rejected the label of misinformation. “These are people’s stories and [the charge of misinformation is] an insult to those people,” he said. “It’s medical gaslighting of people who are having trouble getting their adverse events recognised.” Waning authority In addition to Rennick, the Morrison government’s authority over its own members has been challenged by the Nationals MP George Christensen and Liberal senator Alex Antic who both fronted far-right US online programs to criticise Australia’s Covid response. The acting Nationals leader, David Littleproud, has counselled and condemned Christensen over his comments on American conspiracy theorist Alex Jones’s online show InfoWars, aspects of which Morrison also condemned. At a press conference about the harms of social media on Wednesday, Morrison said he thought Jones’s comments comparing quarantine to a concentration camp were “appalling”. “I have spoken to George directly about them,” he told reporters in Sydney. “I think they’re absolutely appalling. George is not a candidate for the LNP at the next election and I think George should quietly go into retirement.” Asked about Christensen and Antic undermining public health orders, Morrison appeared to blame media for reporting on the controversy. “Well, I don’t think it’s a good idea to promote what they’re saying by constantly drawing it to people’s attention,” he said. “I’m not seeking to do that. I don’t agree with them.”Rememberings Sinéad O’Connor (Sandycove) The singer-songwriter has a genuinely incredible story to tell – by the time she found fame, she had already experienced harrowing abuse at the hands of her mother, visitations from Jesus, a spell in a home for girls with behavioural problems, the failure of her ambition to become a priest and life as a strippergram. But what’s really striking about Rememberings is how she tells it: O’Connor is a great prose writer, even if she insists she isn’t (the piano in her grandmother’s house sounds “like the ghost bells of a sunken ship”). What could entirely understandably have been a book filled with bitterness and regret turns out to be suffused with humour and forgiveness. Major Labels: A History of Popular Music in Seven Genres Kelefa Sanneh (Canongate) “I’m always a bit puzzled when a musician is praised for transcending genre,” states New Yorker writer Sanneh in the introduction to Major Labels. “What’s so great about that?” The line sums up his exploration of musical tribalism: intriguing, controversial, personal. You don’t have to agree with his view about the importance of genres – rock, r’n’b, country and hip-hop among them – to find the book fascinating: his opinions are provocative. He posits that the Dixie Chicks got worse, not better, when they stopped caring about the conservative country establishment. And the story of his own progress through the US punk scene might have made a book in itself. Whether you view it as a rallying call or a eulogy in a world where everyone seems to like “a bit of everything”, it’s a unique and absorbing read. Nina Simone’s Gum Warren Ellis (Faber) Most music biographies follow a well-worn pattern: that of Warren Ellis – Nick Cave’s luxuriantly bearded foil in the Bad Seeds – does not. Ostensibly about Ellis stealing some gum that Nina Simone spat out during a performance at the Cave-curated Meltdown festival in 1999, and his subsequent treatment of it as a kind of holy relic, it winds a gloriously idiosyncratic path through his life and passions, from the mechanics of busking, to his love of Emily Dickinson and the Greek éntekhno singer Arleta. Ellis marshals his scattershot approach with intelligence and charm: you feel as if you’ve spent time in the company of a particularly perceptive raconteur. Run the Riddim: The Untold Story of 90s Dancehall Marvin Sparks (No Long Stories) Sparks – a self-styled “lifelong dancehall student” – spent 10 years researching and writing his history of Jamaica’s most successful and influential musical export since reggae’s commercial heyday. The Jamaican music industry is always fertile ground for writers – it massively punches above its weight in terms of importance and doesn’t adhere to the usual rules. This account is as insightful and revelatory as its title suggests, shining light on a wildly creative, volatile and occasionally hugely controversial genre and the culture that surrounds it. You’re left wondering why no one has written this book before, and why Sparks had to publish it himself. Lyrics: 1956 to the Present Paul McCartney (Allen Lane) The first line in the former Beatle’s introduction to his two-volume collected lyrics posits the book as a kind of alternative autobiography. It’s a canny move, enabling McCartney to talk, often illuminatingly, about his life – he’s particularly good on his childhood in Liverpool – while skirting over anything he doesn’t want to discuss, not least his second marriage to the vilified Heather Mills. So the holes in the story gape, and the sense that we’re never going to get a full picture of McCartney the man lingers, but once you immerse yourself in the books themselves, with their plethora of beautiful photographs and collected ephemera, it scarcely matters. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Last week the US supreme court heard an abortion rights case considered the most important of its kind in nearly five decades. While the verdict will not be heard until June 2022, the conservative-dominated court’s justices seem willing to allow restrictions on abortion at 15 weeks and perhaps earlier in a pregnancy. Many suspect that the court’s real agenda is ultimately to reverse the 48-year-old Roe v Wade ruling and effectively ban abortion in the US. Guardian US health reporter Jessica Glenza sets out how the argument came to this and the societal shock waves such an outcome could cause. And chief US reporter Ed Pilkington considers how the politicisation of the supreme court is threatening to destroy its legitimacy. Sweden is renowned for its liberal, tolerant values, but lately it has also gained a less-welcome reputation for ultra-violent gang crime. The Observer’s Mark Townsend went to Gothenburg to find out how police are tackling a series of brutal attacks that have shocked the nation. Also from the Observer, there’s a great longer read from the West Bank, where Donald Macintyre and Quique Kierszenbaum reveal how attacks by Israeli settlers on Palestinians are fuelling tensions. As fears grow over the spread of the Omicron Covid variant, we consider what it might mean for the pandemic generally. And, with travel restrictions tightening once again, Cal Flyn reflects on the consequences for the world of a year in which air travel pretty much ground to a halt. On the Culture front, there’s an interview with Diane Morgan, the British comedy actor who is surely set for wider global recognition. And we ask if a roving art exhibition can succeed in its ambitious goal of reuniting Europe. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your home.The spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus appears to be doubling every two to three days, Prof Neil Ferguson has said, adding that it could be necessary to impose new lockdowns as a result. Ferguson, a member of the UK government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and head of the disease outbreak modelling group at Imperial College London, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday that Omicron was likely to be the dominant strain in the UK before Christmas. “It’s likely to overtake Delta before Christmas at this rate, precisely when is hard to say,” Ferguson said, speaking in a personal capacity. “We’ll start seeing an impact on overall case numbers – it’s still probably only 2%, 3% of all cases so it’s kind of swamped, but within a week or two we’ll start seeing overall case numbers accelerate quite markedly as well.” He said so far case numbers were particularly high in London and Scotland. “London is to be expected because that’s where most of our foreign visitors come,” he added. He said it was less clear why it had spread more quickly in Scotland but speculated that it could be linked with the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. The number of cases of the original Omicron variant detected in the UK rose by 101 to 437 on Tuesday as Scotland announced a return to working from home. Regarding lockdowns, Ferguson said it was difficult to rule out anything, adding that we “haven’t got a good enough handle on the threat”. He added: “Clearly, if the consensus is it is highly likely that the NHS is simply going to be overwhelmed then it will be for the government to decide what what he wants to do about that, but it’s a difficult situation to be in of course.” Pushed on whether lockdowns might be possible, he said: “It certainly might be possible at the current time.” He also noted preliminary work in the UK that suggests that two doses of Pfizer are roughly half as protective against mild disease as against other variants. But he said: “We think that protection against severe disease is much more likely to be maintained at the high level, but we don’t have firm data on that. That’s just based on extrapolation from past experience.” Ferguson called the pace of Omicron’s growth “very fast”, saying: “It’s the same if not faster than we saw with the original strain of the virus in March last year, so it is a concern.” He said data on the evasion of vaccines was preliminary but pointed to a study in South Africa that said “this virus Omicron can evade immunity antibodies generated against the very original Chinese strain of the virus better than any variant we’ve seen so far”. Lockdowns or other restrictions could help to protect people from infection and gather information, Ferguson said. “There is a rationale, just epidemiologically, to try and slow this down, to buy us more time principally to get boosters into people’s arms because we do think people who are boosted will have the best level of protection possible, but also to buy us more time to really better characterise the threat. “So if you imagine a kind of plan B plus with working from home might slow it down – it wouldn’t stop it but it could slow it down, so it’s doubling rather than every two or three days, every five or six days. “That doesn’t seem like a lot, but it actually is potentially a lot in terms of allowing us to characterise this virus better and boost population immunity.” Ferguson said the “key question” of whether the UK decided to attempt to slow the spread of Omicron would “critically depend on really the threat it poses in terms of hospitalisations. At the moment we don’t really have a good handle on the severity of this virus. “There’s a little hint in the UK data that infections are a little bit more likely to be asymptomatic. But we really need to firm up that evidence at the current time.”A Japanese billionaire has fulfilled his childhood dream of travelling to space, as one of two passengers onboard a Russian rocket that blasted off towards the International Space Station. Yusaku Maezawa, the founder of Zozo, a successful online fashion business, and his production assistant, Yozo Hirano, on Wednesday became the first space tourists to travel to the ISS for more than a decade. But Maezawa, a noted art collector who reportedly has a net worth of $1.9bn (£1.44bn), has said his ambitions do not end there, having signed up for a more ambitious journey around the moon on Elon Musk’s SpaceX rocket planned for 2023. On launch day, Maezawa and his crew left their hotel in Baikonur to a Soviet-era song played for all cosmonauts before their flights. The song, about cosmonauts missing home, was sung partially in Japanese. Maezawa’s family and friends – some holding Japanese flags – waved him off as he was driven to get his spacesuit fitted. “Dream come true,” the tycoon tweeted before he and Hirano boarded a three-seat Soyuz spacecraft piloted by the Russian cosmonaut Alexander Misurkin in the run-up to their launch from the cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. “I’m excited,” he told reporters on the eve of his 12-day journey. “I feel like an elementary school student about to go on an outing. I didn’t think I would be able to go to space. I used to like the starry sky and heavenly bodies. I feel fortunate to have this opportunity and to finally fulfil my dream.” The 46-year-old used social media to chronicle the 100 days he spent preparing for the mission, saying he had enjoyed the experience of induced weightlessness on an adapted plane, but confessing that sitting in a spinning chair had been “like torture”. He and Hirano, a film producer, will document daily life on the space station, where the entrepreneur will perform 100 tasks for the tycoon’s YouTube channel, which has more than 750,000 subscribers. Maezawa, who sold Zozo to SoftBank in 2019, will follow his ISS mission by becoming the first private passenger on the moon voyage aboard the SpaceX rocket. He is searching for eight people who “see themselves as artists” – but who do not necessarily have to be artists – to join him on the six-day trip, which he will pay for himself. He has reportedly received more than a million applications since last year. Named by Forbes as Japan’s 30th richest person, Maezawa is seen as something of a maverick in his native country, where he has made headlines with his liking for private jets, supercars and works of art. He created a Twitter frenzy last year when he said he would give away ¥1m (£6,650) each to 1,000 of his 13.8 million followers as a “social experiment”. He abandoned another online contest seeking candidates to be his girlfriend but only after attracting almost 30,000 applicants.After a leaked video of No 10 officials joking about a lockdown Christmas party last year that Downing Street insists did not take place, the prime minister is facing fresh accusations of lying. On the 18 December, the date that sources have said the party took place, there were strict Covid regulations in place, and it would have contravened the rules. We would like to hear your thoughts on whether you would be willing to lockdown now if the government said it was best for the country. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The former chairman of the UK competition regulator has condemned the market for PCR tests for travellers, describing it as a “rip-off jungle”. After the reimposition of the requirement to take the tests on return from abroad, Lord Tyrie accused the government of once again allowing the companies offering PCR tests to manipulate the system by making them available at unrealistic prices. “For this policy to get into a mess once might be seen as a misfortune but for it to resurface again after all the warnings over the summer would have to be described as carelessness,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “It was a scandal waiting to happen and it’s now happened and it needs very urgent action.” Last week, the Guardian revealed that a slew of the cheapest deals on PCR tests had been removed from the government website amid concerns travellers were being misled by companies advertising the coronavirus testing service for less than a £1. Private companies offering day two tests for travellers are listed on a government website for consumers to search. However, most of the deals were found to not be suitable for most travellers as they were often offered in only one location, on limited dates and only available to those who could attend in person. “It appears that some of the worst practices – misleading online advertisements, overpricing, unacceptably poor service among them – are still widespread,” said Tyrie, the former head of the Competition and Markets Authority, and the ex-chair of the Treasury select committee. “To allow this to continue over the peak Christmas period would be scandalous. Other countries seem to have done better, we’ve got to try harder.” Concerns regarding the price of tests have been raised again after the government announced people arriving in the UK would need to take a PCR test before the end of their second day, as well as a pre-flight test. The Laboratory and Testing Industry Organisation, which works with ministers to ensure the UK testing industry has high ethical and professional standards, said the government had failed to “enforce accuracy” on its provider list. A government spokesperson said: “We’ve been clear that it is unacceptable for any private testing company to take advantage of holidaymakers.”Reading and Leeds festivals have announced their lineup for 2022. Using two main stages at each site, the festivals will host six headliners: Dave, Arctic Monkeys, Rage Against the Machine, Megan Thee Stallion, Bring Me the Horizon and Halsey. Also appearing further down the bill are Glass Animals, Wolf Alice, Polo G and more across the Gen Z-leaning pop, rock and rap lineup. With Megan Thee Stallion and Halsey’s headline slots, plus female artists including Little Simz, PinkPantheress and Griff also appearing, the lineup goes some way to correct a bias towards male artists that has long been a feature of the festival. The last time a female artist or female-fronted group headlined was Paramore in 2014. Rage Against the Machine had been due to headline in 2020 before the festival was cancelled due to the pandemic. Arctic Monkeys’ appearance, joining a slate of previously announced festival slots in Europe, follows rumours that the band have quietly recorded a new album in Suffolk in recent months. Reading and Leeds 2022 takes place 26-28 August. Tickets go on sale from 10am on Friday 10 December.The health secretary, Sajid Javid, pulled out of Wednesday morning’s broadcast interviews after a video emerged showing No 10 aides laughing about a Christmas party during Covid restrictions. The government was facing a furious Tory and public backlash against its behaviour. No ministers were available to be interviewed on the BBC, Sky, ITV and other media, despite Javid having been due to appear for the first anniversary of the vaccination campaign. Other government figures – including the vaccines minister and justice secretary – also pulled out of planned broadcast interviews later in the day. Conservative MPs expressed anger about the situation that No 10 had got into by holding a party, denying one had taken place, and then maintaining that denial despite the video obtained by ITV. Sir Roger Gale, a longstanding backbench Tory MP, told the BBC that Johnson must explain what happened properly at prime minister’s questions later on Wednesday and warned him that “to mislead the House of Commons deliberately would be a resignation matter”. He also rejected the idea that Johnson’s chief of staff should be sacked over the affair, saying “the buck stops at the top”. Gale told Sky News that the party was a “Barnard Castle moment” and the government cannot say one thing and do another. His comments refer to the incident in which the prime minister’s then aide Dominic Cummings explained he had driven to a beauty spot, Barnard Castle, during lockdown to test his eyesight, despite stay-at-home orders in place to contain the spread of coronavirus. Charles Walker, the vice-chair of the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers, told broadcasters that the incident reminded him of the expenses scandal. He said it had left the government without the authority to impose restrictions in future, saying they would have to be “advisory” only. Tracey Crouch, a former minister, demanded a “fulsome explanation and apology”. She said: “I am fuming! My constituents have every right to be angry. Their memories of lost loved ones are traumatised knowing that they died alone, first and last Christmases passed by, and many spent what is usually a special day by themselves. I am not even going to begin to justify or defend a party in Downing Street.” Another backbencher, Anne Marie Morris, said it was clear No 10 staff broke rules. “It’s not on and, at the very least, they should admit their blatant error and apologise for breaking the rules they imposed on society,” she said. Other senior Tory MPs vented their fury, with one saying there was a need to “drain the swamp” in No 10, and another accusing Johnson’s team of “playing silly games” by “trying to wriggle out of what constitutes a party”. Sayeeda Warsi, a Conservative peer and former party chair, tweeted: “Those that make the law must obey the law. If consequences do not follow a breach of the law by lawmakers we send a green light to the public that laws and rules don’t matter. This is dangerous territory for us as a nation.” Johnson and his aides have repeatedly denied that the event, reportedly held for staff at No 10 in December last year, broke Covid rules or took place at all. However, in the leaked video of a mock televised press briefing, an adviser to Johnson is seen joking with Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. The footage, obtained by ITV, was shot on 22 December 2020. The Friday before was 18 December, the date on which multiple sources have said there was a staff party inside No 10, which would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. It shows Stratton, the prime ministerial adviser Ed Oldfield and other staff making a series of jokes about a party, including references to “cheese and wine”, the lack of social distancing and making the excuse it was a business meeting. Quizzed in the leaked footage, Stratton laughingly says: “This is recorded … This fictional party was a business meeting and it was not socially distanced.” The emergence of the video was called a “bullet to the chest” of families who have lost loved ones during the pandemic. Dr Saleyha Ahsan, from Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice, told BBC Breakfast the saga was “an example of how the government have run this from the start: one rule for them and the rest of us have to adhere to different rules.” Ahsan, who said she had been working in north Wales at the time of the mock press conference, said: “Numerous people around the country couldn’t spend those precious last few days, hours, minutes with loved ones. It was heartbreaking. In 14 years in the NHS I’ve never seen anything like it. “And this latest revelation is just a bullet to the chest, it really is. It just demonstrates the lack of regard for the rest of us.” The Metropolitan police have said they are considering the footage after two Labour MPs made complaints about the party and another gathering in November when London was in lockdown. Johnson’s spokesperson denied on Tuesday that any event at Downing Street took place. Asked about the video, Downing Street insisted it had not changed its view, saying: “There was no Christmas party. Covid rules have been followed at all times.” Separately, the Department for Education confirmed a report that some staff and the then education secretary, Gavin Williamson, held an office party on 10 December last year, while London was in tier 2, the second-highest level of Covid restrictions. The Mirror said Williamson gave a speech while up to two dozen staff gathered in a cafe area drinking wine. A DfE spokesperson said that on that date “a gathering” took place of officials already present at the office “to thank those staff for their efforts during the pandemic”. The spokesperson added: “While this was work-related, looking back we accept it would have been better not to have gathered in this way at that particular time.”Deaths from fentanyl will continue to rise and overdoses may be increasingly difficult to battle in the US, said Roger Crystal, who helped develop Narcan nasal spray, an easy-to-use medication that reverses overdoses. The overdose crisis that killed more than 100,000 Americans in one year is “all about fentanyl”, Crystal said – and it’s only going to get worse. Those who are overdosing from fentanyl have a shorter window of time to be saved and may need additional doses of the medication. “Fentanyl is an opioid, but it’s a different beast entirely. It acts faster, it’s much stronger, and it lasts longer,” Crystal told the Guardian. That means overdose reversals need to happen faster, and multiple doses of naloxone may be needed. Sometimes, he said, a person is revived with one dose, but falls back into an overdose again because of fentanyl’s long-lasting effects. Frequently, people don’t realize they have taken fentanyl, because it’s mixed in with other drugs or it’s pressed to look like legitimate prescription pills. And even stronger synthetic opioids – like carfentanil, which is 100 times more potent than fentanyl – are also entering the market. “I call it supercharged fentanyl,” Crystal said. “It’s just frightening and staggering.” Narcan is an inhalable form of naloxone, which was first patented in 1961. Now naloxone is available as a generic, but Narcan nasal spray is patented. This year, harm reduction organizations faced a huge increase in the cost of life-saving naloxone treatments. The pharmaceutical company Pfizer has provided the organizations with injectable naloxone at a very low cost, but due to manufacturing problems, had to cut back on supply for several months. The other available naloxone options are 15 to 30 times more expensive. Harm-reduction advocates unsuccessfully called on companies like Emergent BioSolutions, the company that now makes Narcan, to lower the price temporarily as organizations working on the front lines of the opioid crisis witnessed thousands more deaths than the year before. Crystal, who is the CEO of Opiant Pharmaceuticals, rejected the idea that Narcan’s price tag is making it difficult to save lives. “How cheap do you want a life-saving drug to be?” he argued. Yet he acknowledged the growing force of the crisis in the United States, which is an international leader in opioid use and overdose deaths. Right now, most fentanyl comes into the US from Mexico or China. But the synthetic opioid can be made in a lab anywhere, making it difficult for authorities to limit the supply – unlike, for instance, heroin, which is sourced from opium poppies that need to be grown. “Fentanyl doesn’t have to come from overseas; we could make it here in the US. And it wouldn’t take much more than a competent chemist to be able to do so,” Crystal said. For now, it’s been cheaper to import it, but simply cracking down on imports would not be enough to eradicate the drug. Instead, advocates are calling for better support – including treatment options for those with substance use disorder, inexpensive test strips to detect the presence of fentanyl, and a wide-scale, steady supply of affordable overdose-reversing medication. Supervised injection sites, where naloxone can be administered immediately, and a safe supply for those with substance use disorder, would also cut down on countless deaths, researchers say. Before working in the pharmaceutical industry, Crystal worked as a surgeon in London, and he saw many of the lasting complications of the opioid crisis. “You can do, as the surgeon, the most fantastic surgical repair of a patient and really feel you’ve made a huge difference in saving their life,” he said. “But the sad fact is, the same patients would still come back to the ER later with something else, and then that made me realize, well, we’re not really treating the actual problem here.”As the world of college sports finds itself in uncertain times, Danté Stewart is clear about one thing. “Nothing about college athletics suggests that being a student comes first. So, that language needs to be changed,” says Stewart, a former Clemson football player and author of Shoutin’ In The Fire. “The ‘student-athlete’ is always being limited to being a student rather than a worker.” Stewart is not alone. In September, Jennifer Abruzzo, general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), issued a memo in which she argued that college athletes should be understood as university employees. Abruzzo took direct aim at the NCAA’s use of the term “student-athlete,” arguing that it has been used to undermine college athletes organizing for employment rights. “It allows people outside to limit your identity,” adds Stewart. “So people can say you’re just there for athletics. You are seen as someone who should be grateful. You have no say. You’re a student. ‘Student’ is wrapped up in you’re young, you’re dumb, and you need guidance. It strips your agency.” Objections to the term “student-athlete” are unsurprising given its origins. Walter Byers, executive director of the NCAA from 1951-1987 explained in his memoir: “We crafted the term student-athlete and soon it was embedded in all NCAA rules and interpretations as a mandated substitute for such words as players and athletes.” The NCAA subsequently used the term for decades in court to counter workers’ compensation claims related to athletes who died or suffered grievous injury while providing athletic services to universities. Byers himself would later call the NCAA system “a nationwide money-laundering scheme,” and proclaimed that “the management of intercollegiate athletics stays in place committed to an outmoded code of amateurism … and I attribute that to, quite frankly, to the neo-plantation mentality that exists on the campuses of our country and in the conference offices of the NCAA.” It is in this context that Abruzzo wrote in her memo that because college athletes “are employees under the Act, misclassifying them as ‘student-athletes’, and leading them to believe that they are not entitled to the Act’s protection, has a chilling effect,” and thus, “I will pursue an independent violation.” Since the memo, the NLRB has already received a filing against the NCAA for use of the term. Despite this, the NCAA recently released a draft of its new constitution, to be voted on in January, that uses the term “student-athlete” 44 times. It also explicitly clarified that “student-athletes may not be compensated by a member institution for participating in a sport.” Which is to say, when it comes to the $18.9bn generated annually by NCAA universities, that money will not be finding its way into the wallets of the workers who generate it. Perhaps most remarkably, the NCAA justified the use of “student-athlete” in its new constitution by contending that it was at the “insistence” of the three athlete representatives on the committee of 23. Indeed, according to Daniel Libit’s reporting, Kendall Spencer, a former track and field athlete at New Mexico, said that there was “wide consensus among the thousands of current and former college athletes his group consulted that the term did more good than harm.” That claim has raised the ire of some college athletes. “I wonder who they consulted in terms of ‘student-athletes’ to determine that consensus,” mused Jason, a current player player in the power five, the elite level of college football. “The types of individuals that serve in these groups align with the NCAA’s viewpoint rather than that of the majority of their peers.” Or, as Damion, a former power five football player put it, “The SAAC members and that selection process, that’s all selected by the coaching staff. That’s not a fair representation of everyone else’s opinions.” We talked to 13 current and former players about their reactions to the claim they support the term “student-athlete.” Many athletes we spoke to chose to do so anonymously out of fear of reprisal and have been given pseudonyms to protect their identities. As one athlete explained: “As sad as it sounds I don’t want any backlash from it. I’m still living in their world and they do have control over us.” Not everyone objected to the term. James, a former power five football player, told us, “The term ‘student-athlete’ was something that I felt was a badge of honor.” That was important, he explained, because “it’s almost as if you have two full time jobs …people that went through that kind of rigorous workload, there is a lot of pride associated with it.” Brittany Collens, a former UMass tennis player, understands. “‘Student-athlete’ is a term many athletes are proud to embrace not because of what the system offers but as a term recognizing the sacrifice they have made to distinguish themselves apart from others. It’s meant to be a badge of honor.” What they reveal is how the exploitation of carrying “two full time jobs” with no pay is almost necessarily internalized as a “badge of honor” – which is to say form of identity – because it allows them to cope with the demands. This is at least in part a function of the fact that there is no external recourse through which to process and express these feelings of overwork. Emma, a current division one cross country and track and field athlete, puts it this way, “Even if we athletes are not being compensated, we crave the validation and fulfillment we get from playing the game to the point that we are willing to overlook the nonsensical conditions of our work … As much as the term ‘student-athlete’ is used to mislead us, it also serves to make us feel better.” That, in turn, is related to the reality that most college athletes are not offered a window into the historical and legal implications of the term. Andrew Cooper, the co-organizer of #WeAreUnited and United College Athlete Advocates, told us that many athletes “have no idea that the NCAA invented the term ‘student-athlete’ nearly 70 years ago to avoid paying workers’ compensation and how the NCAA leverages it to justify their tax-evasion scheme.” Collens adds, “It’s widely endorsed by college athletes because they don’t understand the implications behind the word.” That isn’t a coincidence. Universities condition athletes to view the term as a marker of pride divorced from its more insidious applications. As Mikayla, a former division one gymnast, puts it, “athletes are brainwashed from a young age that it’s an honor to be called a ‘student-athlete.’” Emma explains that we can only understand the perspective of college athletes in the context of “the constant deluge of propaganda from school athletic departments.” What that means is that she “can count on receiving an email from my school’s athletic department every day,” that details academic responsibilities. Moreover, “we have always had to have team meetings with our school compliance officer and athletic director…two hours of being told what an honor it is to be an athlete for the university, how we have such great privilege and responsibility compared to regular students, and a very long list of things we cannot, should not, absolutely will never do because we need to be the perfect representatives of the university. It can be difficult to escape that mindset.” Given that context, it is little wonder that many of the athletes we talked were surprised about the origins of the term. Luis, a current group of five football player put it this way, “everyone wants to be a ‘student-athlete’ because that is all we knew and were taught to be. We were never taught the real reason for being shielded away from aid and benefits.” Nearly all the players we spoke to objected to the inclusion of “student-athlete” in the new constitution. Florida Atlantic University football player Andrew Boselli said that “it reduces the rights of college athletes and hides their actual role.” For Luis, “it’s misleading because we are employees. Without us athletes there is no NCAA.” Mikayla added, “the term continues to be used in marketing and in commercials to make the NCAA seem more virtuous than it is.” Former Nebraska golfer Daniel Pearson put it plainly: “the term could not be further from the truth.” Similarly, Jalen, a current power five football player, explained, “I feel like there should be a better term to use or expand the meaning of ‘student-athlete’ to be closer to ‘employee.’” For Jason, the issue is that he believes “the majority of ‘student-athletes’ do not agree that they are simply students who happen to participate in an extra-curricular activity … It is unquestionable that they are actually employees.” This is why Gavin, a current power five football player, sees the term as “very misleading.” He explained, “Athletics are the priority, and everything else comes second. Schools are more concerned with keeping players eligible, rather than maximizing their academic opportunities.” Collens was even more forceful: “college athletes do want to be ‘student-athletes’ but they want to be the student athletes the NCAA organization promised them they would be. Not what the reality is. If they understood what it means they wouldn’t want that terminology to represent them. That’s like saying they want to be held from their rights. They’re being fooled through no fault of their own.” For former Clemson football player Stewart, addressing the problem means addressing the very issue of what it means to be a student in the context of college athletics. “I know people who were athletes and wanted to be students but had to settle short because the classes they wanted to be in got in the way of the athletic demands of the school.” That mirrored Mikayla’s experience. “Athletes cannot always change degrees if and when they have an interest change, their course loads are all too often decided by what makes them eligible, and class selection is based on what’s available outside of team obligations. That’s not putting the student first. Neither is missing approximately twelve class days per year to travel, compete and represent the university.” In Pearson’s experience, “The daily grind includes waking up before the sun for workouts, managing to go to class before or after a long practice, finding time to go to the trainer, to eat, and then maybe deciding to do homework if you can possibly keep your eyes open at that point.” Former UCLA soccer player Kaiya McCullough agrees. “Using the term ‘student-athlete’ frames the discussion of the role of college athletes away from what it is, employment... The reality is that these young athletes are being used for their labor to make money for their respective colleges and the NCAA. Many times in my own career as a college athlete I was forced to make sacrifices in my education for the sake of soccer, as that was the true priority for my time in school. Framing the discussion away from this reality is just another tool the NCAA uses to keep athletes from realizing their worth as employees.” One of the consequences of not treating athletes as employees is, unlike their coaching and administrator counterparts, they do not have the freedom to seek out opportunities to capitalize on market value. As Damion explained it, unlike players, “From a coach’s perspective, they can pick up, go, and make two times their money and walk out … that just happened with Lincoln Riley at USC.” With all this in mind, “the real question is whether the NCAA is willing to rethink what they mean by student and athlete,” said Stewart. And that question cannot reasonably be understood without reckoning with the dynamics of the highest-revenue forms of college sport. Given that in the power five conferences, as of the 2019-2020 season, Black students comprised only 5.7% of the student population, it is notable that they made up 55.9% of men’s basketball players, 55.7% of men’s football, and 48.1% of women’s basketball players. For Stewart, these figures have everything to do with the persistent use of the term ‘student-athlete’. “When people talk about student athletes they’re not talking about white men, they’re talking about Black men,” he says. “If it was centered on white men, they wouldn’t mind paying them. But because it’s wrapped up in race dynamics, people will always reject it because they don’t want Black athletes to have control and power, because they don’t think they deserve it.” From the moment Walter Byers and company invented it, the term ‘student-athlete” has always functioned as an instrument of racialized exploitation. Campus athletic workers are starting to notice. As Gavin put it, “It is silly to try and pretend that we function as regular students who simply participate in an extracurricular activity. “This is a job.”Nine-year-old Turokk Dow loves spelling, airplanes and basketball. He is learning to read and write in his third grade classroom. But suffering from extreme blood lead poisoning at age 3 – with lead levels nearly ten times the EPA action level – has hugely exacerbated the already-substantial challenges in his young life. As a toddler, he had to be rushed to the hospital and started on months of “chelation” treatments to soak up the lead in his body. These involved making him swallow a liquid that his mom said “smelled and tasted like rotten eggs”. “His levels were so high that lead actually got stored in his muscle and his bone,” said his mother, Nette Catholdi-Dow, who now works as an advocate against lead poisoning at the Childhood Lead Action Project in Rhode Island. She said it was only last year, five years after the poison was first detected, that his lead levels dropped to the single digits, getting close to the EPA’s action level of 5 micrograms per deciliter. He still does not have the ability to hold a conversation, and his mother will always wonder how much the lead contributed to his many learning challenges. “It was scary,” said Catholdi-Dow, who said the lead came from paint at her hundred-year-old house in the town of Attleboro. “At first I felt like I did something wrong or didn’t keep him safe. Guilt is a big part of it for parents.” Turokk Dow is one of about 87,000 young children who are diagnosed with lead poisoning in the US each year, more than three decades after the neurotoxin was banned as an ingredient in paint, gasoline and water pipes. Today, lead lingers in houses and apartments, yards and water lines, and wherever states and communities ramp up testing, it becomes clear that the nation’s lead problem is worse than we realized, experts say. A study published in JAMA Pediatrics this fall suggested that more than half of all US children have detectable levels of lead in their blood – and that elevated blood lead levels were closely associated with race, poverty and living in older housing. Black children are particularly at risk. “Most American children are exposed to lead, a substance that is not safe at any level,” said co-author Dr Harvey Kaufman, a senior medical director at Quest Diagnostics, which led the study. According to the CDC, “[e]ven low levels of lead in blood have been shown to negatively affect a child’s intelligence, ability to pay attention, and academic achievement.” “This is an entire United States issue,” Kaufman said. “It really is everywhere.” The nation’s programs to detect lead before it poisons children and to identify those who have been exposed are astoundingly slipshod. “We literally are using the blood of our children as detectors of environmental contamination,” said Dr Mona Hanna-Attisha, the pediatrician who helped to expose the drinking water crisis in Flint, Michigan. States like Rhode Island, which requires all children to get two screenings for lead poisoning by age three, are investing in early detection of lead poisoning. But such initiatives also show the difficulty of removing the toxin from our everyday environments. Without robust testing, states risk not knowing how bad their lead problem is and leaving sick children behind. “The lead epidemic is the longest-running epidemic in our country,” said Liz Colón, a Rhode Island woman whose son suffered severe lead poisoning two decades ago and who has since become a national advocate for solving the problem. “There are little Flint, Michigans everywhere,” she said. “But if you don’t test for it, it’s like it doesn’t exist.” ‘A cloud between being sick and being sad’ Because of decades of pressure from the parents and organizers who run the Children’s Lead Action Program, Rhode Island is doing far more testing of children’s blood than most states in the nation. What health advocates there have discovered is that lead contamination, often thought of as a thing of the past, persists in many communities, with hundreds of new cases of poisoned children discovered every year. Terri Wright, who grew up in public housing in Providence, says she doesn’t know whether the lead that poisoned her came from the peeling paint or the lead water pipes in her building. But she learned first-hand how the substance can leave lasting marks on a young person’s life. “I remember spending my childhood in this cloud between being sick and being sad,” said Wright, 51, who still suffers from the social anxiety she developed from being too weak and feverish to play with other children. Today, she does not trust the tap water in Providence, and buys six to eight cases of bottled water for her family every week. Wright recently joined dozens of Rhode Island activists on the steps of the state capitol, demanding the replacement all the lead pipes in the state’s aging housing stock. In all of Rhode Island, there are still an estimated 100,000 lead water service lines in use in private houses. And each year about 600 children in the state are discovered to have blood lead levels high enough to meet the EPA intervention levels. However, children in Rhode Island may be more fortunate than those in other states, where huge numbers of cases are believed to go undetected. In California, for example, a 2020 report found that 1.4 million low-income children who were supposed to receive testing never got checked for blood poisoning. In some states, like New York, testing of all children is required, but there is often insufficient followup. A study by the New York City comptroller found that 9,000 rental buildings where children tested positive for blood poisoning were never inspected for lead, resulting in additional children being poisoned. “As a society, we’re losing IQ points due to lead exposure,” said Tom Neltner of the Environmental Defense Fund. “In an individual child, you are not going to see it. But statistically we see the child is more likely to have behavior problems, to have learning problems, to have lower income. Other studies indicate that they’re more likely to be arrested, more likely to commit violent behavior – all the things we really don’t want in the next generation.” Children all across the nation are at risk. Lead water pipes are still found in millions of homes in all 50 states, a study by the Natural Resources Defense Council found. Liz Colón has three sons, one of whom suffered from hugely elevated blood lead levels as an infant. Thanks to state health programs that helped her identify his problem, she was able to tutor him as a child to make up for any developmental deficits the lead may have caused. But today when she looks at her sons, Colón thinks she may see slight differences that lead may have contributed to. “My son who was lead poisoned has impulse control issues and can be aggressive,” she said, adding that he has never gotten into trouble. “Those are the very subtleties of lead poisoning.” ‘It all comes down to race and class’ As a former state case manager who now works with Rhode Island’s Childhood Lead Action Project, Elizabeth Sorriano has seen the devastation of lead poisoning with her own eyes. She often worked with children who were two or three years old and could not yet speak and others who could not focus or follow their parents’ instructions. She saw that interventions – such as getting rid of the lead and providing educational support – could make huge improvements in their lives. “All these things can create misery for a young child that is growing up with all these issues,” she said. “It is something that is preventable. We shouldn’t be dealing with this.” A 2017 Pew Charitable Trust study found that taking measures to prevent lead exposure for children could provide huge economic benefits to society – up to $84bn a year in increased earnings and savings. And yet, poorer communities may lack the funding necessary to take on such prevention and remediation programs. While President Biden has made environmental justice a pillar of his administration, the final version of the infrastructure bill contains $15bn for removal of lead water pipes – much less than the $45bn originally proposed. The study published in JAMA found that children living in areas with the highest levels of poverty were two and a half times as likely to suffer blood poisoning. Colón said lead poisoning tends to be ignored because it has far higher incidence in poorer neighborhoods of color, where people tend to live in older housing. “It all comes down to race and class,” she said. “Lead was known as this dirty four-letter word. What people [associate] lead with is dirty people, who don’t clean their house and have kids just sitting around eating paint chips. It’s that stigma that continues to bring our society down.” Turokk Dow was diagnosed with autism at 18 monthsold, a condition which his mother said predated the lead poisoning. But she believes the poisoning affected her son’s speech and gave him an upset stomach that suppressed his appetite for years. The treatments for lead poisoning were also torturous. In addition to having to be force-fed the horrible sulfuric medicine, he had to be held down so that doctors could do intravenous blood tests every three months for years. Catholdi-Dow will never know how much of his speech delays were caused by the lead poisoning. But she said that as soon as his lead levels came down, his speech and his eating improved markedly. Today, he has learned to ask for things that he wants and can say a few sentences. Catholdi-Dow said she would like to see more education offered to parents – and more steps to prevent this sort of poisoning from ever happening. “They’re not doing anything until the child gets poisoned,” said Catholdi-Dow. “There should have been more testing – or at least more questioning of the kind of housing we were living in.”Justin Kurzel’s controversial Port Arthur massacre film Nitram may have dominated the categories but the 2021 Australian Academy of Cinema Television Arts awards were quite literally taken over by tributes to David Gulpilil – whose face adorned the sails of the venue, the Sydney Opera House, on Wednesday evening. Gulpilil, who died last week after a long illness, was honoured during the annual ceremony, which had already planned to award him the Longford Lyell lifetime achievement award. As the delayed broadcast of the awards began on Network Ten, images of the Arnhem Land-born actor and dancer were projected on to the Opera House, celebrating his roles in film classics including Walkabout, Storm Boy, Rabbit-Proof Fence and The Tracker. The film My Name Is Gulpilil collected the awards for best documentary and best editing of a documentary. Jack Thompson, Baz Luhrmann, Leah Purcell, Hugh Jackman, Bryan Brown, Phillip Noyce and Baker Boy were among those paying tribute to Gulpilil. Thompson said the actor nurtured a special relationship with the camera, and confronted the enormous challenge of navigating two worlds. “He brought with him from Arnhem Land absolute magic,” Thompson said. “Even though he always said he was just being himself [on film], he was a superb actor.” Natasha Wanganeen, who starred in the 2002 film Rabbit-Proof Fence at the age of 15, said Gulpilil was the first face she had seen on television “who looked like one of us”. The hip-hop artist Baker Boy dedicated his performance to Gulpilil – “An inspiration to all First Nations people, artists and performers … you are forever in our hearts.” Leah Purcell described him as “an inspiration, a teacher, a songman of the highest order and a man of deep culture. We will miss him.” ‘It’s a very sore wound for most Tasmanians’ Eight of the 2021 film awards were won by Nitram, including best film and best film director. The creators of the film, which depicts the lead-up to the 1996 Port Arthur massacre, acknowledged its controversial provenance. “It took a lot of courage make this film … it was very tough on cast and crew,” said the director, Justin Kurzel, who lives in Tasmania with his daughters and wife, the actor Essie Davis. Davis collected best supporting actress for her role as the mass killer’s benefactor. “We had known from outset we were working with sensitive material – and for some, fairly confronting,” said a producer, Nick Batzias. “We understand it’s not a film for everyone.” Speaking on the red carpet before the awards, Davis said that as a Tasmanian, she understood the rawness of the subject matter. “It’s a very sore wound for most Tasmanians, and we live there,” she said. “People are still very sensitive and I was so nervous when Justin first talked about it. But then I read it and Shaun [Grant, who won best original screenplay] had written such a great script, I knew it was a story that had to be told.” The Texas actor Caleb Landry Jones mastered an Australian accent to play the role of the mass shooter, Martin Bryant. He won for best actor in film, a gong he also picked up at this year’s Cannes film festival. Anthony LaPaglia collected best supporting actor for his portrayal of Bryant’s father and Judy Davis was awarded best actress in film for her role as Bryant’s mother. The Dry, a mystery drama thriller based on Jane Harper’s bestselling book – directed by Robert Connolly and starring Eric Bana – won best adapted screenplay in a film for Connolly and Harry Crips. It also won best cinematography in a film for Stefan Duscio. ABC wins big The Newsreader was also celebrated on Wednesday night, winning in four categories including best drama and best direction in a drama or comedy. The ABC drama series is set in an Australian newsroom in 1986 and covers the Challenger space shuttle disaster and the Chernobyl nuclear meltdown. Anna Torv, who was not present at the ceremony, won best leading actress in a drama series. Best miniseries or telefeature went to the ABC drama Fires, a six-part dramatisation of the 2019-20 Australian bushfire season directed by Ana Kokkinos, Michael Rymer and Kim Mordaunt. Fires also won best cinematography and best sound. The series’ co-creator, Belinda Chayko, accepted the award with a passionate speech about climate change. “People said it was too soon to tell this story but if we don’t act now it will be too late to save this wild and beautiful place,” she said. Rachel Griffiths won best supporting actress for the ABC series Total Control, and the ABC’s Bluey won best children’s program. Scott Ryan collected two awards, for best lead actor in a drama for Fox’s Mr Inbetween. He also won best screenplay in TV for episode six of the series. The SBS series New Gold Mountain won for costume design and original score. Rebel Wilson, Sarah Snook and Taika Waititi were among the night’s high-profile presenters. Tributes to Bert Newton and Peter Cundall Two other seminal figures in Australian screen who died this year were honoured during the ceremony. Rove McManus described the screen veteran Bert Newton as a titan of the industry. “No matter how brightly his star shone, he always made sure to have time for emerging lights,” McManus said. Newton died aged 83 on 30 October. Accepting the people’s choice award for favourite television host, Costa Georgiadis – with vegetation sprouting from his copious beard – said his predecessor Peter Cundall, who died on Sunday, had sewn the seed of Gardening Australia more than 30 years earlier. “This is for Peter,” Geogriadis said, punching his Aacta trophy in the air.Every night, sitting in her room in the remote Queensland town of Doomadgee, Bwerere Sandy Tebau calls her husband and daughter 4,300km away in Tarawa, the capital of Kiribati. “There is no sea!” Sandy says, when asked about the difference between her new home in the red desert of Australia and her island home in the central Pacific. “There is just a lake and in the lake are crocodiles!” Sandy is one of three nurses from Kiribati who have been brought in to work at an aged care facility in Doomadgee, a town of about 1,500 people, 85km from the border with the Northern Territory. Her employment is part of the Pacific labour scheme (PLS), a program that enables residents from 10 Pacific Island states and Timor-Leste to work for approved Australian employers in sectors such as meat processing, tourism and aged care. The program aims to tackle labour shortages that plague rural Australia. Securing a position in the program can be transformative for Pacific families, especially in remote and sparsely populated island states such as Kiribati. “I am going to save money to send back home,” Sandy says. “I will also save money for [my family’s] visa and plane ticket to come to visit me here.” A few weeks in and Sandy is enjoying the work at a facility called Ngooderi House. “We are getting to know the residents and we love the work... We are getting good feedback from Health X, who tells us we are hardworking and that they want to hire more i-Kiribati workers.” Past participants have returned to Kiribati with enough money to build sturdy concrete homes, reinforce wells, buy cars and fund their children’s education. With so much on offer in Australia, many recruits hope for pathways to stay. But back in Kiribati, the loss of the nurses to Australia is having severe impacts on the country’s healthcare system. On a humid Tarawa night, Albert O’Connor has received an all-too familiar phone call. A patient has presented at the hospital and is being prepped by O’Connor’s colleagues for an emergency C-section. Despite the fact he has only had a few hours’ sleep, hospital transport is on its way to take him back in to work at Tungaru central hospital, the country’s largest health centre. “Staff across all wards are working more double shifts,” said O’Connor, a nurse who studied with Sand. “There is no one to take our place, and we are even unable to assist shortages in other wards. “High birth rates and increased instances of non-communicable diseases stress limited resources and lead to long hours for the understaffed nurses… We often do not spend much downtime with our families.” Mereua Eete, Albert’s colleague in the obstetric ward, added: “With less staff and due to the number of patients in the obstetric ward, sometimes on our day off we are not off – we still must work overtime.” The hospital has struggled to cope with the growing needs of the community. According to sources at the ministry of health and medical services, the hospital is often overcrowded, having only 85 beds, including a 10-bed antenatal care unit housed in a tent. Kiribati has a population of about 120,000. In addition, Kiribati nurses receive low pay compared with their counterparts outside the country. The average fortnightly wage for nurses in Kiribati ranges from A$350-$500. As a result, registered nurses with skills and training are turning their sights to better paying and less intense opportunities in the Australian aged-care industry. With the arrival of Sandy and the 15 other nurses late last month, a total of 25 nurses from Kiribati are now employed in Australia through the PLS. The departure of the nurses has also come at a particularly bad time for Kiribati, as remaining staff confront a whooping cough outbreak and with fears that Covid could arrive in Kiribati – the country has so far remained Covid-free – as it plans to open borders in January. The ministry of employment and human resources said concerns about a brain drain from the country were overstated given that under PLS terms, contracts were fixed at three years and did not provide pathways to permanent residency. “At this stage, there is little concern about brain drain as these nurses will not stay in Australia permanently as they will return [to Kiribati] at the end of their contract,” the ministry said in a statement. For Sandy, while the work offers huge opportunities, it is unlikely she will look to stay longer than her posting, if it means being separated from her husband and daughter. The job is fulfilling but a tough commitment, especially during a pandemic that has made it nearly impossible to travel between Kiribati and Australia. “We miss her a lot, especially our daughter,” said Sandy’s husband, Tevevere, who remained in Kiribati. “But also we are happy for her and support her because we know she’s fulfilling one of her goals now.” “[Doomadgee] is a small town,” Sandy says. “There’s not much to do so we go to work, go shopping in the supermarket, and spend my free time in my room calling my husband and daughter. I really miss them a lot.”Life is about the journey, not the destination, the saying goes, and the speed-obsessed Solar Ash is built on that principle. Kitting the player out with invisible space roller skates, this colourful space adventure sees heroine Rei gliding across a gorgeously vibrant planet. Reminiscent of thatgamecompany’s Journey, a soothing collage of oil paintings and minimalistic comic-book design, Solar Ash’s gorgeous ruined cities and pastel-coloured plains rarely fail to stop you in your tracks. In some moments, Solar Ash is glorious, the sort of freeform, wind-in-your-hair joyride that shuts down your thoughts and delights the synapses. But the illusion shatters once you turn to an objective. Charged with saving Rei’s dying home planet from an ominous black hole, you drift and slash your way across the wheezing planet, seeking out poorly signposted tar-like anomalies and slaying the big beastie responsible for birthing them. These anomalies are obtusely hidden, and Solar Ash provides little in the way of subtle visual language to help you find them. I spent hours roaming the same areas in search of what to do next, slowly losing any lingering sense of intrigue and, eventually, my will to live. Solar Ash is all about movement, an experience that prides itself on speed and flow – but all too often, it grinds to a halt. Because it draws from influences as diverse as zombie-blasting rail grinder Sunset Overdrive and existential monster slayer Shadow of the Colossus, at times, playing Solar Ash feels like trying to follow the chaotic threads of one of Charlie from Always Sunny’s hare-brained schemes. There’s a lot happening, and some of it is compelling, but it’s too much to swallow, a hurriedly stirred potluck of genres and concepts. Where the developer’s previous release – Hyper Light Drifter – zoned in on compelling combat, this follow-up loses focus on the actual experience of play in favour of a grand vision. It’s a shame, as Solar Ash’s story and world building ooze potential. As you progress through increasingly eerie places, you’ll find strange grieving humanoid creatures muttering to themselves in madness. You’ll discover corpses lying ominously beside the crumbling bricks of ancient buildings. There’s more than a whiff of Dark Souls about it, adding a sense of unease to your adventure as you take your first few drifts into each new picturesque horizon. Half an hour later, though, I’d find that sense of atmosphere and anticipation replaced by sheer frustration. In its last few levels, Solar Ash begins to find what it’s been missing. The final few biomes are its most buoyant and fun, impressively unafraid to mix things up. When you’re surfing looping rollercoasters of clouds, hurtling into the sky from boost pads, the mask of pretension drops and Solar Ash is free to enter full flow. The boss fights shake off their cookie-cutter shackles and start to become their own distinct showdowns. And then, the game is over. It’s hard to imagine many players powering through the many more infuriating moments to get there. Solar Ash intends to be a striking and poignant mediation on mortality and the universe while uncovering a cosmic mystery. Over my 15 exasperating hours with it, it flirted with these grand ideas, and showed glimpses of gameplay greatness. But instead of gasping in awe, more often it had me sighing with frustration. Solar Ash is out now, £31.99Pat Cummins basked in the afterglow of a “dream start” to his captaincy of Australia as England’s bid to regain the Ashes began with a familiar feeling of despondency at the Gabba. The hosts are being led by a fast bowler for the first time in 65 years but any concerns about saddling Cummins with the extra burden soon melted away when his first five-wicket haul in Ashes cricket blew England away for 147 on day one. “It’s just a dream start really,” said Cummins, who replaced Tim Paine on the eve of the series and became just the second seam-bowling Australian captain to take five wickets in an innings after George Giffen back in 1895. “It wasn’t a bad toss to lose and obviously [Mitchell] Starcy started it all off. But all the bowlers really did our job and to keep them to 147, I’m really proud of how persistent everyone was.” Starc’s eye-popping removal of Rory Burns with the first ball of the series set the tone for two sessions of English agony only fleetingly eased when Jos Buttler top-scored with a breezy 39. For Burns it was a sixth duck in 2021 surpassing Mike Atherton’s record of five by an England opener in a calendar year set in 1998. Australia did not look back, Cummins deftly marshalling an attack that feasted on a touring lineup restricted to just seven sessions of warm-up cricket. It left the England camp defending both Joe Root’s decision to bat on a moist, bouncy pitch with a green tinge and the much-debated dual omission of Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad for the first time in 37 Ashes Tests. Ollie Pope, who was preferred to Jonny Bairstow and compiled 35 from No 6 before becoming Cameron Green’s first Test scalp, said: “I wouldn’t look too much at the toss, we just had to execute in the first couple of hours of the game. We had the quality in the side to score the runs we needed. We’ll keep fighting and we have to see both sides bat on this wicket.” On the early dismissal of Burns, his captain at Surrey, Pope added: “I wouldn’t say it created panic at all because you have to stay calm but it wasn’t the ideal start. I know what Burnsy is like and he’s a competitor. He’ll come back fighting.” Anderson and Broad spent the day running drinks out to the middle and in the case of the former, this absence was a combination of a calf niggle at the start of the tour, a bowling average of 75 in Brisbane and desire to have the 39-year-old primed for possible swing-friendly conditions in next week’s pink ball second Test. Broad has simply been overlooked, the 35-year-old having been forced to make way to accommodate the left-arm spin of Jack Leach and a 90mph fast bowler in Mark Wood, while Ollie Robinson’s superior form in 2021 and the all-round ability of Chris Woakes meant they were preferred. “I guess those are the reasons behind it,” said Pope, while noting the calf tear that ruined the back end of Broad’s home summer against India. “But it’s a bit above my pay grade to be honest.” Asked about England’s selection, Cummins added: “I thought England would play one of Broad or Anderson in each Test so to leave out both was a bit of a surprise. Woakes and Robinson are pretty similar bowlers so the England selectors have gone for different options. But we will knuckle down against them and do our thing.” Root’s players wore black armbands on the first day in memory of the former England women’s cricketer Eileen Ash, who died earlier this week aged 110. For Ben Stokes the armband also featured the number 568 to denote the New Zealand rugby league cap of his father, Ged, on the one-year anniversary of his death.After 16 years of gruelling European summits, late-light coalition negotiations and back-to-back conference calls with heads of state, Angela Merkel has vowed to spend the foreseeable future kicking back her flat black shoes and reading a few good books. But newly emerged details of a new office in central Berlin and veiled hints in interviews suggests the world may not have seen the last of Germany’s outgoing chancellor yet. Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will be sworn in at the president’s Bellevue Palace on Wednesday at noon, after which Merkel will “withdraw from political life” and “not attend any appointments for a period of months”, her long-serving spokesperson, Steffen Seibert, said last Friday. In a video conference with parliamentarians from her Christian Democratic Union (CDU) on Tuesday, the outgoing chancellor reportedly said she would remain available for questions but not give any advice in public. Merkel has rejected suggestions she may don a white lab coat and return to scientific research with her husband, quantum chemist Joachim, who recently extended his contract as a senior researcher at Berlin’s Humboldt University until 2022. “I can see myself regularly speaking out about the connection between our prosperity, research and innovation – but I’m sure I won’t be doing any scientific work,” she told Reuters last month. Since entering politics in reunified Germany in 1990, she had barely had a minute to consider what could interest her afterwards, the chancellor said at an event in September with the Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie. “I want to think very carefully in the now-approaching phase of my life about the question of what surfaces in me,” Merkel said. “Do I want to write, speak, hike, do I want to be at home, do I want to travel the world?” A move to her birthplace, Hamburg, where the chancellor was rumoured to have purchased a property in the wealthy suburb of Blankenese, were quashed on the campaign trail in September, where she assured the citizens of Germany’s north-east that Berlin and Brandenburg state would remain the centre of her life. She would certainly not “accept the first invitation coming in just because I am scared of doing nothing”, Merkel said while accepting an honorary degree at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore in July. Doing nothing doesn’t seem a realistic prospect, or so a document her office submitted to a Bundestag committee last month would suggest. According to the official request that was later leaked to German press, Merkel has asked to have her future office on Berlin’s Unter den Linden boulevard staffed with nine employees, two of them office managers, two specialist assistants, three clerks and two drivers. For comparison, her predecessor, Gerhard Schröder, worked from an office with seven employees after he lost to Merkel in 2005. Schröder, of course, rushed to leave a stain on his political legacy by taking up a job with the Russian pipeline company Nord Stream, only months after leaving the chancellery. His predecessor, Helmut Kohl, whose old offices Merkel will take over, used his political retirement to start a company offering lucrative strategic advice and lobbying services. Germany’s first female chancellor would find the revolving door between politics and business at least temporarily jammed: a law passed in 2015 bars holders of political high office from switching straight to lobbying for at least a year, and up to 18 months. After catching up with reading during her self-imposed break, perhaps Merkel will find herself taking inspiration from a novel published this spring. David Safier’s crime novel Miss Merkel imagines the chancellor retiring to her dacha in the Uckermark district of Brandenburg in the north-east of the country but soon grows bored and investigates unsolved murders instead.When Charley Pride arrived in Belfast in early November 1976, the Northern Irish capital was at war. There were almost daily reports of shootings of civilians and soldiers on both sides of the sectarian divide. An armistice movement, the Peace People, had materialised that summer after three children were fatally struck by an IRA getaway car. Someone else intent on restoring normality to Belfast during the bloody 70s was Jim Aiken. This enterprising former schoolteacher-turned-concert promoter wanted to turn Northern Ireland into a second home for American country music – and rightfully so, since the Ulster Scots folk tradition was an essential ancestor of the genre. Aiken had invited over artists such as Buck Owens and Tex Ritter. Next, he had his heart set on Pride, the singer who found success as a Black artist in a roots genre that had come to be dominated by white artists. Country music was ascendant, and Pride was one of its poster children. Born to sharecroppers in rural Mississippi, he hit the US charts with a string of No 1 albums. He became such an institution that he presented an award to President Jimmy Carter in recognition of Carter’s encouragement of the genre. Having vaulted humble origins, Pride, much like his president (a former peanut farmer from south Georgia), was the American dream incarnate. The rest of the world was taking note. To persuade this famous singer to make his way to Belfast, promoter Aiken trekked to a concert in the US midwest. Mishearing the name “Jim Aiken”, Pride reportedly understood that a Jamaican wished to speak with him after his set. Curiosity led him to summon the promoter backstage. They agreed to one Dublin gig on Pride’s next UK tour, followed by three nights in Belfast. Aiken would drive him up from Dublin, shepherd him across the border and sequester him at the hotel (to appease Pride’s wary lawyer) until showtime. The residency at Belfast’s Ritz cinema quickly sold out. But there were doubts that Pride would manage to get there. Though Aiken had booked big names throughout the 60s, an unspoken ban on foreign performers had tightened since the emergence of the Provisional IRA in 1969. No-shows became common. Johnny Cash’s cancellation of an Ulster Hall appearance in 1971, was a prominent example. The horrific roadside execution of players from a Dublin show band by members of the Ulster Volunteer Force (a loyalist paramilitary group, some of whom were part time soldiers) in 1975, as the group drove home from a gig in Banbridge, north of Newry, seemed, at that point, to squash all hope of a nightlife in the North. Just days before Pride’s scheduled appearance in 1976, headlines blared: “Singer Tammy Stands Down”, announcing the cancellation of a performance by another country superstar. “I am bitterly disappointed by Miss Wynette’s decision,” Aiken, who had booked her, seethed in Belfast’s biggest newspaper. “I believe she was influenced by the continuing violence here.” Yet who could blame her? Meanwhile, when he was in Dublin, Pride recalled decades later, someone pulled the singer aside and whispered, “You don’t have to do Belfast.” When the day came, however, Pride delivered. In part, duty compelled him: “Jim flew in puddle jumpers [small aircraft] across four states to catch up with me in Waterloo [Indiana] and persuade me to play Belfast in the dark days,” he later explained. But he stayed, one imagines, for what struck him as a revelatory experience. By his third night in Belfast, he said he had a better grasp of the politics. Singing the song Crystal Chandeliers, which he popularised, “I got to thinking about the people coming to see me when there was all this trouble going on, and I got very emotional. And I don’t do fake tears.” The feeling was mutual. A jubilant column in the Belfast Telegraph declared: “Thank you Charley Pride and the Pridesmen … for giving me, and thousands like me two hours of pure enjoyment, and the chance to forget for a while the worries and troubles of sad Belfast. Thanks, Charley &amp; Co for not backing out like so many others.” Other singers, such as Tom Paxton and Joan Baez followed him north. Journalists credited them with bringing about a cultural thaw. “After seven years of violence, the city seems to be getting back a little of that ‘swing’, much of which was dissipated, understandably, by the continual bombings around the city centre,” wrote the Telegraph in 1977. Cash would make it for a concert in 1979. (When Garth Brooks flew to Belfast for Aiken’s funeral in 2007, he represented a third decade of US country acts whom those first Pride gigs had beckoned back to the territory.) The impact of Pride’s appearances in Belfast endured long after the artist had flown home. Odes to “My incomparable Charlie Pride [sic]” appeared in the Belfast papers. Radio stations held Pride-themed sweepstakes with his records as prizes. Rumours spread that, while in Belfast, Pride covertly recorded the Ulster dialect. “Doubtless, back home,” one linguist speculated in the Telegraph, these tapes “are now making his friends marvel”. *** Out of this Pride-o-mania emerged an anomaly in country music. His version of Crystal Chandeliers, a mid-tempo heartbreak shuffle written (as Crystal Chandelier) by Ted Harris and recorded by Pride in 1967, had never charted back home. Nearly a decade after its original release, it found new life as a Northern Irish unity anthem – echoing how the Northern Ireland civil rights movement of the 1960s borrowed the protest song We Shall Overcome and studied the marches of Martin Luther King. Pride had not been a stranger to the UK airwaves before his visit. Years before his arrival in Belfast, the Irish singer Mattie Fox had found some quiet success covering Crystal Chandeliers in 1973. The Diamond Accordion Band of County Armagh (whose debut LP bore images of the Union Jack and the loyalist William of Orange) released a version two months before Pride arrived, building on the excitement of his aggressively promoted gig. But Pride’s appearance in Belfast encouraged more covers in Northern Ireland and in the Irish Republic, a wave that then spread across the UK. Many of these were private-press recordings with little commercial ambition. Some miscredited Pride as the song’s author, he had become so synonymous with the tune. These covers were joined by two jukebox reissues of Pride’s version in the UK and a 1980 BBC poll naming Crystal Chandeliers “Great Britain’s all-time favourite country song”. Fame like this defied the Darwinian logic of what was in the US a ruthlessly commercial genre. Looking for the source of its fresh success, you might point to the song’s pubby chorus, rendered in Chet Atkins’s 1967 production with a tantalising, a capella lead-in. Or you could look at the plot of the song. Pride’s lover has left him for fancier company: I never did fit in too well with folks you knew And it’s plain to see that the likes of me don’t fit with you So you traded me for the gaiety of the well-to-do And you turned away from the love I offered you He addresses his lover, but the words lack a sense of romantic loss. Instead, Pride fixates on a nameless “you” and this person’s new riches: her marble statuettes, the paintings on her wall and the chandeliers that illuminate them. Class and exclusion are the song’s true themes – subjects all too familiar to the Catholics who felt jilted by the Republic, as well as to the Protestants who complained their government had ceded too much to minority Catholics. By appealing to all sympathies, the song temporarily blurred divisions. In 1985, Malachy Doris, a BBC Home Service entertainer from County Tyrone, included the song on his collection of Irish pub favourites. The fortitude of Doris’s Catholic upbringing might account for the optimism he injected into an altered line: “But the love I offered you will come back some day.” One cover came from a steward of the Irish country scene, the singer Daniel O’Donnell, a Catholic from nearby County Donegal (who cut Chandeliers as a duet with Pride in 2008). “In the North of Ireland at that time, Charley had an audience of Protestants and Catholics in the theatre,” O’Donnell told me. “It was very difficult to get people to come at that time. And Charley came, and continued to come. And I suppose it gave people great hope.” Pride became a regular guest in the North and the Republic over the decades. In later years, he grew sentimental: “Every time I step off a plane onto Irish soil I get a sense of belonging. I’m accepted like a native son.” *** It’s hard not to believe, as he looked out over his first Belfast crowd in 1976, that Pride also felt the song’s racial history on stage with him. In 1967, Crystal Chandeliers appeared on his album The Country Way, the first of Pride’s many No 1 albums. The success of that album moved the Black Nova Scotian singer Brent Williams, in 1970, to cover the song on his solo debut, asserting in the liner notes: “There is still room for negro singers in country music.” That same year, America’s household jazz icon included the song on his final album, the inexplicable Louis “Country &amp; Western” Armstrong. The tapes had been farmed out to Nashville players then overdubbed with vocals back in New York – essentially a karaoke disc strangely bereft of trumpet. Although the LP flopped, Armstrong’s performance of Crystal Chandeliers in October 1970, for the Johnny Cash Show at Nashville’s Ryman Auditorium, was nothing short of electrifying. His set that night was also political. After Chandeliers, he closed on a duet with Cash of Blue Yodel Number 9, a canonical classic by the so-called “father of country music”, Jimmie Rodgers. Forty years earlier, in 1930, a young Armstrong sat in on this song’s inaugural session in a Hollywood recording studio, blowing acrobatics around Rodgers’s verses in a collaboration brokered by the talent scout Ralph Peer. As he wailed with Cash on the song he had once helped bring to life, the elder Armstrong now paired it with Crystal Chandeliers, a new number from the rising Black generation. Country music, Armstrong seemed to say, has always been and will always be Black. Passing through these pointed renditions (among others) before it made its way to Belfast, what became a Black country anthem renewed Northern Ireland’s special relationship with US civil rights and amplified the fragile promise of the 1976 Peace People. (A London reggae cover from 1982 would suggest North America wasn’t the only Black audience for the song.) Even as the new peace movement flagged under Margaret Thatcher’s cold Northern policy of the 1980s, Crystal Chandeliers continued to be sung there. The song endured through the franker voicings of Stiff Little Fingers and well after the Good Friday Agreement started, in 1998, the formal end to the Troubles. It was a serendipity of songwriter, interpreter and promoter that brought an outsider into the painful intricacies of sectarian apartheid – the stuff of myth for both country music and civil rights. Today, one year after his death from Covid-19, Pride is remembered for the usual reasons: a voice that combined butter with honk, an ear for two-stepping hits and a career that signalled the possibility of an integrated country tradition. But it was during that distant week in Belfast that an American icon became a global one. • Walker Mimms teaches history in the Bennington College Prison Education Initiative in Vermont.The Nobel laureate Abdulrazak Gurnah, who fled Zanzibar for England in the 1960s, has spoken of how he began writing “in refusal of the self-assured summaries of people who despised and belittled us”. Gurnah, who was awarded the Nobel prize for literature in October for his “uncompromising and compassionate penetration of the effects of colonialism and the fate of the refugee in the gulf between cultures and continents”, was speaking during his Nobel lecture on Tuesday. The author, who left Zanzibar as a teenager after the 1964 revolution, said it was after he arrived in England, following a “prolonged period of poverty and alienation”, that “it became clearer to me that there was something I needed to say”. “It was only in the early years that I lived in England that I was able to reflect on such issues, to dwell on the ugliness of what we were capable of inflicting on each other, to revisit the lies and delusions with which we had comforted ourselves,” said the novelist. “Eventually I began to write about some of these reflections, not in an orderly or organised way, not yet, just for the relief of clarifying a little some of the confusions and uncertainties in my mind.” But Gurnah went on to speak of his “deeply unsettling” realisation that “a new, simpler history was being constructed, transforming and even obliterating what had happened”. For him, he said, it “became necessary then to refuse such a history,” and “to write of the persecutions and cruelties which the self-congratulations of our rulers sought to wipe from our memory”. He also wanted to explore his experience of colonialism as he grew up – something which he said had become clearer to him after moving to the UK as he “gained a better understanding of how someone like me figured in some of their stories of themselves, both in their writing and in casual discourse, in the hilarity that greeted racist jokes on the TV and elsewhere, in the unforced hostility I met in everyday encounters in shops, in offices, on the bus”. “I could not do anything about that reception, but just as I learned to read with greater understanding, so a desire grew to write in refusal of the self-assured summaries of people who despised and belittled us,” said Gurnah, the first black African to win the prize since Wole Soyinka in 1986. But the Nobel laureate, who joins former recipients of the honour including Harold Pinter, Doris Lessing and Toni Morrison, was clear that “writing cannot be just about battling and polemics, however invigorating and comforting that can be”. “Writing is not about one thing, not about this issue or that, or this concern or another, and since its concern is human life in one way or another, sooner or later cruelty and love and weakness become its subject,” he said. “I believe that writing also has to show what can be otherwise, what it is that the hard domineering eye cannot see, what makes people, apparently small in stature, feel assured in themselves regardless of the disdain of others. So I found it necessary to write about that as well, and to do so truthfully, so that both the ugliness and the virtue come through, and the human being appears out of the simplification and stereotype. When that works, a kind of beauty comes out of it.”The Roman empire’s USP has always been its survival. The largest state ever to exist in Europe, Rome’s empire began with the conquest of its Italian neighbours in the last centuries BC, and endured, in one form or another, for more than 1,000 years. The imperial monarchy established by Augustus at the turn of the millennium became a model repeatedly imitated into the 20th century. The Slavic title Czar is a distant echo of Caesar. Its Eagles soared over the empires of Austria, France and Mexico. The Roman fasces, an axe enclosed in a bundle of rods, were not only brandished by Mussolini and Hitler, but continue to adorn the US House of Representatives and the Sheldonian Theatre in Oxford. My book Rome: An Empire’s Story, the second edition of which has just been published, describes that long arc of history from Iron age villages on the Tiber to Byzantium, embattled on the Bosphorus as its Syrian and African possessions were falling to Arab armies. It also explores the echoes of Roman empire through the ages. The following are some of the best volumes in a long and still expanding literature. 1. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire by Edward Gibbon This six-volume history (first published between 1776 and 1789) is now read more by scholars of the Enlightenment than by Roman historians, but no one has told Rome’s story with more style and relish. The famous opening in the ruins of the Roman forum colours the whole book. The sense of antiquity yielding with poor grace to the succeeding ages remains a powerful image. Gibbon knew too that Byzantium was also, and was still, Rome long after the Eternal City was sacked by barbarians (twice) and possessed by the popes. No word describes it better than epic. 2. The Corrupting Sea by Peregrine Horden and Nicholas Purcell As different from Gibbon as it could be, except for its scale and ambition. Published in 2000, this is the most brilliant and influential recent work on the ancient world. Beginning from a deep understanding of the Mediterranean environment it builds a picture of the ancient region as a world of distant but connected communities, many of them precariously balanced on the edge of sustainability. City states and empires play second fiddle here to peasants and villages: wars and revolutions matter less than bad harvests and disease. It is a compelling view of the underside of empire, the base on which it was built. The discipline is still working through the implications of their arguments. 3. The Acts of the Apostles For Rome, of course, we are lucky enough to have eye-witness accounts. Perhaps none is more gripping than the Acts, a sequel to the gospel narrative – life after Jesus – played out in Judaea, among the cities of the empire’s eastern provinces and eventually in Rome itself. Acts has everything from Roman summary justice and civic riots to the perils of sea travel, and especially the strange combinations of identities the empire’s various subjects adopted for themselves. 4. The Emperor in the Roman World by Fergus Millar Politically, all revolved around the emperor. Fergus Millar’s masterpiece, like all great books, has inspired debate and critique, but it changed the way we understand the practice of Roman government. Millar concentrated on building up a picture of what emperors actually did, from their letters and laws and from thousands of inscriptions and provincial records, rather than from the sardonic histories of senatorial writers such as Tacitus and Dio. It conveyed too a sense of the vastness of the empire, and the slowness with which information moved through its arteries. Millar’s emperor struggled to keep track of what was going on. He was mostly on the back foot too, reacting to crises rather than driving policy. It is an image hard to get out of one’s mind. 5. The World of Late Antiquity by Peter Brown Another book that leaves its mark. Where others had seen Rome reach its peak around the turn of the second and third centuries, Brown begins there and tells the story of the new worlds that emerged between the reign of Marcus Aurelius and the prophet Muhammad. The new cultures and religions and languages of late antiquity have been a fertile field for recent research. When revising my own book this was the period in which Roman History had changed the most over the last decade. Brown started the study of late antiquity, which now has its own journals, encyclopedias and conferences, and he has continued to lead from the front. 6. The Roman Triumph by Mary Beard Rome has so often been a model for later imitators that it is sometimes easy to forget how different it was from what followed. This is not the most famous of Beard’s many books on Rome, but it played an important part in exploring the combination of savagery and ceremonial that followed Roman victories. It also described the enormously creative efforts of Romans who reshaped their religion and their monumental city for each generation. 7. Rome. An archaeological guide by Amanda Claridge If you want to explore the remains of that city, there is no better guide than this. Claridge knows the modern city and its most recent archaeology better than anyone writing in English. Her book is a lucid and compact guide to the most ruinous and built-over monuments. I carry it with me everywhere when in the city (and have worn out a couple of copies). 8. Roman Presences by Catherine Edwards Wandering the Eternal City it is impossible not to think of the many aftershocks of the Roman empire. The later reception of images of Rome has been a scholarly growth industry in recent years but my favourite collection remains this one, which ranges from Thomas Macaulay to TS Eliot and London to Bombay. 9. Asterix the Gaul by Rene Goscinny and Albert Uderzo My earliest encounter with a modern reception of ancient Rome was here. It still makes me laugh as much as it did when I was 12 years old. My children learned to read on it. When I came to live in Paris as a graduate student, I realised how much it had to say about France after the second world war and under the Fifth Republic as well. Quite brilliant. 10. Byzantium: The Surprising Life of a Mediaeval Empire by Judith Herrin My final choice, because Gibbon was right that Roman history does not end with the sack of Rome, the deposition of the last western emperor, or even the Arab Conquests. Herrin tells the 1,000-year history of the Christian Roman empire not through a narrative, but a series of brilliant and vivid vignettes. It is a joy to read. Rome: An Empire’s Story by Greg Woolf is published by Oxford University Press (£12.99).Dan works in forestry. Clare is a school counsellor. Recently, they took their youngest son to a superhero film. Their middle son loves football. They miss their eldest, Rory, who left home a few months ago. The Hoopers are much like any other family with three children, or they would be if Dan did not have an unusual superpower. He is the best DIY digger of tunnels in the country. And for a quarter of a century he has burrowed passageways into the paths of new roads, runways and railways that destroy the countryside and add to spiralling carbon emissions and global heating. In this strange underland, Dan has another name: Swampy. The story of Swampy, “the human mole”, was a tabloid fable in the 1990s. Margaret Thatcher’s “Roads for Prosperity” – supposedly the biggest road-building scheme since the Romans – was attracting growing opposition. Protests culminated outside Newbury, Berkshire, in 1996 when thousands marched against a bypass. Young people took to treehouses and threw themselves on diggers. Among them was a 23-year-old from leafy Buckinghamshire. Hooper learned to dig tunnels in which activists could hide, halting construction while bailiffs were forced to crawl underground to evict them. A fellow activist, Angel, called him “Swamp Boy” because of his green waterproofs, dreadlocks and generally muddy demeanour. Swampy stuck. Then, after a biblical seven days and seven nights in a tunnel to stop a dual carriageway scheme on the A30 in Devon in 1997, Swampy emerged into the media glare. He may have been scruffy, but he had the loveliest smile. As the Guardian put it, “Swampy Fever” struck. “His father wears a suit each day to commute into west London where he works as a computer consultant,” gasped the Daily Mail. Both his Mail-reading parents were vocally proud of their son. Swampy became the poster boy of environmental activism. He was the youngest panellist on Have I Got News For You, Coronation Street introduced an eco-warrior called Spider, while the Judge Dredd comic created Spawny. One headline had him heralding the end of 90s lad culture: “Lads limp off as girls swoon for sexy Swampy.” But when Swampy, who is now 48, joined the tunnellers trying to stop Manchester airport’s second runway in 1997, he suffered a backlash. Conservative transport minister John Watts wanted Swampy “buried in concrete”. His high profile grated with the non-hierarchical environmental movement. And the publicity he attracted didn’t seem to inspire more people to join non-violent direct action. So Hooper stopped talking to the media and vanished from view. It was two decades later, in 2020, when he reappeared, balanced precariously on a tower of bamboo poles built in the path of HS2, the high-speed railway from London to Birmingham. This year, he dug tunnels to halt HS2 works at Euston station in London and for the same project in Wendover, Buckinghamshire, where he and colleagues resisted eviction for 28 days below ground. While Swampy hunched in a claustrophobic cavity in the chalk, Alok Sharma, Tory president of the Cop26 climate summit, was declaring that modern-day Swampys were “in boardrooms, in government departments, in multilateral development banks and trading floors all around the world – you, my friends, are the new Swampys, so be proud”. From a Conservative minister fantasising about his murder to another suggesting that bankers were proud to be like Swampy is quite a journey. So, has he changed? Or has the establishment changed? *** Dan Hooper leads me along a muddy path wiggling up Tipi Valley, a 200-acre former farm that, since the 1970s, has been home to families seeking to live in a truly sustainable way. He is pushing an orange wheelbarrow heavily loaded with damp firewood and looks younger than when he emerged, exhausted and grey with chalk, from the Wendover tunnel. He is also preternaturally cheerful, smiling at everything. “What did someone say? ‘He’s more famous for the smile than the soundbite’,” he says, grinning with a grimace. It is a beautiful winter’s day in west Wales. The air smells of woodsmoke and you can hear the distant shout of a child playing. The Hoopers’ home, which they built themselves, is a pair of low, wooden roundhouses with roofs of luxuriant green turf. Inside, there is an immaculate kitchen, table, sofas, bookshelves and a wood-burning stove. The family hotspot with their phone to watch Netflix on a laptop, but an evening bath involves the laborious heating of pans of water from mid-afternoon. At night, the only sounds are a nearby stream and a tawny owl. The family moved here 18 years ago, when Clare was pregnant with Rory. Previously Dan and Clare had been living in a yurt beside a quarry in Derbyshire. But Hooper’s son from another relationship was already living with his mum in the community, so it made sense. “No individual owns the land,” says Clare. “We’re just living as lightly as possible rather than making money out of it. The valley is a uniquely wonderful place where people can grow food and bring up a family so we were lucky to come here.” Hooper grew up in a very different world. As a kid he wanted to join the Parachute Regiment, but also loved nature and making dens. While his older brother became a chemical engineer and younger sister a teacher, he joined a group of hunt saboteurs in Exeter. His environmental protest sprang from an intuition that capitalism wasn’t right. “You always know something’s wrong in the back of your mind – the way things are,” he says. From there he moved on to an A30 protest camp in Devon. Witnessing environmental destruction was shocking “but it was empowering as well because all these people were so dedicated. To see the movement grow was amazing. We lived in the trees and would visit each other’s treehouses and they couldn’t get us until the bailiffs came. That was quite exciting – to be able to stand up for the environment, for the rights of the land.” “Digger diving” was “like a game of bulldog” remembers Hooper. An activist would evade security, jump on a digger, and bring construction to a halt. “It was a lot of fun,” he says. He learned to make a fire, build treehouses and climb. “I used to be scared of heights before I moved to a protest site.” Each individual battle was eventually lost. The M3 extension at Twyford Down, the Newbury bypass, the A30 dual carriageway – all were built. But the wider war was won. The government scrapped much of its £23bn roads programme. And the movement became a finishing school for a generation of environmentalists – from the leading academics Simon Lewis and Paul Chatterton to writers Nicola Chester and George Monbiot. His own fame, Hooper thinks, came by chance: he was simply the last one out of the A30 tunnel. “And I had a silly name,” he says. Plus, Clare points out: “The media liked the fact that your mum still loved you despite you breaking the law and looking a bit scruffy.” Hooper smiles, “I’m Daily Mail-friendly, really, aren’t I? White, middle-class.” During the protests against Manchester airport’s second runway, he became uncomfortable with the media focus on “just one personality”, he says. The police also developed a mysterious ability to spot and arrest him. During one action, every activist was masked and yet the police managed to grab him. Later, he was hidden in a car on the way to have a bath at a supporter’s house when officers stopped it and detained him. Each time, he was with the same activist who had befriended him. “He even gave me some weed just before I was arrested once. And he disappeared from the scene – he supposedly became a Buddhist. I think he was a cop. Greater Manchester police were horrible at the time. There was a lot of police violence.” It wasn’t until 2010 that the “spy-cops” scandal broke: undercover officers had infiltrated the environmental movement so deeply that they even fathered children with some campaigners. So the media personality Swampy disappeared from popular view, but Hooper continued to campaign, joining a camp that successfully stopped a quarry in Derbyshire. While he and Clare were raising a family he avoided going away on direct action. “I get a bit obsessed. I don’t do things by halves,” he says. These days, he’s a forester and co-runs a small tree-planting enterprise. So why is he forsaking the tranquillity of his home life for dangerous tunnelling once more? His main reason is self-evident: the world is facing a climate and biodiversity breakdown driven by an economic system based on overconsumption. The rise of Extinction Rebellion inspired him and he joined an oil refinery blockade in 2019. But XR was too slow-moving – “It’s hard to get anything done without 10 meetings,” he says – so he joined the HS2 protestors. But Hooper is also dismayed by the threat to peaceful protest posed by the draconian police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, as well as the Tories’ post-pandemic “build back better” nirvana of 4,000 miles (6,400km) of new roads. “I thought, bloody hell, this is from the 1990s. It’s mad.” There is a more personal reason Hooper has returned, too: he loves tunnels. When anti-HS2 campaigners dug in near Euston, Hooper was phoned by one of their worried mothers, asking him to check the safety of the construction. He has always been particularly careful with shoring, the wooden buttresses that support the tunnels. Once at Euston, he couldn’t resist getting involved. If you can picture Hooper and his peers digging like Fantastic Mr Fox and his friends, pursued by diggers, you are not far wrong. Hooper never works alone. “You need a big team to make the eviction last longer. You can’t do it by yourself,” he says. Then it’s asymmetric warfare: medieval tools versus state-of-the-art tech. He digs using a shovel or, at Wendover, by bashing chalk with a brickie’s hammer. Buckets of soil and stone are stored in side chambers. Hooper is meticulous and safety-conscious, according to Clare, but in the eyes of the authorities the hand-dug tunnels are dangerous. The bailiffs advance by replacing protesters’ wooden roof props with metal ones; activists are also given monitors to ensure oxygen levels remain safe. Bailiffs use scanners to locate activists underground and power tools to reach them. At Wendover this autumn, Hooper’s group filled the tunnel behind them, sealing themselves underground. Afterwards, they didn’t hear from the bailiffs for two days. “That was a bit scary. When they eventually popped through we were quite pleased to see them.” Is there mutual respect between tunnellers and bailiffs? “Definitely,” says Hooper. He tries to build relationships with them. “It’s a lot safer to evict people if you’ve got some sort of rapport. It’s less likely to escalate into violence.” Some younger activists shout “scum” at the bailiffs, but Hooper wouldn’t do that. “What’s the point in calling them scum? They’re not going to stop. They’re getting paid too well. But they’re still the bottom of the food chain. It’s the people up there who are causing the trouble. We need to work together to stop these capitalists destroying the planet.” As a counsellor, Clare is exploring the link between our ability to care for ourselves and our capacity to nurture the planet. Protesters must cope with watching trees chopped down and deal with intimidation and aggression from police, bailiffs and private security officers. “A lot of activists,” she says, “recognise that what they experience on the camps is trauma.” “A bit too much I think,” says Hooper. “If anything, it’s got less violent over the years.” Hooper says the eviction officers are often former soldiers and traumatised themselves. “I say to activists: ‘Try not to shout at bailiffs’ – because they’ve come back from Afghanistan or Iraq.” There is one final reason for Hooper’s re-engagement in activism, however. His son, Rory, has joined the anti-HS2 campaign. Clare’s phone pinged at work recently. Suddenly, she was watching a live-stream of her son, holding on to a rope in a tree, being “evicted”. Yet she worries less than most mothers because she has lived in camps. She has also seen Rory flourish. “He’s learned so much at HS2 – climbing skills, interpersonal skills. He grew up overnight when he got involved. It’s a joy to see Rory and his friends’ passion for campaigning and for building community as well, which is a powerful thing.” The whole family “had a bit of a holiday” when they first visited the Wendover camp. Hooper’s parents (who still read the Daily Mail) and sister joined them. “People laugh when all the Hooper family turn up,” says Clare. “We joke about who is doing the next tunnel action.” Rory also jokes that he’s better than his dad. His parents agree that he is more diplomatic. But is it important for protests to have elders? “It can be but there’s a lot to learn from younger people as well,” says Hooper. “We’re stuck in the 90s sometimes. The movement has to be anti-leadership. You can teach people a skill they don’t know, but we’re trying to create a society without leaders because it’s the hierarchy of capitalism that’s part of the problem.” This decade’s surge in environmental activism has been led by Greta Thunberg. Given that she is experiencing an extreme global version of the personality cult he briefly endured, does he worry? “I do, but I think she’s a bit more intelligent than me. She’s the right person for the job, if anyone is. A lot of politicians try and use her but she seems to rise above it. Her words are very eloquent and very good.” Just as the 90s roads protests were followed by the end of Roman -style road-building, so the Stop HS2 campaign has been followed by the cancellation of the Birmingham-Leeds section. Hooper is convinced that anti-HS2 protest energy will now shift to stopping new roads. There is already a camp against the A303 tunnel planned at Stonehenge. A tunnel to stop a tunnel? “It’s chalk so it’s probably a good one,” he says, sighing with delight. He learned to tunnel into chalk at Wendover. “Chalk is very safe as long as you keep the tunnel rounded. We can go deep and make it complicated for them.”The dead wolves began turning up in Oregon in early February. First, state fish and wildlife troopers found an entire pack of five wolves – known as the Catherine pack – killed by poison in Union county. Then, between March and July, authorities found three grey wolves, two females and a male, similarly poisoned to death within the same county about 275 miles east of Portland. The Oregon state police suspect the deaths are connected, and for months led an investigation into the poisonings before announcing in December that they had exhausted all leads. Now investigators are appealing to the public for help in solving the crime, a suspected case of poaching, while a group of animal protection and conservation organizations are offering a reward for any information that leads to a conviction. “It has been absolutely shocking and heartbreaking for us,” said Sristi Kamal, senior northwest representative for Defenders of Wildlife, one of the conservation organizations putting up the reward. The groups have received a number of donations related to finding the perpetrators, and on Tuesday upped the reward from $36,000 to $43,000. Conservation and repopulation efforts around wolves are often contentious. A longstanding government-sanctioned campaign to eradicate wolves practically wiped out the grey wolf from much of the United States by the 1950s, and in recent decades there have been efforts to repopulate or protect the wolves. Today, Oregon’s wolf population is rebounding, with 173 wolves counted in 2020, up from 158 the previous year. Unlike other states where wolf populations have grown in recent years, none of Oregon’s wolves were directly reintroduced into the state and instead are the result of natural migration from other parts of the country. In the mid-1990s, 31 grey wolves were shipped from western Canada to Yellowstone national park. The new group of wolves thrived and multiplied, with some of its packs spreading into other states such as Oregon. But the wolf rewilding has been met with backlash from hunters and livestock producers who view them as a threat. “If you know anything about wolves, you probably know that they’re very controversial,” said Michelle Dennehy, a spokesperson for the Oregon department of fish and wildlife. In Oregon, killing a wolf for reasons apart from self-defense is against the law and livestock producers are instructed to use nonlethal means to deter wolves from taking their animals. The department of fish and wildlife can also authorize lethal force or kill wolves in specific circumstances when other options have been exhausted. Wolves are frequently misunderstood and viewed as a greater threat than they actually represent, advocates argue, leading to vilification and illegal killings. Poaching is a concern not just in Oregon but any state where wolf repopulation efforts have led to increased interaction with humans, Kamal said, although the number of wolves killed in Oregon this year stands out. “This is definitely a case where we have not seen wolves being poached at this scale before,” Kamal said. The eight wolves poisoned this year represent around 4.5% of the state’s total known grey wolf population. “It’s terrible. It’s a very egregious case and we hope that someone will step forward for that monetary award,” Dennehy said. The reward is being offered in part because poaching crimes often heavily rely on tips and information from the public, Kamal said. Oregon, for instance, has an anonymous phone line intended for people to report anything they have seen or heard related to illegal wildlife killings. “Poaching is one of those really difficult and challenging crimes where it’s really hard to even know where the victim is, locate the crime scene or identify suspects,” Kamal said. Animal protection advocates have pushed for stronger anti-poaching legislation and enforcement in recent years, with Oregon expanding protections and developing anti-poaching programs. Meanwhile, the Trump administration removed federal protections for gray wolves in the lower 48 states in 2020 in a move conservationists widely opposed. After wolf hunting expanded in a number of states, the Biden administration announced in September that it would review that decision as it pertains to western grey wolves, which occupy areas including Oregon and Washington. It’s not yet known what effect the string of poisonings will have on Oregon’s overall wolf population, according to the department of fish and wildlife. Wolves are social animals with complex pack hierarchies, however, and advocates argue the killing of one wolf can have a destabilizing effect on a larger group.First there was Alpha, then Beta, Gamma and Delta. Now, thanks to the tremendous efforts of scientists in sub-Saharan Africa, the world is getting to grips with the Omicron variant. This new variant of Covid-19 has a number of mutations that distinguish it from previous ones, raising concerns among scientists that the vaccines we are currently using may not remain as effective against it. In response, the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has recommended that all over-18s in Britain should be able to get a Covid booster shot, as long as three months have elapsed since their last vaccine. The logic behind boosters is that ensuring the UK population has a high level of immunity will reduce the number of people requiring hospitalisation or dying as a result of the spread of Omicron. This is based on the hope that it is unlikely the vaccines we are currently using will be totally ineffective against the new variant, but it is too early to be definitive about this. So how do boosters work? Data from observational studies has suggested that the immunity built up by exposure to both vaccines and the virus reduces over time. Repeated exposure to viral proteins (contained within the vaccine, or encoded by it in the case of mRNA vaccines) leads to a more effective immune response when someone does come into contact with the Sars-CoV-2 virus – reducing the severity of the illness they experience and the chances of them transmitting the virus to someone else. A recent UK clinical trial, CoV-Boost, investigated whether people’s immune responses were improved when they had the same vaccine both for their first two jabs and their booster, or had a different vaccine for their booster. The trial studied groups of people who had received two doses of either the Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccines, and randomised them to receive a third dose of one of four different Covid vaccines, with some receiving half-doses of these vaccines as their boosters. All the vaccines boosted antibody levels when given after two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine, and six out of seven increased antibody levels when given after the Pfizer mRNA vaccine. But predicting the long-term protection provided by a vaccine is not straightforward, particularly when you take into consideration new variants. We often measure the level of antibodies circulating in the blood as a surrogate marker of immunity, but this tells us little about the responses of immune cells such as T-cells, which we know are important in fighting viral infections such as Sars-CoV-2. Knowing the level of antibodies also does not provide us with any information about the effectiveness of a vaccine at preventing severe disease that results in hospitalisation or death. The most important question for most people is whether they will get sick or die from Covid-19. Further data from the CoV-Boost trial collected over the 12 months after the booster vaccinations were administered will help answer these questions in the future. We don’t yet know for certain if the Omicron variant and other future variants of concern will result in us needing to get additional boosters. But it’s possible, for several reasons. First, it may turn out that our immune systems need regular exposure to Sars-CoV-2 viral proteins to remind them to generate an effective immune response. This will only become clear over time. Second, there is the risk of Sars-CoV-2 variants emerging that are so different to those currently circulating that we will need new vaccines entirely. Vaccine manufacturers are confident they can produce new vaccines even more rapidly than they produced the first generation. Other innovative approaches are being proposed by organisations such as the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, which has launched a funding call to encourage the development of Covid-19 vaccines that provide protection against multiple types of coronaviruses, avoiding the need for a new vaccine for every new variant that emerges. But it’s impossible to talk about Covid booster vaccinations without highlighting the importance of vaccine equity. Many people, including healthcare workers and people at risk of severe disease, have yet to receive any doses of a Covid vaccine, let alone a booster dose. To prevent the emergence of other variants of concern like Omicron, we need to drive down viral transmission everywhere. Otherwise we will eventually be dealing with the emergence of variants that are not substantially affected by the vaccines we have available, and the ground we have gained over the past year will be lost, along with many lives and the wellbeing of thousands upon thousands of people. You can think of the global pandemic like a house fire. Sars-CoV infections are raging at high levels in multiple territories across the world. Many high-income countries, including the UK, are attempting to tackle this fire by ensuring there is enough water available to douse the flames in the room they occupy. As long as infections are allowed to rage elsewhere because of a lack of global vaccines, the tinder for the fire will always be there. Simply rolling out boosters in one country, without delivering vaccines in low- and middle-income countries, is not going to prevent the house from burning down, or keep us safe from harm. Dr Charlotte Summers is a professor of intensive care medicine at the University of CambridgeThe holidays are coming, and I am ready. I finally know what to say when somebody tells me I look great, that I look like I’ve lost weight, that my skin looks good. I will quote Jonah Hill, the actor and producer, who wrote on Instagram, “I know you mean well but I kindly ask that you not comment on my body. Good or bad I want to politely let you know it’s not helpful and doesn’t feel good. Much respect.” Do you think that will work? I’m not sure. This new policy may upset people. They could feel defensive because their intentions are pure. They don’t realize what happens in my head when the subject of my body comes up; the shock of remembering that I have or perhaps simply am a body. I smell smoke; a bright white light obliterates everything, a loud siren begins to wail, sending urgent shots of warning throughout the aforementioned body. I am a body that sweats and bleeds and will inevitably disintegrate and fade into the ground. My mouth clamps shut, my fists tighten, and I don’t mind telling you that my whole butt clenches! That’s not the best energy to bring to the party. My Christmas wish is that nobody comments on my body. No doubt some people will understand why I ask them to refrain from remarking, and we will share a tender moment. But others will not, and it’s not fair to expect them to obey my demand. I must be realistic, meet them where they are. When it comes to beauty, we’ve all been marinated in history and steeped in socialization for far too long just to flip the comments switch off. Being beautiful, or being told you are, is no straightforward, objective thing. Too often, to be beautiful is to be able-bodied, white and thin, and those rules are disgusting to me. To be beautiful means believing the twin lies of being both in control and being controllable. It’s funny sometimes just how freighted the experience of showing up in a woman’s body can be. Last week at the comedian Jacqueline Novak’s one-woman show ‘Get On Your Knees’, I felt the audience roll back with a massive wave of resonant laughter when she said, “The female form is its own burden, a sack of sex potatoes you can’t leave home without.” Novak went on, “You owe an explanation for, ‘no taters for sale, tonight!’ – a question in the air: why would you bring those out if you didn’t bring enough for the class?” Approving comments about my body read as code words for ‘Congratulations, more and more men that you don’t know will want to have sex with you because of how you look now.’ And that, if you can believe it, is not a significant objective of mine. My true objective is not to hate my body and not to worship it either. Outside voices remarking on my body remind me of that inner confusion, distorting and amplifying it. I need some next-level thinking. Kevin Townley is a Buddhist meditation teacher, so I call him up and demand that he teach me how to accept my body. I tell him I need to cultivate some damn neutrality. Slowly and with great compassion, which is the least you’d expect from a Buddhist meditation teacher, Townley explains that it’s not possible to have a neutral relationship with your body. “We’re going to have our initial reactions no matter what. We have our prejudices, we have our preferences; those are based on all sorts of things.” We cannot step outside of this culture in which we are immersed. People making comments, our feelings about people’s comments, our feelings about our own bodies; all pop up unbidden. So what does Townley recommend? More mulled wine. I’m kidding! Equanimity, that is the thing. “There isn’t any other moment except the one in which you’re having whatever experience you’re having, right? And so the equanimity is to be able to ride that out.” It will pass, and we don’t have to act on it. “Equanimity is the willingness to be with the shifting ground of how we feel about ourselves. And it’s a practice.” I’ll get to practice equanimity a lot during the holidays, and perhaps you will too. Good luck to us all. And remember, when you open your mouth to remark on what someone looks like, pop a mini quiche in there instead, and we’ll all enjoy ourselves that little bit more. Maeve Higgins is a Guardian US columnist and the author of the forthcoming book Tell Everyone on This Train I Love ThemOn Monday, Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, boasted about the Biden administration’s coronavirus testing apparatus. “We’ve quadrupled the size of our testing plan. We’ve cut the cost significantly over the last few months,” Psaki told reporters, noting Americans will now be able to get the costs of tests reimbursed by their private insurers. “Why not make them free and give them out everywhere?” a reporter asked. “Should we just send one to every American?” Psaki asked, beginning to smile. When the reporter answered “maybe”, the press secretary dug in. “What happens if every American has one test? How much does that cost and what happens after that?” Psaki was straining to make the question seem absurd. There are more than 300 million Americans. How can the United States government just mail a test to every person? Her sarcasm revealed a dismal truth: if America is no longer unique in struggling through the pandemic, adequate testing remains in woefully short supply. The Biden administration has failed, like the Trump administration, to make free tests available everywhere. And in that failure, America has fallen behind the rest of the world. In Boris Johnson’s United Kingdom, free packs of Covid-19 rapid lateral tests are available to order daily. Germany has reintroduced free testing as cases continue to surge. South Korea, long a global leader when it comes to aggressively testing for coronavirus, even has free tests for pets. Meanwhile, in the United States, testing varies widely by city, county and state. New York City, battered by the original wave of coronavirus, now has free and easily accessible testing sites in most neighborhoods, where results can be learned within the hour. Other localities are still charging money and taking days to return tests. In rural areas, it can be especially difficult to get tested quickly for Covid-19. At-home tests are now available in most large pharmacies like CVS and Walgreens. A package can cost more than $20. For many Americans, wrangling with a test that can outstrip the cost of dinner is just not worth it. The new Biden plan is convoluted. Instead of subsidizing the cost of tests so they are freely available in stores or following the New York model of paying for testing sites in underserved areas, the Biden administration will compel private health insurers to reimburse people who buy over the counter, at-home rapid tests. Ultimately, this puts the onus on the individual to wade through paperwork or battle with an insurance company to receive a proper reimbursement. There will be Americans who won’t even bother. For those who lack health insurance, Biden’s initiative offers little. The federal government will buy another 25m tests to give to community health centers and rural clinics, a decent gesture that doesn’t account for those who either don’t live close enough to such places or may be passed over if the tests don’t happen to reach their facilities. The plan, ultimately, is frustratingly piecemeal and reflects the byzantine approach to healthcare the American government continues to take. Instead of a universal provider akin to the United Kingdom’s National Health Service or Canada’s single-payer system, America’s healthcare regime remains a predatory patchwork. Private insurance is expensive and inefficient. Comprehensive public insurance is open only to those who are very poor, old, or work for the government. The ailing American healthcare system has been on full display during the pandemic, with those who survive hospital stays sometimes returning home with enormous medical bills. Other Americans, fearing costs, avoid medical visits altogether. A well-funded rapid testing regime could help, along with vaccination and anti-viral treatments, restore normalcy. Coronavirus, as we now know, can still spread among the vaccinated, and the Omicron variant might increase the number of breakthrough cases. This new reality will require a much greater degree of testing than we now have and force the Biden administration, Psaki included, to take it all a lot more seriously. Rapid, accurate testing can make indoor gatherings safer and ensure those with Covid don’t readily infect others. The misery we all have lived through may begin to subside if the federal government does what it should do and guarantees every American a right to a free, available test.For decades, the Theatre Royal panto has been a York institution. Under former writer and long-running dame Berwick Kaler, the theatre’s annual festive offering – with its loyal team, its much-loved chaos and its familiar slate of gags – had almost cult status. But this year it’s all change. Minus Kaler and co, this Cinderella is less eccentric but more reliable. With writer and producer Paul Hendy at the helm, it’s out with the in-jokes and in with the puns. Lots of puns. The best comedy comes from deliciously cruel step-sisters Manky (Robin Simpson) and Mardy (Paul Hawkyard), decked out in a series of wonderfully ridiculous costumes, and from Max Fulham’s show-stealing Buttons, who even manages to make a bizarre routine with a bin hilarious. There’s spectacle as well as silliness, especially in the conclusion of the first act, which sends Cinderella (a charming Faye Campbell) to the ball in dazzling style. Later, a pair of aerialists twist and turn above the stage during the central romantic duet. The gasp-inducing routine is impressive, but it sucks all the attention from the scene, leaving poor Cinders and her prince stranded at the side of the stage as they gamely sing on. At times, the show tries to have its cake and eat it. It signals that it’s moving with the times (the opening “boys and girls” becomes a long list of different family configurations and gender identities), while nostalgically talking about when things were simpler. But it’s at its best when delivering classic panto fare, from chirpy song and dance to “it’s behind you” gags. After the disruption of Covid – references to which Hendy wisely minimises – this Cinderella is an entertaining escape. Cinderella is at York Theatre Royal until 2 January.Good morning. Yesterday’s virtual summit between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin made little apparent headway in defusing the crisis over Ukraine in the wake of a Russian troop buildup, and instead delegated officials from each country to stay in contact. The two leaders talked by videoconference for more than two hours, during which they laid out their positions. The Kremlin said Putin and Biden had traded threats regarding Russia’s buildup of forces near the Ukrainian border. Putin accused Nato forces of undertaking “dangerous attempts to develop Ukrainian territory and increase its potential along our borders”. Putin went on to demand “reliable, legal guarantees” that would specifically prevent Nato from expanding its territory toward Russia or place missile systems in countries bordering Russia. What did the US say about the meeting? The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said: “The discussion between President Biden and President Putin was direct and straightforward. There was a lot of give and take, there was no finger-wagging. But the president was crystal clear about where the United States stands on all of these issues.” Olaf Scholz elected to succeed Angela Merkel as German chancellor Olaf Scholz will succeed Angela Merkel as Germany’s new chancellor after securing a majority of 395 of 736 delegates’ ballots in a parliamentary vote. Scholz will oversee a liberal-left “traffic light” coalition government between his Social Democratic party (SPD), the Greens and the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP), the first power-sharing agreement of such a kind in Germany, and the first governing alliance with three parties since 1957. Scholz, a former mayor of Hamburg and finance minister in Merkel’s final term, secured 21 fewer votes than the 416 seats the three coalition parties have in the Bundestag, though several politicians were absent from the vote due to illness. The politician, who removed his mask to accept the vote with a smirk, will head to the Bellevue Palace – the residence of the German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier – to be formally appointed. Was Merkel there? Yes, she was watching proceedings from the visitors’ gallery. The outgoing chancellor received a standing ovation from almost all delegates in the last minutes of her tenure. When will the new government take over? The new government is to be announced in parliament at 1.30pm CET today, after which Scholz and the ministers in his cabinet will swear their oaths. US fentanyl deaths will rise, warns Narcan developer The overdose crisis that killed more than 100,000 Americans in one year is “all about fentanyl” and will only going to get worse, Roger Crystal of Opiant Pharmaceuticals has said. Deaths from fentanyl will continue to rise and overdoses may be increasingly difficult to battle in the US, said Crystal, who helped develop Narcan nasal spray, an easy-to-use medication that reverses overdoses. Those who are overdosing from fentanyl have a shorter window of time to be saved and may need additional doses of the medication. “Fentanyl is an opioid, but it’s a different beast entirely. It acts faster, it’s much stronger, and it lasts longer,” Crystal said. That means overdose reversals need to happen faster, and multiple doses of naloxone may be needed. Sometimes, he said, a person is revived with one dose, but falls back into an overdose because of fentanyl’s long-lasting effects. Where does fentanyl come from? Most comes into the US from Mexico or China. But the synthetic opioid can be made in a lab anywhere, making it difficult for authorities to limit the supply – unlike, for instance, heroin, which is sourced from opium poppies that need to be grown. In other news … Kellogg has said it is permanently replacing 1,400 workers who have been on strike since October, a decision that comes as the majority of its cereal plant workforce rejected a deal that would have provided a 3% raise. The decision follows months of bitter disagreement between the company and the union. An American hedge-fund billionaire who surrendered 180 looted and illegally smuggled antiquities valued at $70m has been handed an unprecedented lifetime ban on acquiring other relics as part of an agreement with the Manhattan district attorney’s office. French police have arrested a man on suspicion of being a former member of the Saudi royal guard who is accused of being involved in the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. The man, named as Khalid Aedh al-Otaibi, was taken into custody at Paris’s Charles de Gaulle airport. Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, signed an agreement with Chinese officials, estimated to be worth about $275bn, to placate threats that would have hobbled its devices and services in the country, The Information reported yesterday. Stat of the day: 87,000 young children are diagnosed with lead poisoning in the US each year Three decades after the neurotoxin was banned as an ingredient in paint, gasoline and water pipes, 87,000 young children are diagnosed with lead poisoning in the US each year. Today, lead lingers in houses and apartments, yards and water lines, and wherever states and communities ramp up testing it becomes clear that the nation’s lead problem is worse than realized, experts say. A study published in JAMA Pediatrics this fall suggested that more than half of all US children have detectable levels of lead in their blood. Don’t miss this: Steven Spielberg on making West Side Story with Stephen Sondheim The acclaimed director used to get scolded by his parents for singing songs from West Side Story at the dinner table. He was 10 when he became obsessed with the Broadway cast album, which his father brought home in 1957. “It has never left my life,” he says. “I’ve played the cast album to my kids. They memorised the songs growing up. I’ve got videos where I’m running around the place playing Officer Krupke and all the Jets. Those videos prove how West Side Story has permeated my entire life and the lives of my kids and grandkids. It’s crazy!” … or this: what our feline friends really think about hugs, happiness and humans Despite the fact that cats are common pets, we know relatively little about them. This, says Dr Carlo Siracusa of the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, “is partly due to practical problems”. Dogs are easy to study: you can take them to a lab and they will be content. But cats are intensely territorial creatures. “The behaviour of a cat is so modified by its environment that if you move it to a laboratory,” says Siracusa, “what you’ll see is not really reflective of what the normal behaviour of the cat is.” So what are our feline friends really thinking? Climate check: ‘bizarre’ fish songs raise hopes for coral reef recovery From whoops to purrs, snaps to grunts, foghorns to laughs, a cacophony of bizarre fish songs has shown that a coral reef in Indonesia has returned rapidly to health. The reef had been devastated by blast fishing, where explosives are used to stun or kill everything in the area. The corals are being restored, but scientists wanted to know if the many other creatures that inhabit reefs were also returning. The result was “exciting and inspiring”. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter, Down to Earth, to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week. Last Thing: will New York’s cream cheese shortage force bagel joints to go easy on the schmear? An investigation In terms of quintessential New York experiences, ordering a bagel with cream cheese tops the list. But now, bagel shop patrons are beginning to have problems securing one half of their orders. A cream cheese shortage is throwing New York City’s bagel shops across all five boroughs into a frenzy, leaving some of the city’s top bagel spots with only enough schmear in stock to last a few days. To find out whether they are overdoing the amount of cream cheese on each bagel, the Guardian got out a ruler and visited New York City’s bagel establishments.China had its sputnik moment in March 2016. That month an artificial intelligence programme, AlphaGo, beat a South Korean grandmaster at Go, an extremely complex and demanding Chinese board game. The five game series was watched by an audience of more than 280 million viewers across China. In May 2017 AlphaGo defeated China’s 19-year-old prodigy Ke Jie; two months later the Chinese government issued an AI strategy which projected that the country would become the global centre of AI innovation by 2030. By year’s end, China accounted for nearly half of all AI venture funding globally. That is the story of how China became an AI powerhouse, as told by Kai-Fu Lee, a renowned expert in the field, in his book AI Superpowers. Lee, a 60-year-old former president of Google China who has witnessed the country’s tech revolution first-hand, is now chairman and chief executive of Beijing-based tech investment firm Sinovation Ventures. The book was published three years ago and it predicted that China would win the AI contest with the United States – the other great power in AI. This week I interviewed Lee and asked him if China was, as he predicted, winning. He is diplomatic – “both countries are equally strong” – but says they are emerging with strengths in different areas: the US in enterprise software (stuff that businesses use); China in manufacturing and image recognition. He describes both countries as being “equally strong in aggregate” but individually stronger in discrete categories. But first I should crowbar in my regulatory AI explainer just in case you’re wondering what it’s all about (by the way, it’s one of those classic bits of tech that is already embedded in multiple aspects of your life). AI can explain … As Lee explains in his book, the neural network form of AI mimics the underlying architecture of the brain in computer form. This involves constructing layers of artificial neurons (which, in humans, transmit information between bits of the brain and the rest of our nervous system) that receive and transmit information in a way similar to our networks of biological neurons. These networks are then fed lots and lots of examples of a given phenomenon – chess moves, pictures of animals, sounds – and they then identify patterns within the data. In his book Lee uses the example of cats: under the neural network approach a program is given millions of sample photos labelled ‘cat’ or ‘no cat’, letting the program figure out for itself what features in the millions of images are most closely correlated to the ‘cat’ label. Lee writes: “Neural networks require large amounts of two things: computing power and data. The data ‘trains’ the program to recognise patterns by giving it many examples, and the computing power lets the program parse those examples at high speeds.” Juiced up neural networks are now described as “deep learning”. He adds that AI algorithms – a set of instructions that a computer program follows to complete a task or produce a single outcome – will hit white-collar jobs as a consequence because they can process data, and make decisions based on it, much more efficiently. “Much of today’s white-collar workforce is paid to take in and process information, and then make a decision or recommendation based on that information – which is precisely what AI algorithms do best.” And here we are three years on. One former US government official has already given his verdict on the AI superpower contest. Nicolas Chaillan, the Pentagon’s first ever chief software officer, resigned this year because he could not stand to watch China overtake the US in AI, machine learning and cyber capabilities. “We have no competing fighting chance against China in 15 to 20 years. Right now, it’s already a done deal; it is already over in my opinion,” he told the Financial Times, adding that China was set to dominate the future of the world, controlling everything from media narratives to geopolitics. No fighting chance? If you want a primer on how China became a tech powerhouse in such a short period of time, Lee’s book is a good place to start (this year he published another book on AI, co-written with speculative fiction author Chen Qiufan, called AI 2041). It explains how a combination of government support and innate entrepreneurial zeal soon propelled the Chinese tech sector from copying US platforms at first (Twitter, Facebook, eBay) to producing dominant domestic services like WeChat (the app that does everything) and a global phenomenon like TikTok. Much of Lee’s confidence in China’s role in the global AI contest is down to those factors. Lee says coronavirus has accelerated AI use in the US and China. We are on Zoom and he gestures to the blurred screen behind him as an example. “The blurred background is made by AI. Without AI, how could you discern what’s me and what’s background?” He says in the US lockdown has boosted AI’s use at work, citing the success of Romania-founded but New York-based UiPath, which sells AI-based software that automates workaday tasks for businesses such routine tasks such as reading documents and filling in forms. “Companies have all this data that becomes a treasure trove of information on which they can help make the company more efficient,” says Lee, who sees data as a key factor in developing AI programmes. And China generates a lot of data. In China, he says the pandemic has raised use of robotics in factories as well as automated vehicles for delivering goods. “And of course it spills over to restaurants where there are robotic waiters in quite a few Chinese restaurants. Not fancy restaurants and not McDonald’s but … medium to low price sit down restaurants, where it would be safer if a robot delivered your food to you. It’s not a humanoid robot. It’s a tray on wheels that comes to your table.” Lee sees language processing and understanding as a big development for AI. “The ability to basically answer questions, understand text and language and make very meaningful responses to questions,” he says, which will transform search engines. He adds that AI will enable the creation of customised videos to keep you entertained or informed, while the metaverse – a digital world where we can lead our social and professional lives virtually – will be populated not just by avatars of our real selves but also AI avatars. “A key part of the metaverse is it will be inhabited by not just humans but by digital humans.” The process of discovering new drugs will also be transformed, he adds. We also dwell on the negatives. Lee declines to comment on concerns about use of facial recognition in China, where there has been pushback, but says autonomous weapons including drones are “a very big concern”. He says: “How to regulate that is an issue that faces all of us. Just as chemists spoke up about chemical weapons and biologist about biological weapons, I hope governments will start listening to AI scientists. It’s probably impossible to stop it altogether. But there should be some ways to at least reduce or minimise the most egregious uses.” Lee says the next wave of investment and entrepreneurship will be in so-called deep tech, which refers to the big advances in technology like AI, quantum computing and blockchain. “If you are a superstar new grad, 10 years ago, you’re probably thinking what apps should I build? Today, you’re probably thinking, ‘Should I get a PhD?’” Meta’s messaging issues WhatsApp, which is owned by Facebook parent Meta, announced on Monday that it is launching a new setting that allows users’ messages to disappear after 24 hours. Meta has put the brake on plans to launch end-to-end encryption of its Facebook and Instagram messaging services, until 2023 at least. But the NSPCC’s reaction to the WhatsApp move – “poorly thought out” – underlines that tension between Meta and regulators, politicians and campaigners over privacy persists. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Author Norman Bridwell’s picture book series about Clifford the Big Red Dog represented a wholesome slice of mid-century Americana, with the self-explanatorily named title character, an enormous vermillion hound, loved and cared for by his owner Emily Elizabeth Howard, perhaps in the way an American dad of the period would have loved and cared for a Cadillac. A few TV series based on the story moved with the times but largely stuck to the kiddie-centric, suburban world of the books. This reboot feature film has clearly taken its inspiration from the peerless Paddington films, which cleverly updated classic children’s literature property by resituating the setting to contemporary London, idealistically envisioned as a multicultural melange populated by lovable eccentrics. So here we have Clifford as a creature of New York City’s much-less-mean-than-they-used-to-be streets, depicted as another ethnically diverse yet entirely harmonious metropolitan utopia. After being whelped in an abandoned building and accidentally separated from his mum and siblings, Clifford passes through the hands of kindly animal vendor Mr Bridwell (John Cleese) before he ends up adopted by Emily Elizabeth (Darby Camp, who is genuinely brilliant at selling the idea that she can see a giant CGI dog in front of her). The only child of single-parent paralegal Maggie (Sienna Guillory), Emily Elizabeth is very much in need of a friend given she’s being forced to attend a snooty private school where she’s bullied by everyone except fellow outsider Owen (Izaac Wang, another gifted child actor). Clifford, still puppy-sized at this stage and supposedly less than a year old even though he looks like a full-grown dog already, is found inside Emily’s backpack the week that she’s being watched by her hapless uncle Casey (Jack Whitehall). In the morning, they wake up to find Clifford is about 10 feet tall and twice as long, having grown overnight on Emily’s love. Unfortunately, this violates the Howards’ no-pets rent agreement, resulting in much manoeuvring to keep Clifford a secret. Later they must try to keep him out of the hands of a nefarious tech company run by Tieran (Tony Hale) who wants to discover the secret of Clifford’s gigantism so that he can use it to grow GM foodstuffs, which wouldn’t be such a bad idea if it didn’t require separating Clifford and Emily Elizabeth and presumably vivisection experiments. There is an embarrassment of riches in the supporting cast, including Rosie Perez, Tovah Feldshuh and Saturday Night Live alumni Alex Moffat and Kenan Thompson. But despite their sterling contributions, the script lacks the wit and polish of the aforementioned Paddington films, or even an average Pixar movie. Even so, it’s watchable and even occasionally amusing. • Clifford the Big Red Dog is released on 10 December in cinemas.“To be able to play at the Emirates as a fan is so cool because you have this different perspective, a different appreciation of the moment and the place,” says the Arsenal centre-back Lotte Wubben-Moy as she looks forward to Thursday evening’s Champions League showdown with the holders, Barcelona, under the lights of the Emirates Stadium. “Pinch me – yes, it is a dream,” she says. “These are the games you want to play in. To get to play them at such an amazing stadium? Yeah, so cool. A dream would probably be an understatement. “I genuinely think being a fan of the team you play for gives you 10% more when you’re playing. If that’s what wins your game, if it’s those little percentages that are what makes a difference? Then be a fan of any club that you can and play at that club, because it’s an amazing experience.” Wubben-Moy is not the only fan to have risen through the ranks into the first team at Arsenal. She started at centre-back in Sunday’s bruising 3-0 FA Cup final defeat by Chelsea, played after this interview, in place of a fellow Gooner, Leah Williamson, and her teammate Anna Patten has trodden a similar path. “I think growing up, I wouldn’t have honestly imagined that this would be possible,” says Patten, also a defender. “It is just such an amazing game, and such a great way to show what we’re about on the big stage.” Arsenal swapped their usual Hertfordshire home of Boreham Wood FC for the club’s main ground for the season’s opening WSL game, giving Wubben-Moy and Patten a taste of what it will be like on Thursday. Patten was an unused substitute and Wubben-Moy got on in the second half of the 3-2 win over Chelsea. Being together in these moments adds meaning. “It was pretty crazy,” says Patten. “Lotte’s someone with very a similar journey – us being Arsenal fans, having gone through the age groups – and she’s someone I can turn to in these situations. When we were running out for the warm-up it was just like: ‘Wow, this is this is pretty insane, isn’t it?’” Keeping emotions in check isn’t easy “because it’s so surreal,” says Patten. “This is what you’ve worked for, to be here; it’s just such a great feat. And then to do it in an Arsenal shirt is what you dream of.” Wubben-Moy says she has to tune it out. “The minute you step on the pitch, it must be some kind of like switch that goes off in me. It just seems to happen naturally now – I can’t explain it. You’ll going to see me against Barça now and I’ll be crying as I walk on,” she adds with a laugh. The pair are perched on sofas at the Emirates Stadium in full kit. Wubben-Moy’s trainers, white and pale blue, the colours of the University of North Carolina, are a subtle nod to the route both players took, travelling to the US to play college football before rejoining Arsenal. Patten played for Florida State and the University of South Carolina and says Wubben-Moy “might not want to talk about it” when asked whether they faced one another. During their time in the US they would travel back to train with Arsenal over Christmas. “I don’t ever think I ever felt apart from the team,” says Patten. “I always followed how they were doing, their progress. Whether I would get to come back was in the back of my mind a little but most of the time I was like: ‘I’m coming home.’” Wubben-Moy describes Arsenal’s Champions League group opener against Barcelona, which they lost 4-1 in Spain, with both 22-year-olds on the bench, as “a humbling day” but also an invaluable one. Patten says: “It was one of those games where I was just sitting in awe a little bit, like: ‘Wow, this is a top-quality team.’ Because there’d been a lot of talk and because we’d had such great start to the season I think Barcelona came into that game with a bit of a chip on their shoulder, and they really produced top-quality football. “As a club, we’re really investing more and it is our goal to win the Champions League. It was possibly a turning point, or a reality check, of: we need to look at what our next steps can be so that we can be competing with arguably the world’s best.” On matters away from the pitch, Wubben-Moy smiles when asked about being name-checked recently by her clubmates Vivianne Miedema and Lisa Evans, Miedema’s partner who is on loan at West Ham, for having inspired them to join Common Goal, where athletes pledge 1% of their salaries to football charities. Speaking up is “so important,” she says. “The platforms that we have, as not just footballers but female footballers, is something that we can never take for granted. I question people who don’t use it, but even more so I applaud the people that do because it takes time and it takes energy. But if you give it the time and energy, the amount of people it can touch, the amount of people it can elevate and empower and do good for is invaluable. “I feel so lucky that I’ve got this platform, because … Actually, you know what, I don’t feel lucky, I feel like everyone has a platform, everyone has a seat at a table somewhere and anyone can have an impact on anyone. If you’re passionate about it and if you genuinely believe in it then that is good enough.” She pauses and points to a woman working for the club standing nearby and asks her name. “Romina – she works in Borehamwood,” says Wubben-Moy. “She was just chatting to me about her daughter. She’s going to be chatting to her kids and bringing them to the Barcelona game. That’s an impact right there. It’s like a chain reaction, pushing on more and more. And everyone should feel empowered to have a voice – to have an impact.”Will Smith is looking worried. He’s about to traverse a mighty gorge by rope – and if a fall doesn’t kill him, the crocodiles in the river below will. Safely on the other side, having been hauled across by Albert Lin, an explorer, he laughs deliriously. In a movie, he says, a stuntman would have done that for him. Smith gets to have lots of new and scary experiences in Welcome to Earth, a six-part National Geographic series (Disney+). Here he is abseiling down a cavernous ice hole, there he is going to the bottom of the ocean in a submersible – all with a look of terror settling across his face. This is nature documentary, Hollywood-style, produced by the film-maker Darren Aronofsky. It’s the second time he and Smith have taken Earth as their set (they also made the 2018 series One Strange Rock). You can take the men out of Hollywood, etc. The soundtrack is relentless, there are banal messages – delivered in artfully lit black-and-white cutaways – about Important Things such as conquering fear, or the beauty of the world; and a cast of photogenic adventurers who accompany Smith “to the ends of the Earth – and beyond”. There is a lot of ramped-up drama – at one point, a diver goes swimming with manta rays, languid as a soft-close toilet seat, and we’re supposed to believe it’s incredibly dangerous, like a scene from Jaws. The idea of the series is to explore hidden worlds and challenge perceptions. Some of it is really quite boring – you have to be seriously interested in film-making to care that much about cameras. It’s why I always skip that bit at the end of David Attenborough films. And some of it is shallow. Our guides may be explorers in the physical sense, but they’re not given the room to provide much in the way of intellectual discovery. “Going into a cave is very similar to going into space,” says one, an actual astronaut. Is it? In what way? I’m not sure, but I think it involves alien creatures. Another, with his whizzy camera, shows that the desert in Namibia moves over time, but doesn’t really explain the forces at work. It might have something to do with the way we’re hurtling through space, or it could just be the wind – I couldn’t tell. Attenborough, this isn’t. Instead, there’s emotional exploration. The expeditions, says Smith, are “not about discovering the world, it’s about discovering myself”. Still, he’s a likable guide with a nice line in vulnerability. We may know him as the confident action hero, but he confesses to lots of fears. “I was scared of everything,” he says of himself as a child, while being helicoptered over a glacier in Iceland. “I got bullied all the time.” The diverse group of explorers – scientists, engineers and photographers – who accompany Smith, or host their own segments, bring their own inspiring stories of resilience and are a welcome addition to the adventuring world of white male poshos. In the first episode, Erik Weihenmayer is the mountaineer – he is also blind – who takes Smith to the edge of a volcano and teaches him about the spectrum of sound. Later, the photographer Cory Richards goes deep into a cave in the Dolomites with a team of bioacoustic scientists to experience the heavy silence, and record the sound of the mountain – a deep primal rumble. “It’s actually thought to be the sound of the moon’s gravity dragging the mountains,” says Smith’s voiceover. “The moon pulls on the sea to create tides. It turns out, it does the same to the land.” Apparently, the ground beneath New York City can rise by up to 14in, twice a day. “They’re called earth tides,” says Smith. I love this stuff. Other episodes, as befits a big budget and a Hollywood film-maker’s eye, have moments of real wonder. I’ll never tire of seeing weird creatures – the olm, a pale fleshy blind salamander we meet in caves in Slovenia, was new to me, and even our dull brown Channel serves up some lolloping sea anemones. The photography is amazing – the Milky Way reflected in salt flats in Bolivia, the honey hunters ascending dizzying ladders in Nepal, bioluminescence in a bay in starlit Puerto Rico. “When I was a kid, my grandmother used to say: ‘All the best things in life [live] on the other side of fear’,” shares Smith. Does he conquer his fears? Connect with the planet? All while being charismatic, and against spectacular backdrops? Come on, this is Hollywood – of course he does.This year, as children around the world write their Christmas lists, Santa has more to consider than whether they have been naughty or nice. Some of the season’s most popular items, from bikes to the Nintendo Switch, are in short supply across the UK, Europe and US. To see what’s going on, we follow an imaginary toy from factory to Christmas tree to illustrate the pinch points in the manufacture and supply chain that will affect presents this year. “You’re not going to walk into a toy shop and find completely empty shelves,” says John Baulch, the publisher of Toy World magazine. “But if your child made a Christmas list and said I want one particular Barbie doll, you go to shops – it might not be there.” Though it’s not unusual for one or two toys to sell out at Christmas, the toy industry is normally very stable, says Frédérique Tutt, a toy expert at the market research company NPD Group. But the sector has suffered from the same unexpected surge in demand, crash in production, shortages and supply chain problems that have affected all consumer goods during the pandemic. As lockdowns shut schools and cancelled holidays, consumers in the west have been buying toys at an unprecedented rate – global toy sales are up 27% in the year to September, compared with the same period in 2019. “We’ve never seen this before,” says Tutt. “This alone is a struggle for toy companies.”Economists expect supply chain disruption to gradually fade next year, but the issues will not be fixed in time for Christmas. And people may notice price rises as well as shortages. Inflation – the measure of price growth for goods and services – is soaring around the world as a consequence of supply chain problems. Our imaginary present is a deluxe interactive toy house complete with a puppy, named Snowflake. We’ve called it Snowflake’s Lodge. Specially designed for this article, it has a lot in common with some popular toys on this year’s Christmas lists. Tutt knows of toy companies organising airlifts to get products from Asia to shops in Europe and the US. In one case a toy retailer resorted to shipping products from China without packaging, says James Zahn, a senior editor at Toy Insider. “They’ve done that to fit more product in those containers, then it arrives in the US and then they package it here. But they can’t keep doing that forever.” Let’s say Snowflake’s Lodge makes it to Shanghai, the world’s biggest port, and gets into one of the 43.5m containers that pass through every year. But container space is only part of the problem with global shipping. Stuck in Shanghai: port problems in China Ships arriving at Chinese ports face a one- to three-day delay in berthing. And that’s consistent across all Chinese ports, says David Gonzalez, an analyst with the consultancy firm Gartner. “You could say one- to two-day delay to one ship is no big deal, but a one- to two-day delay to 50 ships becomes a significant deal because of the knock-on effect – you have another wave of ships waiting to arrive behind those.” Approximately 150-200 container ships arrive at Chinese ports every day. China’s no-tolerance approach to coronavirus has caused part of the disruption, with whole ports shut for a single case, but the problems at Chinese ports now go far beyond China. Shipping: what went wrong? Ninety per cent of all the products we consume have been on a ship at some point, says Gonzalez. But during the pandemic, ships began to miss ports where there was a lockdown or a staff shortage, introducing unpredictability about when or whether a ship would arrive. That accumulation of unpredictability in many places has snowballed and set the whole system off-kilter. Add in the surge in demand from consumers in the west and it has been enough to plunge this critical piece of global infrastructure into chaos. Backlogs: port problems in Britain With shipping in chaos, it’s not a surprise that ports in Britain have problems. “In an ideal world, as one ship leaves the port, another one is scheduled to arrive,” says a spokesperson for Britain’s biggest port, Felixstowe. “But at the moment all the schedules are completely shot – ships are arriving at random, and they are almost all late arriving,” British ports have an extra problem, too: once the goods arrive, they have nowhere to go. Shortages of lorry drivers and warehouse space have made it hard to move goods around Britain. Previously, containers stayed at the port for about four and a half days. Now it’s nearer to 10. Once Snowflake’s Lodge gets to the UK, there’s a whole other set of problems ... Snowflake’s Lodge may have made it but serious systemic problems remain with global supply chains. Although these issues are expected to fade, the emergence of the Omicron variant has raised the prospect of disruption being around for much longer.There’s a surprising urgency to Stephen Karam’s adaptation of his Tony-winning play The Humans. The set-up – dysfunctional, multigenerational family descends on a Manhattan apartment for Thanksgiving – is seriously familiar, and the execution dangerously stagey. But Karam’s intimate, increasingly oppressive drama is a marvel, not just of writing (his play was also shortlisted for a Pulitzer) or of acting (a monumental Jayne Houdyshell reprises her Tony-winning role alongside a flawless non-transferred cast) but of overall conception, a rare stage-to-screen journey that feels worth the mileage. We’re in the new home of Brigid (Beanie Feldstein) and Richard (Steven Yeun), a relatively new unmarried couple who have just moved in, furniture still waiting to be delivered. They’re welcoming Brigid’s family: her sister, Aimee (Amy Schumer), arriving from Philadelphia and her parents, Erik (Richard Jenkins) and Deirdre (Houdyshell), along with Erik’s mother, Momo (June Squibb), all driving in from Scranton, Pennsylvania. There’s the familiar blend of conflicts, resentments and secrets but all have a believably mundane and human quality to them (stoicism over sensationalism) and Karam’s delicate writing tightly grips us even as they unfold quietly. But while his characters might not raise their volume, his sound design picks up the slack, a punishingly loud and intrusive collection of bangs, creaks and thuds that push us to the edge of our seat, where we stay for the majority of the film. There’s not one false note among his ensemble, who bicker and prod and soothe with such relaxed ease it’s a surprise they haven’t been doing this same performance together twice daily for the last year. Schumer is a particular surprise in her first convincing dramatic performance, her palpable, aching heartbreak surfacing in a recognisably painful call with an ex before a tearful explosion in front of Jenkins, whom we’ve seen in vaguely similar territory before but never quite as wrenchingly. There are references to a culture shift, an age gap, a difference in class and religion but Karam never positions his drama as the one We Need Right Now. It’s of a time and a place but comfortably, quietly, confidently so. There’s something both reassuring and terrifying about it all, the family’s resilient warmth and togetherness providing comfort as the existential horror of what it all amounts to chills us simultaneously. The Humans is going to haunt me and it’s going to haunt you, too.Pastry pinwheels are party food par excellence: simple, easy to customise and happy to sit in the fridge until required, so all you have to do on the big day is shove the tray in the oven and endeavour not to forget about it. I’ve given a few filling ideas below, but really, just about anything is better wrapped in pastry. Prep 25 min Chill 1 hr 10 min Cook 20 min Makes About 16 For the rough puff pastry (or use 500g ready-made puff pastry) 225g plain flour Fine salt 225g very cold butter 1 egg, beaten with a very little water For the snail butter filling 50g parsley 3 plump garlic cloves, peeled 100g butter, softened Salt and pepper For the cheese and Marmite filling 100g finely grated mimolette, red leicester or other hard cheese 2-3tbsp Marmite (or similar), to taste For the spiced sugar filling 4 tbsp sugar (whatever kind you like) ½ tsp ground cinnamon ¼ tsp ground nutmeg 1 clove, ground Finely grated zest of 1 orange 1 Ready-made v homemade puff This is a busy time of year, and no one would think any the less of you for buying ready-made pastry, but the rough puff below is considerably less faff than proper puff. If you’re using a block of the bought stuff, make sure it’s fridge cold before rolling it out. (Conversely, I find the ready-rolled stuff easier to work with if it’s not fridge cold.) 2 If making your own … To make the pastry, sift the flour and a generous pinch of salt on to a cold surface. Cut the butter into roughly 1cm cubes, then gently squidge them into the flour mix – the aim here is not to mix them completely into crumbs, but to end up with small lumps of butter coated in flour. Like its name, the pastry should look rough, rather than sandy. 3 Finish the dough Sprinkle a little cold water over the top of the butter and flour mixture and stir it in. Repeat until the mix just comes together, adding as little water as you can get away with while still producing a coherent dough – it shouldn’t feel sticky, but neither should it shed flour when moved. 4 Chill, then roll Shape the dough into a rectangle, working the pastry as little as possible to limit gluten development (which will make it tough), then wrap well and chill for 20 minutes. On a lightly floured surface, roll out the pastry into a rectangle that’s roughly the thickness of a £1 coin (about 3mm). 5 Fold the pastry and chill again Fold the top third of the pastry rectangle down into the middle, and the bottom third up over it, as if folding a letter, so you’re left with a rectangle with three layers of pastry. Give the dough a quarter turn, repeat the folding process once more, then wrap and chill for another 20 minutes. Leave the work surface floured for the moment (if practical). 6 For the butter filling … Meanwhile, prepare the fillings. For the snail butter, roughly chop the parsley and garlic, put them in a food processor and whizz until very finely chopped. Add the softened butter and mix again until you have a soft, vibrant green butter, then season to taste. (You can make this in advance, but make sure it’s spreadable before use.) 7 … and the cheese or spiced sugar filling For the cheese and Marmite pinwheels, finely grate the cheese and set aside 15g. If making the spiced sugar, stir together all the ingredients: don’t worry if you don’t have all the spices, and make substitutions (ground ginger, cardamom, etc) to taste. 8 Roll the dough again, and fill Roll the dough into a roughly 3mm-thick rectangle again. Neaten the edges, and spread your choice of filling (in this case, snail butter, but if it’s Marmite, add that first, followed by 85g of grated cheese) spreading evenly over the surface, leaving about 1cm clear around the edges. Working from one long side, roll up the pastry tightly into a sausage, place it seam side down on a floured work surface and cut into roughly 2cm rounds. 9 Chill again, then bake Divide the rounds between two lined baking trays, spacing them well apart, and chill in the fridge for at least 30 minutes (or, covered, for up to 24 hours). Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Brush the tops with egg and bake for 20-25 minutes, until golden and crisp – if you’re making the Marmite and cheddar version, scatter over the reserved 15g cheese five minutes before the end of the cooking time. However you’ve filled them, serve the pinwheels while they’re still warm. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe problem with Channel 4 documentaries is, done right, they can be so utterly convincing they lead you to consider a fairly drastic lifestyle change. This is how I almost became a paedophile hunter in 2014, for instance. The long week in 2013 when I got on to the dogging forums. So it is fair to say I went into How to Make It on OnlyFans, the new documentary about the boom in British creators making their livelihoods with sex work online, with a healthy amount of trepidation. Who would I be at the end of this hour-long? Or rather: what fruit would I be mashing with my feet for a paying audience? Do I need to explain what OnlyFans is and what people do on it to you? Do we need to do this dance? Fine, fine: OnlyFans is a content subscription service where you can pay for premium access to certain creators. There might be a golf coach you follow, for instance, who offers putting tips. Perhaps a musical artist you like will give previews of upcoming work. But, realistically, 90% of the platform is sex workers selling nudes. Yes, you could follow the golf coach. Or you could follow the lad who does the piss content you like and takes custom requests. Right, I think we all get the concept now. A good documentary like this one lives and dies on its casting, and How to Make It … has really nailed it. (Is there a way I could articulate this point without the word “nailed”? Normally I wouldn’t think about this, but … ) It’s got Alex Sim-Wise, the lads’ mag favourite turned OnlyFans supremo, to act not only as the charismatic focal point but also a roving OnlyFans fixer, a fairy godmother-type who specialises in maximising budding sex workers’ online presence. So we meet Emily, a nervous first-timer hoping to build her audience of seven into something that can sustain her and her cats. Alex coaches her in how to take more alluringly angled selfies and how to turn a length of street market faux fur into a lush-looking background drape. We meet Will, a beautiful, soft-spoken builder who is more comfortable getting smashed on a sofa than posting a selfie video. And we meet Zoe, who is contemplating the semi-serious decision about whether to sell foot pics online; Alex helps her get her head round a kink she doesn’t fully understand. All this is nice and, occasionally, exceptionally funny: I’ve already submitted a scene where Zoe watches foot porn for the first time to Bafta for their consideration. But it’s only with August’s announcement that OnlyFans would restrict sexual content that this documentary gets the required dramatic heft. We watch Will fret about making his page more softcore, Emily worry about her early career being so dramatically derailed, and Alex ponder, guru-like, about the nature of sex and work when credit card operators can open a trapdoor beneath your feet whenever they feel like it. “They’re deciding for everyone what they can and can’t buy,” she explains. “You just feel so powerless. Everyone’s like: ‘Oh, just do another job then.’ I like this job. I’m not hurting anybody or doing anything illegal. This is what I’ve invested my 10,000 hours into and I don’t think I should have to pivot to anything else.” It’s here the documentary really comes into its own. With that perfectly neutral tone Channel 4 has about sex, it shows OnlyFans creators exactly as they are: going about their lives and working round the parameters of the (since reversed) ban. Emily has fully embraced her OnlyFans alter ego. Zoe has an incredibly straightforward chat with her dad about the uniform length of all her toes. And we see Will overcome his chronic shyness to post a good morning video to all his followers, wishing them a pleasant weekend and telling them briefly about his Saturday night. Soon, his phone is buzzing with messages chirping with thanks. “Happy Sunday,” one reads, “Can I lick your sweaty armpits?” Well, says Will. That got a good response. He seems oddly buoyed. I never thought I’d say this about a horny stranger threatening to lick someone’s underarms, but it might be one of the most charming TV moments of 2021. How to Make It on OnlyFans starts Thursday 9 December on Channel 4On 23 December last year, the day after Downing Street aides were recorded laughing about how they could pretend that a party at No 10 was a “cheese and wine” gathering, a large contingent of police officers arrived at the London Tavern pub in Hackney, east London. James Kearns, the owner, was hosting Christmas drinks for workers at a scaffolding company he also runs. “There were 15 of us,” he said on Wednesday. “About 20 of the police showed up, absolutely hammering on the doors. We all hid in the toilets, but they found us.” This week, the case went before a magistrate. “And we’ve all been fined £100 each.” He and his team have been discussing the Downing Street story in the last few days, he said. “It’s absolutely disgusting. Why do we get a fine and they just have a good laugh about it? If we get prosecuted, they should be too. What’s the difference?” The Downing Street party had taken place the previous Friday in spite of official rules that said such gatherings were not allowed. Dozens of staff crammed in together, played party games and distributed secret Santa presents, sources have told the Guardian and other outlets. When the news broke that the party had happened, the government denied it. But the emergence of the video that so angered Kearns has prompted an investigation and a prime ministerial apology. Almost a year later, memories of the sense of crisis engulfing the country on that day may have faded a little – but at the time, it was palpable. The headline on the Daily Mail’s front page that Friday was “THE BLEAKEST MIDWINTER”, while the Guardian reported that hospitals were running short of beds, with 15,465 Covid patients in hospitals. On the same day, 28,507 new coronavirus cases were reported – bringing the seven-day total to 167,713, a rise of 40%. For Jackie Green, 18 December is imprinted on her memory for the worst reasons. At 1.20am, she got a call from the hospital where her 86-year-old mother, Beryl Harris, had contracted Covid on the ward. “And they were calling to tell me she had passed away,” Green said, her voice breaking as she spoke. “When I put the phone down, I just sat and howled. The pain was just incredible. Mum was my only relative.” After the call ended, she said, “I just sat there. I couldn’t move for probably two hours.” Green, who lives on her own, spent the evening of the 18th alone at home. Her mother was one of 489 people who died of coronavirus that day. “When I first watched the clip, I couldn’t really believe what I was seeing,” said Green, who is 59 and works in communications. “It took a while, several watches, for it to sink in. Obviously, anger was my primary emotion. That they just didn’t care. It was just a joke to them.” She felt “disbelief at how people could behave like that. It was just absolutely extraordinary. These people are supposed to be leading this country.” She said she was appalled that “they would have the party in the first place, that the rules didn’t apply to them and they could do exactly what they wanted – but also think it was funny afterwards”. Publicly, at least, Boris Johnson had seemed acutely aware of the necessity of following the rules. Just hours before the Downing Street party, he told the public: “If you are forming a Christmas bubble, it’s vital that from today you minimise contact with people from outside your household.” Two days earlier, London had been put into tier 3, which meant that “a work Christmas lunch or party” was prohibited “where that is a primarily social activity”. The escalation in the case count was so sharp that on Saturday, Johnson was forced to reverse his previous insistence that cancelling Christmas would be “inhuman” with the bombshell announcement that 18 million people would be placed in new tier 4 restrictions would not be allowed to visit their loved ones on Christmas Day. If Downing Street staff had any doubt about the rules, they did not have to look far to learn the public view of the government’s own ministers. On Thursday, the home secretary, Priti Patel, had accused Tory MP Tobias Ellwood of breaking the rules by attending a Christmas dinner at a private members’ club. She agreed he had committed an “egregious” breach and, when asked if he should face police action, said: “There are fixed-penalty notices. I don’t know the details as to where this happened or the location, but I’m sure … as it is a breach, that will be followed up.” Anyone tuning in to Sky News to seek more details on that story would not have seen Kay Burley, the channel’s best-known presenter, who had been suspended from work a week earlier for six months after holding a party of her own – for just 10 people. Across the country, too, the perceived gravity of such events was clear. Kearns is one of many to have been prosecuted over breaches around that time; it emerged this week that just before 8pm on Friday night, roughly when the Downing Street party would have been taking place, police in Ilford were investigating a gathering indoors at someone’s home. The following day, members of a Cornwall football team went for a Christmas night out in Plymouth, an event that prompted the club to say it was “truly appalled”. Kearns recognised that the police had a job to do over such cases – but said he was “staggered” by the appearance of a different rule for those at the centre of power. “Ours was a works drinks do, exactly the same, but a lot fewer people,” he said. “It’s hypocrisy, pure and simple.” The Met police said on Wednesday that it was “considering” the case in the light of the video, but reiterated its earlier statement that “it is our policy not to routinely investigate retrospective breaches of the Covid-19 regulations”. Jackie Green remembered the pressures of that period with excruciating clarity – and the sacrifices they had meant for her and her mum. “I hadn’t seen her since the February before,” Green said. “I spoke to her every day on the telephone for an hour. Mum was shielding because she was so frightened of Covid. She was very, very careful. “That all seems for nothing now … The fact that I didn’t see her and she died on her own. She was extremely worried and frightened. She kept saying: ‘I don’t want to die.’” They had been hoping to spend Christmas together. Instead, Green spent it alone. On that Friday night, nothing could ease Green’s grief. Friends called her, but “nobody can say anything or do anything to make it feel any better”, she said. Above all, it is her mother’s isolation in the last months of her life that has stayed with her. “She was incredibly lonely,” she said. “But even if I’d wanted to break the rules, she wouldn’t have let me.” • This article was amended on 9 December 2021. The football team that went out in Plymouth was from Cornwall, not Devon.Ministers are expected to sign off new rules to impose home working and vaccine certification across England in the face of rising Covid cases, the Guardian understands. Downing Street said no final decisions had been made but ministers and officials convened on Wednesday to move to plan B and to begin imposing some restrictions as early as Wednesday night. Ministers are increasingly worried about the threat of the Omicron variant, which appears to be more transmissible than Delta and scientists believe could become dominant within the next few weeks. They are concerned that it risks overwhelming the NHS in another Covid wave even if no more serious than Delta, because of the speed with which it appears to be spreading. The move comes as the government is under intense pressure over the Christmas party and a leaving do held in No 10 during last year’s lockdown. Four senior ministers: Johnson; the chancellor, Rishi Sunak; the health secretary, Sajid Javid, and the Cabinet Office minister, Steve Barclay, met on Wednesday morning to discuss imposing fresh curbs as early as this week. Later on Wednesday, a larger group of ministers will meet at the Covid operations committee, before the cabinet is convened to give their signoff. A press conference will most likely be held late in the afternoon, while a simultaneous statement is made in the Commons. Tory MPs have warned that the public may be unwilling to follow fresh Covid restrictions after a video emerged of Downing Street aides joking and laughing about a social gathering last Christmas, while limits on socialising were in force. A Whitehall source told the Guardian: “You can say it’s a distraction but it’s necessary. My worry is that we’ve lost our hearing with the public on this and we can’t do proper comms.” Another Whitehall insider said further restrictions were likely – and probably necessary – but thought they would not be unveiled until 18 December, the point at which Johnson said measures to tackle the Omicron variant would be reviewed. “Officials were not prepared for this announcement coming today,” they said. Referring to the revelation about No 10’s party last Christmas, the source added: “The fact it’s happening now, some would say, is questionable.” The move to plan B is likely to open up pressure on Johnson – already under fire over the party – on another front. Dozens of Tory MPs are likely to revolt against the imposition of tougher restrictions. One Conservative backbencher said it would be a “a big dead cat” – referring to the strategy of diverting attention away from a negative story – and “bring the whole Covid policy into disrepute”. They suggested Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, should “refuse to share a platform for this announcement”.Today we are hearing a lot about what was apparently happening in Downing Street on Friday 18 December; a party in total contravention of the coronavirus restrictions imposed on the rest of us. Let me tell you how I spent that day. I was 15 when my mum and dad came home from a “precautionary” brain scan in August 2016 to tell me and my sister that my mum had a terminal brain tumour. And last December, on that Friday, was the last time I spoke to Mum. She was in a hospice by then, my dad sitting outside her window as he had been every day since lockdown started in March, and I was talking to her via Dad’s FaceTime. I had just come home for Christmas, after four months away at university, and I told Mum I was looking forward to visiting her in person the next day. But the next day we received a call from the hospice. Mum had developed a slight cough, and had tested positive for Covid. She was OK, sitting up. As things were hectic there, it was decided we’d visit on the Sunday, not the Saturday. But on Sunday morning, early, we got another call. Mum had taken a rapid turn for the worse. She wasn’t going to live for the 45 minutes it would take to get to her and watch through a window. Mum died a few minutes later, without us there. We had to turn away some of her closest friends from her funeral because of social distancing laws. Thanks to lockdown, there was no chance of being able to see the people I loved outside of my immediate family, even in the depths of my grief. My best friend couldn’t even give me a hug. And just to be clear, my family was in full agreement with these restrictions – in a pandemic, you do what you have to do. We didn’t, and don’t, want to risk putting any other family through what we’d been through. But the pain of living those first few months distanced from people who cared about me remains. Fast forward to this week. Gearing up for my second Christmas without Mum and the first anniversary of her death, there are new headlines on the front pages. While I had been saying goodbye to my mum for the last time, aged 19, Downing Street was the site of an illegal Christmas party. That leaked video of government staff giggling as they joked about a “cheese and wine night” and a lack of social distancing … it’s unspeakable. As was their flippancy, believing they wouldn’t get called up on it. And still the prime minister denies there was a gathering of several dozen people, and was therefore against government guidelines and, indeed, the law. All the grief I’ve had for the past year came back, and with it a deep rage that left me feeling sick and physically shaking. I was outraged that while my mum died, separated from her family, those in Downing Street took the rest of us for idiots. I can’t do anything to change what happened. I can’t go back in time and make Mum’s death any easier on me and my family. I can’t have another second with my mum. But what I can do is share the horror of losing a loved one in the howling isolation of a pandemic, while those in power enjoyed Secret Santa and champagne. They have ruined many lives in the past two years, but I will not allow them to ruin mine. I’m going to keep talking about my lovely mum, and keep leading the life she would want me to live – including calling out hypocrisy. Daisy Harris is a studentWork has begun to clear 30,000 tonnes of household rubbish from the streets of Tunisia’s “second city” of Sfax after the government backed down in a long-running dispute over a landfill site. Residents and activists in Agareb, where the current dump is located, said the site, opened in 2008 near the El Gonna national park, was a risk to human health. In recent weeks, unrest in the region has escalated, with access to the site blocked and police using teargas against demonstrators from the town. One man, Abderrazek Lacheb, has allegedly died after being caught up in the demonstrations, although the police have denied his death was due to teargas. Moadh Akacha, 34, an activist from Agareb, said he was satisfied with the government’s decision to relocate the landfill. “The new site is 62km [39 miles] away from Sfax, about 22km [14 miles] from Agareb,” he said. “It’s a good location, but it’s only a temporary one. We’ll have to see what happens.” Civil unrest about the site has marked the first signs of public disobedience since President Kais Saied’s power grab in July, which saw him suspend parliament and remove immunity from prosecution for its members. The move remains a popular one with the Tunisian public, wearied by the country’s economic stagnation, the pandemic and the factional squabbling of parties and politicians. However, in Agareb, which Saied visited as a private academic before the election of late 2019, there remains a sense of betrayal over the law professor who had urged them to protest and the president who sent the police in with teargas. Having been in continuous use since its founding in 2008, the accumulation of waste at the landfill, a portion of which is said to be industrial, will take many years to clear. No details were made available by Anged (Agence Nationale de Gestion des Déchets), the government agency overseeing the country’s landfills, on its commitment to the Agareb site. However, the Tunisian General Labour Union (UGTT), which has suspended its calls for a general strike across the region on Friday, has made the postponement of industrial action conditional on the site being made safe. Waste management remains a significant problem for Tunisia. According to a World Bank report, less than two-thirds of rubbish in the capital, Tunis, is collected. Corruption within the sector has become a growing concern. In July 2020, the country’s then prime minister, Elyes Fakhfakh, resigned after being accused of corrupt links to the waste industry. In December, the environment minister was sacked and arrested after he was allegedly linked to an attempt to clandestinely import a shipment of Italian waste into the country.It’s a job that comes with a range of uniform options: dog collars, cassocks, surplices, albs, tippets and chasubles, all available from good clerical outfitters. But clergy are now snapping up a new item from an unexpected source – Marks &amp; Spencer. The retailer’s women’s black jumper with the word “Believe” emblazoned in bold colours is a hit with female priests, leading one Church of England bishop to describe it as “the new clergy uniform”. Ruth Bushyager, the bishop of Horsham, tweeted a picture of female priests in the Chichester diocese wearing the £19.50 Christmas jumper. Rev Kate Bottley, the former Gogglebox star and a priest in Nottinghamshire, also posted a picture using the hashtag #TeamBelieve. “Never one to shy away from a bandwagon, like most of the clerics I know I’ve bought this jumper,” she wrote. Leigh Greenwood, a Baptist minister, asked: “Do you think @marksandspencer have realised yet that they’ve become the unofficial suppliers of clergy Christmas jumpers?” One female priest is putting together a photo montage of more than 200 clergy wearing their Believe jumpers. “It has really struck a chord among women clergy,” said Rev Claire Jones, a curate in Bodmin, Cornwall. “People want something fun and interesting to wear at Christmas carols and school nativity plays. I’m sure it’s not what M&amp;S intended but it taps into what Christmas is really all about.” Some male clergy, for whom the women’s XL size is not big enough, are feeling left out. M&amp;S is selling a similar jumper in its menswear section but with the slogan “Ding Dong” replacing “Believe”. It may prove popular with bellringers. Richard Frith, the canon precentor at Southwell minster, tweeted: “I loathe Christmas jumpers with a consuming passion – seasonal consumerism at its worst, esp. when schools expect them to be worn by children who’ll have grown out of them next year. But even I would probably buy one of those #TeamBelieve jumpers if there was a menswear version.” Traditional clerical robes date back centuries, but four years ago the Church of England agreed to relax its rules on clothing to allow clergy to conduct services in civvies. Some clergy say surplices and albs put off younger people from attending church and set the priest apart from the congregation. Traditionalists maintain the latter is the point of formal vestments. A spokesperson for Marks &amp; Spencer said: “After another difficult year, our designers – and customers – have embraced optimistic and feelgood messages with ‘fabulous’ and ‘believe’ both proving very popular – as the #TeamBelieve posts show.”Stagecoach and the transport hub food specialist SSP have each reported a return of business to about two-thirds of pre-pandemic levels after a resurgence in commuting but warned of uncertainty ahead because of the rise of the Omicron variant. The bus and rail operator and the owner of the Caffè Ritazza and Upper Crust chains have both benefited from the easing of coronavirus restrictions and a return to the office but that now looks at risk amid reports that the government could impose its coronavirus plan B to tackle rising cases. SSP, which operates 2,800 outlets worldwide in airports and railway stations, said that in the first nine weeks of its new financial year it had 72% of its units open, providing two-thirds of 2019 level revenues. However, the company, which reported a £411m pre-tax loss for the year to the end of September, warned of the impact of Omicron over the next few months. “While there remains some uncertainty in the immediate outlook over the winter months, particularly over the potential impact of the Omicron variant on travel restrictions, we are confident in our ability to manage any near-term volatility,” the London-listed SSP said. The company’s revenues fell 42% year on year to £834m, and it expects sales to return to pre-pandemic levels by 2024. New rules were introduced this week, including pre-departure Covid tests for people arriving in the UK, while 11 African countries have been put on the red list for travel. The British bus, tram and rail operator Stagecoach reported a rise in first-half profits, with public transport usage picking up. The company – which announced a pre-tax profit of £31m in the half year to the end of October, up from £5.4m a year earlier – said that passenger journeys hit 70% of pre-pandemic levels in November. Last week the government imposed mandatory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops in England to curb the spread of Omicron. “[There has been] some recent softening, with Storm Arwen and changing Covid-19 guidance,” Stagecoach said. Total revenues grew from £454m to £579m year on year, with Stagecoach’s UK regional bus operations up 34.7%, its London bus business up 7.2% and rail operations up 93%.The chief executive of a US mortgage company who fired 900 employees on a Zoom call has apologised for failing to show “respect and appreciation” for the staff he sacked. The founder and chief executive of better.com, Vishal Garg, expressed contrition in a message (pdf) posted on his company’s website. Garg said he was sorry for the way “I handled the layoffs last week” after staff uproar over the video call last Wednesday. The 43-year-old added: “I failed to show the appropriate amount of respect and appreciation for the individuals who were affected and for their contributions to Better. I own the decision to do the layoffs but in communicating it I blundered the execution. “In doing so, I embarrassed you. I realise that the way I communicated this news made a difficult situation worse. I am deeply sorry and am committed to learning from this situation and doing more to be the leader that you expect me to be.” According to a leaked recording of the firing call, Garg began with the message: “I come to you with not great news.” He then added: “If you’re on this call, you are part of the unlucky group being laid off. Your employment here is terminated, effective immediately.” A now former employee on the call described the meeting as “three minutes tops”, in an interview with the Daily Beast. “They dumped us like trash. We were there since the beginning and worked hard for the company and for our roles,” another said. Better.com, a mortgage lender startup recently valued at about $7bn (£5.3bn), has also been hit by resignations among its senior team since the call, according to reports on TechCrunch and the Insider. Garg said in his apology he would “talk more” at an all-staff company meeting, adding that Better.com’s goals for 2022 were “the metrics that matter most”. The message ended with: “I believe in you, I believe in Better, and I believe that working together we can make home ownership better together.”A hidden sketch by Rembrandt has been discovered beneath the thick paint of the Dutch master’s most famous work, The Night Watch, revealing for the first time the artist’s original vision for the vast canvas. The preparatory drawing, made with beige paint with a high chalk content, was found as a result of a two-and-a-half-year investigation by restorers, data experts and art historians at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. The sketch reveals to researchers evidence of a series of changes Rembrandt van Rijn made to his arrangement of 34 different characters and the array of feathers, spears and swords around them, before the painting’s completion in 1642. The Night Watch, depicting a militia under the command of Capt Frans Banninck Cocq, took three years to finish after being commissioned by Amsterdam’s civic guard for a banqueting hall at its Kloveniersdoelen headquarters. Pieter Roelofs, the Rijksmuseum’s head of paintings, said it had been possible to make Rembrandt’s secret sketch visible through a “calcium map” of the work due to the artist’s use of a chalk-rich paint that could be picked up by the latest scanning technology. He said: “We see straight lines and curves. With the curves he created an initial sketch for the architecture in the background. You may ask why is this so important? Well, it gives us the feeling we can peek over Rembrandt’s shoulder while he was working on The Night Watch. “We always suspected that Rembrandt must have sketched it on the canvas before starting this complex composition. But that was always an assumption. “Now that we can see beneath the surface better than ever before, we now have the proof, this gives us real insight into Rembrandt’s creative process for the first time. It is fascinating to see how he’s searched for the right composition. We’ve discovered the origins of The Night Watch.” Since the summer of 2019, staff working on what they have called Operation Night Watch have been using the latest technology to seek out fresh insights into the painting ahead of its restoration. Rembrandt used the impasto technique, involving the application of thick paint on the canvas to achieve a three-dimensional structure that reflects light. Imaging methods were used to get beneath the layers. They found that Rembrandt originally painted feathers for the helmet of the militiaman Claes van Cruijsbergen, but later painted them over. He sketched more spears than he painted, adjusted the leg position of sergeant Rombout Kemp and there are signs that there was an additional sword in the original between the captain and his lieutenant, Willem van Ruytenburch. “Why did Rembrandt change his mind, you might ask?” said Roelofs. “We don’t know. But probably he removed the feathers, because they drew too much attention as Van Cruijsbergen is in the centre of the composition.” The main purpose of the latest research into The Night Watch was to prepare for its first restoration in over 40 years. Despite the painting having endured a tumultuous four centuries, including transportation into a bunker in coastal dunes at the start of the second world war, its condition is said to be very good despite evidence of abrasion, discoloration and paint loss over time. The priority, Roelofs said, was to tackle the deformation of the canvas seen in particular in its top left-hand corner, which is believed to have been happened during its stay in the Philips wing of the Rijksmuseum during the main building’s renovation between 2003 and 2013. The 3.63-metre by 4.37-metre painting will be taken from its current wooden stretcher, the framework to which the painting has been held by metal tacks since 1975, said Petria Noble, the museum’s head of painting conservation. She said: “We strongly feel that the wooden stretcher is contributing to the problem because a wooden stretch actually reacts differently to the canvas. It will then be put on to a new strainer, a non-reactive material, that we feel will actually be much more stable for the painting. The deformations are then expected to relax and the painting they will assume a flatter, more even surface. “One of the first things that you actually need to do is to remove very gently and systematically those tacks. And of course we have to use some gentle weight to actually coax those deformations, that we see along the left and the right edges, out.” The process will start in January and is expected to take up to three months, after which further possible conservation techniques will be considered, including removal of several varnish layers on the surface of the work.Analysis of an extraordinary fossil discovered in a Gloucestershire gravel pit has given fresh insight into how an ancient sea creature swam through oceans and defended itself from predators millions of years ago. Innovative imaging techniques have allowed scientists to build up a 3D picture of the inner workings of the ammonite, best known by the shell-shaped fossils found on beaches and sea cliffs. The research has led them to conclude that the marine animal swam by jet propulsion using the hyponome – a muscular tube-like funnel through which water is expelled – as found in creatures such as squid and octopuses. Researchers also pinpointed muscles that they believe allowed the ammonite to retract itself deep into its shell for protection. This would have been important since ammonites are believed to have lacked defensive features such as the ink sac found in modern squid and cuttlefish. Ammonites thrived in oceans during the Mesozoic era but became extinct at the same time as non-avian dinosaurs about 66m years ago. Scientists have learned a lot about them through the fossilised remains of their shells, but little was known about the soft body within. In 1998, Neville Hollingworth, an avid-fossil hunter, discovered an exceptionally well-preserved ammonite in an open gravel pit in Gloucestershire in 1998. It was unusual because it contained the fossilised remnants of soft tissue. A research team led by scientists from Cardiff University has now used CT and neutron scanning to create a detailed 3D computer reconstruction of the creature’s muscles and organs. Publishing their findings in Geology, the team say their work suggests ammonites may be evolutionarily closer to coleoids – the sub-group of animals containing squid, octopuses and cuttlefish – than previously thought. Up until now, scientists used the modern cephalopod nautilus as a body-plan for reconstructing ammonite biology. The study’s lead author, Lesley Cherns of Cardiff University’s school of Earth and environmental sciences, said scientists had patiently waited for new techniques to emerge rather than carrying out more destructive research. She said: “Preservation of soft parts is exceptionally rare in ammonites. Since the discovery of the fossil over 20 years ago, we have used numerous techniques to try to decipher the soft tissues, and have resisted the option of cutting it apart and hence destroying a unique specimen to see what is inside. We preferred to wait for the development of new, non-destructive technology – as now used in this study – to understand those internal features without harm to the fossil.” Imran Rahman, a co-author and principal researcher at the Natural History Museum, added: “Ammonites are an iconic extinct group of marine animals renowned for their rich fossil record that stretches back hundreds of millions of years. Their hard shells made of calcium carbonate preserve well, however, important details of the living animal were largely still a mystery. “In almost all cases, it’s only the hard shell – not the soft parts – preserved in fossil ammonites. On the rare occasions where soft parts have been found, they are mostly flattened. “The preserved musculature described in our paper represents the strongest fossil evidence yet that ammonites swam using a muscular hyponome and could retract deep into the shell, which had previously been hypothesised on largely theoretical grounds.” Hollingworth’s specimen is housed at the National Museum Cardiff.The mayor of a Spanish village whose former name was an ugly reminder of the country’s medieval persecution of its Jewish population has vowed to carry on with plans for a Sephardic memory centre despite an antisemitic graffiti attack this week. Seven years ago, the 52 eligible residents of Castrillo Matajudíos – Camp Kill Jews in English, voted in a referendum to change the village’s name back to Castrillo Mota de Judíos, which means Jews’ Hill Camp. The name change was formally approved by the regional government of Castilla y León in June 2015. Documents show the village’s original name was Jews’ Hill Camp and that the Kill Jews name dates from 1627 – 135 years after the edict that ordered Spain’s Jews to convert to Catholicism or be expelled. Despite the authorities’ efforts to make amends for the past, the village has once again fallen victim to antisemitism. On Monday morning, the mayor, Lorenzo Rodríguez, tweeted pictures of the graffiti, which included phrases such as “Juden Raus [Jews out]”, “Long live the Catholic Monarchs”, “The mayor’s sold out to the killer Jew”, and references to the grand inquisitor Tomás de Torquemada. The walls of the town hall had been defaced, as had those of the Sephardic memory centre – which is currently under construction – and a sign leading into the village. Rodríguez said he had reported the graffiti to the Guardia Civil, adding the “cowardly, disgusting, violent and intolerant” attack would not stop the village from opening its Jewish memory centre next year as planned. The mayor said the authorities in Castrillo Mota de Judíos would keep working “for the village, for its people, and for the past culture that once upon a time forged our present”. Rodríguez said he hoped those responsible for the attack would be caught and held to account for a “direct assault on democracy, on ideas, and on the individual and collective freedom of a village”. The Federation of Jewish Communities of Spain said the attack and the threats contained in the graffiti were “unacceptable and show the danger of the ideologies that led Europe to disaster”. It added: “We offer our full support to the mayor of Castrillo Mota de Judíos and encourage him to continue working to recover the Jewish past. We also hope for peaceful and tolerant coexistence.” The village is thought to have been established in the 11th century by a group of Jews who had been expelled from a nearby settlement. Although it became a popular trading hub and home to more than 1,000 people, life changed drastically when Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand expelled the Jews from Spain in 1492. Some researchers believe the name was changed to signal loyalty to Catholicism and the crown, while others think it may have been a slip of the pen, changing mota (hill) to mata (kill). In 2015, Spain attempted to atone for what it termed the “historical wrong” of the expulsion and persecution of its Jewish communities by offering citizenship to the descendants of those who were forced from their homeland. The offer, which expired in October 2019, resulted in 132,226 people of Sephardic descent applying for Spanish citizenship.Senior health officials have drawn up advice saying the UK should bring back stricter isolation and testing rules for contacts of Covid cases, amid concerns that triggering plan B is not enough to stop the spread of Omicron. Top officials at the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) have given three different options to help contain the threat, which at the strictest end would mean all contacts of Covid cases being asked to isolate again regardless of age or vaccination status. Other options would be asking contacts of positive Covid tests to isolate until a PCR test result, with subsequent daily lateral flows, or requiring the contacts to take daily lateral flows. They give further advice in favour of a return to working from home and an extension of mandatory mask wearing. Boris Johnson is expected to trigger plan B later on Wednesday, with working from home expected to become mandatory and the possible introduction of vaccine passports. The decision is due to be taken after a meeting of “the quad” – Johnson, Rishi Sunak, Sajid Javid and Steve Barclay – and a further gathering of the Covid-O operations committee, after they were briefed there were early indications that Omicron is more transmissible than Delta, and multiple experts warned that the new strain could be the dominant variant within a month. However, some top advisers at UKHSA believe even more restrictions are necessary. The major worry is that Omicron could be so transmissible that it could lead to a major wave of Covid, putting pressure on the NHS, even if it does not cause more serious symptoms. The number of Omicron cases throughout the UK rose by 107 to 437 on Wednesday, but the total is likely to be significantly higher, as confirmation by genomic sequencing can take up to a week and there are significant gaps in testing for a key marker of the variant, called the S-gene dropout. Adding to concerns, scientists say they have identified a “stealth” version of Omicron, which cannot be distinguished from other variants using that indicator. Nicola Sturgeon revealed on Tuesday that about 4% of Covid-19 cases in Scotland were likely to be the new Omicron variant, with that figure “steadily rising”. That translates to about 122 new cases a day with the S-gene dropout marker in Scotland, although only 99 cases overall have been confirmed with genomic sequencing. “Our estimate at this stage is that the doubling time for Omicron cases may be as short as two to three days, and that the R number associated with the new variant may be well over 2,” Sturgeon said. Contact tracing is also being enhanced in Scotland, with household contacts of close contacts of positive cases told to test and isolate. With concern rising about the rapid rise of Omicron, advice from UKHSA officials about stricter testing and isolation advice for contacts of Covid cases has gone to the “silver” committee, chaired by the chief medical officer, and the next step would be submission to “gold” level among ministers and top officials or Covid-O committee of cabinet ministers. The advice underlines the seriousness with which UKHSA is taking Omicron. Dr Jenny Harries, who leads the government agency, suggested last week that people should think about reducing social contact, such as Christmas parties, but this was rejected by No 10 and other ministers. The UKHSA advice, detailing the three options for contacts of Covid cases, is likely to be controversial among Tory backbenchers, many of whom were opposed to the so-called pingdemic, when people were asked to isolate without symptoms. Conservative MPs are also warning that people may be unwilling to abide by the government’s advice after a leaked video showed No 10 aides laughing and joking about having held a Christmas party during Covid restrictions last year. On Tuesday, Johnson’s spokesperson said that the next contingency step remained the potential imposition of the so-called plan B, which would introduce vaccine certification and instructions to work from home where possible. But he also maintained the line that the government was “encouraging businesses to bring back people into the office, in line with the guidance”. While the government would “want to make sure that parliament has its say” on any new rules, the spokesperson said, ministers had the existing powers to impose plan B restrictions unilaterally if they were needed. Johnson stressed to his cabinet on Tuesday that strengthening the booster campaign and reaching unvaccinated people was the government’s main tool against Covid. However, there are some concerns that the rate of booster jabs has faltered, with under-40s still waiting for the programme to be expanded to them from 13 December. The government has also brought in new travel restrictions, including bans from some African countries, pre-departure PCR tests and day two PCR tests for new arrivals. The UKHSA was approached for comment on Wednesday morning and no response has been received.Olaf Scholz will succeed Angela Merkel as Germany’s new chancellor after securing a majority of 395 of 736 delegates’ ballots in a parliamentary vote on Wednesday morning. Scholz will oversee a liberal-left “traffic light” coalition government between his Social Democratic party (SPD), the Greens and the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP), the first power-sharing agreement of such a kind in Germany, and the first governing alliance with three parties since 1957. Scholz, a former mayor of Hamburg and finance minister in Merkel’s final term, secured 21 fewer votes than the 416 seats the three coalition parties have in the Bundestag, though several politicians were absent from the vote because of illness. Wearing a bordeaux red tie, the Social Democrat politician removed his black mask to accept the vote. Amid applause, delegates congratulated Scholz with fist bumps, handshakes and flowers. One gave him a basket of red apples. Several politicians from Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union, which plummeted to its worst result in German history at September’s national vote, also took the opportunity to congratulate Scholz on social media. The conservatives’ failed chancellor candidate, Armin Laschet, who not only lost the election but will make way as party leader next spring, tweeted: “Even if we fought for a different result, we can count ourselves lucky that there is so much mutual respect between democrats in this country.” After the vote Scholz headed to the Bellevue Palace residence of the German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, to be formally appointed. By noon, he was back in the Bundestag to take his oath of office, swearing to use the powers bequeathed to him “for the good of the German people”. Scholz, who was raised in a Protestant household but later opted to leave the church, declined to utter the optional final line of the oath, “So help me God”. As he became the first politician to re-fill the empty government benches vacated by Merkel’s team of ministers, Scholz bowed his head in front of the parliament in a show of humility. Guests watching the ceremony from the visitors’ gallery included the former chancellor Gerhard Schröder, Scholz’s wife, Britta Ernst, his parents, Gerhard and Christel Scholz, and his brothers Jens and Ingo. The new government was finally announced in parliament at 1:30 pm, after which the ministers in Scholz’s cabinet took their oaths. The gender-equal new cabinet contains several firsts: women will for the first time hold Germany’s foreign and interior ministries, with the Green politician Annalena Baerbock in the former and the Social Democrat Nancy Faeser in the latter. The defence ministry will be held by Christine Lambrecht, the third consecutive woman in the role. The agriculture minister, Cem Özdemir, of the Green party, will be the federal republic’s first minister with Turkish roots. As the names of the new ministers were read out, the loudest cheer echoed around the chamber at the mention of Germany’s new health minister. Karl Lauterbach, a studied epidemiologist and Harvard graduate who has been a mainstay of television panel debate throughout the pandemic, has become a hate figure for Germany’s anti-vaxxers and lockdown sceptics but was desired by many as the most qualified politician for the job in the health ministry. Merkel, too, watched proceedings from the visitors’ gallery. The outgoing chancellor, who is ending her political career and will not continue as an MP, received a standing ovation from almost all delegates in the last minutes of her tenure. Only members of the far-right Alternative für Deutschland remained seated. As the new president of the Bundestag, Bärbel Bas, read out the names of all delegates eligible to vote for the new chancellor, a mask-wearing Merkel scribbled furiously on a notepad. Merkel’s final day as chancellor was her 5,860th day in office, falling short of the record set by her late former mentor Helmut Kohl by a mere ten days. Merkel will formally hand over her offices at the chancellory in central Berlin to Scholz and his team on Wednesday. The cuboid building opposite the parliament, nicknamed the “federal washing machine”, has been the seat of German leaders since 2001, making Scholz only the third chancellor to govern from its premises. Germany’s new head of government is expected to make his first trip abroad as soon as Friday, when he will also attend the “summit for democracy” hosted by the US president, Joe Biden, via video link. During September’s election campaign, Scholz had stated he would follow the example set by Merkel and make his first trip abroad to Paris. Germany’s new chief diplomat, Baerbock, had vowed to make Brussels her first destination in office, and there have been reports in German media she could make a brief trip to the seat of the European Commission on Wednesday afternoon or Thursday. On Saturday and Sunday, Baerbock is due to attend a meeting of G7 foreign ministers in Liverpool, where she could introduce herself to her colleagues from Britain, France, the US, Italy, Japan and Canada. Scholz’s new spokesperson and representatives of the 14 federal ministers will hold their first press conference on Monday, in keeping with a thrice-weekly question-and-answer session with the media. Merkel’s spokesperson, Steffen Seibert, has indicated his intention to withdraw from politics, with his tweets from the official government handle to be archived.Joe Biden has said that he is not considering sending US troops to defend Ukraine in response to a Russian military buildup on the country’s borders. “That is not on the table,” he told reporters on Wednesday, one day after speaking directly with Vladimir Putin in an effort to avert a military crisis. Biden has warned Putin that there would be “severe consequences” if Russia launches an attack on Ukraine and said the US would be providing “defensive capabilities” to the Ukrainian military. Biden also said that he was hoping to announce “meetings at a higher level” between Russia and at least four Nato members in an effort to address the Kremlin’s complaints about the military alliance. Biden said he hoped to be able to announce the meetings by Friday. The talks would include “at least four of our major Nato allies and Russia to discuss the future of Russia’s concerns relative to Nato writ large and … bringing down the temperature along the Eastern Front”. Those talks could match the “discussion of strategic security on the continent” that Kremlin said it was expecting in remarks after the high-stakes talks between Biden and Putin. “I want to emphasise once again: the talks were very open, substantive, and I would say constructive. In any case, I hope the US side feels the same way about the results of our meeting,” Putin told reporters on Wednesday. “We can continue this dialogue. It seems to me that’s the main thing.” Biden and Putin appeared to make little headway during their virtual summit on Tuesday, trading accusations over the Russian military buildup near Ukraine and the potential for new economic sanctions against Moscow. The US had not indicated it is ready to hold the same negotiations that the Kremlin wants. But the Kremlin statements indicate that Russia is not yet abandoning talks, while leaving an estimated 100,000 troops within striking distance of Ukraine. “#Putin-#Biden video call has been useful,” wrote Dmitry Trenin, the head of the Moscow Carnegie Center. “Acknowledging each other’s security concerns is key. Reviving channel on [Ukraine] can help avoid misunderstanding … War fears in west will not subside just yet, but jaw jaw is better than war war.” Dmytro Kuleba, the Ukrainian foreign minister, said “the contact itself serves [as] deterrence and de-escalation”, Reuters reported. “We appreciate the crucial diplomatic engagement of the US in efforts to bring Russia back to the table of negotiations.” Biden is scheduled to speak with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Thursday. Russia and the US each gave vague confirmations for further talks, but the exact subject of those talks and when they would be held has remained unclear. Russia has said it wants “legal guarantees” to limit any further eastward expansion of Nato and the placement of missile systems in Ukraine or other countries bordering Russia. That would indicate Moscow is seeking a new treaty with the alliance, which is likely to anger some members. Russia has also demanded that Biden compel Ukraine to open direct talks with Russian-backed separatists, a non-starter in Kyiv. The White House wants Russia to reduce the threat of an invasion as a condition for discussions, and Biden has warned the Kremlin of specific sanctions that could result from a new Russian offensive into Ukraine. The US and Ukraine fear that Moscow could be planning an operation beginning in late January. The two leaders talked by videoconference for more than two hours, a format Putin enjoyed, Peskov said. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said: “The discussion between president Biden and president Putin was direct and straightforward. There was a lot of give and take, there was no finger-wagging. But the president was crystal clear about where the United States stands on all of these issues.” After the call, Biden spoke to the leaders of the UK, Germany, France and Italy by conference call. The president had consulted them on Monday, and the White House said they had agreed “to stay in close touch on a coordinated and comprehensive approach in response to Russia’s military buildup on Ukraine’s borders”.Katie Allan had her period the day she was sent to prison. The 20-year-old from East Renfrewshire was sentenced to 16 months in Polmont, near Falkirk, in March 2018 for a drink-driving offence in which a teenage boy had been injured. His parents wrote to the sheriff urging a non-custodial option, and Katie’s family had been assured by their lawyer that the chances of their daughter, a first-time offender studying geography at the University of Glasgow, being sent to prison were “next to nothing”. “I’ll never forget,” says her mother, Linda, in the kitchen of the home where she and her husband, Stuart, brought up their daughter, a perfectionist student and Guide leader, along with her younger brother, Scott. “She turned in the dock as she was getting handcuffed and said: ‘Help me, Mum’ – then she got dragged away. “We came back here and we were in shock.” The pitch of her voice rises sharply, and there is a shadow of the panic that must have gripped her then. “You know nothing! We didn’t know where she was. We didn’t know who to contact. We were petrified for her. She didn’t have pyjamas or underwear. She had her period and didn’t have sanitary towels.” Completely unfamiliar with prison protocols, Katie had no clue how to access sanitary supplies, or even make a phone call to her frantic parents. Linda heard that a fellow inmate eventually loaned her some essentials. Since her daughter’s suicide in June 2018, three months on from that day, Linda and Stuart have had many moments to reflect on the petty humiliations, relentless bullying, inadequate mental health provision and broader system failure that they believe led directly to their child’s death. But it is this first, brutal introduction to the power plays of prison life that sticks with her mother. The last time Linda saw Katie alive, she was scarcely recognisable. Her hair was falling out in clumps from alopecia; there were angry red patches of eczema on her arms and dark circles under her eyes. Although preparations were under way for her release with an electronic tag, Katie, who had just turned 21, was in extreme distress. The bullying she was experiencing from other inmates had reached an intolerable level, with shouted threats of violence and recrimination for imagined slights keeping her awake. “She was exhausted,” says Linda. “Then she got upset, which she’d never done in the visitors’ hall before.” Usually Katie would maintain a cheerful front at visits, both for her family’s sake and her own, not wanting to give her tormentors more ammunition. Linda told her about the cushions she had bought for Katie’s flat, readying the place for her return. “She was so upset that I couldn’t do what she always said, which was not to speak to a prison officer about it.” That officer promised to convey the message to staff on Katie’s hall, “and she did what she said she would”, adds Linda, who has absolute recall of the smallest acts of kindness towards her daughter. “She did report it to two other officers, who spoke to Katie and said: ‘Everything’s going to be all right,’ and that they might move her in the morning.” Her tone shifts now, turning brittle. “Then they locked her up.” Katie’s body was found in her cell the next day. Everything that Linda and her husband have done since then, they explain, is about making sense of that catastrophic loss. It is an endeavour that has expanded well beyond their own grief and led them to expose, through painstaking research, failings not only in how the state cares for some of its most vulnerable citizens, but also in Scotland’s peculiar system of fatal accident inquiries (FAI), which are mandatory whenever anyone dies in custody. The Allans say their evidence proves these inquiries, the rough equivalent of an English inquest, are manifestly incapable of holding the prison service to account for Scotland’s shocking rates of death in custody, particularly among younger inmates. At the end of November, a review recommended that every death in prison custody should have an independent investigation completed within months of its occurrence. It’s an incremental victory of sorts for the Allans, whose most recent analysis revealed that 40% of prisoner deaths in Scotland over the past decade were suicides, with nearly half of those under the age of 30. But Linda remains sceptical of additional well-meant recommendations without the power to implement them. Accepting the recommendations of the FAI review in principle on 30 November, Scotland’s justice secretary, Keith Brown, acknowledged that “systemic and operational” changes were needed but insisted some progress has been made. A spokesperson for the Scottish Prison Service (SPS) has said: “We recognise the profound emotional distress experienced by families when a loved one dies in custody and anything that can be done to provide information and engage with families is to be welcomed.” A Scottish government spokesperson also commented, saying: “We remain committed to making improvements to the response to, and experiences of, families impacted by a death in prison custody.” “We were quite ashamed,” admits Linda, “because we just had no idea about what was going on in prisons. It does not make logical sense to us that there’s all these buzzwords about rehabilitation, but there’s no way on God’s earth that the prison Katie was in rehabilitates anyone.” Scotland’s custody record offers much to be ashamed of, with an incarceration rate marginally higher than that of England and Wales and substantially higher than comparable EU countries, despite the SNP government’s attempts to minimise short-term custody and promote community-based rehabilitation. One-third of inmates are aged 30 or under, and there is a higher prison suicide rate than in England. Nascent Scottish government reforms, especially regarding female prisoners and young offenders, were stalled by the pandemic and, just prior to it, Europe’s anti-torture watchdog described conditions in Scotland’s overcrowded prisons as being at emergency level. The damning report highlighted a rise in drug-related violence, poor mental health provision and inmates confined to their cells for lengthy periods of time, sometimes in less than 9 sq metres of living space. This was the crumbling system that Katie was subsumed by in the spring of 2018. Linda and Stuart are forthright in acknowledging their daughter’s guilt – according to press reports at the time, from the moment of her arrest Katie was full of remorse and concern for the boy she had knocked down – as well as her privilege: “There were no ACEs [adverse childhood experiences] in her background.” But they remain baffled that “one wrong decision”, compounded by a series of institutional failings, resulted in the death of their “kind-hearted, perfectionist” daughter. The hardest thing to accept, they say, is that Katie was let down by those who were ultimately responsible for her care. At the time of the crash, Katie was working at a local cafe to subsidise her university bills. At a night out for a colleague’s birthday, she drank cider and was over the limit according to a subsequent test. Driving back through the Glasgow suburb of Giffnock, Katie clipped her wheel on a traffic island. The tyre blew and she lost control of the car, mounting the pavement and hitting a 15-year-old boy who was out running, leaving him unconscious with a broken ankle and fractured eye socket. Katie stopped further up the road to change the tyre and has always maintained she had no idea she had hit anyone. A charge of fleeing the scene of an accident was quickly dropped. “Katie was absolutely devastated [when she realised she’d hurt someone],” says Linda. “There’s no way that she was lying to me.” Katie’s experience of prison was gruelling from the start. Stuart is frank: “Katie was not your normal prisoner and probably stuck out like a sore thumb, and there was a lot of bullying.” In addition, there were regular “humiliating” strip searches and constant difficulties accessing basic support, which too often proved inadequate. But the Allans believe that repeated warnings about Katie’s vulnerability went unheeded. “The biggest issue in prisons is in the halls. It is not in the lovely new education suite where the drama groups go, or the therapy pets; it’s about what goes on there and the institutional staff behaviour …” Linda groans, recalling how her mother, a wheelchair user, was forced to stand up so the receptionist could check her passport photograph over the high desk; and how one officer casually responded: “We can’t guarantee your daughter won’t get battered”, when she said she was worried about Katie’s ability to cope; and how Katie had been told to get rid of half her books after the university sent in her academic texts so that she could continue her studies. “All these wee power struggles. It’s that helplessness you feel, not wanting to make a fuss because you’re frightened of the repercussions on your loved one.” Immediately following Katie’s death, and for some time after, “we were on our knees”, says Linda. But there was also a clarity: “From day one, we had made our mind up that this was a crime that had been committed.” The family are still appealing the decision by Scotland’s crown office not to prosecute the SPS under the Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007 over Katie’s death. An FAI cannot be held until this appeal is decided. The Allans are a good team: Linda has a background in healthcare, while Stuart works with data and trends. Through months of work analysing death certificates and FAI reports, their most recent study of almost 200 inquiries into deaths in custody found the sheriff made no recommendation to improve practice in 90% of cases, while FAIs often took three or four years to complete. They discovered that no death of a woman in custody in Scotland has ever resulted in a finding of problems, despite recent critiques from human rights bodies about the care of female inmates. “In trying to find out what happened to their daughter, Linda and Stuart have discovered and exposed deep flaws in how the state manages its duty of care for the life and wellbeing of those in their custody,” says Sarah Armstrong, professor of criminology at the University of Glasgow, who worked with the Allans as equals in a research team to produce this latest report. “They have forced the government to do what it should have all along by taking seriously the levels of death and the quality of care given to people in custody.” Their solicitor, Aamer Anwar, is likewise convinced of the couple’s impact on the prisons debate in Scotland. “Katie wasn’t a rich, famous or powerful woman, but what she has are two stubborn parents who have refused to be silenced, lied to or patronised by a prison service used to a culture of denial. They carry a moral authority that terrifies the prison service.” But for Linda and Stuart, the measure remains in the things undone. A review of mental health services for young people in custody was carried out later in 2019, prompted by Katie’s death and that of 16-year-old William Lindsay, a boy from a very different background to Katie, who killed himself on remand in the same prison four months later, despite his significant vulnerabilities being flagged to staff. The Allans, who remain in touch with William’s mother, are particularly frustrated at the lack of progress since this review. Meanwhile, they have applied for a grant to undertake further research. “We’ve always said we don’t want this to define the rest of our life, especially for Scott. We have lots of difficult conversations and everything we do is a decision between the three of us.” Katie and Scott were “incredibly close”, say their parents, and as the younger sibling headed to university himself this autumn, “he’s missed his sister more now than ever, because the person who’d be helping him make this transition was his sister. She was a bossy-boots, so she would have been sorting out the cooking rota with his flatmates.” The drive to keep asking questions is simple enough, they say. “We hear it a lot from people who have lost children. We had to make some sense of Katie’s death because it was completely senseless.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgThe government is facing a furious backlash after a video emerged showing senior No 10 aides joking about lockdown rules and a Christmas party held at Downing Street. After Boris Johnson and various aides repeatedly denied that a party took place at all and that Covid rules were broken, Johnson said on Wednesday that he “apologises unreservedly for the offence that [the video] has caused” as well as “for the impression that it gives”, while still insisting that, as far as he was aware, no party took place. He said there would be investigation into the matter by the cabinet secretary. Here, Guardian readers share what they think of this latest scandal engulfing the prime minister’s administration, and whether they would be willing to accept another lockdown this winter. ‘My brother-in-law died around the time of the party’ It’s all an absolute disgrace with the government and I just despair, but I would observe the rules if a lockdown was called. You’ve got to try to keep the faith. It pains me to say, but the selfish nature of what we have become as a nation, encouraged and nurtured by this Tory government over the last 10 years, breaks my heart. My brother-in-law died around the time of the party. He had heart problems but wasn’t in bad health, and was looked after at home by my sister-in-law who is a nurse. He went into hospital, tested negative before returning home, but later tested positive and died a few days later. My sister-in-law now has long Covid. Mike , 71, retired, West Kirby ‘I’m done – there’s now no chance you’ll stop me from seeing family at Christmas’ I have severe asthma and am clinically extremely vulnerable and have always been fastidious about the rules. Now I also have a five-month-old baby. After 18 months of a new scandal every week, culminating in them literally laughing at us, I’m done. I will keep my distance from people I don’t know, I will wash my hands, I will even wear a mask. But you try to stop me from seeing family at Christmas – my daughter’s first Christmas, my nephew’s first Christmas, the first Christmas since my grandfather’s Parkinson’s diagnosis? Not a chance. The 18 December would have been the same as every other night for me the previous nine months – sitting at home doing nothing. I’ve never liked Boris but he really must resign now. How the Tories still have any support from the public is beyond me. Liam 34, IT manager, Newcastle upon Tyne ‘The government has no respect for the public’ The news about an alleged Christmas party is truly scandalous. The government appears to have no respect at all for the public, and no care at all for what people have gone through – whether we’ve suffered a bereavement, endured Covid ourselves, lost jobs and financial security or even just muddled through trying to survive a crisis. It seems to just see it all as a game and they do not care what happens to normal people while they’re playing If another lockdown was imposed I would be willing to comply. I understand many people won’t because the government has continually undermined its own public health message, but we are still in a pandemic and I want to do the right thing to protect myself and others from getting ill. Emma Hawley, 41, programme manager, Stockport ‘The video is the icing on the cake’ If we went into lockdown I wouldn’t be willing to. It imposes too many restrictions on our freedoms. The latest video is the icing on the cake – the government has now made lockdown even more of a divisive issue following their actions. They cannot expect to be listened to. They have attempted to manipulate the British public using health and social care as a tool, playing into our compassions, while they circumvent whatever laws they wish. They’re just annoyed they’ve been found out and it’s about to bite them in the ass. The 18 December is my mum’s birthday and last year was the first time I’ve missed it – I was at university and just couldn’t get home to see her. It’s all well and good speaking to someone on FaceTime but it’s not the same as being around them. I think that was the hardest thing for us. Oliver, 20, politics student, London ‘I feel absolute disgust’ My 62-year-old father had a serious stroke in November last year, he was hospitalised and then taken to a rehabilitation home until January. That’s where he spent his Christmas. He almost died and we weren’t allowed to see him at all throughout that period. He had trouble speaking and it was very hard to communicate with him on the phone. One day he called us and was crying on the phone. I feel absolute disgust when I think about the fact that No 10 had a Christmas party while we went through this. It sickens me. My dismay at that man being the leader of the country I live in increases by the day. The obvious answer is that the Tories were laughing at us all. I wouldn’t be willing to follow another lockdown in regards to seeing loved ones. Daniel, 35, from York ‘It really is one rule for them and another rule for the rest of us’ While the government is unlikely to act fast enough, given previous lockdowns, I would be willing to lockdown if it was deemed important. Last year I was just at home, not having a Christmas party. I did not see anyone other than my household that night. Unfortunately, the latest developments do not surprise me. It really is one rule for them and another rule for the rest of us. I absolutely think the prime minister should resign. He is completely incompetent and ideally he should have already resigned over general mismanagement of the pandemic. Louis, 19, student, Monmouth ‘It really hurts’ I don’t think I would be willing to go back into lockdown. Last year was a really tough Christmas, we didn’t see anybody and it was horrible, though we did it as we were told to and it was the right thing to do. Knowing that so many people weren’t allowed to have what would have been their last Christmas together while the government threw a party is just awful. It’s laughable that all these people in the Conservative party – Dominic Cummings and Matt Hancock and Boris Johnson – seem to be getting away with these hypocritical actions time and time again. It hurts, it really hurts. Hannah Ibbatson, 41, a stay-at-home mum from YorkRapper Travis Scott has denied responsibility for deaths at the Astroworld festival in Houston, where 10 people died last month when the crowd surged toward the stage. The Astroworld concert is among the deadliest live music crowd events in recent American history. More than 140 lawsuits have been filed so far, including a mass litigation suit brought by more than 1,500 concertgoers. Most of the cases allege the defendants, including Scott, were negligent and stood to gain from continuing the concert despite the crowd control problems. Scott denies the allegations. In court documents responding to six lawsuits obtained earlier this week by CNN, attorneys for Scott asked for the cases to be dismissed and barred from being brought again. “Defendants generally deny the allegations set forth,” they said. Families of victims blasted the rapper’s legal filings as “shameful”. Houston attorney James Lassiter told CNN that Scott “continues using social media to present a public image of someone who is grieved by the catastrophic loss of life that his actions caused” while “quietly paying celebrity lawyers to argue his victims deserve nothing more than symbolic help with funeral costs”. Soon after the tragedy, Scott released a video statement to say he was “honestly just devastated” by the tragedy. Scott has offered to pay for the funerals of victims of the crowd control disaster. However, at least one family, that of the youngest victim Ezra Blount, nine, declined the offer. Another Houston attorney, Brent Coons, is demanding Scott pay $10bn to settle litigation from the disaster. The attorney represents 1,547 concertgoers, which the law firm said is the largest suit to date. Lawyers have asked the court to combine cases to make litigation speedier. “What happened at Astroworld was an unconscionable tragedy and it is important that justice is served for all those impacted,” said Coons.Microplastics cause damage to human cells in the laboratory at the levels known to be eaten by people via their food, a study has found. The harm included cell death and allergic reactions and the research is the first to show this happens at levels relevant to human exposure. However, the health impact to the human body is uncertain because it is not known how long microplastics remain in the body before being excreted. Microplastics pollution has contaminated the entire planet, from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest oceans. People were already known to consume the tiny particles via food and water as well as breathing them in. The research analysed 17 previous studies which looked at the toxicological impacts of microplastics on human cell lines. The scientists compared the level of microplastics at which damage was caused to the cells with the levels consumed by people through contaminated drinking water, seafood and table salt. They found specific types of harm – cell death, allergic response, and damage to cell walls – were caused by the levels of microplastics that people ingest. “Harmful effects on cells are in many cases the initiating event for health effects,” said Evangelos Danopoulos, of Hull York Medical School, UK, and who led the research published in the Journal of Hazardous Materials. “We should be concerned. Right now, there isn’t really a way to protect ourselves.” Future research could make it possible to identify the most contaminated foods and avoid them, he said, but the ultimate solution was to stop the loss of plastic waste: “Once the plastic is in the environment, we can’t really get it out.” Research on the health impact of microplastics is ramping up quickly, Danopoulos said: “It is exploding and for good reason. We are exposed to these particles every day: we’re eating them, we’re inhaling them. And we don’t really know how they react with our bodies once they are in.” The research also showed irregularly shaped microplastics caused more cell death than spherical ones. This is important for future studies as many microplastics bought for use in laboratory experiments are spherical, and therefore may not be representative of the particles humans ingest. “This work helps inform where research should be looking to find real-world effects,” said microplastics researcher Steve Allen. “It was interesting that shape was so important to toxicity, as it confirms what many plastic pollution researchers believed would be happening - that pristine spheres used in lab experiments may not be showing the real-world effects.” Danopoulos said the next step for researchers was to look at studies of microplastic harm in laboratory animals – experiments on human subjects would not be ethical. In March, a study showed tiny plastic particles in the lungs of pregnant rats pass rapidly into the hearts, brains and other organs of their foetuses. In December, microplastics were revealed in the placentas of unborn babies, which the researchers said was “a matter of great concern”. In October, scientists showed that babies fed formula milk in plastic bottles were swallowing millions of particles a day.The cancer drug specialist Clinigen has agreed to a £1.2bn takeover deal from a London-based investment firm, becoming the latest big British company to be taken private. Triton Investment Management has offered to pay 883p a share for the company, whose main product is the acquired cancer medicine Proleukin. Clinigen, which is based in Burton-on-Trent, Staffordshire, said its board had recommended the offer to shareholders, which include the New York hedge fund Elliott Management, with a 7.6% stake. The news sent Clinigen’s share price soaring by up to 15% in early trading, though they later settled at at 901p, up 10.2%. Elliott declined to comment. It has been reportedly demanding a break-up of Clinigen, but never made its demands public – unlike the pressure it has applied to the drugmaker GSK and the energy firm SSE. The hedge fund first publicly disclosed a 5.2% stake in Clinigen on 10 September when the share price was 659.5p – meaning it has made a significant gain on its holding since. Clinigen does not develop medicines itself, but acquires the rights to medicines from drug developers, produces them via contract manufacturers, and distributes them around the world. A growing part of its business is offering services to other biotech and pharmaceutical firms, such as selling their drugs around the world and running clinical trials for them. The group works with 34 of the top 50 pharmaceutical companies. There has been a flurry of private equity buyouts in recent months. The supermarket group Morrisons was bought for £7bn by the US firm Clayton, Dublier &amp; Rice, which beat off SoftBank-owned Fortress Investment in a head-to-head auction. David Cox, an analyst at the investment bank Panmure Gordon, has said that the takeover approach of Clinigen was inevitable after its shares fell earlier this year, when it warned sales of its cancer drugs would be lower than expected because of the coronavirus pandemic. This has mainly hit sales of Proleukin, which is given at hospitals as an IV drip or injection. Clinigen, which employs more than 1,000 people in 14 countries, was created by Peter George from the merger of three healthcare businesses in 2010. He floated the company on the London stock market two years later. George cashed in part of his stake for £16.5m in 2016 but retained a 3% holding at the time. It is unclear whether he still owns Clinigen shares today.Enjoy the fulfilment that comes from giving something with real meaning. Our winter programme of online Masterclasses is chock-full of opportunities to strengthen skills and grow knowledge from world-leading experts in creative writing, science, journalism and business. For the up-and-coming writer A masterclass in novel-writing with Kate Mosse and Maggie O’Farrell Kate Mosse and Maggie O’Farrell lead this unique novel-writing workshop, full of practical tips and inspiration, brought to you in partnership with the Women’s Prize Trust. Ways into writing: How to begin your story with Cathy Rentzenbrink This workshop with the bestselling author will enable you to carve out some space for starting to write and honing your craft. The first 20,000 words: The beginner’s guide to writing a novel Face up to that blank sheet of paper and begin the gentle jog towards the first checkpoint, under the guidance of one of the best writers in the business. Everything you need to know about journalism, taught by leading Guardian writers A unique opportunity to learn about a career in journalism first-hand from leading Guardian writers. How to write your family history: A weekend writing course with Nick Barlay The critically acclaimed writer will help you learn how to create a compelling story from your family history. For the creative Introduction to illustration: An interactive workshop with Millie Nice Learn the basics of illustration and complete a short drawing project in an afternoon in this practical masterclass with illustrator Millie Nice. A beginner’s guide to digital photography with David Levene This unmissable masterclass with David Levene will give you the skills and confidence to turn off the automatic settings and take beautiful shots. How to make your first documentary: A weekend workshop with Laurence Topham Award-winning filmmaker Laurence Topham will introduce you to the fundamentals of documentary storytelling and video journalism. How to get started in podcasting with Craig Templeton Smith and Jack Soper Learn the nuts and bolts of podcast production, and gain the skills to start hosting and producing your own. Lyric-writing: A one-day workshop with Chris Difford Award-winning Squeeze lyricist Chris Difford will help you explore and experiment with various lyrical perspectives and techniques. For the career-focused Create a successful digital marketing strategy and boost your business Learn the secrets behind modern-day marketing channels, how to adapt your objectives to external change, and how to attract more customers online. Data visualisation: A one-day bootcamp Transform your data into beautiful infographics, communicate your datasets with clarity. Start a business: An interactive masterclass for entrepreneurs Serial entrepreneur Charly Lester will take you through the crucial steps of setting up a new company and establishing your brand. The secret ingredients to being a great freelancer Master the art of freelancing in this practical, hands-on masterclass with Alison Grade, author of The Freelance Bible. For a little self-care The weekend psychology MA: Explore challenges to mental health with world-leading academics From neuroscience to social psychology, this masterclass brings together multiple disciplines to explore key factors that affect mental health. Wellbeing hacks: Make 2022 your best year yet Hear from experts in neuroscience, sport, business and nutrition, as they provide simple, yet effective, practical tips and advice. How to improve your confidence and manage anxiety: A three-week course with Ian Robertson Discover the secrets to building your confidence with neuroscientist and clinical psychologist Ian Robertson. Love it or leave it – your guide to finding true work happiness This inspirational workshop will help you discover what work happiness should look like and how to make it happen, with a roadmap for each step to take. How to boost your energy and stop feeling tired all the time Nutritional therapist Jackie Lynch shows you the simple changes you can make to vastly improve your energy and performance, at any age. Browse our full programme of Guardian Masterclasses here and find the perfect gift for your loved one.I used to have a joke with my mum where I’d call her the rubber ball, because she always seemed to bounce back from any illness she had. My mum was called Beryl Harris, and she was 86 when she died of Covid-19. She died in hospital on 18 December last year – the same day as the non-socially distanced Christmas party at No 10. We had had a terrible few years already. My stepfather Brian had developed an aggressive form of vascular dementia that meant he deteriorated very quickly; he was diagnosed when he was 74 and died when he was 78. That really took its toll on my mum and me, not least emotionally. My mum was just coming out of that very bleak period, and feeling far more positive about things – she was getting her zest for life back again, and it was really lovely to see. Late last year, she began feeling unwell – she had anaemia, for which she needed a blood transfusion. I wasn’t particularly worried, because this had all happened before – so she went into hospital, had the transfusion, all was going well, and she was just about to be discharged. Then I had a call from one of the nurses to say Mum had been in contact with somebody with Covid, and they were going to test her. Two hours later I got another call to say she had tested positive. I spoke to her right away, and she was a wreck. She was so frightened. She just kept saying, “I don’t want to die.” I kept telling her, “You’ll be all right, Mum: you’re a rubber ball, you’ll bounce back from this too”, and she started laughing a little bit. But she deteriorated very quickly. When I rang to speak to her the next day, she was in and out of consciousness, and obviously wasn’t able to speak. On the third day, I spoke to her and she sounded like she was rallying, she sounded quite chirpy – she was sitting up in bed, and we laughed about how bad hospital food was. I thought, “She’s going to pull through.” That was 17 December. In the early hours of the 18th, at 1.20am, I got a call from the hospital to say that Mum had passed away. My mum lived in Wellesbourne in Warwickshire, and because I’m in south London, and we were both abiding by the rules, I hadn’t been able to go and visit her. Mum was very keen for me to abide by the rules, she was very worried about contracting Covid – she was steely in her determination to shield. So many people had to shield, not just older people but vulnerable people. And even for those who weren’t technically shielding, there was so much loneliness during the lockdowns, and such an impact on all of our mental health – not least at Christmas. In this context, the news of the party has just been staggering. The initial reports were bad enough, but then the leaked footage from the press briefing rehearsal has just made it so much worse. I had to watch it several times, because the first time I was just so stunned that it didn’t sink in. Allegra Stratton and everyone else in that room having a jolly time laughing about their “cheese and wine” party that had taken place just hours after my mum had died. The constant denials from the government over the past few weeks have just made it 10 times worse. If the prime minister had just put his hands up when the story first broke, admitted it and apologised – it would never be enough for all the people who have lost loved ones, but it would be something. But the fact that not only Boris Johnson but his ministers seem to be lying to our faces about this – it’s abhorrent. The government is supposed to have a duty of care to this country, and just when you think it can’t get any worse, something like this comes to light. To say I’m angry is an understatement, but I’m saddened as well. I didn’t personally vote for this government, but some people did and they put their trust in it. The weight of that responsibility is not being taken seriously. The government should be holding itself to much higher standards than those it demands of everyone else, but it is not even playing by its own rules. I joined the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice campaign in February, because I thought it was important to bring all these different voices together. So many people have their own very tragic stories – and one thing we can actually do is join together, call for a proper independent inquiry, and try to ensure it doesn’t happen again. These are people’s lives we’re talking about, and we’ve had enough of Johnson’s platitudes. It’s coming up to the first anniversary of my mum’s death. This government really needs to be brought to account. Questions need to be answered, and answered truthfully, about what happened last Christmas. Jackie Green is a member of Covid-19 Bereaved Families for JusticeStock markets in Europe are a sea of red while the FTSE 100 index in London is holding on to a meagre gain of 0.2%, after two days of chunky rises for global stock markets. On Wall Street, stocks haven opened slightly higher. Here are our main stories: Thank you for reading and commenting. We’ll be back tomorrow. Bye! - JK JPMorgan Chase is incredibly bullish about next year. The US investment bank is predicting that 2022 will mark the end of the coronavirus pandemic and see a full global economic recovery, Reuters reports. The bank’s outlook report for next year said new vaccines and therapeutics would result in a “strong cyclical recovery, a return of global mobility, and a release of pent-up demand from consumers.” On the stock markets, the UK’s FTSE 100 index is up 0.2% at 7,354, a 14-point gain. Germany’s Dax and Spain’s Ibex are down 0.6%, France’s CAC has lost 0.3% and Italy’s FTSE MiB has shed 0.8%. Sir James Dyson has lost a legal battle to secure tens of millions of pounds in damages from an EU court following a row about vacuum cleaner labelling, the Daily Telegraph reports. In a long-running dispute, the billionaire’s company successfully overturned a Brussels regulation that allowed “old fashioned” vacuums to appear as energy efficient as newer, bagless models. Dyson and other makers of bagless cleaners argued they had lost out on sales due to this lack of distinction and sought damages of €176m (£150m) from the European Commission. However, the General Court of the EU has rejected their claim and ordered them to pay the Commission’s legal costs. It said: The court concludes that the Commission demonstrated conduct that could be expected from an administrative authority exercising ordinary care and diligence and, consequently, that the Commission did not manifestly and gravely disregard the limits on its discretion. The cancer drug specialist Clinigen has agreed to a £1.2bn takeover deal from a London-based investment firm, becoming the latest big British company to be taken private. Triton Investment Management has offered to pay 883p a share for the company, whose main product is the acquired cancer medicine Proleukin. Clinigen, which is based in Burton-on-Trent, Staffordshire, said its board had recommended the offer to shareholders, which include the New York hedge fund Elliott Management, with a 7.6% stake. The news sent Clinigen’s share price soaring by up to 15% in early trading, though they later settled at at 901p, up 10.2%. Elliott declined to comment. It has been reportedly demanding a break-up of Clinigen, but never made its demands public – unlike the pressure it has applied to the drugmaker GSK and the energy firm SSE. Stagecoach and the transport hub food specialist SSP have each reported a return of business to about two-thirds of pre-pandemic levels after a resurgence in commuting but warned of uncertainty ahead because of the rise of the Omicron variant, writes my colleague Mark Sweney. The bus and rail operator and the owner of the Caffè Ritazza and Upper Crust chains have both benefited from the easing of coronavirus restrictions and a return to the office but that now looks at risk amid reports that the government could impose its coronavirus plan B to tackle rising cases. SSP, which operates 2,800 outlets worldwide in airports and railway stations, said that in the first nine weeks of its new financial year it had 72% of its units open, providing two-thirds of 2019 level revenues. However, the company, which reported a £411m pre-tax loss for the year to the end of September, warned of the impact of Omicron over the next few months. Our visuals team has tracked one toy’s journey through the supply chain crisis: from Chinese factory to UK child’s stocking. Not even elves and goblin warriors are immune from the global supply chain crisis. The table-top science fiction and fantasy-themed miniatures company Games Workshop said it was grappling with higher freight costs as well as adverse currency effects. Games Workshop’s shares tumbled as much as 8.5% in London after the company, which makes the Warhammer series of games, said half-year profit before tax would be below last year’s figure. It expects to make a profit before tax of “not less than £86m,” compared with £91.6m a year earlier. Sales, projected to be £190m, will be higher than last year’s £186.8m, though. This comes after a bumper year in 2020, when sales and profits surged during the pandemic. The company is paying a further £2,500 cash bonus to each employee under the group profit share scheme in December (after being criticised for low pay). The shares are down 18% this year, after an 83% surge last year. The chief executive of a US mortgage company who fired 900 employees on a Zoom call has apologised for failing to show “respect and appreciation” for the staff he sacked, writes our global technology editor Dan Milmo. The founder and chief executive of better.com, Vishal Garg, expressed contrition in a message (pdf) posted on his company’s website. Garg said he was sorry for the way “I handled the layoffs last week” after staff uproar over the video call last Wednesday. The 43-year-old added: I failed to show the appropriate amount of respect and appreciation for the individuals who were affected and for their contributions to Better. I own the decision to do the layoffs but in communicating it I blundered the execution. The prospect of shoppers being faced with empty shelves at Tesco this Christmas has receded as members of the Unite union have been made an improved offer in the dispute over pay, and have suspended their planned strike. Unite had announced earlier this week that its members employed at Tesco distribution centres in Antrim, Belfast, Didcot and Doncaster would be staging a series of strikes both before and after Christmas. But then fresh talks were held with the company, and workers have been offered a minimum of a 5.5% increase backdated to July 2021 (the anniversary date for annual pay increases) and an additional 0.5% from February 2022. Unite general secretary Sharon Graham said: Tesco’s improved offer shows what can be achieved by our members standing together. Given that the company has forecast profits for 2021 topping £2.5bn an improved offer is the least Tesco workers could expect. However, members of the shopworkers union USDAW, employed at Tesco distribution centres have also voted for strike action. They are covered by separate negotiations, which it is understood will be held later this week. In addition, Unite said it had secured an agreement with Tesco for a formal dialogue on revising the current system of legacy and new generation contracts. If agreed this would create a single pay scale for all the work being undertaken in the distribution centres. Unite was also able to secure an increase in overtime at the Doncaster distribution centre and an increase in holiday entitlement (one bank holiday and one standard holiday) for the workers at Belfast. Unite will now ballot its members on the deal and is recommending its acceptance. If the deal is rejected by the members then fresh strike action will be announced but that is unlikely to be before January. The negotiations held did not include the Unite members employed at the Livingstone distribution centre in Scotland who have also announced strike action. A further update about this dispute is expected in the coming days. The FTSE 100 has edged 0.1% higher to 7,349, a 10-point gain, while European stock indices are in the red. Germany’s Dax is down 73 points at 15,740, a 0.46% fall, while France’s CAC is down 8 points, or 0.1%, to 7,055 and Italy’s FTSE MiB has dropped 181 points, or 0.67%, to 26,955. The FTSE 100 index briefly turned negative but is now flat, after earlier gains, as investors veered between positive vaccine news and concerns over tougher Covid-19 measures in the UK [see post below]. Germany’s BioNTech and the US drugmaker Pfizer said that a three-shot course of their Covid-19 vaccine neutralised the Omicron variant in an initial lab study. Ugur Sahin, chief executive and co-Founder of BioNTech, said: Our preliminary, first dataset indicate that a third dose could still offer a sufficient level of protection from disease of any severity caused by the Omicron variant. Broad vaccination and booster campaigns around the world could help us to better protect people everywhere and to get through the winter season. We continue to work on an adapted vaccine which, we believe, will help to induce a high level of protection against Omicron-induced Covid-19 disease as well as a prolonged protection compared to the current vaccine. Ministers are expected to sign off new rules to impose home working and vaccine certification across England in the face of rising Covid cases, the Guardian understands. Downing Street said no final decisions had been made but ministers and officials convened on Wednesday to move to plan B and to begin imposing some restrictions as early as Wednesday night, report Jessica Elgot and Rowena Mason on our politics team. Ministers are increasingly worried about the threat of the Omicron variant, which appears to be more transmissible than Delta and scientists believe could become dominant within the next few weeks. They are concerned that it risks overwhelming the NHS in another Covid wave even if no more serious than Delta, because of the speed with which it appears to be spreading. The move comes as the government is under intense pressure over the Christmas party and a leaving do held in No 10 during last year’s lockdown. Here is our full story on Lord Tyrie’s damning comments on the PCR test market. The Guardian’s Money editor Hilary Osborne says the “race for space” that became characteristic of the property market during the Covid pandemic could be starting to slow. As people shunned city centre work and life during lockdowns, and the government introduced a stamp duty holiday, demand for country living – or at least a spare room – grew. But in the latest snapshot of the housing market from Halifax yesterday, the mortgage lender said there were signs this trend could be fading. Growth in the price of flats was now outpacing growth in the price of detached houses, which were in high demand during lockdown. In November, flats were changing hands for 10.8% more than at the same time last year, while detached houses were typically fetching 6.6% more. The percentage difference does not tell the whole story: according to Halifax, the average price of a flat that it agreed a mortgage on in November was £118,771, up from £107,159 last year, while the average detached house costs £517,650, compared with £485,684 in 2020. So a much smaller cash-price rise comes through as a bigger percentage at the lower end of the market. But there are reasons why demand may have tipped in favour of flats. For months the housing market boomed on the back of sales of larger properties, with commentators reporting that lifestyle changes prompted by the pandemic were fuelling demand for homes with gardens, studies and spare rooms as more people worked from home. Meanwhile, Taylor Wimpey, another big UK housebuilder, has announced that its chief executive Pete Redfern will step down after more than 14 years at the helm. Irene Dorner, the chairman, said: Pete has made an invaluable contribution to the business during his almost 15 years as CEO, including having successfully led the company through a global financial crisis and the recent pandemic. Pete has led a management team which has overseen the transformation of Taylor Wimpey into one of the largest housebuilders in the UK, with an industry leading landbank, a strong financial position and a clear and deliverable strategy for profitable growth. In addition, Pete will leave the business with a strong and differentiated culture he can be proud of creating. Redfern said: Last year, having significantly increased our landbuying to take advantage of land market opportunities, we have grown our landbank and set a clear path to deliver strong growth and returns over the coming years. The FTSE 100 in London is still 19 points ahead at 7,359, a gain of 0.27%. Berkeley Group, the upmarket housebuilder that focuses on London and the south east, is the top riser, up more than 4% at £48.36, while fellow builder Persimmon is 1.8% ahead. Berkeley has upped its full-year profit outlook after sales recovered to pre-pandemic levels, and expects 5% annual profit growth for the next three years. This follows recent house price figures from Nationwide and Halifax which showed the UK property market is still red hot. Berkeley boosted profits by 26% to £290.7m in the six months to 31 October and built 1,828 homes, with another 395 through joint ventures. The group’s growing slate of developments in progress is expected to see volumes grow to 50% above pre-pandemic levels by 2024/25, and to yield a £625m profit that year. Steve Clayton, manager of the Hargreaves Lansdown Select UK Growth Shares fund, which holds Berkeley shares, said: Berkeley are sounding confident in these results and are allocating additional capital to their land buying efforts accordingly. The group’s ability to redevelop complex sites in and around the capital, taking land that others fear to touch and transforming it into premium properties is their key attraction for investors. Berkeley lock significant future margin into their development plans and so far, the cost pressures seen across the industry have not impacted upon the group. No surprise to see the shares reacting positively. Here is our full story on Tui. Adam Vettese, analyst at the investment platform eToro, says: Tui is in a really tough spot now. It has announced a big rebound in its revenue versus the lows of the pandemic in Q4 2020. It has also cut its debt levels which investors should cheer. But the firm has a real puzzle in front of it with the Omicron variant. In its results, the firm is warning of weakness in sales momentum thanks to the new strain of the virus. January and the early months of the year tend to be really important for travel firms in terms of bookings for the year ahead, so it couldn’t really have come at a much worse time. To add insult to injury, booking numbers are still way behind pre-pandemic levels. Even if Omicron doesn’t prove to be a serious risk, the uncertainty caused by a lack of information could harm consumer confidence severely. Extra travel restrictions have already been imposed in the UK and some EU nations. Plus, countries such Austria, The Netherlands and Germany were already taking steps to introduce limited forms of lockdown even before Omicron became an issue. All this together acts as a huge discouragement for consumers, unsure if their holiday bookings will be unceremoniously wiped out. This will certainly put a dampener on trading for the firm regardless of the actual outcomes with Omicron. TUI could find itself soon having another mountain to climb and investors won’t be supportive as it makes the attempt. Despite its optimism for next summer, Tui is reviewing whether to cut the remainder of its winter programme in light of rising coronavirus cases and the spread of the Omicron variant, Mark Sweney reports. Its chief executive Fritz Joussen said: There will be flexibility in deciding whether to offer winter programme capacity at the lower end of the range depending on the so-called fourth corona wave and possible policy decisions with regard to the Omicron variant. Capacity plans are regularly reviewed and adjusted. However, Easter is already running at about 90% of pre-pandemic levels “predominantly booked by the UK”. For next summer, the company has so far received 2.2m bookings, an increase of 535,000 since its last update in early October, “reaffirming the intention to travel and continued appetite for a Tui summer holiday”. The former chairman of the UK competition regulator has called the market for PCR tests for travellers a “rip-off jungle,” reports my colleague Mark Sweney. Lord Tyrie criticised the government for once again allowing the companies offering PCR tests to manipulate the system by making them available at unrealistic prices. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he said: For this policy to get into a mess once might be seen as a misfortune but for it to resurface again after all the warnings over the summer would have to be described as carelessness. It was a scandal waiting to happen and it’s now happened and it needs very urgent action. Last week, a slew of the cheapest deals on PCR tests were removed from the government website amid concerns travellers are being misled by companies advertising the coronavirus testing service for less than a £1. Private companies offering day 2 tests for travellers are listed on a government website for consumers to search. However, most of the deals were found to not be suitable for most travellers as they were often in just one location, on limited dates and only available to those who could attend in person. Tyrie, former head of the CMA and chairman of of the Treasury Select Committee, said: It appears that some of the worst practices: misleading online advertisements, overpricing, unacceptably poor service among them, are still widespread. To allow this to continue over the peak Christmas period would be scandalous. Other countries seem to have done better, we’ve got to try harder. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The world’s biggest tour operator Tui said it expects travel to bounce back to pre-crisis levels next summer, as it posted a full-year loss of €2.4bn. However it said it was close to breaking even in the fourth quarter, and that it was almost fully booked for the winter quarter. Tui chief executive Fritz Joussen said: It is still too early to make a real forecast for the 2022 summer season. But we are optimistic that tourism will be able to recover to 2019 levels next summer. We want to, we can and we will find our way back to economic strength. The programme of the first financial quarter of 2022 is already almost fully sold. This means that we are currently achieving 69% of the pre-crisis level. We expect summer 2022 to reach a largely normalised booking level. He said that the pandemic has caused holidaymakers to book “much later and at shorter notice” but that next summer is looking “very encouraging in all Tui markets”. Global stock markets rallied yesterday as concerns about the severity of the Omicron Covid variant and its impact on economies faded. There was also news that GSK’s antibody treatment works against the full combination of Omicron mutations; the US passed legislation to pave the way for a debt ceiling increase; and the US Federal Reserve’s hawkish tilt has been digested and priced in by now. The Nasdaq jumped 3%, the biggest one-day gain since March, the S&amp;P 500 rose 2% and the Dow Jones rose 1.4%. In Europe, the German French and Italian indices were all up more than 2% while the FTSE 100 index in London closed 1.49% higher. The UK index recouped all of its post-Thanksgiving Omicron losses and closed at its highest level since 15 November. The optimistic mood has spread to Asia, where Japan’s Nikkei gained 1.4%, the Shanghai Composite Index is up 1.18% while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng is flat. Trading in shares of embattled Chinese developer Kaisa Group Holdings has been suspended on the Hong Kong stock exchange, prompting fresh nerves about the financial stability of the country’s massive property sector. Evergrande, the biggest property developer, is teetering on the brink of collapse. The suspension on Wednesday comes after Kaisa was reportedly unlikely to meet a dollar bond repayment of $400m (£301m) by the deadline of Tuesday night in the US, Reuters said, citing a source with direct knowledge of the matter. The Chinese government sparked a crisis within the property industry when it launched a drive last year to curb excessive debt among real estate firms as well as rampant consumer speculation. Is it too much optimism? asks Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at the bank Swissquote. The news is not all rosy, but the perception is very optimistic, and that supports the back-to-back strong gains. In theory, such strong gains are sign of instability and should be taken with caution, however the good news is that the volatility is easing, and the VIX index dropped 20% yesterday, meaning that the latest fears could slowly begin fading. Yet, the US inflation data due Friday remains an important threat to the market mood, and could encourage some consolidation and perhaps some profit taking into the critical data. Japan released figures that showed its economy shrank faster than initially reported between July and September, at an annualised rate of 3.6% rather than the previously estimated 3% contraction. European stock markets have opened slightly lower after the strong gains seen in the last two days, with Germany’s Dax down 0.2%, France’s CAC down 0.1%, Italy down 0.2% and Spain’s Ibex 0.4% lower. Only the FTSE 100 index in London is 0.18% ahead at 7,352, a gain of 12 points. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, says the “unbridled optimism” seen in the last two days after last week’s panic in the markets will fade as Europe is still battling increases in Delta infections, which is likely to hamper the recovery across Germany, Austria and the Netherlands where restrictions and lockdowns have been reimposed. These concerns over Delta were acknowledged earlier this week by the IMF who warned that they might have to cut their GDP forecasts for the eurozone when they publish new estimates in January. The Agenda 8.15am GMT: ECB President Christine Lagarde speaks 12pm GMT: US MBA Mortgage applications for week to 3 December 3pm GMT: Bank of Canada interest rate decisionThe unfolding government crisis over an alleged Christmas party at Downing Street during lockdown last year has gripped social media watchers, especially after the emergence of a video showing aides laughing and joking about it. But beyond the jokes, there have been searing messages comparing the idea of a No 10 staff party with the experiences people were having by following lockdown rules. Many were keen to point out that it was the first time the new No 10 briefing room, constructed with much fanfare and at a cost of £2.6m, had provided real value to the taxpayer. Once used by the prime minister to watch the latest James Bond movie, the media suite had been intended to host daily press briefings featuring Allegra Stratton, who will now mostly be remembered for starring in a pretend one. One review of her performance featured Kathryn Hahn as Agnes Harkness in the Marvel TV show WandaVision, which rapidly became internet shorthand for when someone isn’t telling the truth, and knows that you know they aren’t telling the truth. This image from Succession cropped up a lot too. No spoilers – but if you know, you know. There was speculation about what it would mean for Boris Johnson’s leadership, given the Conservative party’s history of removing leaders they fear have become a liability. And there were also plenty of suggestions on how the Labour party should capitalise on the row. It was already clear on Tuesday evening that the story had changed from a Westminster bubble” issue to one that had cut through as soon as it featured in a segment from Ant and Dec on ITV’s I’m a Celebrity … last night. The video has been watched about 5m times on social media, not including the audience of the ITV show. And it allowed people to point out what an unlikely turn of events it was. On Wednesday, ITV continued to pile on the social media pressure, with the Good Morning Britain presenter Adil Ray making an appeal for any Conservative MP to come and fill the vacant Westminster studio seat on the show after the health secretary, Sajid Javid, cancelled his media appearances on Wednesday morning. From Dictionary Corner, Countdown’s Susie Dent can always be relied on to provide her oblique commentary on the events of the day. On a more serious note there were photographic comparisons of Downing Street staff laughing at the mock press conference with medical staff in the PPE they were wearing at work that day. One image appeared again and again, with people comparing the Queen sitting alone at her husband’s funeral and observing social distancing rules, to the alleged behaviour of staff at Downing Street. In Scotland, there were comparisons with how the Scottish Tories had reacted to a breach of Covid regulations from the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, two days after the Downing Street party was apparently held last year. The stories are unverified, but they speak to grief and the disruption in people’s lives that the video and the party – not just at No 10 as alleged, but also a gathering at the education department – belittled. And there were many, many more.Six weeks ago, in a basement snug in friendly, rainy Manchester, Joe Root had talked about fine margins of angle and bounce, about Australian soil, Australian leather, Australian height; the cultural geometry of Australian fast bowling. Root had already spent a month indoors visualising bowlers and plans. He talked about the way his own learned movements betray him, about reprogramming that voodoo-ish understanding of the planes of movement around off stump; and about the fact Australia’s bowlers would be focusing on the same space, the same angles, the route to the edge of his bat. There is always talk about “targeting” an Ashes captain. A simple dismissal isn’t enough. Captains must be assailed, hauled from their plinth like a tinpot town-square statue. It feels pointed this time. Root is arguably England’s greatest modern batsman, in arguably their least convincing top six. The whole series is 42 days long, a race that will be won from the front. In Brisbane Root had won the toss and chosen to bat, an act of necessary aggression. England were already two down as Josh Hazlewood turned to bowl his 17th ball of the morning, 23 minutes into the day. Root was on strike, and on nought. Angles, bounce, the pocket of air just outside the line of his hands. Something would be decided in that space. Hazlewood is a likable, baggy-looking figure, a man who seems always to be pretending to be a little meaner than he really is, but doing a fair old job of it. In the buildup he had spoken about the simplicity of what he does, the idea of “just finding a length”. This is a little deceptive. It probably is about that when you’re already 6ft 5in tall with perfect wrist, shoulders, hips, nip, bounce, stamina, craft, speed, a kind of attritional one-man physical supremacy. Yeah. Just hit that length. England’s captain had looked stiff, scrabbling for some elusive line between keeping his front pad clear, while also covering that wider space around off stump. All five balls in the over had been tight to the stumps. This time Hazlewood went wider, releasing from a lower angle, drawing Root’s hands, his head, his batsman’s spider-sense into its arc. One quarter of a pitch’s length into ball 17, Hazlewood was already on his way to producing a perfect little Ashes miniature. At the start of the day there had been something a little raw in the sight of Haseeb Hameed and Rory Burns padded up for the anthems, squinting and blinking, trying to get the feel of the sky, the stands, the space. England have played only a couple of days’ cricket in Australia, even those an inter-squad game against fellow pale, culture-shocked English people. For all its brilliance, Hazlewood to Root was already destined to be overshadowed by the sheer theatre of Burns’s dismissal to the opening ball of the series. There will now be further pointless dissection of the Burns technique. Here he planted his front foot across himself, like a man about to start pirouetting down a staircase tipping his hat and twirling a walking cane. This is just what he does. It works as well as it works when it works. But here he looked frazzled, losing his angles and missing a Mitchell Starc half volley that swung a bit. Either way Burns is now an Ashes footnote. He will never escape that moment. At the other end Hazlewood removed Dawid Malan, who edged trying to leave. That was about length. The ball to Root was about trajectory – and Root was already coming to meet the swing as it veered in, triggers flaring, adjustments being made. He will have felt in control even as the ball started to change direction, cutting away so, so late as it pitched – even as his hands came down blamelessly to meet the original line. Root’s bat ended up slightly in front of him, pulled out of shape by the movement and wider line of previous deliveries. But there is no correct response to those angles. The logical outcome, the maths, the correct intersection of lines and bounce is a nick. In that moment Root was simply a canvas for the brilliance of the delivery; and beyond that for some shared store of deep Gabba‑knowledge, the Aussie fast-bowling myth kitty. It was the eighth time Hazlewood has got Root; he has done so more than any other bowler in Tests. It was also Root’s ninth Test duck, four of them in his past eight innings against Australia. And in that moment something did seem to shift. There was time for some resistance from Ollie Pope, who looked eager, nimble, focused, fluent and somehow always on the verge of getting out. Such has been the talk of Hameed “playing low” you half expected to see him bent double, knuckles grazing the turf, but he was right in defence, left the ball better than anyone else, and looked like a Test player, which is something. Later on Pat Cummins would clean up the lower order to complete a cinematic five-for on his captaincy bow. But it felt like the day and the innings came and went with Root; and with the deep, controlled brilliance of those early overs.The Mercedes Formula One team and a firm that made combustible insulation used on Grenfell Tower have ended their sponsorship deal after outrage from bereaved friends and relatives, the survivors and the UK government. The team, whose main driver is the current champion, Lewis Hamilton, confirmed the short-lived partnership with Kingspan was terminated after just one race in which the logo of the firm that made some of the foam boards used on the tower was emblazoned on the nose cone of cars driven by Hamilton and Valtteri Bottas. When the deal was announced before last week’s grand prix in Saudi Arabia, survivors called on the team’s boss, Toto Wolff, to sever the relationship, describing it as “sportswashing sins”. It was called “disgusting” by Nabil Choucair, who lost six members of his family in the fire. The team said on Tuesday that the deal had been intended to promote sustainability, but that: “Both parties have … concluded that it is not appropriate for the partnership to move forward at this current point in time, notwithstanding its intended positive impact, and we have therefore agreed that it will be discontinued with immediate effect.” Kingspan’s actions have been heavily scrutinised by the public inquiry into the disaster, which has already found its materials “contributed to the rate and extent of vertical flame spread”. Grenfell United, which represents bereaved people and survivors had told Wolff: “Kingspan played a central role in inflicting the pain and suffering that we feel today, and there must be a degree of public censure for Kingspan’s recklessness and carelessness for human life.” Mercedes was also told by Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, that it could face an advertising ban if it promoted a firm that is a core participant in the public inquiry into the June 2017 disaster that killed 72 people. Gove told Wolff in a letter that he felt “deep disappointment” at the deal. He said the UK government had already told the inquiry that it understood Kingspan employees knew their products were more combustible than they were advertising them to be. Gove noted that one employee admitted to the inquiry he had been involved in a “deliberate and calculated deceit by Kingspan”. On Friday, Wolff apologised to the survivors and bereaved people for the hurt caused by the new partnership, but stopped short of announcing the deal would be abandoned. He accepted an offer to meet Grenfell United representatives “as soon as we can … for me to learn and understand better”. Grenfell United welcomed the scrapping of the deal. “We’re pleased to hear this morning’s news that Mercedes have decided to terminate their sponsorship deal with Kingspan with immediate effect,” a spokesperson said. “We met Toto Wolff and shared the facts from the Grenfell inquiry, and Mercedes came to their own conclusion. Mercedes have … shown that people can be put before profit.” Hamilton, who has previously spoken out in solidarity with the Grenfell community, said before his win in Saudi Arabia on Sunday: “It was news to me when I heard the things that have happened this week. Unfortunately my name is associated with it because it has been on my car, but whether that remains the same, we will see.” He added: “Toto is sorting it.” Kingspan said in a statement: “We are deeply aware of the sensitivities raised in recent days, and so we have jointly agreed that it’s not appropriate to move forward at the current point in time.” It emphasised that it was not involved in making the cladding that was the principal cause of flames spreading, and that its materials made up approximately 5% of the insulation and were used without its knowledge. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021. Kingspan was incorrectly described in a previous version as a cladding manufacturer; also, an earlier headline and text stated that the decision to end the deal with Kingspan was made by Mercedes, rather than on a mutual basis.Boris Johnson has said he “apologises unreservedly” for a video showing Downing Street officials joking about a staff party during the peak of lockdown last December, and has promised to hand over any evidence of law-breaking to police. At a noisy prime minister’s questions, Johnson said he had been repeatedly assured that no party took place, and that he had been “shocked” by the emergence of the video. He promised that Simon Case, the cabinet secretary and the UK’s most senior civil servant, would investigate the circumstances surrounding the video and the facts surrounding what happened on 18 December last year. However, later it emerged that this investigation would not cover another party believed to have taken place in Downing Street on 27 November, at which Johnson himself is said to have given a speech, or a third party alleged by former aide Dominic Cummings to have happened in the prime minister’s flat on 13 November. A spokeswoman for Carrie Johnson has previously denied there was a party in the flat on that date. Johnson’s official spokesman also would not confirm whether Case himself had been present at the party on 18 December. The spokesman declined to say whether he personally had been at the party, and Johnson’s press secretary also declined to say whether she was present. They did confirm that Johnson himself did not attend any such event on 13 November and stood by previous assertions that there had been no party on that date and that all Covid rules were followed. Questioning Johnson, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, expressed incredulity at his protestations of ignorance, saying the incident had left the prime minister without “the moral authority” to ask the public to follow Covid rules. Following the session, Ruth Davidson, the former leader of the Scottish Tories, also gave a scathing verdict on Downing Street’s conduct. “None of this is remotely defensible. Not having busy, boozy not-parties while others were sticking to the rules, unable to visit ill or dying loved ones. Nor flat-out denying things that are easily provable. Not taking the public for fools,” she tweeted. “And today’s ‘we’ll investigate what we’ve spent a week saying didn’t happen and discipline staff for rules we continue to say weren’t broken’ was pathetic. As a Tory, I was brought up to believe in playing with a straight bat. Believe me, colleagues are furious at this, too.” Johnson’s appearance at PMQs on Wednesday was his first response to the video, uncovered by ITV, in which his then-press secretary, Allegra Stratton, and other No 10 staff talked jokingly on 22 December last year about a staff party four days earlier, and how media questions about it could be countered. Before taking any questions, Johnson told the Commons he was “also furious to see that clip”, saying: “I can understand how infuriating it would be to think that the people who have been setting the rules have not been following the rules.” He continued: “I apologise unreservedly for the offence that it has caused up and down the country, and apologise for the impression that it gives.” To jeers from the opposition benches, Johnson said he had no personal knowledge of any party. He said: “I repeat that I have been repeatedly assured since these allegations emerged that there was no party, and that no Covid rules were broken.” He added: “I have asked the cabinet secretary to establish all the facts and to report back as soon as possible, and it goes without saying that if those rules were broken, then there will be disciplinary action for all those involved.” Starmer asked Johnson if he would be “handing over everything the government knows about parties in Downing Street to the Metropolitan police?” Johnson replied: “Of course we will do that.” In a further escalation of what is fast turning into a political crisis for Johnson, as he was speaking in the Commons Cummings accused the prime minister of hosting lockdown-breaking parties in his Downing Street flat. “Will the CABSEC [Case] also be asked to investigate the *flat* party on Fri 13 Nov, the other flat parties, &amp; the flat’s ‘bubble’ policy … ?” he tweeted. That date – when England was in full lockdown – was the day that Cummings, Johnson’s chief adviser, was sacked by the prime minister. Cummings has already accused Johnson of lying about both staff parties and ones held in his official flat. Starting his questions at PMQs, Starmer said it was not credible for Johnson to pretend he had known nothing. “They knew there was a party, they knew it was against the rules, they knew they couldn’t admit it, and they thought it was funny.” The Labour leader used one question to highlight the case of a woman whose mother had fallen gravely ill with Covid last December and had not visited her before she died. The woman wanted to know, Starmer said, “why did the prime minister expect her to accept that the rules allowed a Downing Street party but didn’t allow her to visit her dying mother?” Starmer also cited the example of the Queen, who sat alone during the funeral of Prince Philip: “Leadership, sacrifice – that’s what gives leaders the moral authority to lead. Does the prime minister think he has the moral authority to lead and to ask the British people to stick to the rules?” Johnson responded by reiterating his apology but also accusing Starmer and Labour of “playing politics” and seeking to create confusion over Covid rules. Starmer replied: “That’s so desperate and even his own side can see it.”The UK government failed to account for the billions of pounds in financial support it provides to the fossil fuel industry when deciding how much oil and gas to extract from the North Sea, climate campaigners have argued. A high court hearing that began on Wednesday has put the economics of the fossil fuel industry under the spotlight and raised questions about the compatibility of oil and gas production with a net zero goal. The UK’s Oil and Gas Authority (OGA) has a legal duty to “maximise economic recovery” from domestic oil and gas resources and adopted a new corporate strategy to achieve this in February. But campaigners say this does not benefit the UK as a whole. The three plaintiffs in the case – climate activist Mikaela Loach, thinktank director Kairin van Sweeden, and a former oil refinery worker, Jeremy Cox – say tax relief for new oil and gas exploration, as well as financial support provided for decommissioning costs, effectively amounts to a subsidy – a description the government denies. These “negative tax flows” totalled £2m in 2015-16 and £359m the following year – more than oil and gas firms paid the UK in tax. Representing the plaintiffs in court, David Wolfe QC claimed it was wrong for the OGA to exclude tax relief from its economic calculations and said the body could not claim to be acting in the national interest if it did not distinguish between money going to the Treasury or to the fossil fuel industry. The lawsuit also notes that many of the petroleum companies extracting North Sea oil and gas are foreign-owned, so much of the money spent supporting the industry flows outside the UK. Government support for the fossil fuel industry is increasingly under the spotlight, with one report estimating that the UK provides £12.5bn in annual subsidies. The Committee on Climate Change recently recommended the Treasury review the role of the tax system in delivering net zero. The OGA’s February strategy imposes some new climate-related obligations on the oil and gas industry, including a requirement to cut emissions associated with production, support for carbon capture and storage projects, and moves to advance clean hydrogen production. But the plaintiffs argue that it is in fundamental conflict with the UK’s pledge to be net zero by 2050, because it would lead to greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels that would otherwise have stayed in the ground, and because it would create stranded assets from the infrastructure required for such extraction. That is important, they say, because it provides further evidence that the government made an “irrational” decision in approving the OGA’s strategy. North Sea oil and gas producers are pressing the government to back up to 18 new fossil fuel projects. But last week Shell announced it was backing out of plans to develop the Cambo oilfield, casting doubt on the whole project. Neither the OGA nor central government would comment on an ongoing legal case. But in a statement, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said there would “continue to be diminishing need for oil and gas over the coming years while we ramp up renewable energy capacity”. The case continues.As I type this, feeling close to tears, not one single minister has been willing to publicly defend – or even describe – the government’s position on that party. Why? Because it is indefensible. No nuance, no shade. As black and white as life and death itself. If any elected representative was present at such a tawdry party, they should resign. They know it; we know it. Only the grubbiest travesty of “public service” would prevent them from doing the right thing. Although I note that as of this afternoon, Boris Johnson and his ministers were continuing to insist that no such party had taken place. “The top priority is making sure lives are saved,” Matt Hancock (ever one to make personal capital from a global pandemic) said on the morning news. Speaking to ITV’s Good Morning Britain, Hancock said he couldn’t possibly comment on the apparent rule-breaking because he had been rather busy at the time saving lives. Sorrywhatpardon? Yes – yes – this is the same Matt Hancock who saw fit to kiss his aide Gina Coladangelo in the middle of the afternoon in the Department of Health when he was meant to be focusing on pandemic management. It’s enough to make a doctor such as myself retch. So let me remind you what we were doing in the NHS while members of the Downing Street elite seemingly took part in the revelry, or now refuse to condemn the revelry of others. On 18 December, there was palpable desperation in hospital corridors. We were smack in the middle of the most godawful rerun of Covid’s first wave. I use the word godawful deliberately. Pandemic casualties were flooding wards and ICUs. Patients suffocated as we scrambled to find iPads to connect them to their families. Some died because we had to ration ventilators. It was field medicine of the most brutal kind. On 18 December, then, as we are told that members of government and advisers nibbled cheese and quaffed champers, my colleagues and I were palliating the symptoms of those too frail and weak to stand a chance of surviving Covid: older people, often, or those who were immunosuppressed. You know, those “expendable” members of the herd. Frequently, all we could do was give morphine to take away the terror of fighting for air. There is no sensation more frightening than being unable to breathe. It was godawful in part because we had been here before. While Downing Street apparently partied, we were witnessing this horror for a second time. Rather than listen to his scientific advisers, who had long warned of the need for winter restrictions, Boris Johnson couldn’t resist the cheap populism of being the man who “saved” Christmas – a pound-shop messiah who placed self-promotion above saving lives. I remember thinking at the time: how monstrously cavalier. On 18 December, the Covid death toll stood at 68,442. By 19 February, it had reached 121,867. More than 50,000 deaths from Covid in two months alone – the unspeakable price of a vanity government. But the most heartbreaking aspect of all this was also paradoxically positive. Every day I witnessed the staggering grace and dignity of the British public. The selflessness of loved ones who willingly obeyed the rules, though it cost them everything. Who didn’t visit their wives, husbands or parents in hospital. Who chose to stay at home so as not to imperil others. Who missed the chance to say goodbye. Who joined funerals by Zoom, then grieved in isolation. On one occasion, I had to beg, beseech and grovel to my seniors to persuade them to permit a teenage boy to join his mother in saying goodbye to his father, while he died on my watch from Covid. Can you imagine that? A disease so deadly – and spreading so freely – it forced hospitals to impose such draconian restrictions? On that occasion, I was allowed to admit both the boy and his mother. They were granted an hour at the bedside of the dying man they adored. But how many others were not? The truth is that, though Johnson has chortled and wisecracked his way through this pandemic, the public has always known that personal sacrifice is an act of radical kindness, and that individual forbearance saves lives. We have restrained ourselves willingly because, quite simply, we care about each other. In contrast, if what we have heard of this government’s partying, joking, complacency and rule-breaking is true, it sticks two fingers up to basic human decency. They should hang their heads in shame. Rachel Clarke is a palliative care doctor and the author of Breathtaking: Inside the NHS in a Time of Pandemic.Allegra Stratton was supposed to help revolutionise UK government communications when she was appointed to host a daily White House-style press conference from Downing Street. In the end, the public will get to see only one instance of Stratton standing on the podium of the purpose-built £2.6m briefing room – in a highly damaging leaked recording featuring her laughing at a question about No 10 holding an illegal Christmas party. The public outcry over the video – which led news bulletins and swiftly attracted tens of millions of views online – led to the 41-year-old’s tearful resignation from government on Wednesday afternoon. Ironically, her struggle to quickly answer the question about a Christmas party in a private rehearsal in December 2020 was among the issues that led the government to ultimately decide it should not put her on air as host of the daily briefings. Dozens of established political journalists and press spokespeople had originally shown interest in hosting the proposed daily press conferences, which was a pet project of the former communications director Lee Cain. This has created awkwardness after their names became public and they failed to get the job. The BBC’s political correspondent, Ellie Price, was considered to be the leading candidate for the role during last summer’s auditions. She was praised for her ability to “take the temperature down” when facing tough questions, an individual who was present at the auditions told the Guardian. Yet the £125,000-a-year job ultimately went to Stratton, who had quit journalism only a few months earlier to become a press adviser to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak – himself a close friend of Stratton’s husband, the Spectator’s political editor, James Forsyth. Although she helped coin the “Eat out to help out” slogan to promote subsidised dining to revive the restaurant industry, Stratton had little experience of fielding detailed questions from former journalistic colleagues. “Every metric said she’s not good enough to do the job,” said a person involved in the hiring process for a spokesperson who was expected to become one of the most prominent political figures in the UK. They claimed Stratton was the personal choice of Boris Johnson, who overruled the wishes of other staff members, possibly because Stratton was at that point close to his then fiancee, now wife, Carrie Johnson. As dress rehearsals for the press conferences continued throughout the autumn of 2020 – with aides chucking tough questions at Stratton to test her responses – it became clear that something was not working. When the winter wave of Covid-19 came in and Downing Street decided to stick with senior ministers addressing the nation on television, the plans for a daily press conference were continually shunted back before being officially axed in April. Stratton was moved from being the public face of the government to a role as the spokesperson for the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. In this role she surfaced occasionally – saying a diesel car suited her current lifestyle, suggesting people should help the environment by rinsing their dishes before putting them in the dishwasher, and recommending that the public join the Green party to fight the climate crisis. When the climate conference finally took place, she stayed in the background while remaining on the public payroll, maintaining a low profile with an unclear role until the leaked recording surfaced. After working as a BBC producer, Stratton became a reporter at the Guardian in 2007, before being hired as the political editor of BBC Newsnight five years later. The public broadcaster later had to apologise for one of her reports after it was ruled that Stratton had unfairly portrayed a working single mother as unemployed and dependent on benefits. In 2015 she jumped ship to ITV in the role of national editor, in addition to co-presenting political editor Robert Peston’s weekly politics show. After five years in this job, she announced she would be joining the government as an adviser to Sunak – who was best man at Stratton’s wedding to Forsyth. The failed press conference project is one of a number of publicly funded schemes designed to boost the image of the government that has also involved the hiring of multiple official government photographers, who are given access that independent press photographers do not enjoy. As for the multimillion-pound briefing room, it has been used sparingly – although Johnson and Downing Street staff used it for a viewing of the new James Bond film in November.I lived at sea for 10 years. I co-owned and ran a global kiteboarding expedition business. We’d sail around the world on a 60-foot catamaran, following the trade winds, kiteboarding, surfing and paragliding in remote locations. One night, I watched a Hollywood movie called The Fall, which had a section where an elephant was swimming in tropical blue water. I didn’t know if it was real or a fake Hollywood thing. But I thought: “Man, if that does exist, I’d love to photograph it.” I searched the internet and found the elephant from the film was living in the Andaman Islands, an Indian territory in the Bay of Bengal. When we sailed into the capital, Port Blair, a few months later in 2010, I decided to hop off and try to find this elephant. I found Rajan on Havelock (now Swaraj) Island and spent two weeks with him, learning about his incredible story. Rajan was brought to the Andamans with nine other elephants in the 1970s to help log the islands. They needed a way to get the cut trees out to the barges just off the islands, so the elephants were forced to learn how to swim in the ocean. Elephants love fresh water but they don’t like salt water because the salt stings their eyes and dries their skin. The elephants would drag the giant cut badak trees and swim them out to barges. Once an island was logged, the elephants would be made to swim to the next island. They’d sometimes swim miles, which was mind-blowing: a group of 10 elephants swimming in open ocean. When logging was banned in 2002, Rajan was out of a job. He was the last elephant of the group to survive and lived out his days on Havelock Island until his death in 2016. When I found him, he was around 60 years old, living out his retirement with Nazroo, his caretaker, who in India is called a mahout. Every morning, Rajan would go into the jungle or walk down to the beach. He went swimming whenever he felt like it. He seemed to have adapted to swimming in salt water and even to enjoy it. I truly felt like he was having fun swimming in the ocean. I think that comes across in this picture. Many people tell me it looks like he’s smiling. At times, he’d wade into the water a little bit and decide not to swim, and other times he’d submerge himself completely and swim out into deeper water, like someone doing laps in a pool. He’d totally immerse himself and use his trunk like a snorkel, which was so cool. It’s surreal to swim with an elephant, especially in tropical blue water. I remember thinking, “Wow, this is crazy that I’m here witnessing this.” Often, Rajan was in shallower areas. But I really hoped to get a photo of him swimming weightlessly in deeper water, his legs kicking freely, in doggy paddle motion. It was challenging because I was always having to try to stay clear of him and his movements were unpredictable, which made it difficult to anticipate where he was going to swim. It all came down to whatever mood Rajan was in. On the day I took this photo, I was with him on one of his longer swims and I used a weight belt to freedive down to get the angle I wanted. Rajan’s mahout was always nearby. He felt so comfortable with Nazroo and didn’t want to be far from him. His original mahout, who was the one who had done all the brutal training, had died from a cobra bite, and Nazroo came in after that. I’ve worked on human-elephant conflict for a few years in Asia and I’ve done stories on mahouts in India, so I’ve seen different levels of the relationship between humans and elephants, but I’ve never seen a bond as strong as Rajan and Nazroo’s. It was like watching a mother and child – a caring, loving relationship. Spending time with Rajan was an amazing experience. Rajan was probably the last ocean-swimming elephant we’ll ever see, which gives the image extra poignancy. As logging bans have increased, using elephants for logging has significantly diminished. I think it still happens in some Asian countries, but it’s a practice that’s thankfully fading. I’ve had incredible experiences as a photographer. I think it’s important to share those experiences to encourage and inspire people to get out of their comfort zone and have their own adventures. It not only enriches their own lives but strengthens their relationship with nature and the environment, which means they’ll be more inclined to protect them. Photography can make a real difference in people’s lives. Jody MacDonald’s CV Born: Ottawa, Canada, 1978. Trained: Self-taught. Influences: Steve McCurry, Ami Vitale, George Steinmetz. High point: “Never giving up on following my passion for photography.” Low point: “I got kicked in the face by a camel in Sudan two months ago.” Top tip: “Always try to improve your craft and don’t quit.” Jody MacDonald is one of 100 photographers supporting Vital Impacts, an international print sale fundraiser running until 31 December created by photographer Ami Vitale and journalist Eileen Mignoni to raise funds for Jane Goodall Institute’s Roots and Shoots, Big Life Foundation, Great Plains Conservation’s Project Ranger and SeaLegacy. See vitalimpacts.org and @vital.impacts. For more on Jody, see jodymacdonaldphotography.com/ and @jodymacdonaldphotoThat’s all for Wednesday’s coverage. Thanks for following along and be sure to check out our full report off Game 10 here. “Frankly I hadn’t thought about him playing the Petrov today at all,” Carlsen says. “I was preparing for various sharp openings that he could play. The thought was if he goes 1. e5, I’ll see. I didn’t think making a draw against the Petrov would be a major issue.” Asked about the most interesting moment of today’s match, the champion says: “There wasn’t that much to talk about. I was fairly happy with the move [17. g3]. I kind thought I might be getting a very slight edge at that point. And then probably I needed to be a little more patient later on since I was kind of hoping that after allowing this [23. ... g5] to happen that I could provoke f5-f4 maybe later on, then start pushing with h4. But it all holds very well together for black there, so there is nothing. I think if I played a little more patiently there I could have had the tiniest of edges, but naturally I would have hunted for it more diligently if the match situation had been different.” “At this point, there’s so few games to go that any draw is an excellent result,” Carlsen says. Asked about his choice to play 4. Nd3 instead of Nf3, the champion underscores his willingness to play for a half-point as black: “(It was) mainly the prospect of getting the queens off very soon and getting a drawish position.” On whether that will govern his strategy in the remaining games, Carlsen says: “I mean I very much assume he’s going to try and win, especially with the white pieces. But sure, any half-point that I can get is great and I think that’s pretty obvious.” Nepomniachtchi is asked about his choice to play another Petrov to open the post-game presser. “The problem playing as black is you don’t have such a good choice,” he says. “Especially in classical, even if you play a so-called sharp opening like Sicilian, if white wants to shut it down white surely will shut it down. It’s not realistic. I have a couple of tries with the white pieces in the remaining four games. Of course it depends on what I produce in the 11th game. But today it was just an idea to play a normal game, try not to blunder something in my moves.” The moderator, American grandmaster Maurice Ashley, then follows with a bit of a howler: “You’ve only got four games left and a three-point deficit. Your strategy is still heavily trying to win this match?” Nepomniachtchi, who’s handled these circus-like pressers well, is clearly peeved and pauses a beat before responding: “Well, that’s an absurd question.” Carlsen says he was surprised by Nepomniachtchi’s decision to play the Petrov Defence. “I didn’t particularly think he would do that,” the champion says immediately after exiting the playing studio. “But I guess he was in damage-limitation mode at this point.” He’s asked about Nepomniachtchi’s 7. ... Nc6, the first new move of the match and one which Carlsen spent nearly 20 minutes pondering before responding with 8. c3. “It was a bit surprising because I thought this move order was not supposed to be that good, but I guess you have to play Bb3 in order to try and do something against it and I was not in the mood for that. I guess it was all right. After c3, it’s really pretty boring.” Asked if it’s accurate to say both players were OK with a draw in today’s game, Carlsen agrees but adds he felt he enjoyed a small advantage early on: “Sure, but I was certainly a little bit better at some point. But maybe I was a bit rash in playing (20. g4) and (21. Bf4) and maybe I needed to put the bishop on h6 or something and be a little more patient, because I thought I had a really tiny edge at that point.” The rooks come off after 39. Rf7 Rf6+ 40. Rxf6+ Nxf6 41. Ke3. And the players shake hands and agree to a draw after 2hr 5min, the shortest game of the match so far. Speeding toward a peaceul result after 33. Rh3 Kxg5 34. Rg3+ Kf6 35. Rf3+ Ke7 36. Nf4 Kd6 37. Ng6 Re6 38. Ne5 Ne8. Nepomniachtchi must be precise, however. More material comes off the board in a flurry of moves: 27. ... fxg4 28. hxg4 Bxg4 29. Rxh6 Bf5 30. Bxf5 Nxf5 31. Rh7+ Ng7 32. fxg5 Kg6. First a pair of pawns, then the light-squared bishops. The draw should be incoming soon. Carlsen invites an exchange of kingside pawns with 26. Rh1 h6 27. f4. The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse lists 24 legal moves for Nepomniachtchi, who’s been on the clock for six minutes and counting. Twenty of them are fine for black. After 24. ... f5 25. h3 Kf7, the engines continue to point toward a peaceful result. But we’ve seen Carlsen grind from drawish positions like these before. More pieces are off the board after a bishop exchange: 22. Bf4 Bxf4 23. Nxf4 g5. Carlsen then spends nearly six minutes, briefly appearing to nod off (not really), before playing 24. Ne2. Carlsen is back on the clock after 20. Kf2 c6 21. g4 Ng7, more than a half-hour behind Nepomniachtchi on time. If you were asking yourself why the champion is wearing a black suit today after having worn the same color as the pieces he’s been playing for the first nine games, Carlsen aide-de-camp Magnus Barstad offers this explanation: “I’m going to blame someone here. We were supposed to have the white suit but dry cleaning didn’t deliver it in time, so we had to go black suit white shirt today, unfortunately.” White appears slightly better after 17. g3 g6 18. Ng2 Re8 19. f3 Nh5. But there’s not a ton of juice in this position. “This game is also looking like it’s being steered gently to a draw,” the former world champion Vishy Anand says on the official Fide broadcast. “I hope it does end as a draw without any further adventures.” The players exchange rooks then knights during the next flurry of moves (13. Bd3 Re8 14. Re1 Rxe1+ 15. Nxe1 Ne6 16. Nxe6 Bxe6). The position is simplifying quickly. Says the English IM Lawrence Trent on Chess24’s broadcast “I think it’s becoming more clear that Ian’s objective today is to make a draw, get a rest on the rest day, fully recharge, do something different, enjoy himself ... do something that just allows him to relax and then go all in for the remainder.” The queens are off the board after 10. Nf3 Qxe2+ 11. Bxe2. The challenger then develops his bishop (11. ... Bd6). After Carlsen castles and Nepomniachtchi follows (12. O-O O-O), the engines evaluate the position as even. Nothing we’ve seen thus far dispels the notion that Carlsen is perfectly fine with a draw today. And Carlsen bypasses the more ambitious options for the natural 8. c3 after nearly 19 minutes. Nepomniachtchi answers quickly with 8. ... d5, a dry offering that hardly signals winning intent. The champion thinks for three minutes before playing the non-committal 9. Nd2, slightly improving his knight. Nepomniachtchi follows with 9. ... Nd8. Carlsen has been pondering his response to Nepomniachtchi’s 7. ... Nc6 for more than 18 minutes now. The three candidate moves appear to be trading off the queens (Qxe7+), pushing the pawn (c3) or venturing into potentially interesting complications (Bc3). After 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nd3, Carlsen captures white’s e-pawn (4. ... Nxe4). This extends the same line he played in Game 6 of the 2018 world title match against the American Fabiano Caruana, a game he nearly lost. The players remain in familiar territory (5. Qe2 Qe7 6. Nf4 Nf6 7. d4) until Nepomniachtchi plays the first new move: 7. ... Nc6. Here we go! The first surprise of the day: Carlsen, who is marshaling the white pieces, is wearing a black suit jacket after thus far having corresponded the color to the pieces he’s been playing. And the second: Carlsen opens with 1. e4 and Nepomniachtchi plays into another Petrov (1. ... e5 2. Nf3 Nf6). Does the Russian challenger’s decision to play this solid, drawish opening amount to a white flag of surrender? There was a spot of controversy shortly before Nepomniachtchi’s collapse yesterday. Carlsen touched his knight on his 18th move before playing 18. ... h6 in apparent violation of the touch-move rule. The champion was not pleased when a Norwegian journalist brought it up at the post-game presser, saying any violation was in letter and not in spirit. “Not this again,” he said. “This happens in every single world championship match. Clearly some pieces are adjusted and it’s with no intent to move. Do better.” A quick refresher on the format for this world championship match. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. (Carlsen leads 6-3 over Nepomniachtchi after Tuesday’s third win.) The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. Players cannot agree to a draw before black’s 40th move. If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Notably, Carlsen’s second and third title defenses both came down to tiebreakers. But many believe the increased length of this year’s match (from 12 to 14 games) and the stylistic matchup at hand promises a decisive result in regulation. Hello and welcome back for the 10th game of the World Chess Championship. The overall score in the showdown between Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi is 6-3 to Carlsen after the Norwegian’s breakthrough wins in Game 6, Game 8 and Game 9. Before yesterday, Nepomniachtchi was attempting to become only the third player in the recognised 135-year history of world championship matchplay to win after trailing by two or more points. The others were Max Euwe, who rallied from 5-2 down against Alexander Alekhine before winning 15½-14½ in 1935, and Bobby Fischer, who was down 2-0 to Boris Spassky before winning 12½-8½ in 1972. The task is that much taller after Tuesday’s shocking turn of events: when the Russian challenger made an extraordinary blunder in the middlegame (27. c5??) that cost him a bishop and immediately pointed Carlsen towards a straightforward win in just under four hours. “Pressure gets to everybody,” the 31-year-old Carlsen said afterwards. “As I said before, no style points awarded. I’ll take it. It was a tough game in which I was under pressure both on the board and on the clock. Just to turn it around like that was unexpected.” For anyone just coming aboard, Carlsen, who turned 31 last week, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Vishy Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, also 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April. The best-of-14-games match is taking place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games). We’re about 40 minutes from today’s first move with Carlsen set to marshal the white pieces. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s his report from Tuesday’s ninth game in Dubai.The British Council will be stripped of its role in running the £110m Turing student exchange scheme and replaced by the outsourcing firm Capita, the Guardian has learned. The decision, which has yet to be made public, has shocked higher education insiders, who fear the loss of the British Council’s long experience with international educational exchanges. The council has helped hundreds of thousands of young people find work and study placements abroad. The Turing scheme, announced in 2020 by Boris Johnson, replaced the EU’s Erasmus student exchange scheme after the UK withdrew after Brexit. Now the British Council is to lose its role as lead partner after Capita undercut its bid for the government’s tender. The tender lists the contract as worth up to £7m, to administer funding of £110m, including administration costs. Capita is said to have bid well below the £7m ceiling. Losing the contract will be a financial blow for the British Council, which is already absorbing staff cuts and office closures as a result of income lost during the pandemic and reductions to Foreign Office funding. The council said it was “continuing to work through the implications of the decision”. The British Council said: “We are proud to have launched the Turing scheme in February 2021 and supported £98.5m of grant funding in the inaugural year of the Turing scheme, including 41,024 participants, of which 48% are identified as coming from disadvantaged backgrounds.” Hiring Capita is the latest example of the government’s efforts to award contracts to outsourcing companies. Capita has been one of the major beneficiaries of the policy, despite criticism of its high-profile failings involving army recruitment as well as in back-office administration in NHS England. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “The Turing scheme is creating life-changing opportunities for over 40,000 students to work and study across the globe this academic year – with nearly half of all placements going to those from disadvantaged backgrounds. The government has committed to funding the programme for a further three years, including with £110m for the next academic year.” The DfE recently took the contract for administering the national tutoring programme for schools from the Education Endowment Foundation and awarded it to the multinational consultancy Randstad. This week, MPs heard that only 43,000 pupils had received tuition so far this year, compared with Randstad’s target of 524,000. The British Council has been helping administer the Erasmus scheme since 2007, and since 2014 has administered the successor Erasmus+ programme. When applications for the Turing scheme opened in March, the government said the British Council and Ecorys UK, an economics research consultancy, would continue to administer the scheme as a consortium, with an emphasis on attracting young people from disadvantaged backgrounds. But in July the DfE said it was “inviting the market to participate in engagement” and issued a tender to administer the scheme until December 2023, “to award a single contract for delivery of the services across four nations of the UK”. The British Council said it would continue administering the Turing scheme until the end of March 2022. “The British Council and Ecorys will work closely with Capita to ensure a smooth transition. All current and planned mobility activities will go ahead uninterrupted, and there will be no gap in service,” it said. Capita will be helped by organisations such as the Confederation of School Trusts, the Association of Colleges, the Sutton Trust and the Association of Commonwealth Universities, which has experience administering student scholarship schemes. They will have a limited role according to the tender documents, which state: “The [DfE] will require a single legal entity to enter into the contract with it. Sub-contractors are permissible, but the authority will not accept bids from consortia proposing joint and several liability for delivery.” The documents also say funding for the scheme could vary: “The supplier will be required to ensure systems and processes delivering the services are sufficiently responsive to manage a higher or lower budget for the future Turing scheme.” The British Council, the equivalent of France’s Alliance Française or Germany’s Goethe Institute, is the UK government’s cultural arm and educational ambassador. Earlier this year, it was forced to close 20 offices across the world, as part of a restructuring programme after cuts to the Foreign Office’s aid budget and the loss of income from language tuition and exams during the pandemic. A Capita spokesperson said: “Following a competitive procurement process, we are delighted to have won this contract to administer grants for the Turing scheme. We look forward to working with the DfE and our partners to enable students from all backgrounds to access global work and education opportunities.”Water company Severn Trent has been fined £1.5m by a court for illegal sewage discharges from its wastewater treatment plants. The firm was fined for discharges from four sewage treatment works in Worcestershire between February and August 2018, the Environment Agency said. The water company failed to respond to alarms warning of a blockage, failed to adequately manage sewage sludge, and failed to adequately manage a situation when a piece of equipment failed, Kidderminster magistrates court was told. About 360,000 litres of raw sewage were illegally discharged as a result of the breaches at four water treatment plants in Worcestershire. Severn Trent pleaded guilty at an earlier hearing. Prosecuting for the Environment Agency, James Puzey said Severn Trent Water failed to respond promptly to alarms at its sewage treatment works at Blackminster, near Evesham, in February 2018. A blockage to the works resulted in approximately 360,000 litres of sewage being illegally discharged to the nearby Broadway Brook. It was hours before Severn Trent Water operatives attended to take remedial action. The court also heard how over the winter of 2017/2018, Severn Trent Water failed to adequately manage treatment of sewage sludge at other treatment works in Worcestershire. In passing sentence, district judge Ian Strongman said in respect of the Blackminster incident that “alarms were not actioned as they should have been”. This resulted in the works “discharging for four hours”. The court heard that Severn Trent Water’s previous convictions were an aggravating feature of the prosecution. David Throup, environment manager for the Environment Agency’s West Midlands area, said: “Incidents like this are preventable and are completely unacceptable, particularly at a time when the need to protect the water environment for wildlife and people has never been greater and when public consciousness on environmental matters is so high.” The water company has also been ordered to pay prosecution costs of £58,365. Last summer the company was fined £800,000 for discharging 3.8m litres of raw sewage into a Shropshire stream between November 2014 and May 2016. The Environment Agency and Ofwat are investigating several water companies after they admitted they may have illegally discharged raw sewage from their wastewater treatment plants. The investigation involves about 2,000 sewage treatment works, but the agency will not reveal which companies are involved. A Severn Trent spokesperson said: “We take our role in protecting and caring for our region’s rivers extremely seriously, which is why we have consistently been recognised as a leading UK water company and awarded the very highest four star status by the Environment Agency. “These were historic issues that occurred in 2018 and we self-reported them to the Environment Agency at the time; we have been open and transparent with them throughout the process. We accept and take seriously the court’s findings; we have learned the lessons from the incidents to ensure that we continue to work to the highest environmental standards.”NO COVID RULES WERE BROKEN IN THE WRITING OF THIS FIVER Please excuse the Fiver for being particularly bleary eyed and low rent today. Up late last night, you see. Granny Fiver threw an impromptu business meeting, with cheese and wine and parlour games and Secret Santa and all that, so everyone could watch the first session of the Ashes together. But then Rory Burns hamster-danced himself out first ball, so The Fiver chugged back its glass, made its excuses and left. A bit of a bust, all told, and absolutely no ministers or lobby journalists were in attendance. Thank goodness, then, that The Fiver got its sporting kicks earlier in the evening. There was some proper hot Big Cup action on Tuesday night, with Nat Phillips providing the signature moment of the entire tournament so far, Cruyff turning his way out of trouble in his own box, sending Zlatan Ibrahimovic off for a copy of La Gazzetta dello Sport and 20 MS Filtro. San Siro hasn’t witnessed such defensive elegance since the days of Franco Baresi, and the trick has almost certainly guaranteed Liverpool’s fifth-choice centre-back a £108m move to Newcastle in January, you see if we’re wrong about that. Kyle Walker provided his own moment of simple wonder during Manchester City’s non-event with Leipzig, hoofing an opponent up the jacksie in the silent-movie style for absolutely no reason whatsoever, though Pep Guardiola will be delighted that his first-choice right back will be fully rested for the quarter-finals. But even that act of brazen hoodlummery paled into insignificance when compared to Atlético Madrid’s Matheus Cunha ludicrously crashing to the ground upon being gently brushed by Porto defender Wendell and sparking a stylish bench-emptying 42-man touchline stramash, a magnificent comic-book cloud that had fists and boots poking out of it, and Pepe and Diego Simeone diplomatically bobbing around in the middle. A completely unnecessary brouhaha, and the kind of feelgood romp we all need in these straitened times. The evening was inevitably all downhill from there. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Niall McVeigh from 5.45pm GMT for hot Big Cup MBM coverage of Zenit 1-2 Chelsea, before Chelsea beat Juventus 2-0 at 8pm in Women’s Big Cup, with Simon Burnton. Scott Murray will also be on hand for Manchester United 2-0 Young Boys at 8pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Pinch me – yes, it is a dream. These are the games you want to play in. To get to play them at such an amazing stadium? Yeah, so cool. A dream would probably be an understatement” – Lotte Wubben-Moy gets her chat on with Suzy Wrack, alongside teammate Anna Patten, about the prospect of Arsenal playing Barcelona in Women’s Big Cup at the Emirates. FIVER LETTERS “Re: Ralf Rangnick headlines (yesterday’s Fiver letters). What if Manchester United were to make enquiries about Burnley’s goalkeeper, Nick Pope, only to be rebuffed? ‘Rangnick rang Nick (but Nick never rang him back)’?” – Paul Southgate. “Re: football names that could be places to visit (Fiver letters passim). Back in the day we went to see the Terracotta Warriors at the Kremlin Museum, they were on a world tour. Friend of a friend on hearing this opined that he didn’t know their stuff and could he borrow a CD” – Geoff Saunders. “I didn’t just mention my thought of Dewsbury-Hall sounding like a northern tourist attraction to The Fiver (Monday’s Fiver). I also spoke to a friend about it, who told me he’d always thought Trent Alexander-Arnold sounded like a firm of accountants from the West Midlands” – Daniel Kennedy. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’ the day is … Geoff Saunders, who bags a revised and updated version of Richard Foster’s Premier League Nuggets. We’ll give a copy away every day this week, and it is available to buy here. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly podcast. There’s a new Ashes pod about too, if you’re that way inclined. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Pelé is in hospital to undergo treatment for a colon tumour, with São Paulo’s Hospital Albert Einstein saying the Brazil legend is in a stable condition and will hopefully be discharged in the coming days. Tottenham manager Antonio Conte has confirmed eight players and five members of staff have tested positive for coronavirus following an outbreak at the club. “To speak about football today is impossible,” he said. “The last situation made me very upset. The situation is serious. There is a big infection.” Southend United are back in the news, but unfortunately it’s because the National League have placed a transfer embargo on them in relation to unpaid debts. David Moyes plans to go wild in the aisles come January in a bid to fix West Ham’s knack crisis. “We have been looking to add to the forward players,” he sighed. “We tried in the summer for a forward but there was nothing. Now we have to consider looking for a defender if possible.” Udinese have given head coach Luca Gotti the boot after one win in their last 13 Serie A games. “The most profound thanks go to the coach for our years together,” tooted the club. “[We wish] Gotti the best professional fortune the rest of his career.” And Buxton United striker Diego De Girolamo – who was interviewed here before their FA Cup exit last weekend – faces a lengthy spell out after breaking his arm while getting out of his car. STILL WANT MORE? Our rundown of the best female footballers in the world for 2021 continues, now from Nos 100 to 41. What is the earliest goal scored in a match that finished 1-0? The Knowledge knows. Ben McAleer browses through the Newcastle transfer catalogue Premier League players who could do with a January move. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! HAPPY BIRTHDAY, OPHAN!The oil, gas and metals merchant Trafigura will reward its top traders and executives with financial rewards worth more than $1bn after making record profits from the market upheaval during the Covid pandemic. At $1.1bn, the rewards are 87% up on last year, and follow volatility in the global commodities market helped the company to almost double its net profit to $3.1bn, the highest in its 28-year history. The company was able to use the severe swings in the market price for commodities that were driven by sudden lockdowns and reopenings to lock in profits through its trading activities. Commodity traders have emerged as one of the chief beneficiaries of the tumult in global markets, which has led to record highs in the price for oil, gas and copper. The windfall for Trafigura traders falls short of the record payday for senior executives at the oil trading company Vitol, which handed the equivalent of more than $8m to each of its 350 most senior staff. Jeremy Weir, Trafigura’s chief executive, said the “underlying fragilities in global supply chains were laid bare” through the Covid pandemic, as demand rebounded with the easing of lockdown restrictions but “logistics and supply struggled to keep pace”. Trafigura’s trading desks “capably managed extreme market volatility across a broad spectrum of commodities”, he said, and they performed “exceptionally well regardless of market conditions”. Weir added that the profit, turnover and volumes handled by Trafigura over the year “were the highest in our history” and its core oil and petroleum products and metals and minerals business divisions continued “to fire on all cylinders”. In May 2020, the Guardian revealed that Trafigura was under investigation by authorities including the US Department of Justice, which is looking into suspected corruption and market manipulation. Trafigura declined to comment at the time. Christophe Salmon, the company’s chief financial officer, said the company expected the volatile market conditions of the past two years to continue, in part because of “the unpredictable dynamics of the climate transition”. “One of these dynamics is a persistent mismatch between growing demand for energy and industrial raw materials on the one hand, and supply constraints including due to chronic under-investment on the other,” Salmon said in the company’s annual report.The Brazilian government has been accused of seeking to turn the South American country into a haven for unvaccinated tourists after it shunned calls – including from its own health regulator – to demand proof of vaccination from visitors. The decision – announced on Tuesday by the health minister, Marcelo Queiroga – sparked anger in a nation that has lost more than 615,000 lives to a Covid outbreak the president, Jair Bolsonaro, stands accused of catastrophically mishandling. “This government has the policies, the face and the stench of DEATH,” tweeted the leftist politician, Mônica Francisco, one of many Brazilians urging tighter rules to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. “He’s nothing but a ventriloquist’s dummy for the president,” the newscaster, Fábio França, wrote of Queiroga, a cardiologist who is reportedly plotting to run for office next year, with Bolsonaro’s backing. Átila Iamarino, a prominent scientist and broadcaster, tweeted sarcastically: “Don’t want to get vaccinated? Are you a denialist? A coronavirus router? Come to Brazil for a chloroquine caipirinha. We don’t demand vaccination. The public health service is all yours.” Under Brazil’s new rules, unvaccinated visitors will need to spend five days isolating after arrival before being tested again. It is unclear if, or how the quarantine will be enforced. International visitors are required to take a PCR test up to 72 hours before departure. Queiroga defended the government’s stance, telling journalists: “As the president said … sometimes it’s better to lose your life than your freedom.” The decision not to demand proof of immunisation contradicted the advice of Brazil’s health regulator, Anvisa, which has been pushing for such measures since last month. In a recent analysis, Anvisa officials warned not requiring vaccination “could turn Brazil into one of the countries of choice for unvaccinated tourists and travellers, which would be undesirable given the risk this group poses to the Brazilian population and national health service.” Bolsonaro, a far-right populist who claims to be unvaccinated and has repeatedly resisted Covid containment measures, publicly challenged Anvisa on Tuesday. In a speech to business leaders, the president falsely claimed the government agency was seeking to shut down Brazil’s airspace. “Bloody hell, this again? Are we really going to start going on about this business again?” Bolsonaro complained, before sniffing: “Ah, Omicron! We’ve got bags of variants ahead of us.” Brazil’s Covid disaster has eased in recent weeks after a hugely successful vaccination campaign spearheaded by its NHS-inspired public health service, SUS. Nearly 138 million people – 64.6% of the entire population – have been fully jabbed, with more shots administered than anywhere else apart from China, India and the US. Fewer than 200 daily deaths are being reported on average, compared with more than 4,000 at the peak of Brazil’s second wave in April. However, health specialists fear that progress could be undone by Omicron and Bolsonaro’s opposition to tougher rules for international travellers. The mayor of Rio, Brazil’s top tourist destination, is among those pushing for proof of vaccination to be required of foreign visitors. In October, Eduardo Paes said he had a simple message for unvaccinated sun-seekers thinking of visiting his city: “Please, don’t come”.In February this year, a stencilled sign appeared on the gable end of the South London gallery’s new Fire Station annexe. Spray-painted in turquoise on white, it read AT A DISTANCE TO THE FOREGROUND. Passengers on passing buses mused over the sign’s meaning. It was a surveyor’s mark, perhaps, or something to do with health and safety. In fact, it was a work of art by the American conceptualist Lawrence Weiner, who has died aged 79 of cancer. The road to AT A DISTANCE TO THE FOREGROUND (1999) had begun half a century before, with another work by Weiner called A SERIES OF STAKES SET IN THE GROUND AT REGULAR INTERVALS TO FORM A RECTANGLE – TWINE STRUNG FROM STAKE TO STAKE TO DEMARK A GRID – A RECTANGLE REMOVED FROM THIS RECTANGLE (1968). The title of this was descriptive and literal. Weiner’s piece, installed on the sports field of a college in Vermont, was precisely as its name suggested. The college football team, oblivious to conceptual art, took objection to their pitch being co-opted for it. Cutting its twine by night, they then pulled up Weiner’s titular stakes and dumped them on the touchline. Far from upsetting him, this intervention came as a damascene moment for the young artist. “I began the realisation that it seemed to mean something,” he recalled in an interview for the Archives of American Art in 2019. “People talked about it, even though it wasn’t there any more. So that was it.” In common with others of his generation, Weiner had been looking for a way of making art that would be defiantly anti-commercial. His first piece, a form of happening, had involved him blowing holes in the earth of a California state park with sticks of dynamite when he was 18. The work, Cratering Pieces (1960), was both illegal and unrecorded. Although it could not be bought or sold, it had actually existed. Weiner’s experience in Vermont eight years later suggested an art that would be even more evanescent in having no physical substance at all. From then on, his chief material would be words, often painted on walls, as at Camberwell’s South London gallery, in a font called Franklin Gothic Extra Condensed. (The sides of container vessels and Manhattan manhole covers were also to provide handy supports.) Ownership of the text was shared by anyone who chose to look at it. “My work starts off having no monetary value,” a satisfied Weiner observed, “and by the time it’s all finished it doesn’t have any monetary value because it has entered into the culture.” His equating of property with theft had started early. Born to a working-class couple, Toba (nee Horowitz) and Harold Wiener, who owned and ran a sweet shop in the Bronx, New York, Lawrence began working as a stevedore on the Lower East Side wharves at the age of 12. Brushes with the law – hot-wiring cars was a skill picked up from neighbourhood friends – led to a broader dislike of authority. This, combined with union solidarity on the docks, turned to a taste for protest. By his teens, Lawrence was skipping school at Stuyvesant high to join civil rights marches in Mississippi and Alabama, and anti-nuclear demonstrations in the naval dockyards at New London, Connecticut. Although he managed to win a place at the radical Hunter College in New York to study philosophy and literature in 1959, student life was too tame. After a couple of terms he dropped out to follow a career as a self-proclaimed TNT sculptor in California. It was his experience in Vermont, though, that was to lead to the publication, a few months later, of his Statement of Intent. Now seen as a founding document of conceptualism, the statement’s three dictums – 1: the artist may construct the piece; 2: the piece may be fabricated; 3: the piece need not be built – opened the way for an art that might exist simply as a description of itself, free to be used by anyone who wanted to. If, like AT A DISTANCE TO THE FOREGROUND, the work ceased to exist materially for a couple of decades, it would not disappear conceptually. What the gnomic statements of pieces such as SHELLS USED TO BUILD ROADS POURED UPON SHELLS USED TO PAY THE WAY, AT THE LEVEL OF THE SEA, inscribed on a Miami museum in 2008, actually meant was likewise in the eye of the beholder. “I grew up in a city where I had read the walls,” Weiner said. “I still read the walls. I love to put work of mine out on the walls and let people read it.” His Statement caught the eye of the Swiss curator Harald Szeemann. In 1969, he invited Weiner to take part in a show called When Attitudes Become Form at the Kunsthalle in Bern, now held to have united the several strands of nascent conceptualism into a single movement. Weiner’s entry for the show called for the removal of a square yard of plaster from a gallery wall. New York’s Museum of Modern Art, which now owns the work, lists its medium as “language + the materials referred to”. Weiner’s early Swiss exposure meant that he would work mainly in Europe for the next two decades. In 1967, he had met Alice Zimmerman, then a waitress at the fabled New York nightspot Max’s Kansas City. By 1970, the couple were living in Amsterdam on a houseboat with no electricity, and were soon joined by a daughter, Kirsten. The trio would remain on the boat for 18 years, with intervening stays in Berlin – “the first time in my life and Kirsten’s life we had central heating” – and elsewhere in Europe. Perhaps because of this, his first American retrospective, at the Whitney Museum in New York, came only in 2007. By contrast, he was widely shown in Europe, not least in Britain. His last major exhibition there, called Within a Realm of Distance in 2015, saw Weiner taking over the whole of Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire. A section of one of John Churchill’s so-called Victory Tapestries was temporarily removed to make way for a piece by Weiner called Far Enough Away As to Come Readily to Hand. Although he always counted himself an American artist, Weiner remained internationalist, equally at home on both sides of the Atlantic and happily switching in conversation from English to Dutch or German. Borders and boundaries were a recurrent theme in his work, particularly in the films he had begun to make in the early 1970s. One, Plowman’s Lunch (1982), features a trio of travellers who cross not just borders but languages and – groundbreaking for its day – genders. Weiner was himself an unexpected mixture of tough guy and tenderfoot, imposing and bearded like an Old Testament prophet but happy to own up to a soft side. Stricken with cancer, he particularly mourned having to give up the earrings he had worn for decades. “It’s very odd for me,” Weiner said, sadly. “I used to have Chinese gold in my ears, lots of it, but you have to keep taking it out when you’re taking all those tests. I miss it.” He is survived by Alice, whom he married in 2003, and Kirsten. • Lawrence Weiner, artist, born 10 February 1942; died 2 December 2021When the order was made to deprive Shamima Begum of her British citizenship in February 2019, it seemed gestural and unlikely to stand. She was born in England and had no dual nationality; her marriage to a Dutch citizen was invalid since she was 15 when she entered into it; and she had a baby, who was British by descent according to the British Nationality Act of 1981. Within three weeks, her son had died, and the gesture had solidified into something darker and more concrete: a statement of values, in which some citizens are more British than others. What should be seen as chilling safeguarding issues – underage girls trafficked by criminal gangs into war zones – became security matters, in which the national interest is so profoundly threatened that, not only is the state relieved of its duty to protect, the girls can be made stateless. Begum is not the only British citizen treated in this way. A recent Reprieve report details 20 British families stranded in north-east Syria, most of whom have had their citizenship removed. To divest us of any illusions, that these are freak occurrences for the monumentally unlucky, we now have the third reading of the nationality and borders bill. Forty-four members of the Scottish parliament signed an open letter to the home secretary, detailing what they considered to be its implications for asylum seekers – cruel measures to make already unsafe routes more treacherous – but noting, also, that it hangs “the threat of citizenship removal over naturalised British people in clear violation of international human rights agreements and basic principles of decency and fairness”. Under the proposals, any foreign-born British citizen can be deprived of their citizenship, without notice or notification. Dual citizenship is not a precondition; they can be made stateless so long as the British government believes they are eligible for citizenship of another country. Analysis from the 2011 census, by the New Statesman, finds an astronomical number of people – 5.5 million in England and Wales – who fall into this category, including about 408,000 people born in the UK. It is hard to imagine a more flagrantly racist idea emanating from anywhere but a National Front manifesto: it affects half of British Asians and 39% of Black Britons. This represents merely an acceleration of the Conservative agenda over the past decade. The Cameron years were more timid and underhand. The hostile environment policy of 2012, and the Windrush scandal it created, was openly racist, but limited in scope to one cohort. This in no way mitigated the injustice of it; to deprive one citizen of statehood, not to mention liberty, legal rights, healthcare, social security and the ability to work, is to deprive all. But it was a long time before it received due attention and protest, and victims are still waiting for restitution. That same year, the minimum income threshold of £18,600 was introduced for British citizens who wanted to bring a foreign spouse into the UK. The implications of this were, again, unremarked for a long time, but extraordinary; poor Britons thereafter had fewer rights as citizens than rich ones. So citizenship was, from 2012, stratified by race and class. Full rights were enjoyed by a particular cross-section, and those outside it were newly precarious. Even if that insecurity were hypothetical – how many of us will, in the end, marry someone foreign born? How many are in the Windrush generation? – the principle was real, and ambient noise shored it up, not just Theresa May’s racist “Go Home” van but a fixation with shirkers and strivers, reinforcing a new conception of civic decency being a function of economic productivity. Cameron’s government came to power, after its coalition fits and starts, on the back of a fiscal scarcity narrative that popularised austerity measures whose cruelty would have previously been unsellable. In power, the Conservatives have adjusted that scarcity so that it is no longer just money but also belonging that we don’t have enough of; there is simply not enough citizenship to go around, not enough nationhood, not enough human rights for the whole country to enjoy. Priti Patel may not need to repatriate your neighbours to nowhere today, but she needs to start knocking the legislation into shape, so that when the deportations begin, she knows who least belongs. The question is not how likely it is that five and a half million Britons ever face deportation: it is, what political purpose does it serve to turn citizenship into a question not of unity but of hierarchy? It is more complex and intricate than simply sowing division and eroding solidarity; it generates emotional support for external xenophobia – against the EU, against refugees – by making the condition of Britishness a fragile one in which legitimacy is uncertain and loyalty must be continually demonstrated. The racism of the nationality and borders bill is not a Tory accident. It creates the conditions for their future successes and cover for their vast, unfolding errors; it’s up to all opposition parties to make sure it costs them more, electorally, than it can ever deliver. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistWhy is the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, in so much trouble? On Tuesday last week, the British tabloid newspaper, the Mirror, published a story that claimed parties had been held at Johnson’s Downing Street residence in the run-up to Christmas last year. One of the events was said to have taken place on 18 December, with dozens of people drinking wine and playing party games. There was one major problem with this: London had just been placed under new restrictions to stop the spread of coronavirus. Last December, Covid was spreading rapidly, hundreds of people were dying every day, and Johnson’s government had told people that parties were no longer allowed. Government guidance at the time stated: “Although there are exemptions for work purposes, you must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” When Johnson was first questioned about the claims of the pre-Christmas party last week, he denied any rules had been broken. Repeatedly. In media interviews over the last week, a number of his cabinet colleagues have also categorically denied that a party took place, or that rules were broken. But the explanations did not make complete sense. The BBC correspondent Ros Atkins captured the inconsistencies in this short film. So, what changed? The story appeared to be fizzling out – until Tuesday evening. A British broadcaster, ITV News, was leaked a video. The footage showed Downing Street officials doing a practice press conference. It was filmed on 22 December last year – just a few days after the party was said to have taken place. In the film, Allegra Stratton, a senior political adviser who then worked directly for Boris Johnson, was fielding questions from colleagues – one of them, Ed Oldfield, referenced a party that had taken place days before. Oldfield asked her: “I’ve just seen reports on Twitter that there was a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night, do you recognise those reports?” What followed was revealing and excruciating. Stratton appeared floored and flummoxed. Between hesitations and some embarrassed laughter, she replied: “I went home … hold on, hold on, erm, err … What’s the answer? … This fictional party was a business meeting [laughs] and it was not socially distanced.” The video could not have shown Stratton and other officials in a worse light, given the seriousness of the situation facing the UK last Christmas. But worse than that – their conversation appeared to confirm there was a party in Downing Street, despite Johnson’s denials. How did Johnson react? To begin with, there was an eerie silence from Downing Street. Usually, government ministers are dispatched to do interviews for the national broadcasters for their morning news bulletins and chatshows. On Wednesday, they all stayed at home. All eyes were then focused on prime minister’s questions – the weekly event in the House of Commons where the leader of the opposition Labour party, Sir Keir Starmer, gets to ask Johnson a series of questions. This week, Johnson started the session with a dramatic apology. Before taking any questions from Starmer, the prime minister told the Commons he was “also furious to see that clip”. “I can understand how infuriating it would be to think that the people who have been setting the rules have not been following the rules,” he said. “I apologise unreservedly for the offence that it has caused up and down the country, and apologise for the impression that it gives.” Johnson insisted he had no personal knowledge of any party, saying: “I repeat that I have been repeatedly assured since these allegations emerged that there was no party, and that no Covid rules were broken.” This last statement drew jeers of incredulity from opposition MPs. And there was an awkward silence from MPs in Johnson’s Conservative party. Johnson said he had asked the country’s most senior civil servant. the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, to investigate the claims about the party – and the prime minister promised that anyone found to have broken the rules would be disciplined. Observers were quick to point out that Johnson appeared to be putting his own staff in the firing line. Had they lied to him about the party? Is it conceivable he didn’t know what was going on? How damaged is Johnson? The “apology” is the latest in a series of wretched episodes for Johnson and his party. Over the last few weeks, the Conservatives have been embroiled in a sleaze scandal, provoked by Johnson. The prime minister intervened to try to stop a Conservative MP, Owen Paterson, from being disciplined after a watchdog ruled he had broken rules by lobbying for a company for which he was working. Johnson tried to save Paterson by ripping up the House of Commons disciplinary process. This was regarded as an outrageous attempt to stop someone he knew from being punished. The anger this provoked led him to perform a U-turn – but the damage was done. And now this. So far, voters have shown remarkable tolerance for Johnson’s looseness with the truth. But there are signs that people outside parliament, and his own MPs within it, are beginning to have second thoughts. Johnson’s position should be strong. In the 2019 general election, he won a convincing victory. The Conservatives won 365 seats out of a possible 650 – giving the prime minister a clear 80-seat majority. But the Conservatives are notoriously ruthless when it comes to changing their leader – and Johnson is nothing like as popular within his own party as you might imagine. If MPs conclude he has become a liability, then he is in trouble. And that’s before Covid is put in the equation. With the UK facing a new Omicron wave of infections, the government has been forced to introduce new restrictions. Yet how will the country react now that it seems Johnson’s own team have not played by the rules they have set?The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has confirmed his country’s officials will not attend the Beijing Winter Olympics, joining the US in a diplomatic boycott of next year’s Games and prompting accusations from Beijing of political posturing. Morrison told reporters in Sydney it was “not surprising”, given the deterioration in the diplomatic relationship between Australia and China, that officials would not attend next year’s winter Games. “Australian athletes will, though,” he said on Wednesday. “Australia’s a great sporting nation and I very much separate the issues of sport and these other political issues.” Morrison said he would like to see longstanding tensions between Australia and China resolved, but his government did not intend to “step back from the strong position we had standing up for Australia’s interest”. Confirming the diplomatic boycott, Morrison raised human rights abuses in Xinjiang as one of the factors Australia had “consistently raised”. He said the Chinese government had not made itself available to address human rights concerns. Beijing has consistently denied wrongdoing in the Xinjiang region. Responding to the move, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, said Australia was “blindly following” the US in announcing a diplomatic boycott, adding: “Whether they come or not, nobody cares.” Earlier, the Chinese embassy in Canberra accused Australian politicians of “political posturing” and suggested – as it did in response to the US boycott – that the diplomatic representatives were not necessarily invited anyway. It did not mention human rights or other issues raised by those proposing boycotts, instead calling on Australia to take “practical measures” to improve bilateral relations, saying all blame for the “current predicament” lay squarely with Australia. “This is not a boycott of the games in the way the US (plus others) and the Soviet Union boycotted each other’s Games in 1980 and 1984 by not sending participants,” said Shaun Breslin, a China expert at the University of Warwick in England. “It’s about sending a signal – or actually two signals. One to China, and another one to those domestic audiences who want a harder line on China. It is symbolic, but symbols are important.” The prime minister was earlier asked whether he expected any retaliation from China in response. Morrison said any reprisals would be “completely and utterly unacceptable and there would be no grounds for that whatsoever”. Australia remained open to dialogue with China, “whether it’s their concerns with our foreign interference legislation or foreign investment rules”. But he repeated that Australia would continue to pursue policies in its national interest. The New Zealand government said on Tuesday it would not send diplomatic representatives at a ministerial level to the Winter Olympics, citing “a range of factors but mostly to do with Covid”. The Biden administration also confirmed earlier in the week that the US will pursue a diplomatic boycott. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, cited China’s “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. That decision drew a furious reaction from the Chinese government, which flatly denies crimes against humanity or any wrongdoing in Xinjiang, and accused Washington of “posturing and political manipulation”. Senior officials sought to dismiss the boycott by saying the US representatives had not been invited anyway, but state media also reported Beijing had made “stern representations” to the US. China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, had warned of unspecified “counter-measures”. Asked to elaborate at a regular press conference on Tuesday, Zhao said only that the US would “pay a price for its erroneous actions” and observers “may wait and see”. On Wednesday, Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, and the sports spokesperson, Don Farrell, said the opposition party supported the decision, as Labor held “deep concerns” about ongoing rights abuses in China and about athlete safety given the circumstances around tennis player Peng Shuai. “This decision, alongside other countries’ diplomatic boycotts, sends a strong signal that these are not the behaviours of a responsible global power,” they said, adding that it was “appropriate” athletes were not being asked to make the sacrifice. “Our athletes have trained hard for years towards this opportunity and didn’t choose where the Winter Olympics are being held.” The Australian Olympic Committee responded to Morrison’s announcement, saying it respected “the fact that diplomatic options are a matter for government and that politics and sport should be separated”. “Our Australian athletes have been training and competing with this Olympic dream for four years now and we are doing everything in our power to ensure we can help them succeed,” said the committee’s chief executive, Matt Carroll. “Human rights are extremely important, but the considered view of diplomats is that keeping channels of communication open is far more impactful than shutting them down.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Rayhan Asat, a US-based Uyghur lawyer whose brother, Ekpar Asat, disappeared in China in 2016, said the series of moves by the US, Australia and the UK were “a long-awaited step in the right direction, but it cannot end here”. “Other bystander countries should follow suit … The athletes should hear first-hand about how mass atrocities are affecting Uyghur families around the world. Once at the Games, they will have an invaluable platform to protest and resist. We cannot legitimise crimes against humanity.” Exiled Uyghur campaign groups also welcomed diplomatic boycotts from western countries. But World Uyghur Congress, an advocacy body that Beijing calls “separatist”, said that while it welcomed announcements of boycotts, it “continues to urge governments around the world to take further bilateral and multilateral action”. The diplomatic boycotts of the Olympics come amid broader calls for government and commercial boycotts of the Games over the Chinese government’s human rights abuses, while the Women’s Tennis Association has taken the unprecedented step of cancelling all 2022 tournaments in China over its concerns for the wellbeing of the tennis player Peng Shuai. Peng was not seen for more than two weeks after she accused a senior Chinese official of sexually assaulting her. The International Olympic Committee, which had faced scrutiny over its stated preference for “quiet diplomacy” in response to the case of Peng, said on Tuesday it respected the US’s boycott decision.Do you help your employees celebrate the birth of their grandchildren – or are you planning to? Saga has announced it is to give staff a week’s paid “grandparent leave” as well as giving their grandchildren access to its on-site nursery. Research shows a quarter of working grandparents said they find it difficult to balance work with childcare commitments. We’re keen to talk to other employers who help their staff mark the role of grandparents to their families and society. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“I guess I’m part of history,” says James Lowe, lead singer of the Electric Prunes, of the band’s oeuvre being gathered into a box set this month. “It suggests the idea we had for the band was viable – at least for a while.” Indeed, the Los Angeles quintet were, if only briefly, one of psychedelic rock’s pioneers. Ironically, as Lowe confirms, the Prunes weren’t particularly interested in hallucinogenic drugs – “we had no support crew, no tour bus; we couldn’t sit around stoned” – and no Prune possessed the dark charisma of fellow LA psychedelic shamans Arthur Lee or Jim Morrison. Initially a surf-rock outfit, a passing real-estate agent heard the band rehearsing in a garage and suggested a friend of hers might be interested in them. Lowe gave his phone number but thought nothing of it, because “everyone in LA knows ‘someone’ in the film or music industry”. She actually did – her contact, David Hassinger, was the resident sound engineer at RCA Studios. There he engineered the Rolling Stones’ 1964-1966 LA sessions (the likes of (I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction, Lady Jane and Under My Thumb benefited from his skill). Hassinger was looking for his own Stones and Lowe’s band – photogenic, dynamic, enthusiastic – fit the part. “Being discovered while rehearsing in a garage and getting a record deal from it: it’s such an LA story,” Lowe laughs. That they’d written very few songs didn’t matter: Hassinger brought in songwriters, while a name change to the Electric Prunes suggested an awareness of the rising psychedelic tide, as did their second single, I Had Too Much to Dream (Last Night). Songwriter Annette Tucker wrote it as a hangover ballad but the Prunes – “we had a very Link Wray kind of sound, dark and powerful” – created a psych-rock anthem with guitarist Ken Williams employing striking effects. This song and another Tucker effort, Get Me to the World on Time, both reached the US Top 40 (and UK Top 50), ensuring the Prunes were on the road to fame and fortune. Except they weren’t. Their second album, 1967’s Underground, produced no hits and slowed momentum. Still, touring Europe the Prunes did the prerequisite swinging London activities of visiting the Beatles at Abbey Road studios, getting high with Hendrix, playing the Marquee and being photographed by Gered Mankowitz. “I felt like the luckiest guy in the world,” says Lowe. “Meeting Hendrix and Cream and Soft Machine – we owned their albums and now we were in London at parties with them.” Returning to Los Angeles, the Prunes found David Axelrod assigned with composing and arranging their next album, 1968’s Mass in F Minor. Axelrod was no jobbing tunesmith: his skilful productions of R&amp;B singer Lou Rawls, jazz saxophonist Cannonball Adderley and Scottish actor David McCallum’s albums marked him as a sonic visionary. “David was a jazzbo – the hippest guy in the room,” says Lowe. “What he set out to achieve in the studio was quite beyond what we were used to.” For Mass In F Minor, Axelrod employed the Prunes alongside the likes of Carol Kaye and Earl Palmer (of top LA session players the Wrecking Crew) to create psychedelic soundscapes over which Lowe sang in Latin and Greek. Both odd and engaging – Axelrod brilliantly layers the sound – Mass In F Minor was promoted to the burgeoning FM rock radio stations (they acquiesced) and US Catholic media (they refused). “I’d been a Catholic altar boy so had no problem singing the mass in Latin but was Mass In F Minor really the third album the Prunes should have made?”, wonders Lowe. There were strong sales, though, and Axelrod was given the go-ahead to record a follow-up: Release of an Oath, based on the Jewish Kol Nidre prayer. Where the Prunes had contributed (in part) to Mass, this time Axelrod simply went ahead using the Wrecking Crew to create an album that, when released in November 68, bombed (Release of an Oath has since been picked over for samples by elite rap producers). Having been made superfluous, the band split, and Hassinger employed another band as the Prunes to tour and then, using another, produced 1969’s Just Good Old Rock and Roll. As its title suggests, these Prunes played conventional rock: the cover billed them as “new and improved” but few paid attention. “I gave Hassinger permission to keep using the Prunes name,” says Lowe. “In retrospect, that was probably a mistake, but there was a certain momentum I didn’t want to derail.” Later that same year Easy Rider, the extraordinarily successful counterculture film, featured Mass In F Minor’s Kyrie Eleison in both the film and on its soundtrack album. By then, the band were completely done, Hassinger finally having lost interest after the last lineup split. “We never got paid for Easy Rider,” says Lowe wearily, “and the soundtrack LP was the biggest selling in Dunhill [Records’] history. Hassinger told me his ex-wife stole all the royalties.” As for a share of what Axelrod received from the likes of Dr Dre and Rakim sampling his productions – again, nada. Lowe shrugs and adds, “I got on with my life and I’ve been a lucky guy. No point in complaining about what might have been.” Indeed, Lowe became a successful recording engineer and producer, working with Todd Rundgren, Sparks and many others. Meanwhile a slow resurrection of the Prunes was underway, beginning in 1972 when Lenny Kaye – now best known as Patti Smith’s long time guitar foil, then a freelance music writer and record shop clerk – compiled and issued a double LP compilation called Nuggets: Original Artyfacts from the First Psychedelic Era with I Had Too Much to Dream as its opening track. Punks embraced the Prunes – the Damned and Wayne County &amp; the Electric Chairs (among others) covered Too Much to Dream – as did the Paisley Underground, LA’s 1980s pastoral psych scene. The crowning of David Axelrod as the go-to producer for sublime samples at the dawn of this century led to further interest – Axelrod’s one UK concert, at the Royal Festival Hall in 2004, had Richard Ashcroft joining him on stage to sing Holy Are You from Mass In F Minor. Punk, psychedelia, hip-hop – that’s a lot of sonic territory to cover for one rather unsung band to cover. “Believe me, I’m surprised at the interest,” says Lowe. “My son first told me about Nuggets and how friends of his liked our music. I had no idea.” The Prunes reformed in 1999, released Artifact, an album they claimed “was the third album we never got to make” in 2001 and toured widely – Lowe still leads the Prunes today. “We now go and play places like Japan, and Kent – cool places that we never played back in the 60s, and our audiences are often dads and sons. We’re a cross-generation band. I love it that our music has some kind of primal appeal.” Now there’s a boxset containing every 1960s recording by the garage band who found themselves hijacked into making music they never imagined. “Did we have too much to dream?” asks Lowe merrily. “I know we had a great time – back then, playing rock’n’roll on Sunset Boulevard with the likes of Leon Russell was as exciting as things got!” Then Came the Dawn: Complete Recordings 1966-1969 is released by Cherry Red this week.The former head of human resources at Canada’s military has been charged with sexual assault and committing indecent acts as the country grapples with a wave of misconduct and assault allegations levelled against senior officials. Military police announced the charges against V Adm Haydn Edmundson on Wednesday. At least seven generals have been implicated in various scandals over the past year, a crisis that has eroded public trust in the institution and weakened morale within the military’s ranks. The charges by military prosecutors come despite a promise by the governing Liberals last month that the prosecution of sexual misconduct cases in the military would be handed over to civilian prosecutors. The allegations against Edmundson date back to 1991, when a retired member of the armed forces, alleges Edmundson exposed his genitals to her onboard a navy ship. At the time, Edmundson, a lieutenant commander, was her superior. Stéphanie Viau, who at the time was a 19-year-old steward, told CBC News that she yelled and told Edmundson his behaviour was unacceptable. Days later, Edmundson raped her, she alleges. Edmundson has denied the allegations. “Vice-Admiral Edmundson continues to deny any suggestion of criminal misconduct and looks forward to the opportunity to restore his distinguished reputation for service to our country,” his lawyer, Brian Greenspan, said in statement. Viau’s lawyer, Paul Champ, said his client “will wait for justice to take its course”. Edmundson stepped down in May after the allegations of assault first surfaced. He was replaced by Lt Gen Steven Whelan. But Whelan was also forced to step down from his role in October after military police confirmed an investigation into an allegation of sexual misconduct. He too has denied the allegations. Last month, defence minister Anita Anand said she would accept the recommendations of a former supreme court justice to transfer sexual misconduct investigations to civilian police and prosecutors – except in cases where an investigation is close to completion. In Edmundson’s case, officials say the case was in its final stages and will be handled by the military justice system. Edmundson is due to appear in an Ottawa court on 25 January.Leftwing congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has spoken out about the hypocrisy of gun-wielding Christmas card photos, an emerging trend among several Republic lawmakers who have posted holiday photos showing themselves and their family holding military-style rifles. In a tweet on Wednesday, Ocasio-Cortez called out far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert of Colorado, who had posted a picture of her family, including her small children, holding rifles in front of a Christmas tree. “Tell me again where Christ said ‘use the commemoration of my birth to flex violent weapons for personal political gain’?” said Ocasio-Cortez, recalling back in 2015 when conservatives declared that there was a “war on Christmas”, with companies like Starbucks facing threats of boycott. “lol @ all the years Republicans spent on cultural hysteria of society ‘erasing Christmas and it’s meaning’ when they’re doing that fine all on their own.” In addition to Boebert’s gun-themed Christmas photo, Kentucky congressman Thomas Massie recently posted a picture of his family holding rifles while posing in front of a Christmas tree, with the caption: “Merry Christmas! PS: Santa, please bring ammo.” The photo was posted only days after a school shooting in Oxford, Michigan, located an hour outside of the state’s capitol, where four students died and seven people were injured. Boebert and Massie’s Christmas photos faced widespread criticism, as several other Republicans have used violent imagery in attempts to shock and provoke as well as rally supporters. Arizona congressman Adam Gosar was censured after tweeting an animated video depicting him killing Ocasio-Cortez and Boebert received criticism for Islamaphobic comments about Minnesota congresswoman Ilhan Omar. “Here his family’s got guns under a Christmas tree just after four kids were killed,” said Elaine Kamarck, a former official in the Clinton administration, in an interview with the Guardian. “The guy’s abominable but that’s what’s happening to the Republican party. They’re flat-out nuts. There’s a piece of the Republican party that now supports violence.”According to film director John Maggio, two types of executives run the entertainment industry – one far rarer than the other. “The vast majority of them don’t know what’s good, or what will be a hit, until ten other people tell them,” he said. “But a few can tell you right away. They’re the visionaries.” For an extended time, one of the most clairvoyant was Robert Stigwood. Yet no one had made a feature documentary about him until now. Mr Saturday Night lays out the rocket-like trajectory of this manager turned producer turned impresario who scored hits in the worlds of music, theater, concerts and film. Stigwood’s projects ranged from managing the Bee Gees to running a record label featuring artists like Eric Clapton to producing two of the biggest movies of all time – Saturday Night Fever and Grease, as well as the successful movie version of the Who’s Tommy – to bankrolling smash plays like Jesus Christ Superstar and Evita. “For a time, he was the Wizard of Oz of entertainment,” said Maggio, who directed the film, to the Guardian. “Between 1970 and 1978, he could not not make a hit.” True to the documentary’s title, it focuses on the period when Stigwood developed a 1976 article in New York Magazine titled Tribal Rites of the New Saturday Night into the multimedia cultural phenomenon that was Saturday Night Fever. The story of its creation features improbable twists and innumerable roadblocks exemplifying the high-risk dramas that defined the most eventful part of Robert Stigwood’s life, which ended in 2016 when he was 81. The film doesn’t cover his early life in Australia because, said Maggio, “this wasn’t mean to be straight biography.” Instead, the action starts in the colorful London music scene of the 1960s. Stigwood’s first client was John Leyton, a TV teen idol who pined for a singing career. Stigwood connected him with Joe Meek, the famously eccentric producer who, in 1961, turned Leyton’s single Johnny Remember Me into a No 1 UK hit. By the mid-60s, Stigwood became the booking agent for the Who as well as the manager of one of rock’s first super-groups, Cream. He also discovered the Bee Gees and advised them on their early Edwardian hits starting in 1967. Like many of rock’s seminal managers, including the Beatles’ Brian Epstein and the Who’s co-manager Kit Lambert, Stigwood was gay. While the men were all out within their milieu, they remained closeted to the larger world, a necessity in an era when homosexual acts were still outlawed in the UK. According to Maggio, the straight managers of the day “definitely used the identity of the gay managers against them. They were disparaging about their sexuality behind their backs,” he said. “Don Arden (who managed acts like Small Faces and the Move) would refer to “that fruit Stigwood”. At the same time, sexual identity provided a bond between Stigwood and Epstein. Shortly before Epstein’s death in 1967, he asked Stigwood about helping to take over management of the Beatles since that role had begun to wear him down. But the Beatles hated both Stigwood and the Bee Gees. “They thought they were a pop act who were not to be taken seriously,” Maggio said. At the same time, the Beatles were becoming increasingly business savvy. After Epstein’s death from an accidental overdose of pills, Stigwood boasted that he was going to buy the band for half a million pounds. “That just seemed vulgar to McCartney,” said Maggio. Undaunted, Stigwood moved his operation to New York, the better to avoid then sky-high British taxes. There, he quickly found a new venture of note. The untested team of Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice had written and recorded an album of songs with the blasphemous title Jesus Christ Superstar, which they hoped could be produced for the stage. Recognizing its potential, Stigwood put together a concert tour featuring the music, then developed it into a successful Broadway musical. “Stigwood saw things others didn’t,” said Maggio. He showed equal foresight when the fortunes of the Bee Gees began to falter in the early 70s. “For God’s sake, listen to what’s happening in the world today,” he is quoted as telling the Gibb brothers in a vintage clip featured in the film. Taking note of the rhythmic hits of the Average White Band, Stigwood put the Bee Gees together with that band’s producer, Arif Mardin, who helped shape an entirely new sound for them. The result led to No 1 hits like Jive Talking and You Should Be Dancing, both of which were later repurposed for the Saturday Night Fever soundtrack. In the same period, Stigwood developed the Who’s Tommy into a film, casting Tina Turner, who was adrift after she left Ike, in a cameo. In the documentary, Nik Cohn, the writer of the New York Magazine story that birthed Saturday Night Fever, talks about what first drew him to the disco scene in the extremely unfashionable area of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. To him, that demi-monde had the same impetus and effect as the youth cultures he had observed in UK, like the teddy boys and the Mods and Rockers. “Nik was fascinated by the yearning of teenage angst, by the feeling of wanting to escape,” said Maggio. “He was also interested in the male peacockery of the scene, all the stuff that adolescent boys do to strut and try to find their place in a world that’s tribal.” But the way this particular tribalism expressed itself presented a jarring irony within the context of disco history. Though the genre began in Black and gay clubs, the scenes in Bay Ridge and Bensonhurst couldn’t have been more racist or homophobic. In the film, Cohn recalls bringing a Black dancer to the club where his piece was set and watching in horror as the crowd violently chased him out. Cohn’s original article, an exemplar of “new journalism”, contained no shortage of drama, sweep and un-journalistic devices (including the wholesale invention of its central character, Tony Manero). Yet, only Stigwood envisioned it as a smash feature. He also recognized that it could be a perfect vehicle for a star who had yet to appear on the silver screen. Before he came across the New York magazine article, Stigwood signed a three-picture deal with John Travolta who, at the time, had power only in the worlds of TV and teen idols. “It was a huge risk to sign him,” Maggio said. After all, at the time TV stars almost never sold on big screens. “I’m a gambler,” Stigwood says in the documentary. “I work instinctively.” He took equal risks with the people he hired to run his burgeoning movie company. They were all young men, barely in their 20s, who tended to be very good looking. Yet, they were no boy toys. Though they had no experience, “they turned out to be amazing at their jobs,” Maggio said. It was down to the novice Kevin McKormick to somehow find a director for Saturday Night Fever. Miraculously, he came up with John Alvidsen, who had just shot Rocky. But when that director balked at using the Bee Gees’ music in the film, Stigwood fired him, which left McKormick flummoxed and scramblingfor another director. The one he came up with, John Badham, knew nothing about musicals and had only one film directing credit at the time. Likewise, when Stigwood asked Barry Gibb to write five new songs for the proposed movie, the musician hadn’t read the script, let alone seen a single frame of film. Regardless, he wound up writing a string of pitch-perfect pieces, all of which became smash hits, including Stayin’ Alive, Night Fever, How Deep Is Your Love, More Than a Woman and If I Can’t Have You, the last one sung in the movie by another Stigwood client, Yvonne Elliman. Despite that trove of riches, many of those who worked for Stigwood fretted that they were coming to the disco trend too late. By that time, it had begun to show signs of petering out and there were already signs of the coming the “disco sucks” movement, whose title tipped off its implicit homophobia. In the same vein, Paramount, the studio that released the film, had no idea what they had, despite the brilliance of the Bee Gees’ songs, the dynamism of Travolta’s performance and the sociological acuity of Norman Wexler’s script. Executives like Barry Diller and Michael Eisner hated the darkness in the film as well as the prolific use of the “f” word by its characters. True to form, Stigwood used their cluelessness to negotiate a greater share of the profits for himself, nearly 50%, as well as total ownership of the soundtrack. In a brilliant marketing move, he also insisted that the soundtrack come out before the movie. Once the songs of the Bees Gees hit radio, they shot up the charts, creating a ready-made audience when the film arrived. Powered by that synergy, the movie generated a worldwide gross of more than $282m while the soundtrack became one of the mightiest sellers in music history. Stigwood’s transformation of the play Grease into another movie monster was equally improbable. The show had been a middling Broadway success with little broader resonance. But the movie, the second in Travolta’s deal with the producer, generated an international gross even greater than Saturday Night Fever’s, topping $396m. With that one-two punch, the Stigwood empire became a virtual Venn diagram of pop culture in the 70s. More, his vision set off a long trend of blockbuster movie soundtrack tie-ins, including projects like Urban Cowboy, Dirty Dancing, Flashdance and Titanic. Naturally, the herculean scale of it all necessitated a backlash, first hitting the Bee Gees before spreading to Stigwood, who by the dawn of the 80s not only lost his Midas touch, but essentially inverted it, resulting in some of the most spectacular bombs of all time, from the appalling Sgt Pepper movie to Travolta’s belly-flop Moment by Moment. “It happens to everyone: you get to a certain point where you lose your touch,” Maggio said. “Also, for a guy like Stigwood, who was making more money than we can even conceive of, it takes off the edge.” Even though he was just in his late 40s, Stigwood wound up retiring to his tax haven in the Bahamas to enjoy his money. He spent a good part of his time on his yacht, entertaining young men and drinking heavily. Maggio believes some of Stigwood’s drinking can be attributed to the fact that he never came out. “That has to weigh on you,” he said. “It speaks to the sadness in him.” He also believes that, despite his massive wealth, Stigwood “never felt that sense of success”. At the same time, Maggio said, “Robert Stigwood’s life captured a moment in time. It was a revolt against the high-mindedness of the 60s culture, which gave way to the excesses of the 70s. Robert rode that wave in a spectacular way to become one of the last great curators of pop culture.” Mr Saturday Night premieres on HBO on 9 December and in the UK at a later date • The caption of the main photo in this article was amended on 9 December 2021. An earlier version said that John Travolta “had never been in a film before” when he was cast in Saturday Night Fever; in fact he had already filmed Carrie.Squid Game, Bernie Sanders’ mittens and how to wear skinny jeans were among the most searched for subjects on Google around the world this year, and in the UK the Euros dominated web queries. The annual search trends list released by Google showed that Squid Game, the bloody South Korean smash hit on Netflix, was the most searched-for TV show, while the knitted gloves worn by Sanders, a former US presidential candidate, at Joe Biden’s inauguration ensured that searches for mittens reached a global high in January. The mitten memes turned into a search hit too, along with, for the more sartorially progressive, the query “how to style straight leg jeans”. Indian cricket fans ensured that their national team featured in the most searched-for overall term in 2021, which was “Australia v India” as a Test series came to a close at the beginning of the year. In the UK, sport dominated too, with the Euros the top overall search term and the footballer Christian Eriksen, who suffered a mid-game cardiac arrest at the tournament, the most searched-for footballer (and most searched-for athlete globally). The most numerous “when?” questions in the UK related to “When will lockdown end?”, reflecting anxiety over the renewed anti-Covid measures at the start of 2021. Matt Hancock, who resigned as health secretary in June, was the most searched meme in the UK. The top five overall searches globally were all sport-dominated, with the Australia v India series followed by India v England, IPL [Indian Premier League], NBA and Euro 2021. Globally, Afghanistan was the top news search, and “Covid vaccine” made up the third most searched-for term for news. The other three entries in the top five overall reflected strong interest from amateur investors, as “AMC stock” came second thanks to small shareholders rallying online to invest in the cinema chain, and in fifth place was “GME stock”, the stockmarket ticker for the video game retailer GameStop whose stock rose to vertiginous levels via an online community on Reddit message boards. Dogecoin, the cryptocurrency favoured by Tesla’s CEO, Elon Musk, came fourth. Alec Baldwin, the actor involved in the accidental onset shooting of the cinematographer Halyna Hutchins, was the most searched-for actor and person globally this year. The most searched-for death was that of DMX, the New York rapper who died of a heart attack in April. The results for TV shows underlined the global dominance of the streaming platforms. Squid Game was followed by another Netflix smash, Bridgerton, the racy regency drama that dominated the cultural conversation to the extent that it was a surprise another show was able to overtake it. Third was WandaVision, the Avengers spin-off that helped spur the growing popularity of the Disney + platform, followed by the martial arts drama Cobra Kai on Netflix, and another Disney + Avengers effort, Loki. American artists also dominated song searches, with Olivia Rodrigo’s single drivers license coming top, followed by Lil Nas X’s album Montero and song Industry Baby, Walker Hayes’ song Fancy Like, and MAPA by the Filipino boy band SB19.Norway’s Magnus Carlsen inched closer toward the fourth successful defence of his world championship on Wednesday, playing to a quiet 41-move draw with Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi in the 10th game of their showdown in Dubai and maintaining his commanding three-point lead with four scheduled contests remaining. Less than 24 hours after Nepomniachtchi missed an elementary tactic and made an extraordinary blunder from a promising position to effectively seal his fate in the best-of-14 match, the challenger appeared willing to settle for a peaceful result ahead of Thursday’s rest day before making one final push. The 31-year-old Carlsen, playing as white, started with 1 e4. But the swirling hopes that Nepomniachtchi would go for broke were quickly extinguished when he played into the Petrov Defence (1 … e5 2 Nf3 Nf6), the identical solid but drawish opening he had opted for in Sunday’s ill-fated eighth game. “Frankly I hadn’t thought about him playing the Petrov today at all,” Carlsen said afterwards. “I was preparing for various sharp openings that he could play. The thought was if he goes 1 e5, I’ll see. I didn’t think making a draw against the Petrov would be a major issue.” After 3 Nxe5 d6 4 Nd3, Nepomniachtchi captured white’s e-pawn (4 … Nxe4) to extend the same line Carlsen played in the epic sixth game of the 2018 world title match against the American Fabiano Caruana, which he nearly lost. The players remained in familiar territory (5 Qe2 Qe7 6 Nf4 Nf6 7 d4) until Nepomniachtchi played the first new move (7 … Nc6), a novelty Carlsen spent nearly 20 minutes contemplating. “It was a bit surprising because I thought this move order was not supposed to be that good,” Carlsen said. “But I guess you have to play [Be3] in order to try and do something against it and I was not in the mood for that.” Not long after Carlsen bypassed more ambitious options for the natural 8 c3, the queens came off the board (10 Qxe2+ 11 Bxe2) before the position rapidly simplified with more exchanges of material. Carlsen said he believed he was slightly better after 17 g3, but was more than happy to settle for the half-point after a brisk 2hr 5min, the shortest encounter of the match so far. “I think if I played a little more patiently there I could have had the tiniest of edges, but naturally I would have hunted for it more diligently if the match situation had been different,” Carlsen said. The 31-year-old Nepomniachtchi defended his placid opening choice, saying: “Even if you play a so-called sharp opening like Sicilian, if white wants to shut it down white surely will shut it down. It’s not realistic. I have a couple of tries with the white pieces in the remaining four games. Of course it depends on what I produce in the 11th game. But today it was just an idea to play a normal game, try not to blunder something in my moves. Carlsen leads 6½-3½ in the €2m ($2.26m) match at the Dubai Exposition Centre going into Thursday’s idle day. The proceedings will resume on Friday with Nepomniachtchi marshalling the white pieces.Found at the site of a future housing development in Cambridgeshire, the near 1,900-year-old skeleton at first did not seem particularly remarkable. Aged 25 to 35 at the time of death, the man had been buried with his arms across his chest in a grave with a wooden structure, possibly a bier, at one of five cemeteries around a newly discovered Roman settlement at Fenstanton, between Roman Cambridge and Godmanchester. But once his remains were removed to a laboratory in Bedford, a grisly discovery was made – a nail through the heel bone that experts now say is the best physical evidence of a crucifixion in the Roman world. Nails used for crucifixion – the method of capital punishment by which the victim is tied or nailed to a large wooden beam and left to hang until death – are a rare find, most likely because the victims would not often have received proper burial and, contrary to popular views, it was commonly carried out using rope. But after prolonged analysis crucifixion was established as the only likely explanation, and the first details of the extraordinary find are reported on Wednesday in British Archaeology magazine. On a wet, dull day in November 2017, the skeleton was uncovered and recorded in situ without the nail being noticed, as it was protruding only a couple of centimetres either side of the heel and was caked in mud. It was not until the bones were bagged and removed to the lab, where they were cleaned, that the nail was revealed. David Ingham, project manager at Albion Archaeology, which conducted the dig, said: “Well it’s the first time a skeleton has been excavated archaeologically that anyone has found a nail in, so it’s not the sort of thing you’re looking for.” He went on: “We know a reasonable amount about crucifixion; how it was practised and where it was practised and when and so on from historical accounts. But it’s the first tangible evidence to actually see how it worked.” The off-site analysis was conducted by Corinne Duhig, a renowned archaeologist at the University of Cambridge, who came to the conclusion that crucifixion was the reason the nail was used. The find is more remarkable because it is highly unusual for the body of a crucifixion victim to be reclaimed, brought back to a settlement and buried alongside others. The reasons behind this, the crucifixion and the identity of the man will never be known, but Romans are thought to have reserved crucifixion for condemned slaves, rebels and lower classes. The Fenstanton man was found with an iron nail in his right heel bone, the calcaneum, which would have been inserted into the sides of an upright timber. And, while the location of crucifixion is unknown, it is likely to have been elsewhere, possibly by the side of the road. The find is the only instance of physical evidence of crucifixion in northern Europe and the fourth reported worldwide, two of which had no nails associated with them. A heel bone with a nail in the same position as the new find was accidentally found by builders in Israel in 1968 and was less well preserved and subject to some controversy. The Fenstanton man’s bones have been radiocarbon dated to between AD130 and AD360, making them between 1,661 and 1,891 years old. DNA analysis shows he was not genetically related to any of the other bodies found on the site but was from the native population. There is evidence that suggests the man could have been a slave – his shins were thinned, as if manacles had been worn for prolonged periods of time. However, this is inconclusive – he could have been imprisoned for other reasons. He was among the remains of 48 bodies found at the site during the archaeological excavations, which were undertaken as a requirement for planning consent for a now-completed housing development. Ingham hopes a 3D replica of the heel bone with the nail embedded will be displayed at the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology in Cambridge. Other finds in the settlement include unusual evidence for industrial processing of cattle bones, perhaps for cosmetics and soap. The dig took place between May and November 2017. The findings were set to be revealed in 2020 but this was delayed by the Covid-19 pandemic.A 25-year-old Victorian man has been charged with threatening and menacing the ABC journalist Mark Willacy and his family. Victoria police said a Lara man had been arrested after a report of an alleged threatening phone call. He was charged with one count of making a threat to kill and using a telecommunication device to menace. The ABC on Wednesday night reported the charges related to an alleged anonymous threatening voicemail message Willacy received in November. “Hey Mark, how you going, you fucking paedo cunt,” the caller allegedly said, according to the ABC. “I hope your kids get Covid and I’m going to slit your old lady’s throat, ya dog.” Willacy, an ABC investigations reporter, was in 2020 awarded a Gold Walkley for his reporting on alleged war crimes by Australian special forces in Afghanistan. He has reported for the national broadcaster in more than 30 countries and was twice named Queensland journalist of the year. In August Willacy published a book piecing together eyewitness accounts of alleged war crimes, including how a soldier allegedly shot and killed a young disabled Afghan man in 2012. “These are soldiers who want the regiment’s honour, its prestige, its reputation restored,” the author of Rogue Forces: An Explosive Insiders’ Account of Australian SAS War Crimes in Afghanistan told Guardian Australia. “This is a book about veterans, it’s a book about veterans who are suffering, and they are suffering because of what they’ve experienced during their service in Afghanistan.” The ABC declined to comment on Wednesday night. The accused has been summoned to appear at Geelong magistrates court in June 2022.Recent graduates on temporary visas are being locked out of Australia due to a flaw with the government’s reopening plan, leaving many in a state of anxiety and financial hardship. The government is planning to ease border restrictions for temporary visa holders from 15 December, including those holding 485 visas, a type of visa given to recent graduates with sought-after skills. But that will not help a large number of visa holders who have been trapped abroad for so long that their graduate visas, which generally only last 18 months, have expired. The immigration minister Alex Hawke attempted in November to fix the problem by allowing 485 visa holders to apply for a second, replacement visa, something usually not permitted. But people like Samantha Raut, who is trapped in Nepal because she is dependant on her partner’s 485 visa, have been told the replacement visas won’t be available until July 2022, seven months away. In the meantime, Raut is locked out of Australia but is still having to pay her rent, bills, and other expenses while earning a relatively low income in Nepal. The replacement visa costs another $1,680 on top of the $1,680 already spent on the original visa. “That’s actually not fair,” she said. “We are financially broken, we are mentally broken, so many people are going through depression, anxiety attacks due to this issue. “And after 21 months, when everyone is getting relief, we are being stranded and left out for another eight months.” Others like Raut have been inundating Hawke’s office with pleas for help, asking him to bring forward the date for replacement visas. They are also asking for concessions for the visa replacement fees. A letter to Hawke from a number of 485 visa holders said those trapped abroad had already suffered enough. To make them wait another seven months, the letter said, was “unnecessary and risks further damage to Australia’s reputation as a place for international students to undertake their studies”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The depth of pain, anxiety and suffering being experienced as a result of the uncertainty surrounding our futures has been profound,” the letter says. “Some have developed severe mental health problems and are taking a heavy toll on their health. We have been locked out of the country we were calling home before the border closed, and all through no fault of our own.” Those on expired 485 visas are not the only ones who are still trapped, despite the planned easing of restrictions. Those on bridging visas are not included in the changes due to come into effect from 15 December. That has caused profound difficulties for people like Hannah Thomas, a British citizen, who has lived in Australia since 2016. Thomas is on a 482 temporary skills visa, which is eligible for travel. But the visa will expire three days before Christmas, and she will then be placed on a bridging visa until her permanent residency application is resolved. That has left Thomas with an invidious choice. She can either give up the country she now calls home to see her family, or be cut off from her family for the foreseeable future. The choice is made even harder by the fact that, in April, Thomas had to miss her father’s funeral in the UK, watching it on video link instead. She described the decision not to include bridging visas in the planned reopening as “devastating”. “Now that they are reopening to temporary visa holders, it’s just so inconsistent to say ‘these ones can, but these ones still can’t’,” she said. “It’s just really, really tough. It’s been a really difficult few weeks since they made that [reopening] announcement.” The home affairs department said those offshore could apply for a replacement temporary graduate visa from mid-2022. “In normal circumstances, applicants are limited to just one temporary graduate visa in a lifetime, and a further visa is only available based on regional work and study,” a spokesperson said. “It is expected this will benefit approximately 30,000 current or former temporary graduate visa holders.” The department said it needed to amend the migration regulations to allow for replacement 485 visas to be applied for and granted. It also needed to introduce “information and communications technology changes”. “Prospective replacement visa applicants may also consider a range of other existing visa options to enter Australia prior to 1 July 2022, according to their individual circumstances,” a spokesperson said.The great disruption of 2020-21 – yes, it’s been a long two years – has led many people to reconsider the way they live and work, the way they relate to those around them, and the life choices they make. So what will you keep beyond this phase of the pandemic? How has it given you pause for thought? What are the good parts of your life that are working, what will you discard, and what will you change, if you can? Maybe it’s the career change you’ve been thinking of, the not so great relationship or friendship you’ve considered ending, new resolutions about your social life, or the new healthy habit you have found time for since you haven’t had to commute. If we’re not going back to normal, as some experts say, what will your new normal look like? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. You don’t have to answer all the questions, just the ones you are keen to share your answers to. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.The New South Wales government paid more than $1m in 2016 to compensate for environmental damage from the construction of the WestConnex motorway by buying offsets on a property 400km outside Sydney that is part-owned by a consultant who worked on the environmental assessment for the project. A second consultant who holds shares in the offset site was employed as a conservation officer in the NSW environment department at the time the land, near Kempsey on the state’s north coast, was purchased in 2014. The offset purchase was made in October 2016 and there is no suggestion either consultant was aware of the offset requirements for WestConnex when they bought the land. The consultants told Guardian Australia it was their understanding the offset requirements had not been developed at the time the property was purchased. The transactions are revealed in emails tabled in the NSW parliament, where hearings in the state’s inquiry into biodiversity offset schemes resume on Thursday and Friday. Offsets exist to allow developers to compensate for environmental damage in one area by delivering an equivalent environmental benefit in another. But offsetting is beset with problems, including in one case a 20-year delay in delivering environmental protection and so-called “double-dipping” by developers in areas of urban sprawl. Guardian Australia revealed earlier this year that consultants from a company that advised governments on major developments in western Sydney had made windfall gains of tens of millions of dollars selling offsets to the state and federal governments for those same developments. The revelations triggered a string of reviews, including a parliamentary inquiry, internal investigations by Transport for NSW and the planning department, and an investigation by the state integrity body. Now, $1.2m in transactions involving Sydney’s partially completed WestConnex motorway and a company called Angophora Holdings have come to light through documents tabled in the NSW parliament. The WestConnex project faced strong opposition from community groups because of the environmental damage it would cause to certain ecosystems in Sydney and to habitat for the threatened green and golden bell frog. Under its approval conditions, the former NSW Roads and Maritime Service – now Transport for NSW – was required to compensate by buying credits under the state’s offset scheme. The credits it was required to purchase were for the frog and for two types of woodland – critically endangered Cooks River/Castlereagh ironbark forest found in Sydney, and paperbark swamp forest, an ecological community found in Sydney and on the NSW north coast that is listed under NSW laws as endangered. The environmental impact statement (EIS) for WestConnex was produced by the multinational engineering firm Aecom and was published in November 2015. The firm also worked on earlier contracts for the project, including a November 2014 report for the project’s application as state significant infrastructure. Transaction records show that in October 2016, the NSW government – via the WestConnex company – purchased 203 green and golden bell frog offset credits for $1,116,500 and 27 paperbark swamp credits for $87,750, excluding GST, from Angophora Holdings. Land records show the company bought a property at Kundabung, near Kempsey, for $125,000 in July 2014 and “banked” it for conservation under an agreement registered in June 2016. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning According to the EIS, requests for the relevant credits were advertised on the government’s public biobanking register in December 2014, August 2015 and October 2015. The listed directors of Angophora Holdings are Anthony Davis and Darren James, who are also listed as shareholders, with their respective partners. At the time of the property purchase, Davis was an associate director at Aecom and is named as the reviewer for some of the chapters of the WestConnex EIS, specifically sections relating to contamination and waste. James was employed as a conservation officer in the then NSW office of environment and heritage. Angophora Holdings said the company was unable to answer specific questions in the timeframe given by Guardian Australia but stressed that the land was purchased before the offset requirements for Westconnex were developed and that any inference that they had known about the offset requirements before buying the land would be “wrong and baseless”. “Angophora Holdings is committed to the protection and management of biodiversity within the biobank site, and biodiversity conservation more generally,” the company said. “Angophora Holdings will be happy to assist with any official enquiries or reviews undertaken of the offsetting scheme.” Aecom told Guardian Australia it is committed to acting with the highest level of ethics and integrity and “we do not tolerate any behaviour that does not align with our Code of Conduct”. Asked if James had declared any potential conflicts of interest associated with the property, a spokesperson for the NSW planning department said he had made a “private or secondary employment declaration that was approved by the director, metro branch of the former Office of Environment and Heritage in January 2014”. Geoffrey Watson, a director of the Centre for Public Integrity and a former counsel assisting the Independent Commission Against Corruption, told Guardian Australia that on their face the transactions raised questions about potential conflicts of interest. “The department needs to investigate this matter to make sure its controls were appropriate,” he said. Guardian Australia does not suggest any impropriety by James, Davis or Angophora Holdings. In response to earlier reporting by Guardian Australia about the state’s offset scheme, the department commissioned two external reviews of how it had managed potential conflicts associated with staff holding financial interests in offset sites. One review, by the legal firm Maddocks, found “no issues arising”, the department’s spokesperson said. In response to the second, by the consulting firm Centium, the department had adopted a number of recommendations, including developing a conflict of interest protocol. Transport for NSW did not respond to a list of questions. Tara McCarthy, the agency’s deputy secretary for safety, environment and regulation, speaking generally, said: “Matters concerning biodiversity offsets, such as those relating to the Western Sydney Infrastructure Plan, are with the Independent Commission Against Corruption.” Labor’s environment spokesperson, Penny Sharpe, demanded an urgent response from the environment minister, Matt Kean. “Minister Kean has failed to provide even the most basic oversight and monitoring of the biodiversity offset scheme that instead of protecting biodiversity is leading to windfall gains for individuals and a licence to clear endangered habitat,” she said. “The minister has admitted that the scheme is under investigation – that is not enough. This failure needs an urgent and thorough response.” The Greens MP Cate Faehrmann, who is chairing the parliamentary inquiry, questioned why the government had offset a motorway in Sydney with land more than 400km away. Under the state’s offset policy, credits for species can be purchased from any part of the state but ecosystem credits are expected to be purchased from sites closer to where land is cleared. Faehrmann said the outcome was an environmental loss for Sydney. “Paying money to a landholder on the mid-north coast for green and golden bell frog habitat wouldn’t give much comfort to the frogs in western Sydney whose homes were bulldozed,” she said. “Species are listed as threatened for a reason and offsetting the destruction of habitat makes them more so, not less. Kean told Guardian Australia the public had a right to know that any development was offset and consistent with the rules. “Public trust in the scheme and its outcomes is vital,” he said. “There are a number of issues relating to the scheme that are currently under review or investigation by integrity bodies, as well as by my department. “I look forward to receiving the outcomes of that work and working closely with stakeholders to further improve the scheme.” The NSW environment department’s spokesperson said under current offset rules, the purchase of the paperbark swamp credits near Kempsey – which occurred under old laws – would not be considered a like-for-like offset. The spokesperson said the department was consulted by the WestConnex company before the purchase and had confirmed it was acceptable.Malcolm Turnbull has given full-throated endorsement of climate-focused independents running at the next federal election, characterising the looming political contests in Liberal party heartland as a “very, very healthy development”. The former prime minister and federal Liberal party leader said on Wednesday night “clearly a lot of traditional Liberal party voters feel the party has moved way off to the right on a bunch of issues, in particular on climate, and they are frustrated by that”. Turnbull said disaffected Liberal voters were “now getting the opportunity to vote for the sort of candidates that share their values”. “I don’t think coalition governments are a bad idea – I don’t think working with crossbenchers is a bad idea,” the former prime minister said. “I can make a case for you that the worst thing that happened to John Howard in politics was getting a majority in the Senate. “The blood rushed to the head and he decided to introduce WorkChoices … he had no electoral mandate for it whatsoever, he did it because he could do it, and that was a major factor in his defeat in 2007.” Turnbull said more representative diversity in the parliament meant prime ministers had to explain their positions to other actors in the political system. “Once you start treating people with respect, you get a better result,” he said. “There is a tendency for people to tell leaders what they want to hear – as a leader you have to work very hard to ensure people tell you what they really think. So it’s good to have to deal with, whether it is a crossbench in the house or the Senate, where you have to actually … explain your case.” “I think a bit more diversity in our parliaments would actually make a very big difference.” Turnbull’s public endorsement of the political insurgency threatening the Morrison government’s parliamentary majority comes as the Climate 200 organisation – which is bankrolling independents challenging Liberal incumbents in their urban heartland –has amassed an election war chest of more than $4m. Independent candidates will run against Liberal moderates in Turnbull’s former Sydney seat of Wentworth, as well as in North Sydney, Mackellar, Goldstein and Flinders. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Turnbull was speaking on Wednesday night at the launch of a new integrity project from the Accountability Round Table. As well as backing independents, Turnbull urged his former Coalition colleagues to embrace a federal integrity commission that would hold public hearings, declaring secret inquiries could lead to “incredible injustices” being done. Morrison has proposed that a new federal integrity commission not hold public hearings for political investigations. Despite the prime minister promising for three years he would legislate a commonwealth integrity commission, the legislation establishing the body has not yet been introduced. Some Liberals are concerned the government’s preferred model is too weak. Tasmanian Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor during the final parliamentary sitting fortnight to support an independent bill for a federal integrity commission, after accusing the government of “inertia” over the issue. Addressing the current public debate about anti-corruption commissions, the former prime minister drew on his professional experience representing the media mogul Kerry Packer at the Costigan royal commission in the early 1980s. He acknowledged his own thinking about anti-corruption commissions had evolved over time. Turnbull told Wednesday night’s webinar his negative experience with Costigan had prompted him to advise Nick Greiner against establishing an anti-corruption watchdog in New South Wales. Turnbull said he had also previously held the view that there was not much corruption to police in Canberra because federal politicians were not involved in land transactions. He acknowledged that judgment had been “naive”. Turnbull said politicians were always worried about public hearings in anti-corruption commissions, particularly if they had legal training. But he said secret hearings could operate like “star chambers” and could be hobbled by “group think”. He said his experience in the Costigan process was “these types of inquiries are more likely to run off the rails if they don’t have public hearings”. Turnbull said there was “no substitute for sunlight”. Turnbull’s commentary follows Morrison’s decision to launch a full-frontal attack on the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac). The prime minister has characterised Icac as a “kangaroo court” and claimed former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian had been hounded out of office. Morrison has been trying to persuade Berejiklian to run in Warringah to try to wrest the federal seat back for the Liberals. Warringah is held by the climate-focused independent Zali Steggall who defeated Tony Abbott in 2019. Earlier on Wednesday, Morrison acknowledged Berejiklian may not run. The former premier resigned voluntarily in September after Icac revealed it was investigating whether she broke the law by failing to report a reasonable suspicion of corruption on the part of her ex-lover, the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. At the time, Berejiklian expressed frustration over the timing of her departure, but told reporters she had “no option but to resign the office of premier”. She has denied any wrongdoing or that she had reason to suspect Maguire. Icac is yet to hand down its findings.Peter V’landys has long styled himself as a decisive leader who rules with a strong hand and does all he can to protect his patch of turf. It is because of this that the NRL became one of the first leagues in the world to restart after the pandemic shut down sport across the globe. On the subject of Covid-19 vaccinations, though, V’landys and the NRL have left both the grunt work and the leadership to clubs. The NRL has not made vaccination mandatory and V’landys has previously urged clubs not to sack players who refuse it, citing measures which could be utilised to allow vaccinated and non-vaccinated players to operate together safely. In October he told Nine the NRL was encouraging clubs to reach 95% vaccinated status, at which point he said the NRL’s advice was that there was no significant risk. This week Canterbury became the first club to end their relationship with an unvaccinated player by letting go of 138-game veteran John Asiata. “The Bulldogs and John Asiata have agreed to part ways by mutual consent,” the club said in a statement. “Asiata signed with the club this season, but had yet to train with the squad.” Canterbury football manager Phil Gould said he had been “hoping” Asiata would change his mind last month but that the club would explore options should he decide against the jab. The lack of consistent policy across the game has created wildly different expectations among clubs on how to handle unvaccinated players and staff. It stands in stark contrast to the AFL’s policy of no jab, no play for the 2022 season. One player has so far retired and others have been informed they must be double vaccinated if they want to participate in the national competition. “The policy reflects the AFL’s strong-held view that as the governing body of the sport, we share a responsibility to address the risk of exposure to Covid-19” an AFL statement said in October when the governing body released its policy. In November the NRL estimated around 20-24 players were yet to be vaccinated and chief executive Andrew Abdo has been forced to defend the governing body’s policy, saying he didn’t think there was “anything soft” about their rules. “We want people to have the freedom of choice, which I think is important,” Abdo said. “But we are putting health at the forefront of our policy which is why we believe in vaccination, we want everyone to get vaccinated.” The NRL was contacted for comment on this story but did not respond. It is a policy on which the league may quickly need to change tack given the disparity both between clubs’ handling of the issue and their geography – the New South Wales state government is taking a significantly more liberal approach than its Victorian and Queensland counterparts. At clubs such as South Sydney, all players and staff are vaccinated. “We, like most clubs, would have preferred compulsory vaccination as the simplest and most effective protocol” Rabbitohs chief executive Blake Solly said. “We recognise the complexities that the RLPA and NRL are dealing with and respect their work on the process, but I think everyone wants to get to a position where the risk of disruption to the 2022 NRL season is minimised.” Others, such as Melbourne, are attempting to navigate Nelson Asofa-Solomona’s resistance to the Covid vaccine; Victorian health regulations meant he was unable to resume pre-season training on Tuesday as scheduled. Storm chief executive Justin Rodski said a decision had not yet been made on his contract. “We’re not putting any further pressure on Nelson other than we’re really hopeful a decision will be made shortly and he’ll be able to return in January,” Rodski told News Corp on Tuesday. Meanwhile, at Manly, an unvaccinated senior football department staffer allegedly led a training session without a mask. The Sea Eagles have been forced to defend the situation, saying that they are adhering to NRL protocols – the primary concern is the flimsiness of said protocols and how they line up with community expectations. The vaccination status of staff is quickly becoming a significant concern for the NRL. Football department staffers are generally viewed as leaders within a club and play a notable role in setting standards and shaping thinking. They are also typically less in the public eye than players. Not making vaccinations mandatory allows for situations that can quickly escalate. The lack of a clear-cut policy is causing both angst and concern for stakeholders within the game. One senior club official said vaccination status played a significant role in recruitment and retention decisions. “We will not sign an unvaccinated player,” the official said, in a sign vaccination status could quickly become a useful means of salary-cap management. The NRL must lead on vaccination rather than defer – if for no other reason than self-interest. Rugby league cannot afford to lose games, nor can it afford to put the season on hold.In news that unfortunately will shock no one who has thought about buying a house at any point in the past year or so, the latest residential property price figures from the bureau of statistics show that in the past 12 months prices have risen by record levels. The ABS has been tracking property prices since 2003 and from then till the first quarter of this year, prices across the country had risen by more than 5% in a quarter just once. But in the first three quarters of this year, prices rose by more than 5% every time: If the graph does not display please click here In the 12 months to September this year, property prices across Australia’s capital cities grew on average by a record 22%. The surge was led by house prices more so than for apartments. House prices were up 25% on average across the capital cities and 32% in Sydney: If the graph does not display please click here The record increase is of course no surprise for regular readers given three months ago I noted that the massive explosion in home loans meant prices would keep rising faster for some time yet: If the graph does not display please click here The recent slowing in the amount of mortgages being taken out does suggest the peak growth of house prices should be occurring now; but even still by March next year we should expect that prices will be some 15% above where they were earlier this year: If the graph does not display please click here While Melbourne house prices are unlikely to grow by the 40% the huge spike in home loans occurring earlier this year suggested, even the more recent home loan data implies prices in that city will continue to grow even faster than they are now: If the graph does not display please click here It truly is a depressing story for those hoping to get into the housing market or have hopes that their kids might one day be able to afford a place of their own. In Sydney the median house price is now above $1.2m, and in Melbourne half of the houses bought in July, August and September cost more than $900,000: If the graph does not display please click here I guess you could consider buying an apartment or townhouse. But in Sydney the median price for one of those is now at a record $790,000 – higher than the median price for a standalone house in all other capital cities except Melbourne and Canberra: If the graph does not display please click here Sydney house prices are now completely divorced from wages. In the past two years, wages in New South Wales increased 3.5% while at the same time apartment prices grew 17% and house prices a stunning 40%: If the graph does not display please click here And if that sounds absurd, it is. Consider that in the 10 years from September 2003 to September 2013, Sydney house prices grew 31% while wages went up 41%, but since then house prices have soared 105% while wages have risen just 18%. Now sure, paying a mortgage is better now than in the past (especially if you took out a loan in the past) because interest rates are at record lows. But the deposit hurdle has risen to pole vault heights. Earlier this week the latest Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia survey allowed us to calculate that in 2019 the median household pre-tax income for a family of two adults and one child was around $113,400. That figure is close to the combination of an average male full-time earnings in NSW in May 2019 plus a third of the average women’s earnings at that time. Using that calculation as a proxy median income for a family of three allows us to track over time the amount of months a 20% deposit on a house in Sydney is worth. Back in 2002, the deposit of a median-priced house in Sydney was equivalent to 14 months of a median household’s pre-tax income. Now it is equivalent to 24 months: If the graph does not display please click here That of course does not mean it would take you two years to save the required $242,000 but just how long it would take a median household to earn that much. Housing affordability has been utterly destroyed in the past two years, and while house prices are expected to not rise as fast as they have in the first nine months of this year, they look set to continue to grow for many more months to come – and certainly at a rate faster than do wages.The Greens have called for an investigation into a number of “deeply concerning” social media posts allegedly made by Queensland prison officers, including calls for the use of violence against “maggot” inmates. Several of the comments cited in a complaint by the Queensland Greens MP Michael Berkman were made by individuals on the Facebook page of the Together Queensland Prison Officers’ Union. There is no suggestion the views were endorsed by the union, which has since changed its privacy settings and removed all comments. In response to a post on the union’s page about a riot at the Capricornia Correction Centre at Rockhampton in October, one comment says: “It’s corrections. Let’s start correcting. “This shit is happening every day. Let’s drop the hammer. “Blame the crims; stop pretending they’re rational human beings; because they’re not; they’re filth. We all know it. Treat them accordingly.” Other comments on the union post include claims rehabilitation is “imaginary” and a “crock of shit”. “(Dropping the hammer) worked well until the snivell libertarians and do gooders pushed and pushed until the Qld Government folded and let the maggots think they are human and have entitlements,” the comment says. Berkman’s complaint also references comments allegedly made by Queensland corrections employees on a popular national Facebook page for prison officers. In a letter to the Queensland police and corrections minister, Mark Ryan, Berkman says the “dehumanising and stigma-based comments in these forums about inmates, including those who use drugs, contribute to an unsafe environment in Queensland prisons”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I understand (the posts) also include descriptions of incidents inside correctional centres with details that appear to breach confidentiality. The content on the pages is deeply concerning and, I believe, not consistent with the public service code of conduct. “I also believe it is indicative of a toxic work culture within corrections and a very unsafe prison environment for both staff and inmates.” Berkman told Guardian Australia the posts were “degrading, discriminatory and violent comments by people employed to look after some of the most vulnerable people in our society”. “They appear to reflect a disturbingly toxic work environment in Queensland prisons, where inmates are seen as subhuman and not deserving of basic rights.” The Together union assistant branch secretary, Michael Thomas, said the comments on the page were “not representative of the overall view” of union members and the comments had been made at the time of a major riot, when prison officers had a heightened fear for their wellbeing. He said the complaint “misses the point” about the issues that exist within the corrections system. “We are really worried about the welfare of prisoners and the culture within prisons,” Thomas said. “To focus on a couple of comments that are not representative of our members misses the bigger picture of the causes of why the riots occurred. The root causes are the overcrowding (including placing multiple prisoners in single rooms, retrofitted with bunk beds), the increase of incidents, the increase of lockdowns, the lack of access to programs and activities (for prisoners) that assist in rehabilitation. “We also should recognise that Queensland correctional officers are the lowest paid in the country ... for the first four years working in a correctional centre you earn less than a cleaner. “They’re not valued by the community and we expect a lot from them.” Berkman’s letter to Ryan asks for an investigation into the alleged involvement of Queensland Corrective Services staff in online forums and appropriate disciplinary action; a broader review of the work culture within the state’s prisons; and mandatory training for prison staff in mental health first aid and working with people who use drugs. A spokesman for Ryan said he had referred the matter to the Queensland corrections commissioner “for appropriate action”.For many in Australia, a surefire way to tell the festive season has started is by the arrival of cherry season. Depending on the region, cherry harvests normally run from mid-November to as late as the end of February; this year, however, thanks to a record-breakingly wet and cold November, the season has been delayed. Barisha Batinich, the New South Wales representative of Cherry Growers Australia, said he only began harvesting two or three days into December, two to three weeks later than usual. “It’s a very late season for us, and across all the growing districts as well; every area is experiencing slow-ripening cherries … It’s caught some of our early areas off guard a bit, because we’re usually 60% through my whole farm at this stage, and really I’m only just 10% of the way at the moment.” Batinich, who runs Valley Fresh Cherries and Stone Fruits, says the delayed harvest likely means he will be picking and selling cherries until the very end of December, and possibly into the new year. “Other areas may not have the bulk of cherries ready before Christmas, and their main harvest might begin in the new year. So we’re lucky in that sense that there will be cherries for Christmas – weather depending, of course.” Last weekend saw Young, the “cherry capital of Australia”, put on their annual cherry festival. While pandemic precautions meant a scaled-back program, Young’s tradition of crowning a cherry queen and charity queen was kept alive. This year, Trudi Summerfield and Ashlenn Bannister were respectively crowned cherry queen and charity queen. In other years, there was also a cherry king, but the festival did not receive any entrants for the title this year. Cherry queen hopefuls are evaluated on their charity fundraising efforts, participation in community events, and a portfolio about themselves. Each entrant runs a number of events – raffles, morning teas and trivia nights – to work towards their goal. “I was born in Young so I’ve always attended all the festivals,” Summerfield says. “Just the buzz in the community in the weeks leading up to it, and the visitors we get that pick the cherries for us and help out – it’s just a real community thing and everyone’s just really happy and smiley.” Bannister, whose title was awarded after she raised more than $14,000 for motor neurone disease research, says the community support despite uncertainty and changing restrictions was key to their efforts. “I think, through the year that we’ve had, we’ve all managed to do quite well. We were all quite lucky – we had to go into lockdown twice once we started fundraising. Even with that and all the restrictions we were all quite lucky to get events held and have the community still be as involved as they were.” Batinich’s farm also lent a hand, sponsoring the coronation dinner. “Cherry queens have been around for a long, long time, and we needed to support them to get them hopefully through to next year, where we’re all hoping things get back to normal,” he said. A fourth-generation cherry grower, Batinich says damage and unpredictability from the weather, buyers expecting cherry supplies and Covid have made this season one of the hardest he’s experienced. Nonetheless, he is looking forward to his harvests of the Lapins, Simone and Regina varieties: “The quality of the later-season fruit is exceptional.” Summerfield says she is excited for her role as an ambassador for Young, and will continue working with her chosen charity, PCYC Young. Her favourite way to enjoy cherries? “I just like to eat them, normally – off the tree.” Bannister is in full agreement: “You can’t go wrong with fresh cherries this time of year. I’d say the best way to eat them is straight from the box.” Five ways with cherries Felicity Cloake’s cherry clafoutis A hard-to-beat, classic cherry dessert, Felicity Cloake’s version macerates the cherries in kirsch and sugar to layer in the stone fruit’s aroma. Pit the cherries if you like, or don’t – leaving the pits in will result in a more intense flavour. Yotam Ottolenghi’s roast cherry and black rice salad Roasting fresh cherries intensifies their sweetness, a perfect foil to nutty black rice, fresh herbs and zippy vinegar and lemon. This summery salad would make a great addition to a holiday lunch or dinner spread. Nigel Slater’s roast chicken salad with lentils and cherries Roast chicken thighs in the oven, or use leftover roast chicken for this dish. If you’re using leftover chicken, the addition of lentils means it’s robust enough to make a quick weeknight dinner. Tamal Ray’s cherry sorbet Just three ingredients are needed for this sorbet: fruit is stewed with sugar in wine (or juice for a booze-free version), then blended to a puree and churned into sorbet. While it might seem a little appliance-heavy, Ray also includes a method for those who don’t own an ice-cream machine. Thomasina Miers’ cherry kirsch tartlets Cooked cherries are easier to pit than fresh ones; Miers stews them in a little Cointreau, citrus and spices, then spoons them into golden filo shells filled with a silky creme patissiere.The UK’s library users are widely seen as a traditional bunch when it comes to choosing their next read, but while Richard Osman might have topped the list of the year’s most-borrowed ebooks, Ellery Adams’s tale of a North Carolina bookshop owner who doles out bibliotherapy over a fresh-baked scone has made a surprising entry on the list. Adams’s 2017 title The Secret, Book &amp; Scone Society, in which Miracle Springs bookseller Nora prescribes the “perfect novel to ease a person’s deepest pain”, only for one of her customers to be found murdered, was the fourth most-borrowed ebook from UK public libraries in 2021. It was more popular than Booker winner Shuggie Bain by Douglas Stuart, which came in fifth, and Lee Child’s latest Jack Reacher novel The Sentinel, although it came in behind Osman’s The Thursday Murder Club, Matt Haig’s The Midnight Library, and Kazuo Ishiguro’s Klara and the Sun. The figures come from OverDrive, which provides ebook and audiobook access to more than 3,000 of the UK’s libraries. Adams said she was “stunned, humbled, and deeply grateful” at the news. “I also want to tell readers in the UK that besides being an admirer of every author on the list, I’m a fan of the Oxford comma. I wanted it on the cover. Truly,” she said. “And would someone please tell me if I should be saying ‘scone’ as in ‘skone’ or ‘scuns’? Seriously.” She came up with the idea for her series of books “because I love books set in libraries and bookshops”, and “wanted to write about the healing power of books”. “I know that sounds new age-y, as does the term ‘bibliotherapy’, but books do rescue people. All book lovers have practised bibliotherapy at least once. Have you ever thrust a book into someone’s hand, knowing that it would get them out of their own head for a few hours? That it would make them laugh, solve a problem, or kindle a spark of hope? Has someone given you a title that ended up breaking your heart, thereby releasing a boatload of stress and sadness?” she said. “That’s how bibliotherapy works. I wanted to chart the path of the right book(s) finding their way to the right reader. Once I figured that out, I added a group of food-loving characters, a mystery, and a small-town setting.” OverDrive has also revealed the most-borrowed audiobooks from the UK’s libraries this year – and while the list is topped by JK Rowling’s perenially popular Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, two mysteries from Canadian author Brenda Chapman take up an unexpected two places in the Top 10, ahead of titles by Michelle Obama, Kazuo Ishiguro and Marian Keyes. Chapman’s Cold Mourning, which follows officer Kala Stonechild’s investigation into the disappearance of a wealthy businessman, is in second place here. Her Butterfly Kills, in which Stonechild, who is from a First Nations reserve, investigates an apparently linked murder and rape, No 8. “The import of having Cold Mourning as No 2 and Butterfly Kills No 8 on the audiobook loans in the UK took a moment for me to absorb, but then I was both thrilled and grateful to know that my books were being heard by so many mystery fans. I’m still a bit over the moon,” said Chapman. Cold Mourning was Chapman’s first attempt at an adult mystery series. “I was working as a senior communications adviser at the Department of Justice on the Indigenous file, and Kala Stonechild came out of all the unsettling and sometimes horrific news that I was reading daily about the Indigenous issues,” she said. “I wanted to create a damaged but heroic and intuitive Indigenous protagonist and to show her journey. Since we are also a bilingual and multicultural country, I include characters from many different cultures and nationalities throughout the series.” Her government work also saw her handling the forced marriage file, which “became the nugget of an idea for the mystery in Butterfly Kills,” she said. “Readers tell me that they love following the lives of my main cops, especially Kala Stonechild who has been called the first lead, female, Indigenous detective in a series,” said Chapman. “They particularly like Stonechild’s relationship with a teenage girl whom she fosters while struggling with her own difficult upbringing in foster care. Readers also enjoy trying to solve the twisty murder plots and reading about the Canadian setting.” Other popular audiobooks in the UK’s libraries this year include Stephen Fry’s Mythos, and Stuart MacBride’s The Coffinmaker’s Garden. Top 10 ebooks from UK Public Libraries in 2021 The Thursday Murder Club by Richard Osman The Midnight Library by Matt Haig Klara and the Sun by Kazuo Ishiguro The Secret, Book &amp; Scone Society by Ellery Adams Shuggie Bain by Douglas Stuart The Sentinel by Lee Child The Darkest Evening by Ann Cleeves Five Total Strangers by Natalie D Richards Grown Ups by Marian Keyes Bridgerton Collection, Volume 1 by Julia Quinn Top 10 audiobooks from UK Public Libraries in 2021 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets by JK Rowling Cold Mourning by Brenda Chapman A Song for the Dark Times by Ian Rankin Becoming by Michelle Obama Klara and the Sun by Kazuo Ishiguro The Coffinmaker’s Garden by Stuart MacBride Mythos by Stephen Fry Butterfly Kills by Brenda Chapman Grown Ups by Marian Keyes Still Life by Val McDermid * Figures supplied by OverDrive.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert recapped a tense moment in diplomatic relations Tuesday evening, after Russia’s leader Vladimir Putin placed troops on the border of Ukraine, an ally the US has promised to protect. To de-escalate some of the tension, Biden and Putin talked about Ukraine in a video call on Tuesday. “Makes sense, the only way to resolve a delicate situation that requires crystal clear communication is two old men on a Zoom,” the Late Show host joked. According to the White House, Biden promised that if Putin invaded, the US and allies “would respond with strong economic and other measures”. “I know we’re trying to avoid another hot war here,” said Colbert, “but those are some pretty vague threats – ‘Son, if you throw a party when your mother and I are out of town, we will respond with strong reactions and emotions, TBD.’” At the end of the call, the two presidents “tasked their teams to follow up”, according to the White House. “Very good, we will have our people follow your people,” Colbert joked in a Russian accent. “I mean, follow up. Perhaps they talk about it over a nice bowl of poison, I mean soup.” Jimmy Fallon On the Tonight Show, Jimmy Fallon also mocked the two-hour video call between Biden and Putin: “Like most two-hour meetings over Zoom, Putin was like, ‘this could’ve been email’.” “Zoom meetings with Putin are interesting,” he added. “Some people go without pants, Putin just goes without a shirt.” Fallon also imagined the advice offered to Biden by European leaders before the call, including UK prime minister Boris Johnson (“never get your haircut from a Supercuts that has 1.5 stars on Yelp”) and Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan (“I’ve always found that other world leaders respond to me breathing heavily into the phone and not saying anything”). In other news, China’s moon rover spotted a mysterious cube-shaped object (or rock?) on the surface of the moon. “Everyone on the internet is trying to figure out what it is,” said Fallon. “Because if there’s anyone who knows the truth, it’s random people on the internet. Yeah, the same internet who couldn’t figure out the color of a dress.” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah investigated the red-hot competition in the US housing market. “For decades, owning a home has been one of the core parts of the American dream, just below dating Pete Davidson,” he said. “But right now, actually buying a home has been harder than Matt Gaetz watching the new Saved by the Bell.” The swift competition and steep prices are “kind of a perfect storm of many different factors”, he continued, from shortage of supply, historically low mortgage rates, and work from home flexibility that has led many young people to leave cities for the suburbs. Also, it’s who has stepped into the housing market: large financial firms, often backed by private equity, which are snapping up single family homes sourced by computer algorithms to rent out. “I know what you’re thinking right now: why on earth would we allow Wall Street to mess with the housing market?” Noah said. “They caused the housing crisis! Yeah, exactly, they already caused a housing crisis – what are the odds it happens again?!” “What better way to fix your image problem than to become the nation’s biggest landlord, I guess?” he joked. There’s also a generational divide at play, as millennial first-time prospective buyers compete with baby boomers (and their lifetime savings) looking to downsize, leading many young people to either buy houses with friends or look for cheap fixer-uppers. “Why do millennials love crappy old houses that no one else wants?’” said Noah, mocking a journalist’s question on the subject. “Because it’s their only option! It’s like asking me in grade school, ‘Trevor, why do you love sitting by yourself at lunchtime?’” “So that’s where we are right now: thanks to Boomers, and Wall Street, owning a home may soon no longer be the American Dream,” he concluded. “The good news is, if you wait around long enough, you might still get a chance to date Pete Davidson.”A year of post-Brexit bickering has left the French and the British feeling significantly less well disposed towards each other, a poll shows. After ill-tempered exchanges over everything from fishing to submarines and Covid travel rules to the Northern Ireland protocol, the YouGov poll found that favourable opinions of the British had slid in France and other EU countries. Data from YouGov’s EuroTrack survey shows the proportion of French people saying they held an unfavourable view of Britain surged to 42% in November from 33% in August, while the number holding a positive view fell from 53% to 46%. And Britons are taking a correspondingly critical view of France, with the proportion holding a negative opinion of the UK’s nearest continental neighbour rising from 31% to 40%, and those with a favourable view falling from 56% to 47%. Recently it was reported that Emmanuel Macron had privately called Boris Johnson a clown in charge of a circus, after the prime minister tweeted a letter calling on France take back people who had crossed the Channel illegally. Tensions between London and Paris that built up over five years of Brexit talks have been exacerbated by a series of increasingly heated cross-Channel disagreements, some related to the fallout from the UK’s departure from the EU but others not. Johnson’s remarks that Paris should “prenez un grip and donnez-moi un break” ruffled French feathers at the end of the summer, while more recent rows over fishing licences and small boat crossings have strained Anglo-French ties further. Negative European views of Britain are not restricted to the French, however. The survey of 15 countries found that people in Spain and Germany were more hostile towards Britain in November than they were over the summer. Fully half of Spaniards said they had an unfavourable opinion of Britain, sharply up from 38% in August, while Germany showed a more modest increase of 41% to 45%, mirrored by a four-point drop in favourable opinions of the UK to 43%.The largest lab-grown steak yet produced has been unveiled by the Israeli company MeaTech 3D, weighing in at nearly 4oz (110 grams). The steak is composed of real muscle and fat cells, derived from tissue samples taken from a cow. Living bovine stem cells were incorporated into “bio-inks” that were then placed in the company’s 3D printer to produce the steak. It was then matured in an incubator, in which the stem cells differentiated into fat and muscle cells. Companies across the world are racing to produce cell-cultured meat, arguing that creating meat without raising and slaughtering livestock is better for the environment, animal welfare and potentially health. Sharon Fima, CEO at MeaTech, said: “The breakthrough is the culmination of over one year’s efforts in our cellular biology and high-throughput tissue-engineering processes, as well as our precision bioprinting technology. We believe we have placed ourselves at the forefront of the race to develop high-end, cell-based meat products.” Cell lines for pork and chicken are also being developed, he said. The company said it aimed to produce cultured meat at the same cost as conventional meat. But the steaks will not appear on diners’ plates soon. The company’s first venture into the market will be to sell the cultured fat as an ingredient for other products, with a pilot plant planned for 2022. “The MeaTech announcement marks an exciting step forward in terms of the complexity and sheer size of a cultivated steak,” said Seren Kell at the Good Food Institute (GFI) Europe. “3D printing enables companies to create more sophisticated ‘whole cut’ products which can authentically recreate the taste, texture and mouthfeel of conventional meat.” However, one industry observer told the Guardian that 3D printing was widespread now and MeaTech had yet to show that its technology could be scaled up and produce steaks at a reasonable cost. The first steak cultured from cells was produced in December 2018 by another Israeli company, Aleph Farms, though the company said at the time that the taste needed more work. Meat cultured from cells requires regulatory approval before being sold to the public, and this happened for the first time at the end of 2020, when chicken nuggets made by US company Eat Just were served to customers in Singapore. Other companies pursuing lab-based meat include Mosa Meats in the Netherlands, set up by Prof Mark Post, who produced the first lab beefburger in 2013, and Memphis Meats, now part-owned by Tyson and Cargill, two of the world’s biggest meat companies. Another company, Meatable, aims to remove the need for repeated extraction of starter cells from animals by creating lines that multiply continuously. This week, scientists at the University of Lisbon in Portugal announced a GFI-funded plan to make seabass fillets from 3D-printed cells using ingredients from algae to create edible scaffolds for the cells to grow on. Frederico Ferreira, at the University of Lisbon, said: “I love fish and I want to carry on eating fish. There’s a role to play for small-scale sustainable fishing, but we can’t continue the deep-sea fishing that causes so much damage to ocean ecosystems.” Kell said: “The race is on to produce whole-cut steaks, fish fillets and other meats using cellular agriculture. But to make these innovations accessible and to achieve the huge environmental, public health and food security benefits of cultivated meat as quickly as possible, we need governments to invest billions in research and commercialisation.” Companies are also producing steaks from plant ingredients, with Spains’s Novameat delivering what it called the “most realistic” to date in early 2020. Its ingredients included pea, seaweed and beetroot juice, which were extruded into fine fibres to re-create muscle tissue. In November, Redefine Meat presented its 3D-printed plant-based steak in London. The Guardian’s taster described its mimicry of real meat as “extraordinary”. Other firms working on plant-based meat include Atlast Food, which is using fungus fibres to create textures similar to meat. Huge reductions in meat eating are essential in rich nations to cut greenhouse gas emissions from livestock and avoid dangerous climate change. One study found that avoiding meat and dairy products was the single biggest way to reduce an individual’s environmental impact. Plant products have very low emissions, but cell-cultured meat can require large amounts of energy to produce, potentially causing significant emissions if not from low-carbon sources.Trading in shares of the embattled Chinese developer Kaisa Group Holdings have been suspended on the Hong Kong stock exchange, prompting fresh concerns about the financial stability of the country’s indebted property sector. The suspension on Wednesday comes after Kaisa was reportedly to be struggling to make a loan repayment of $400m (£301m) by the deadline of Tuesday night in the US, Reuters said, citing a source with direct knowledge of the matter. Panicked investors offloaded shares amid concern that some of the biggest names connected to China’s unravelling property boom might also be close to collapse. Speculation that China Evergrande, the world’s most indebted property developer, will also be unable to access fresh loans to pay down debt sent shares in the company to a record low. Evergrande has been selling assets in recent months to raise the money it owes to customers, investors and suppliers after borrowing £300bn to finance many of the 1,300 developments it has in more than 280 cities across China. The Chinese government sparked a crisis within the property industry when it launched a drive last year to curb excessive debt among real estate firms as well as rampant consumer speculation. Companies that had accrued huge debt to expand found the money taps turned off and began struggling to complete projects, pay contractors and meet domestic and foreign repayments. Kaisa, the 27th-largest Chinese real estate firm in terms of sales, became the latest company to spook investors when it announced on Friday that it had failed in its attempt to secure a debt swap that would have bought it crucial time. A debt swap involves giving creditors shares in the company instead of repaying the debts. On Wednesday morning, the firm announced it was suspending trading in Hong Kong, where it is listed, “pending the release by the company of an announcement containing inside information”. It is the second time Kaisa has suspended trading in the last month. Its shares have lost 75% of their value this year. Kaisa last month announced a plan to delay the repayment timeline for some of its debts, offering an exchange for at least $380m of bonds, which would have given it room to find money further down the line. But the offer failed to win the 95% approval from bondholders needed for the plan to go ahead. Some bondholders sent a formal offer of forbearance on the debt to give Kaisa more time to repay, but it was not clear on Wednesday whether Kaisa would accept. The company has about $11.6bn of dollar-denominated bonds outstanding. It previously defaulted on a dollar debt in 2015, becoming the first Chinese developer to do so. Analysts at the credit ratings agency S&amp;P predicted last month that a default by Kaisa was inevitable because the developer’s liquidity appeared to be so depleted. “We believe nonpayment risk is high and could ultimately lead to debt restructuring,” they said. “A default scenario is inevitable within the next six months.” The only Chinese developer with more offshore debt is Evergrande, which set off the current confidence crisis in September. The company failed to make payments of $82.5m on some US dollar bonds at the end of a month-long grace period on Tuesday, setting the stage for a massive default. Most of the £300bn debt is in China, with only $23bn denominated in dollars. As a result, analysts expect that Evergrande will now be restructured or broken up in some way and that its huge debts will be spread through the Chinese financial system. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.One night manning the phones as a GP in lockdown, I talked to a carer sitting with an elderly woman discharged from hospital and dying of Covid. She had refused readmission, saying that she didn’t want to take an ICU bed from a young person. The carer needed someone to talk to during her lonely vigil. What a shame nobody thought to call a business meeting (PM accused of lying after No 10 officials caught joking about Christmas party, 7 December). They could have had cheese and wine. Dr Mary Lowth London • The Tories have given opposition parties the perfect billboard banner for any future election: “They’re laughing at you.” Frank Gutierrez Sutton-on-the-Forest, North Yorkshire • Thanks to Patrick Barkham (4 December) for reporting the efforts of grouse moor keepers to protect hen harriers. A pitiful contribution compared with the damage driven grouse shooting does to other wildlife and the environment. Jane Hutchins Crowborough, East Sussex • Comments about “pre-booking” (Letters, 7 December) bring to mind the great Irish humorist Flann O’Brien’s advice on getting a fictitious forthcoming book: “It is not enough simply to order your copy. You must order it in advance.” Chris Baker Willington, Derbyshire • The curious resurgence of this headgear (Baseball caps are back thanks to Succession but logos are out, 3 December) is noted. But I have always abided by the view of The Libertines that “there are fewer more distressing sights than that of an Englishman in a baseball cap”. Dan Stacey London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.On the day government staffers allegedly partied in No 10, British hospitals were filled with the dead and the dying. There were 514 deaths announced that day, while 2,000 Covid patients were transported to hospitals, to be put on ventilators and comforted by the exhausted footsoldiers of a shell-shocked NHS. We have endured two years of personal sacrifice at a level not seen since the second world war. As 150,000 of our fellow citizens died, we have all taken extraordinary measures to prevent an even graver human catastrophe: not being able to hold the hands of dying relatives, separated from loved ones, educations injured, enforced solitude for the 8 million Britons who live alone. The story of that single Christmas party – with its secret Santa, cheese and wine and all – is a lesson in how power works in this country. Among the general population, compliance with the most severe restrictions on our freedoms in the history of Britain far exceeded sceptical pre-lockdown predictions. Still, the state has come down hard on those accused of violating rules. There were nearly 6,500 prosecutions for lockdown transgressions in the first six months of the crisis, while Londoners have been forced to cough up more than £1m worth of fines. These punitive rules have not been applied equally. In Scotland, fines were 12 times more common in deprived communities than in affluent areas. Black people in London were up to 11 times more likely to be stopped and searched than white people, while in the first lockdown, men of colour were twice as likely to be fined as their white counterparts. There were cases of homeless people being charged for being on the streets during lockdown and a carer being fined for eating a sandwich. More than a quarter of ordinary citizens were found to have been inappropriately charged with Covid fines – with fixed penalties being issued up to £10,000 – according to the Crown Prosecution Service. Laws have always disproportionately affected poor and marginalised communities. As working-class citizens were forced to pay ruinously large sums of money, our top officials look to have been cavorting with “definitely no social distancing”, as the former prime ministerial spokesperson Allegra Stratton put it on the leaked tape. It is an exposé both of a crooked government and a rigged society, where the powerful often correctly calculate that laws and rules are for somebody else: often poor and often Black. The lies, too: Boris Johnson is simply a more vulgar example of deceit and dishonesty than most of our rulers. The only consistency in his tawdry, always-falling-upwards career is deception: from making up quotes to lying to his former leader about affairs to, most recently, prioritising the airlifting from Afghanistan of cats and dogs over human lives. Whether he himself knows what is a lie and what is the truth is an open question, but ultimately irrelevant: what matters is that no rational human being should ever trust a single utterance issued by a pound-shop Trumpian administration. There is another lesson about power, too, and that is the revolving door that links the British establishment. Allegra Stratton epitomises it: formerly a journalist at the Guardian, BBC and ITV whose job was to scrutinise the government, she ultimately joined it as a propagandist. She is married to the Spectator’s political editor, James Forsyth, who was best man at the wedding of Rishi Sunak, who himself is a former employer of Stratton. This is a story of incestuous political and media elites. When Stratton was Newsnight political editor, she humiliated a single mother on national television, seeking to portray her as a benefit “scrounger”, erasing the fact she was in full-time work and was compelled to claim housing benefit; the programme was forced to apologise on air. This is no tangent: it is a story of how too much of a media ecosystem profoundly entangled in government fails to hold the powerful to account, while encouraging us to be angry at the powerless and the vulnerable. No wonder they are, like Stratton in that leaked video, laughing at the rules that bind the rest of us. Indeed, note how the Sun newspaper today fails to splash on the biggest political scandal of the year. This rag’s deputy editor is none other than James Slack – a revolving door veteran who was the prime minister’s official spokesman at the very time the Christmas party took place. A single episode can act like a flare, lighting up the true nature of power in ways that only those who deliberately close their eyes can ignore. So yes, Boris Johnson must go, and indeed much of the Tory party are themselves coming to this conclusion, perhaps in favour of Stratton’s former employer. But that is not enough. The ugly truth about our ruling establishment is right there before us. And the consequences must go far further than our deceitful, corrupt prime minister. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistWednesday’s meeting of the families of gambling-related suicide victims could not be more timely. The government is in the process of reviewing the 2005 Gambling Act (Report, 8 December), a piece of legislation that predated the digital revolution. Gambling addiction can too often lead to family breakups, crime and, in too many cases, suicide. I spent 18 months last year chairing a Lords select committee on gambling harms, and produced a raft of reform recommendations to the act and to the remit of the Gambling Commission. My fear is that the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport may soften the reforms needed under pressure from the Treasury, whose concern will be to maximise gambling tax revenues. Would that the gambling operators and the Gambling Commission had been present at this meeting of bereaved families, to better understand the urgent need for a root and branch reform of the present statutory and regulatory regime. This might stiffen government’s resolve to resist the lobbying of the gambling operators to the Treasury. Michael Grade Conservative, House of Lords • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Fly-tipping incidents in England increased last year, with household waste accounting for by far the biggest proportion of the problem, which has been worsened by the impacts of the coronavirus pandemic. From March 2020 to March 2021 in England, 1.13m fly-tipping incidents were dealt with by local authorities, an increase of 16% on the 980,000 reported in the previous year, according to data released by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs on Wednesday. Higher numbers of incidents were reached in 2007-09, but the way the data is collated has changed, so direct comparisons with years before 2018 are not possible. Despite the increase in numbers, the number of enforcement actions went down over the period, with only 456,000 actions taken, compared with 474,000 in the year 2019-2020. Jo Churchill, minister for resources and waste, said: “Fly-tipping is a crime which blights communities and poses a risk to human health and the environment. It also undermines legitimate waste businesses where unscrupulous operators undercut those acting within the law. During the pandemic, local authorities faced an unprecedented challenge to keep rubbish collections running and civic amenity sites open, and the government worked closely with them to maintain these critical public services.” She said new technology was being used to combat the problem, such as apps and online platforms to report the crime so local authorities can take action, and she said local authorities had been given new powers to tackle fly-tipping, which would be further strengthened by the forthcoming Environment Act. But she added that individual responsibility was key: “We all have a duty to know where our waste is going.” About two-thirds of the recorded incidents, or 737,000 in total, involved household waste, a similar proportion to the previous year. The most common place for rubbish to be abandoned was on pavements and roads, where more than two-fifths of dumping took place, a similar proportion to the previous year. About a third of the incidents involved a small vanload of rubbish, and a further quarter were the contents of an average car boot or less. Fewer than one in 20 incidents involved major quantities of rubbish, equivalent to a lorryload. The cost to councils of clearing up these major incidents was £11.6m over the year, up from £10.9m in 2019-2020. Defra noted that the first national lockdown, introduced in March 2020, led to some local authorities being unable to maintain collections of dry recyclates, and the widespread closure of household waste recycling centres. These were later reopened, but with restrictions such as booking systems in place. Along with changes in household consumption, travel and leisure owing to the pandemic, these factors “may have contributed” to the increases in fly-tipping, according to the government’s analysis. The reduction in enforcement actions was attributed to staff shortages, staff being furloughed, and staff being redeployed owing to the pandemic and lockdowns. Councillor David Renard, environment spokesperson for the Local Government Association, said the problem cost them about £50m a year. He said the government must step in and do more, while the companies that benefit from selling consumer goods must also bear responsibility. “We continue to urge the government to review sentencing guidelines for fly-tipping so that offenders are given bigger fines for more serious offences, to act as a deterrent,” he said. “Manufacturers should also contribute to the costs to councils of clear-up, by providing more take-back services, so people can hand in old furniture and mattresses when they buy new ones.” Farmers are also concerned that not enough is done to prevent fly-tipping on private land. The government’s figures cover only fly-tipping incidents on public land, such as streets and pavements. The Country Land and Business Association (CLA), which represents 28,000 farmers and rural businesses, said many of these incidents fall to farmers to deal with – one CLA member reported facing a bill of more than £100,000 to clear up one major incident. Mark Tufnell, president of the CLA, said: “These [Defra] figures do not tell the full story of this disgraceful behaviour which blights our beautiful countryside. Local authorities tend not to get involved with clearing incidences of fly-tipped waste from private land, leaving the landowner to clean up and foot what is often an extortionate bill. The government figures do not reflect the true scale of the crime because increasing reports of fly-tipping on private rural land are not included, coupled with the country plunged into lockdown.” He called for tougher rules and a crackdown on fly-tipping criminals, as enforcement has not kept up. The maximum fine for fly-tipping is £50,000 or 12 months’ imprisonment, but fines and sentences on that scale are rarely invoked in the magistrates courts where such offences are tried. Tufnell warned that without stricter enforcement, fly-tipping was likely to continue to rise. He warned: “It’s not just the odd bin bag, but large household items, from unwanted sofas to broken washing machines, building materials and even asbestos being dumped across our countryside.”Dr Beth Rimmer’s suggestion that the NHS employ retired doctors, nurses and pharmacists to administer Covid vaccinations appears to be the obvious solution to what is already a serious problem facing the service – ie too much to do with too few resources (Letters, 5 December). Unfortunately, such a solution does not fit with the Tory government’s long-term strategy for the health service. By ensuring GPs give Covid vaccinations priority over the day-to-day, yet essential, services that the NHS provides, the backlog will continue to increase. On top of that, we are already hearing senior Tories complaining that GPs are not doing enough with regards to face-to-face appointments. Over time, this will all add to a growing acceptance among the public that the NHS, as it is currently configured, just cannot cope. The Tories realised many years ago that they would not be able to privatise the NHS because the public treasure it more than any other public service. The plan, therefore, is to undermine their faith in the health service by demonstrating how it is no longer the excellent service people thought it was. I predict the government’s response to any inquiry into its handling of Covid will place all blame squarely on the shoulders of the NHS. It will then argue that the only way a post-pandemic NHS can even begin to get back to anything approaching normal will be to involve the private sector. Sadly, employing retired doctors would undermine this strategy. Shaun Soper Midhurst, West Sussex • I write as a retired GP who returned to practice earlier this year to deliver vaccinations as Dr Rimmer did. Working at a large vaccination centre, it was clear that the clinical knowledge and experience required to safely deliver Covid vaccines was minimal. So although retired clinical staff can do this, leaving NHS staff free to get on with the day job, people with no clinical experience (for instance, military personnel) could easily be trained up to vaccinate people. Of course, there would still need to be an experienced clinician on hand to deal with queries or adverse effects, and to ensure that the process is clinically led. Dr Tim Owen Newcastle • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There is a fundamental problem with your editorial (6 December) arguing that “progressives ought to embrace strategic voting with a vengeance next week” and urging Labour voters to back the Liberal Democrats. While Ed Davey has ruled out putting Boris Johnson back in office after the next election, he has not ruled out going into another coalition with a different Conservative leader. Thus, there is no guarantee that voting “for the candidate best placed to dislodge the Tories” will achieve that objective. The real problem for progressives is the undemocratic voting system used in general elections. If the opposition parties were to pledge to replace it with a fairer system there might be a point in a progressive alliance. Given Labour’s current policy, that seems unlikely, but the alternative is continuing Tory rule on a decreasing minority vote. Declan O’Neill Oldham, Greater Manchester • I am active in the campaign to elect Labour’s excellent candidate, Ben Wood, in the North Shropshire byelection. The Guardian is once again advising Labour voters to vote against their own party. There is no informal agreement for Labour supporters to vote Lib Dem in the upcoming byelection. Labour has been the main challenger to the Conservatives in North Shropshire in every parliamentary election, bar one, since 1997, whereas for most of the last 24 years, the Lib Dems have languished in third place. You tell Labour voters in North Shropshire to “set aside their tribal loyalty”. Yes, some did in 2010. The Lib Dems briefly edged into second place. Within days of that election, Nick Clegg led his MPs, including their present leader Ed Davey, into their regressive alliance with David Cameron. The Lib Dems closed SureStart, tripled tuition fees and slashed public services. Davey is hardly “a refugee” from the Johnson government. David Hallam Smethwick, West Midlands • After backing Keir Starmer as Labour leader, the Guardian now advises Labour supporters to vote Lib Dem, even though Labour came second in the last election there. With this liberal opposition, the Conservatives must have difficulty believing their luck. But when we remember the disaster of the 2010 coalition government in imposing austerity and poverty, you must take us for fools. Dave Green Northampton • I am 14 years old and so dismayed by politics at the moment. When I wrote to the Guardian earlier this year (Letters, 10 May), after the local elections, I suggested a simple way forward for Labour – an ABC coalition (Anything But Conservative) to remove a cruel, uncaring and incompetent government. Seven months later, with the recent sleaze episodes, refugees dying in the channel, social care policies that protect the assets of the wealthy and the mismanagement of the pandemic, things are even worse. With more than 10 other candidates standing in North Shropshire, effectively the vote is being split and the Tories are likely to win again. This is not because they are the party supported by most people, but because the other parties haven’t come together to support one opposition candidate. It pains me to say, but Labour has no chance of winning the byelection next week. So why not invoke the principles of ABC and get behind the Lib Dems … please. Joseph Walker Bath • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Elon Musk criticized new incentives and infrastructure for electric vehicles in a huge spending bill backed by Joe Biden, saying he would “delete” the measures and even ditch the entire legislation if he had the power. Musk, the multibillionaire founder of the electric car company Tesla, said that if he were in charge of the federal government “I would just can this whole bill. That’s my recommendation.” The entrepreneur, speaking at a Wall Street Journal summit on Monday, added: “It might be better if the bill doesn’t pass because we’ve spent so much money, you know, it’s like the federal budget deficit is insane.” The nearly $2tn reconciliation package, called the Build Back Better bill, carries the weight of Biden’s agenda across numerous policy areas and has been hailed as the biggest, and arguably first, legislation in US history to tackle the climate crisis. The bill passed the House of Representatives last month and Democrats hope it can navigate through a sharply divided Senate before Christmas. The spending includes significant incentives for Americans to leave behind polluting vehicles and opt instead to go electric, including a tax rebate that will offer up to $12,500 to anyone buying a zero emissions car. There is also funding towards the president’s goal of building out 500,000 new electric car charging stations across the US. But Musk, despite operating the world’s largest electric vehicle maker, said that these measures are “unnecessary”. He added: “Do we need federal support for gas stations? We don’t. So there’s no need for this, for support for a charging network. I would delete it. Delete.” Musk, who in October became the first person to have a net financial worth of more than $300bn, also did not welcome the bill’s funding for public transit, seen as an important way to slash US emissions, instead touting the need to build more roads, only underground. “In cities that are congested we’ve got to do something about extreme traffic, which is some combination of double-deckering freeways and building tunnels,” said Musk, who in addition to running a car company also founded a tunnel construction business called the Boring Company. Critics were quick to point out that Musk has himself benefited from billions of dollars in government subsidies in order to get his various ventures off the ground, with Tesla making large sums from a system of zero emissions credits offered in California. Musk’s opposition to the $12,500 tax credit may also stem from the fact it applies to electric cars made in the US by a union workforce. Tesla is not unionized. Other nonunion automakers – including Toyota, Volkswagen and BMW – have urged lawmakers to drop the “discriminatory” incentive, with the Mexican government also raising objections to the American-made stipulation. “Elon Musk is butt-hurt that Tesla is not getting as many electric car subsidies as Ford and GM (who have union workforces, unlike Tesla),” tweeted Tristan Snell, a business lawyer and CNN pundit. “So he’s whining that no one should get subsidies. That’s all this is.” Others had some pointed advice for Musk. “If Elon Musk is so concerned about the deficit, perhaps he should pay his fair share of taxes,” said Robert Reich, who was secretary of labor in Bill Clinton’s administration.Gambling firms could be forced to ask punters for payslips to prevent unaffordable losses, the minister overseeing a landmark review of the sector has said, citing a “moral obligation” to tackle addiction. Chris Philp, who took over as gambling minister in September, outlined a series of government proposals, indicating a tougher regulatory environment that would reduce industry revenues. His comments were echoed by Andrew Rhodes, the head of the Gambling Commission, who said some operators were not complying with the rules and saw regulatory fines as a form of “tax”. Philp, speaking at the annual conference of GambleAware, the charity administering funding for programmes to reduce gambling addiction, said: “I have heard too many stories of people who lost obviously unaffordable amounts of money … without proper checks being made by the gambling operators who had the data available. I have also heard about direct marketing, offers and VIP treatment being targeted at people with manifest gambling problems. This is not how gambling should operate, and we must take decisive measures to change it.” Philp said a white paper outlining government proposals, to be published early next year, could include affordability checks, which would stop operators intervening only when a customer had lost large sums and it was “far too late”. “Demanding payslips or bank statements from every customer spending £100 is probably going to be unwelcome, disruptive and disproportionate. But there is a level at which that is appropriate.” He said data from credit rating agencies could be used to ensure “smooth and unobtrusive” initial checks were made on punters who spent smaller sums, with “more intrusive” checks at higher levels of spending. The minister said it was “critical” that gambling operators were forced to share data about people displaying signs of addiction, through a “single customer view” system. Campaigners are concerned that the industry is being left to develop this system, but Philp suggested the government was also considering other options. He indicated that the Gambling Commission would receive more funding to improve its regulatory capacity, including greater powers to “requisition” and analyse data in bulk from gambling companies to ensure they were not exploiting vulnerable people. “All of us have a moral obligation to protect our fellow citizens who are in the grip of a severe clinical addiction that has devastated many lives,” he said. Speaking at the same event, Rhodes said gaming and betting companies were still failing in their duty to protect problem gamblers, despite their efforts to show improved behaviour before the review. “Too many operators are not complying with our rules,” he said. “This year is on course to be our busiest year,” he added, saying gambling companies had come to view regulatory fines and settlements, which have reached £100m since 2017, as a “compliance tax”. “We still see cases that make everyone blush,” he said. “That has to stop.” Rhodes criticised gambling companies for saying the parallel market would thrive if tighter regulation were introduced – claims repeated by some MPs who had enjoyed hospitality from the industry. He said this was too often used as an excuse. Zoe Osmond, chief executive of GambleAware, said: “We welcome the minister’s announcement that the government is working with the Gambling Commission to take steps to better protect people at risk of gambling harms through affordability checks, a single customer view, and a data repository to inform intervention and uphold industry standards.” She also called on the government to impose a mandatory levy on gambling firms to fund addiction research, education and treatment. Philp’s predecessors have so far resisted recommendations to replace the existing voluntary system.Almost 30,000 homes in Ireland and 500 properties in Scotland have been left without power after Storm Barra swept in from the Atlantic bringing severe winds, rain and snow. The latest outages came days after the final homes in Britain were reconnected after Storm Arwen, which caused “catastrophic damage” to electricity networks mainly in north-east Scotland, affecting 135,000 properties. The north-west of Ireland and Scotland bore the brunt of the second day of the storm, when winds gusted at 80mph, parts of England and Wales flooded and emergency vans were dispatched to people in remote areas of Scotland. About 1,000 homes in Scotland suffered power cuts on Wednesday morning with flood warnings in 11 areas. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, said the 511 households still affected were expected to be reconnected by 7pm on Wednesday. He said the continuing problems were discussed at an emergency civil resilience meeting chaired by Nicola Sturgeon on Wednesday morning. He acknowledged the “inconvenience and hardship” caused for those affected – some of whom had only recently had their power switched back on after the damage caused by Storm Arwen. Flooding was reported in Cambridgeshire around Ely while counties in the south-west of England and in Wales remained under a yellow weather warning until 6pm on Wednesday. Bryngwyn comprehensive school in Llanelli, Wales was forced to shut temporarily after gusts of more than 70mph ripped part of its roof off on Tuesday evening. In Ireland the north-west bore the brunt of the storm overnight, and the severe weather was not expected to abate until Wednesday afternoon. Schools remained closed in 12 counties as electricity and water authorities worked to restore supplies in the next 24 hours. By 5pm the head of forecasting at Met Éireann said the country had moved into the “tail end” of the extreme weather event and weather warnings started to lift across the country. Electricity supplies had been restored to about 30,000 of the 59,000 hit by Barra in Ireland while Irish Water was working to repair supply to 68,000 customers. In Northern Ireland about 1,000 homes were without power on Wednesday morning with the strongest gust reaching 75mph at Orlock, County Down. Met Éireann said the county would experience severe or damaging gusts of between 62-80mph with localised stronger winds likely. “Owing to a combination of high waves, storm surge and high tide, coastal flooding is expected. Disruption to power and travel are likely,” the forecaster said. About 8,000 homes in the county had lost power at the peak of the storm with and extra staff brought were brought in to repair any damage to the Northern Ireland Electricity network.An academic at Exeter University who describes herself as “naturally loud” has won an unfair dismissal case after being suspended by senior management for “overbearing” behaviour. We would like to hear from people who have loud voices about their own experiences. Has it proved problematic in any way? Have you ever felt discriminated against, or misunderstood at work or elsewhere? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.It’s Christmas Eve and young Mouse and his family are on their way to Grandpa’s. Outside, snow is falling. But this family show isn’t heading where you might expect. It’s been adapted from Piers Torday’s book and – in typical Torday fashion – is a dark and wild adventure. There’s a horrible accident, genuine tragedy (that had me in tears), straight-talking animals and a very silly singing minstrel. It’ll have your children excited and just a little bit scared, bursting with questions about life and death they might never have found a way to ask without this special story. Barb Jungr and Samantha Lane have retained all the eccentricity and complexity of Torday’s book and have also woven in some delicate songs. Mouse (Stacey Read) is a young girl in this stage version and as she ventures through the forest, in search of a castle and her missing family, her songs sound brave and hopeful but fragile and haunting, too. Judith Hope’s puppets are both utterly convincing and fantastically magical. Mouse’s toy horse is transformed into a lifesize companion: plush and purple, velvet and grand. The talking sheep looks as if he’s skipped straight from a nearby field and, as Mouse nears the end of her quest, a wizard with a spinning head provides one last visual flourish. The cast works incredibly hard, jumping between multiple roles, controlling countless puppets and carving out carefully calibrated moments of comedy, pathos and fear. As director, Lane uses the space with real skill and even opens out the back of the theatre. It’s here that an increasingly worried Grandpa makes a series of calls to the police. The young audience swivel around as one, anxious not to miss a moment of their story. There May Be a Castle is at Little Angel theatre, London, until 23 January.The UK was “embarrassed” into funding a huge gas project in Mozambique while considering ending overseas support for fossil fuels, a court has heard. During a three-day high court hearing, Friends of the Earth highlighted government documents that suggested there would be “obvious repercussions” if the government did not follow through on $1.15bn of support to an offshore pipeline and liquefied natural gas plant in Cabo Delgado province. Representing the campaign group in a judicial review of the decision to fund the project, barrister Jessica Simor QC said rejection would have resulted in the need to unwind existing contracts and a perceived loss of trust in the UK’s “ability to execute transactions”. The money – a combination of loans and guarantees – comes from the government’s export credit agency, UK Export Finance (UKEF). At an advanced point in the negotiations, UKEF “felt that not agreeing to the loan would be embarrassing to the United Kingdom given its role in the African Development Bank”, Simor told the court. The African Development Bank is co-financing the project, which is led by oil company Total. UKEF approved the funding in July 2020, having concluded that the project could lead to a net reduction in global emissions and would help Mozambique meet its own climate targets. But Friends of the Earth said the project’s climate assessment was inadequate. It is particularly critical of the fact that the assessment only considered how compatible it was with keeping the average global temperature rise to 2C, not the more stringent 1.5C that is now considered a vital physical threshold by scientists. It also argues that, under the Paris agreement, the UK has a responsibility to help developing countries increase their capacity for renewable energy. Mozambique is not only one of the poorest countries in the world, but also one of the most affected by the climate crisis and most vulnerable to its impacts. It is also in the middle of a violentIslamic State-led insurgency. Environment minister Zac Goldsmith said earlier this year that “the prospect of the arrival of massive gas income” was one driver of the conflict and he hoped this would be the last fossil fuel project funded by UKEF. Even as discussions about Mozambique were going on, the government was considering whether to pull the plug on all overseas fossil fuel funding. Documents cited in court suggest the civil service was concerned that to reject the Cabo Delgado project would “pre-empt” the government’s policy decision and affect wider UK support for the hydrocarbon sector. The UK finally committed to ending support for overseas projects last December, five months after the Mozambique deal was finalised. Parts of the government do appear to have been nervous about financing the project, which both the foreign and international development secretaries at the time, as well as the Cop secretariat, had recommended against. UKEF, which has been accused by activists of “rank hypocrisy” over its record on fossil fuel financing, acknowledged that there were both environmental and reputational risks in providing funding. But internal government documents cited in court also showed concern that rejecting it may encourage further campaigning against UKEF, including in other sectors such as aviation. UKEF declined to comment on ongoing legal proceedings but said in a statement that it remains confident it follows “robust and internationally recognised due diligence before providing any support for overseas projects”.Rail unions are drawing up plans for a national strike as job cuts loom across the industry. The RMT is preparing to ballot its members for industrial action, with the union anticipating compulsory redundancies are highly probable at train operating companies and Network Rail. Such redundancies would mean “trains are coming to a halt”, the TSSA union said after it failed to get assurances over jobs. Unions have been in talks since June over plans to reduce costs in the industry. While broad voluntary redundancy schemes have been introduced, negotiations have taken place under an agreement to rule out forced job cuts until 31 December. Pay rises are also yet to be agreed, with inflation rising rapidly. Train operators have been told by the government to find savings of 10% in revised business plans while protecting services. With large fixed costs in rolling stock and rail access, cutting staff or reducing terms and conditions remains a probable target for savings. An RMT spokesperson said: “We’re very clear on the direction of travel, that a massive jobs cull at train operators and Network Rail are coming, as well as an attack on pay and pensions. We’re getting our tanks on the lawn right now.” Manuel Cortes, the general secretary of the TSSA, said: “Any attempt to use compulsory redundancies will be seen as a declaration of war and trains will be coming to a halt. “Our members are already rightly angry that having been hailed as heroes for keeping our country moving during the pandemic, they are now facing job cuts. Despite putting themselves on the line through the pandemic, the vast majority of them saw their income fall in real terms as they did not get a pay increase for 2021.” He added that without a guarantee to avoid compulsory redundancies in 2022 and of a pay rise in line with inflation, “ballots for industrial action will follow as swiftly as night follows day”. Rail passenger numbers have dropped back from about 70% of pre-Covid levels to just over 60% since warnings over the Omicron variant began. Expected government advice to work from home is likely to reduce passenger revenues further. According to official figures published last week, the Treasury spent an additional £6.5bn on running the railway in 2020-21, to cover lost fare revenue during the pandemic. Strikes may also follow in London, where Transport for London has announced plans to reduce head count, but so far only through not replacing departing staff. Unions have accused the government of “engineering the crisis” at TfL by refusing to fund it sufficiently, to the point where bosses have warned of a “bleak future” of “managed decline”. But the minister for London, Paul Scully, said on Tuesday that the government would provide “more than enough money to keep services running at their current levels”, as sources suggested there was a deal ready ahead of the 11 December deadline, when funding expires. TfL has asked for £500m to cover lost income for the rest of the financial year. Government sources said the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, had yet to come up with promised plans to raise income and suggested that £300m would cover fare losses – although the plan B measures expected to be announced soon, such as restricting socialising and office working, could cut passenger numbers and income yet further.A theatre nurse was charged on Wednesday with a series of sexual offences against patients and staff at the Royal Hallamshire hospital, Sheffield. South Yorkshire police said Paul Grayson, 51, had been charged with 20 offences, including voyeurism and sexual assault, as well as with taking and making indecent photographs of children. Ten counts of voyeurism and three counts of sexual assault related to offences allegedly committed at the hospital against five hospital staff and four patients between 2017 and 2020. Four of those charges related to the discovery of recordings of the intimate areas of three unidentified female patients, a police spokesperson said on Wednesday. The remaining seven charges, one count of taking indecent photographs of a child, three counts of voyeurism and three counts of making indecent photographs of children, were not related to the hospital. “It is highly unlikely that the three unidentified women [in the recordings] will ever be identified as all existing lines of inquiry have now been exhausted,” said Ch Supt Shelley Hemsley, district commander for Sheffield. “Despite this, we have pursued charges on behalf of these women so that the judicial process can continue.” Grayson has been bailed to appear at Sheffield magistrates court on 4 February.Tiger Woods will make his return to competitive golf next week at the PNC Championship alongside his 12-year-old son, Charlie. Last week the 15-time major champion acknowledged he is unlikely ever to make a full-time return to the professional game after a car crash in February this year left him with serious leg injuries. However, he said he would “pick and choose a few events a year and … play around that”. Woods sustained open fractures to the tibia and fibula in his right leg in the crash and said amputation had been a very real possibility. The PNC Championship is a tournament in which major champions play alongside a family member. Tiger and Charlie played together in the tournament last year. “Although it’s been a long and challenging year, I am very excited to close it out by competing in the PNC Championship with my son Charlie,” Woods tweeted. “I’m playing as a Dad and couldn’t be more excited and proud.” Alastair Johnston of IMG, the executive chairman of the PNC Championship, said he was looking forward to welcoming the Woods family to the event. “We have been liaising with Tiger and his team for some time and are delighted that he has now decided to make his return to competitive golf at the PNC Championship,” he said. They will face competition from the defending champions, Justin Thomas and his father Mike, a former PGA professional. The world’s No 1 female golfer, Nelly Korda, will team up with her father Petr, who won tennis’s Australian Open in 1998.Allies of animal charity boss Pen Farthing and a Labour MP have cast doubt on Downing Street claims about a letter by Boris Johnson’s parliamentary aide Trudy Harrison giving him permission to be evacuated from Kabul in August. No 10 said Harrison was “acting in her capacity as a constituency MP” when she wrote the letter – as it continued to insist that Boris Johnson had not ordered the rescue of Farthing and his cats and dogs ahead of desperate Afghans. But Dominic Dyer, an animal rights campaigner lobbying to help Farthing, said on Wednesday that neither he nor Farthing were constituents of Harrison but that she had become involved in their campaign after some of her constituents had raised it. “From my perspective, Trudy was in contact with the PM. I understood the PM was committed to the operation and seeing it happened,” said Dyer, who had been intensively lobbying government over Farthing in late August. “Pen needed something he could hold up at Kabul airport. To be fair to Trudy, she did a good job, and said, ‘I’ll see what I can do.’ I don’t know if she took it to Johnson, but I can’t believe he wasn’t aware it was written. I can’t believe he wasn’t aware we’ve tied up the loose ends.” Harrison’s letter, which emerged on Tuesday night, was dated 25 August and signed by her in her capacity as MP for Copeland in Cumbria and as “parliamentary private secretary to the prime minister”. It spelled out that the Foreign Office, Home Office and the Ministry of Defence – which had made last-minute objections – had cleared the way for Farthing and staff at his Nowzad charity to be evacuated from Kabul’s airport. “You are therefore authorised to proceed,” she wrote. Dyer said he believed the letter was “not the letter of an ordinary constituency MP”. He said “it was sought because Pen did not want to rely on emails from the Foreign Office. It was there to show he and his staff had the legal right to leave.” Harrison, however, said the letter, which had a Commons header, “was sent on parliamentary paper to confirm appropriate security clearance had been provided”. She added: “Whilst I was indeed the PM’s PPS, this was not a matter for him. It was a routine task in response to many Copeland constituents’ requests to assist.” Chris Bryant, a Labour member of the foreign affairs select committee, who had raised the issue earlier this week, said he was sceptical of No 10 and Harrison’s explanations. “I just don’t buy it. It all seems far too convenient and murky. It still seems clear to me that the prime minister effectively if not directly ordered this evacuation. He just didn’t want his sticky fingerprints all over it.” Conservative MPs contacted by the Guardian said it would have been unusual to deliberately reference her role as Johnson’s aide in the Commons if she did not intend to signal it had the backing of the prime minister. Party sources said there was unease at what they believed was an approach that amounted to the prioritising of “animals ahead of Afghans” in the final days in Kabul. Farthing and over 150 cats and dogs were rescued in one of the last flights out of Kabul, but last-minute delays at the airport meant that over 60 staff at the Nowzad charity and dependants had to cross the border to Pakistan before they could come to the UK. “This was always a wider humanitarian mission,” Dyer said.Last week, Shell walked away from 170 million barrels of oil off the coast of Shetland, declaring the “economic case for investment” too weak. As might be expected with such a politically sensitive venture, there has been much speculation about what other factors might have been at play, whether pressure from Nicola Sturgeon or from Whitehall. But let’s try another question: how did Shell ever decide that there was an economic case? After all, the energy giant does not deny that its entire business will have to change. It advertises its “target to become a net zero emissions” company by 2050, publishes a “sustainability report” and partners with environmental organisations around the world. Yet little of this environmental awareness shows up in the hard numbers. The company’s latest accounts features this disclaimer: “Shell’s operating plans, outlooks, budgets and pricing assumptions do not reflect our net zero emissions target.” In other words: whatever the oil giant says is not what it thinks. This is not an accusation of corporate hypocrisy, of saying one thing and doing quite another. Here is something far more troubling: the multinational is openly admitting that its core assumptions have not changed to reflect the greatest single threat to our planet, our economy – and its business model. It operates on the premise that oil prices will remain high at $60 a barrel, even though working towards net zero would force them to drop, as industries and consumers shift to alternative sources of energy. The International Energy Agency has issued a net zero scenario that projects the price of a barrel of oil will slump to $36 by the end of this decade and $24 by 2050. Prices so low might deter Shell from all kinds of exploration and drilling projects. It might also wipe millions off the value of the firm. Company reports are audited and Shell’s auditor is another giant, EY. Yet EY does not quibble with Shell’s assumptions – it simply says “it is neither possible nor appropriate” for it to challenge them. This is, frankly, nonsense. EY is one of the biggest financial firms on the planet and is as capable as the Guardian of looking at the independent forecasts for what green transition means for oil prices. Moreover, the regulator for auditors has demanded they “address, and where relevant report” on climate change. This isn’t to single out Shell; it is just one obvious example. In a recent review, the thinktank Carbon Tracker recently found that 70% of companies and 80% of auditors failed to disclose climate risk in their financial reports. The government is consulting on reforms to the often scandal-hit audit industry. This would seem an obvious issue for Kwasi Kwarteng to take up. Let’s value companies according to hard limits being imposed on us by the planet, rather than according to the fictions dreamed up by fossil fuel industries.Boris Johnson’s career path is paved with falsehood. He was fired from his first journalism job for fabricating a quote. As a correspondent in Brussels, he traded in grotesque Eurosceptic mythology. In 2004, he was sacked from the Conservative frontbench for lies he had told to Michael Howard, then opposition leader, about an extramarital affair. In the 2016 referendum campaign, he misled the public over the cost of EU membership. In the 2019 general election, he boasted about the qualities of a Brexit deal he now wants to renegotiate. No one who has followed the prime minister’s dysfunctional relationship with the truth now believes him when he denies knowledge of a Christmas party in Downing Street on 18 December 2020, in contravention of pandemic restrictions. The prime minister told MPs on Wednesday that he was “sickened” by video evidence that such an egregious breach of the rules occurred and by the sight of his staff making light of it. Allegra Stratton, the spokesperson caught on camera, has resigned. The cabinet secretary is due to investigate. Mr Johnson claims to share public fury. That is doubtful. Most people obeyed the rules, forgoing time with friends and family. Many could not visit sick relatives. Some were denied the chance to say farewell to dying loved ones. To know something of their pain then, and their feelings of betrayal now, Mr Johnson would have to know also the power of empathy and what it means to exercise personal responsibility. But he is a stranger to those things. They cannot be allowed to impede his ambition and vanity. If Mr Johnson’s outrage were sincere, he would have demanded the inquiry when reports of the party first emerged and not waited until the evidence forced his hand. He would not have told MPs last week that no rules had been broken, nor sent his spokespeople out to issue still more brazen denials in the following days. Those rank falsehoods now hang over Downing Street, befouling the political air. As a journalist, Mr Johnson was able to practise dishonesty alone. But a prime minister needs a team. Elevating contempt for the truth into a governing ethos is a corporate enterprise. MPs must hold the line. Cabinet ministers are expected to defend it on television. Officials must implement policies conceived in defiance of good judgment. Aides must practise misdirection, as was captured in the video clip that plunged No 10 into chaos. Loyal servants are needed to take the rap for their boss, as Ms Stratton has done. The effect, over time, is an ever-widening circle of cynicism that infects the public, corroding faith in the political process and degrading the office of prime minister. The spectacle of Mr Johnson lurching between denial and affected contrition would be unedifying in any circumstances. At the current juncture, when restrictions are being reimposed in England, it is profoundly damaging. The prime minister’s brazenness in refusing to address the question of trust when announcing the new measures on Wednesday evening will not make those questions go away. Pandemic regulations will be imposed by law, but public compliance through the winter requires willing acquiescence and respect for official warnings. That needs confidence in the motive and integrity of politicians who make the rules, plus patience and a spirit of collective social responsibility. Those conditions are hard to meet with a leader who has no conception of probity and can only simulate compassion. It is hard when the prime minister is a liar. There is a grim absurdity in the prospect of an inquiry, led by the cabinet secretary, into an event the very existence of which has been denied by Downing Street. There is no need for an inquiry to understand the origin of the political crisis that this party has triggered. It springs from moral failure at the top. It is a syndrome that radiates dishonesty outward from the very heart of government. That syndrome has a name. It is Boris Johnson.A travel company called Black Tomato, in return for a significant sum of money, will drop you in the middle of you know not where, and leave you there. The product is called Get Lost and is surely more evidence that we’ve, well, lost our way. Which isn’t to say that it’s a daft idea. As a matter of fact, it quite appeals to me. I’m used to feeling psychologically lost – that wouldn’t be much of a holiday – but I’m very rarely physically, geographically lost. And annoying, and even frightening, as it can be, I miss this sensation. I believe it is good for the soul. “Oh, that magic feeling, nowhere to go,” is a line in a Beatles song. How about: “Oh, that magic feeling, where the bloody hell am I?” It’s been an awfully long time since I asked myself that question without the means to answer it straight away. It was dusk in an ominously quiet forest somewhere – I’m still not quite sure where – in mid Wales, more than 30 years ago. It was raining steadily, and we had nowhere to stay. Chancing upon a stream, with bleak logic, my mate and I reasoned that the stream had to lead to a river that had to lead to civilisation. We slipped, slid, sloshed and cursed our way down that stream until we saw a light at the end of this confounded tunnel of trees. Leaving wet footprints on the carpet of an inn, we slumped there in relief. We had lost ourselves, but found ourselves. If you never get lost, you never get to go through the process of seeking your bearings, or the joy of finding them. If you have a mobile phone, it’s now almost impossible to be truly lost. It will almost always tell you not only where you are but, crucially, in which direction you’re facing. In the UK, equipped with the Ordnance Survey app, I can know where I am in quite extravagant detail. There will be no need to look around me – really look – at the earth and the sky, and think – really think – about what data I have in my head to figure out my place in the world. Some crucial, hard-wired, mental capacity is lying dormant; this can’t be good for us. It reminds me of something a rather brilliant psychologist once said to me. He mused that in days of yore most humans had only one concern: to have enough food and shelter for their families to survive another day. If they did, they were happy; if they didn’t, they weren’t. In the context of this existential daily struggle there wasn’t a lot of time for emotional crises, the like of which I was bringing to this clinician’s consulting room on a weekly basis. You know, stuff like: What am I for? Why do I crave approval? How can I stop feeling like a failure? Blah blah blah. And, tellingly, I’m quite sure that at some juncture I wailed to him: “Where am I?” The answer was Harley St, but that wasn’t what I meant. As everyone knows, thanks to the first law of thermodynamics: “Energy cannot be created or destroyed; it can only be changed from one form to another.” Some psychologist or neurologist or neuroscientist, or whatever the relevant discipline is, must have looked into what happens when the brain chemistry of physical “lostness” is stirred around a bit. Perhaps “lostness”, like energy, can’t be created or destroyed; it needs to manifest itself somewhere. It certainly seems that the more we know where our feet are planted, the less we know which way is up. We have our bearings, but we’re losing our marbles. • Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistA band who accused John Lewis of copying their arrangement for a Christmas song are going head-to-head with Ed Sheeran for this year’s Christmas No 1 slot, using one of the pop superstar’s own songs. Alt-folk group the Portraits were selected on Wednesday by the Official Charts Company as one of 13 contenders to top the Christmas charts. They are performing a pared back, orchestral version of Ed Sheeran’s Photograph with a video which features 300 portraits of people who lost their lives to Covid. Funds raised by the new single, which launches on Thursday, will be donated to two charities helping people through the pandemic: Cruse Bereavement Support and Mental Health Ireland. The Portraits produced a version of Philip Oakey and Giorgio Moroder’s 1985 electro-pop classic Together in Electric Dreams for Christmas 2020. That track also featured photos of people lost in the pandemic. John Lewis featured Oakey and Moroder’s track in their Christmas ad this year. The Portraits accused the company of plagiarising their arrangement of the track. John Lewis strongly denied this but subsequently made what the Portraits say was a “substantial donation” to the two charities to which the Portraits donated the proceeds of their 2020 song. The Portraits have some stiff competition with Ed Sheeran and Elton John’s Merry Christmas track a strong contender along with Adele’s new album – several tracks from this album are performing strongly – as well as Abba’s Little Things and George Ezra’s reworking of Come on Home for Christmas. The Portraits, Jeremy and Lorraine Millington, said they were thrilled to be contacted by the Official Charts Company on Wednesday to be informed that their new track has been added to the Christmas No 1 Contenders list. The email said: “Best of luck with the campaign – it’s such an important cause and the clip of the video is very moving.” Jeremy Millington said: “We’re absolutely over the moon. Our new track is a memorial for the loved ones lost in the pandemic.” The couple’s 15-year-old daughter, Ciara Mill, who herself recently came down with Covid, performs lead vocals on the track. The Somerset County orchestra and the Skylarks, a Somerset choir, have also participated in the track. It will be released in partnership with the Yellow Hearts Facebook group, which has established a Covid support network. The race for the No 1 spot starts formally on 17 December and the winner will be announced on 24 December.Boris Johnson has announced new Covid restrictions across England, to come into force over a period from Friday. Below is a guide to what will happen. What is plan B, and what does it involve? This is the autumn/winter contingency plan for fast-rising Covid cases set out when restrictions were lifted over the summer. It set out three mitigations: a requirement to wear a mask in some settings; advice to work from home for a period; and so-called Covid status certificates, or vaccine passports. Advice on mask-use has already changed, meaning people are required to use them on public transport and in shops. What did Johnson announce? Basically, plan B but with a few tweaks. Masks will now also be needed, from Friday, in “most public indoor venues” including cinemas and theatres, unless people are exercising, eating, drinking or singing. People will be asked to work from home from Monday where possible. He also announced a scheme for Covid certificates in some venues, to begin a week from now. What will Covid status certificates involve? While the original plan B envisaged only vaccination being allowed, Johnson said people will also be able to show evidence of a recent negative lateral flow test – some MPs and ministers were known to be wary of vaccine-only certificates. These will be mandatory for nightclubs or other large crowded spaces. They will be needed for all unseated indoor venues with a capacity of 500 or more; all unseated outdoor venues of 4,000 or more; or any venue, seated or not, which contain 10,000 or more, meaning they will be needed for football stadiums and other mass sports venues. The certificates will need to be shown via the NHS app. People can register their details, and then download a QR-based “pass” which shows when they received their boosters. This can also be printed off from the NHS website. The app and website also allow people to upload negative lateral flow tests. What sort of vaccination would be required? The scheme would require two doses of a recognised vaccine. However, Johnson said expanding this to also include booster jabs would be kept under review. Would MPs have to vote on this? Downing Street has said previously that it would like the Commons to have its say, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, made a statement to MPs at the same time as Johnson announced the new measures at a press conference. However, a Commons vote is not necessary. A government document setting out the background for possible Covid certification says that while the government would want to hold a vote on any significant changes to Covid rules, if this was not possible, for example cases shot up during recess, the necessary regulations could be changed using emergency procedures in the 1984 Public Health Act. These would need to be retrospectively approved by MPs within 28 days. Would the government win a vote on vaccine passports? Most likely. Even if a number of Tory MPs rebelled, Labour has called for plan B to be introduced, and as such would be expected to support the idea. What is the rest of the UK doing? In general, a bit more, or at least up to now. Scotland has already been advising people to work from home if possible, and has longer-standing rules on masks. In Wales, from last month people have had to show an NHS Covid pass (which unlike the English plan allows people to also demonstrate a recent negative test instead of just vaccination) to go to theatres, cinemas and concert halls. Northern Ireland has perhaps the most stringent rules, including a limit of 30 people meeting inside homes, and obliging hospitality businesses to collect customers’ test-and-trace details, and carry out risk assessments for bigger indoor gatherings. And other countries? Many other European countries have, in particular, introduced internal Covid certificates as condition of entry to many places. Since the summer, people in France have had to show a health pass, giving proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative test, to enter cafes, restaurants and cinemas, and take long-distance trains. Germany has more recently introduced a similar scheme for access to places such as restaurants or fitness centres. Other countries have gone further. Austria imposed lockdown rules only for those not fully vaccinated, with the country’s chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, saying this would tackle both rising infection levels and the country’s “shamefully low” vaccination rate. Other countries to have used or proposed vaccine passports include Denmark, Israel, Greece, the Czech Republic, Sweden and Slovakia.Dyson, the vacuum cleaner firm, has said it will appeal against a ruling by an EU court that it is not entitled to £150m in damages over flawed energy efficiency regulation. Sir James Dyson, the company’s billionaire owner, is an outspoken critic of the EU and was one of the most prominent supporters of the campaign to leave the EU. He had argued that mandatory EU tests had “illegally misled millions of consumers” and sought damages from the European Commission for lost sales and wasted time. James Dyson controversially moved Dyson’s headquarters to Singapore in early 2019 in order, he claimed, to be closer to the growing Asian market. However, the EU remains an important market for the company and its products are designed in Malmesbury, Wiltshire. The court dispute is centred on the energy efficiency stickers ranking all vacuum cleaners sold in the EU from A to G. Following years of legal battles, Dyson successfully argued that the first version of the test, which required an empty bag or dust compartment, was flawed as it did not reflect real-world use. The regulation was annulled in 2018 after the intervention of the European court of justice, the EU’s highest court. However, the EU’s lower general court on Wednesday ruled that the commission had not breached its duties to act fairly or discriminated unfairly against the makers of bagless manufacturers like Dyson. It said there was enough doubt over the efficacy of tests to justify the commission choosing to use an empty bag. “By using the standardised empty receptacle testing method, the commission did not manifestly and gravely disregard the limits on its discretion or commit a sufficiently serious breach of the principles of equal treatment and sound administration,” the court said in a summary of the judgment published on Wednesday. Dyson reacted with fury to the judgment, hitting out at rivals in Germany. A Dyson spokesperson said: “The general court has chosen to turn back from the earlier decision of the European court of justice and seems unconcerned that the commission broke their own law and ignored Dyson’s evidence – they declare it is not obvious enough for them to justify damages. “This is an insult to the millions of shoppers who were misled and totally ignores the substantial harm – running to £150m – caused to Dyson. “Meanwhile the commission walks away scot-free despite having favoured the European bagged-machine lobby, including the major German manufacturers, throughout.” Dyson has the right to appeal to the court of justice within the next two months and 10 days.As an investigation is launched into a party held in No 10, other alleged gatherings are under the spotlight amid allegations that some in Downing Street may have contravened Covid rules. An inquiry announced by the prime minister, however, is focused on facts surrounding what happened on 18 December 2020. 18 December 2020 – Downing Street Christmas party A party was held in No 10 when London was in tier 3 restrictions, which banned social events, according to multiple sources after the Daily Mirror first broke the story last week. Several dozen people – a mix of civil service and political staff – reportedly attended and were told to bring “secret Santa” presents, with cheese and wine laid on. While Boris Johnson’s spokesperson insisted no rules had been broken and then denied any party took place, a video filmed four days after the event was published by ITV. The leaked footage showed Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then aide, rehearsing for televised press conferences and laughing and joking with aides about a party on 18 December. Stratton all but confirmed the event took place by laughing it off as a “business meeting” but added: “It was not socially distanced.” Cabinet secretary Simon Case will investigate what rules may have been broken. 10 December – Gavin Williamson’s staff party Earlier in the month, when London was in tier 2, which only allowed socialising in groups of six outside, then-education secretary Gavin Williamson threw a party in his Whitehall department. The most senior civil servant in the department, Susan Acland-Hood, attended and admitted that there was a “work-related” gathering hosted in the canteen. She did not dispute people were drinking wine, and blamed Williamson for instigating the event. She recalled he wanted to “say a few words” to thank staff after a difficult year. Acland-Hood confirmed Case would also consider the Department for Education event as part of his investigation into Westminster parties. Unspecified date in December – a festive No 10 quiz On an unspecified date also in December, a Christmas quiz was organised for No 10 staff, the BBC said, with invites emailed to everyone who worked in the building. Some guests were said to have dialled in by Zoom but others apparently attended in-person and sat in groups of six, some wearing Christmas jumpers. Downing Street was contacted for comment. 27 November – Downing Street leaving do While England was still in the grip of its second national lockdown, a leaving do was organised in No 10 – said to have been for Cleo Watson, a former aide to Johnson’s chief adviser Dominic Cummings. A source told the Guardian that Johnson personally attended and gave a speech, remarking on how full with people the room was, before leaving to continue working. At the time, socialising in groups from different households was completely banned and people were ordered to work from home, though key workers could continue going into the office. 13 November – Boris and Carrie Johnson flat party The latest alleged party to emerge dates to around midway through England’s second lockdown and relates to the Downing Street flat where Johnson and his wife live. The accusation came from Cummings and the event was said to have taken place on the same evening he left Downing Street for good. After Case’s review into the 18 December party was announced, Cummings urged the cabinet secretary to also investigate a party in the Johnsons’ flat. He alleged there had been “other flat parties” and suggested the pair’s “bubble” policy should be investigated. Asked this week if a party went ahead in his flat on 13 November, Johnson said “no”. The prime minister’s “bubble” has come under scrutiny before, after his spokesperson did not deny that a close friend of Carrie Johnson – Nimco Ali – stayed with them last Christmas. One of the explanations offered was that Ali was considered part of the Johnsons’ childcare support bubble.The three-person disciplinary panel hearing the case in which Robbie Dunne is charged with bullying and harassing his fellow jockey Bryony Frost over a seven-month period in 2020 adjourned on Wednesday to consider its decision, having been told by Louis Weston QC, representing the British Horseracing Authority, that the case highlighted a “sour, rancid” weighing-room culture which should be “thrown out and discarded”. Weston was presenting his closing statement to the panel on the fifth day of the hearing, and sought to present Dunne’s behaviour towards Frost on a number of occasions between February and September last year as part of a pattern of bullying behaviour. “It is unacceptable for the sport to have this going on,” Weston said. “It is unacceptable that Miss Frost should be allowed to compete on a racecourse on a level playing field, only to find when she comes back to the weighing room that she’s met by Mr Dunne, acting out a role as head of some patriarchy, re-enacting social attitudes of the 1950s in his capacity as a self-appointed enforcer of ‘weighing-room traditions’.” Weston said an incident at Southwell racecourse in September 2020, when Frost says that Dunne “promised to hurt” her by “putting her through a wing” in a future race, was “the culmination of Mr Dunne’s conduct over months and years”, rather than “a one-off flare-up of anger”. He also suggested a tweet by Dunne which apparently mocked Frost’s post-race interviews, posted in April 2020, showed he had been targeting the rider for several months. When Weston also highlighted an incident at Stratford in July 2020, when Dunne was seen to ride up to Frost and apparently remonstrate with her and is alleged to have directed a torrent of misogynistic abuse at her. “If there is a weighing-room culture that allows jockeys to threaten serious injury to another or their horse, to call another a whore, a slut and a slag, then that culture is sour, rancid and one that we say should thrown out and discarded,” Weston said. “It’s time, if it ever had its time, has gone.” Summing up the case for the defence, Roderick Moore suggested the BHA’s decision to charge Dunne with a seven-month series of alleged incidents of bullying and harassment had produced a case like “a jigsaw puzzle with numerous missing pieces”, and that “when you look at the bigger picture, it doesn’t make sense”. He told the panel that six female jockeys interviewed by the BHA during its investigation of Frost’s complaint “had not supported” her allegations against Dunne “in any meaningful sense”. He also suggested that for the panel to “get to the right answer” it would be “essential to understand the weighing room”. Moore said: “It is hard to imagine a tougher or more dangerous sport. The weighing room has a culture which you have now heard a great deal about, from a number of witnesses [including current and former jockeys]. “Mr [Tom] Scudamore, Mr [Nico] de Boinville, and Mr [Richard] Johnson are highly respectable, impressive individuals. They gave their take on stuff that happens in the weighing room. It is a dangerous sport and they have to tell each other if they think there is a danger, including in the way they think one of their colleagues is riding. That’s what happens and has to happen to keep them all as safe as possible.” Moore added: “If something needs to change, that’s for the future. That’s a policy matter, a political matter. You can only judge Mr Dunne against the present weighing room.”John Mitchell has denied that he abruptly left his role as England’s defence coach after a falling out with Eddie Jones despite signing an extension to his contract just three months before he quit the role. Mitchell, who has since taken up a coaching role at Wasps, rejected reports that an argument with Jones in the summer over whether he could watch his son Daryl, an international cricketer for New Zealand, play for Middlesex on a day off had precipitated his departure. Instead, the 57-year-old New Zealander highlighted the toll of working for England within tight bubble restrictions and the better work-life balance afforded to him at a Premiership club as reasons for his exit. While that may be true, the bubble restrictions in force during the Six Nations were significantly eased over the summer – Mitchell’s last campaign with England – and only partially explains the about-turn, having signed on through to the 2023 World Cup in February. Mitchell insists he came to the decision in April and informed Jones in May. “It was an easy decision actually in the end,” Mitchell said. “I had a normal chat and at the end said: ‘Eddie, I’m done mate, thanks very much. You’ve now got the opportunity to find someone else.’ “I think at 57 years of age I value things differently in my life, and just made a decision that I felt that I wanted to get out of international rugby at that point. And you’re sick of the bubbles, sick of the time away from home and I wanted to look at returning to club rugby. “I wake up and coach every day wanting to enjoy it and wanting to be myself. That’s the most important thing to me. I woke up one day in April, having been thinking about it for a month at least, and just thought: ‘I’ve got to make sure I live by what I value the most.’ I thought: ‘It’s time to make the right decision.’” Mitchell also insisted he still enjoys a “very good relationship” with Jones and said the fact he had endured the disappointment of being sacked as the All Blacks head coach after their World Cup last-four exit in 2003 meant he was less minded to stay on until 2023 in an effort to go one better with England than in Japan two years ago. “If a gold medal was important to me and a World Cup, if that was my main priority, then maybe my decision would be different, but I value life more than just winning a World Cup,” he said. “My life has been exposed before in not winning a World Cup so I know exactly what that’s like. I’m certainly not going to put myself in that situation again.”Emmanuel Macron has warned against the “manipulation” of history in a clear message to the far-right presidential candidate, Éric Zemmour, on a symbolic visit to Vichy. After the German occupation in 1940, the spa town was chosen for Marshal Philippe Pétain’s puppet regime, which collaborated with the Nazis and ensured the deportation of Jews to death camps. Zemmour has angered historians by claiming, instead, that Pétain saved French Jews. On Wednesday Macron addressed the shadow of the second world war hanging over France’s increasingly tense and divisive election campaign, although he will not announce his own bid for re-election until early next year. His presence in the town was calculated to counter Zemmour, 63, a far-right TV pundit who has convictions for inciting racial hatred. At the weekend Zemmour launched his own bid for the April presidential election, vowing to “save” French civilisation from immigration. To the anger of historians, Zemmour has repeatedly said that Vichy protected French Jews. He said on radio: “It’s my combat against repentance and guilt. The French people are permanently being made to feel guilty.” Jacques Chirac was the first president, in 1995, fully to acknowledge the role of France and the French state in rounding up Jews for concentration camps during the “criminal folly” of the Nazi occupation. After the war, Pétain was sentenced to death for treason, which was commuted to life in prison. French historians have furiously denounced Zemmour. The historian Jacques Sémelin wrote in Le Monde that Zemmour’s statements about Vichy had “no historical basis”. Macron’s trip to Vichy is the first time since 1978 that a French president has made an official visit to speak about the town’s history. Before a planned visit to a memorial for deported Jews, Macron told the local radio station, France Bleu, that “history is written by historians”, and it was a good thing to “respect it and learn about it” and to allow historians to build up a truth built on documents and traces of the past. He said history should not be “manipulated” or “agitated” or “revised” and that France should honour those who fought to make it free. Macron said he would celebrate the bravery of the 80 parliamentarians who in 1940 opposed the vote giving Pétain full powers. Zemmour, a Paris-born son of Jewish Berbers who emigrated from Algeria in the 1950s, has been called a dangerous racist and Holocaust denier by the French justice minister, Éric Dupond-Moretti. On TV this week Zemmour disagreed that he was a Holocaust denier and said his opponents called him racist to belittle his campaign and his supporters. That Macron has waded into the row with an official visit to Vichy shows that the government is stepping up its offensive against Zemmour. Although the polemicist, who has no election experience, has slipped back from his strong showing in the polls this autumn, he is still considered a serious contender in the first-round vote. Two finalists will go through to a second round on 24 April. The polls currently show Macron as favourite to win. A government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, said on Wednesday: “There are several visions of the history of France that are confronting each other in the public debate. Ours is the work of historians, on the basis of facts, documentation, research, and not based on personal whim and a will to use it for politics. Those who erase the crimes of the past are in some way justifying those of the future. On the contrary, we must learn from the past in all its complexity, including the darkest pages of our history.” On Thursday, Macron’s economy minister, Bruno Le Maire and Zemmour will hold a primetime debate on the TV channel France 2.Sports fans will be required to show proof of a negative Covid test before attending live events in England, as part of a range of measures announced by the government to halt the spread of Covid. A Covid pass that shows evidence of at least two vaccine doses will also be accepted at live sports events, but reports that the vaccine passport would be the only means of gaining access have proved to be unfounded. Boris Johnson announced his plan B on Wednesday evening after figures showed cases of the Omicron variant doubling every two to three days since it arrived in the country. The measures referring to sports events will take effect from a week’s time which means the weekend’s fixtures, notably in football and rugby union, will be unaffected. There will be some exceptions for smaller events too, but the rule will apply to outdoor seated events with a capacity of more than 10,000 people and outdoor standing events that can hold more than 4,000 people, as well as indoor events with capacities greater than 500. “We will make the NHS Covid pass mandatory for entrance into … spaces where large crowds gather,” Johnson said. “Having taken clinical advice since the arrival of Omicron, a negative lateral flow will also be sufficient.” Mask wearing will not be required at outdoor events, regardless of the crowd size. They will be mandated at indoor events, however, with exceptions made for athletes and for gyms and gym users. Johnson described the new measures as “proportionate and responsible” with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, telling the House of Commons that the number of Omicron cases in England could be as many as 10,000. The changing picture means most sports organisers will be anxious about further regulations in the weeks ahead. Two Premier League teams – Leicester and Tottenham – have revealed Covid outbreaks in their squads, and Spurs are likely to call for their fixture against Brighton on Sunday to be postponed after they were forced to call off Thursday’s game at home to Rennes. Organisers have been aware of the possibility of vaccine passports for some months, with the addition of negative lateral flow test results likely to make things easier. But there will be broader concerns over accurate verification, and also over the staffing levels needed to enforce the regulations. The rugby union Champions Cup has already been put under pressure by the Omicron outbreak, with competing squads quarantined in South Africa after positive tests. Next weekend in the second round of the tournament Bath v La Rochelle, Harlequins v Cardiff and Leicester v Connacht are scheduled to take place, with new requirements for foreign travel now in place. The Premiership has not run trials on Covid passes. The Premier League has made clear since the summer that it is well prepared for the measures, with the hope that effective implementation would limit the possibility of crowds being excluded from stadiums again should the pandemic continue to get worse. A further ban on crowds would be the worst outcome for organisers. Many professional sports teams went 14 months without being able to perform in front of crowds and the attendant drop in revenues caused a financial crisis in British sport that continues to reverberate.It may not boast a cathedral, a university or a major sports team – the sort of features often associated with a typical British metropolis. But the town of Marazion (population 1,440), perched prettily on the south coast of Cornwall, has nevertheless launched a bold campaign for city status. Marazion, which does have a couple of churches, a primary school and rowing and sailing clubs, would become the smallest and most southerly city if its proposal is accepted. Richard Stokoe, a town councillor who is leading the campaign, argued that Marazion deserved to be promoted. “The wonderful people, the fascinating history, stunning beauty and incredible community spirit mean Marazion would be a fitting and popular place to become the next town to be honoured with becoming a city,” he said. There is stiff opposition, with much larger urban areas such as Reading, Bournemouth and Middlesbrough having also entered the UK civic honours competition, launched as part of the Queen’s platinum jubilee celebrations, but Stokoe, a university lecturer, said the Cornish town was up for the fight. “Size is not important. Despite being a David in a field of Goliaths applying for city status, anyone who has ever lived, worked or visited Marazion knows that there is something for everyone and that it would be a worthy winner.” Visitors often whiz through Marazion on their way to the extraordinary island castle of St Michael’s Mount (which would not be part of the city, as it has its own parish council) and the town tends to be overshadowed by places such as St Ives and Penzance. But Marazion’s application is packed with intriguing facts and figures, one highlight being a comparison between the town’s clock tower and the style of architecture featured in the beloved children’s shows Trumpton and Camberwick Green. It also flags up its fine Cornish pasty shop. But champions of the entry say there is a serious side too. While visitors tend to see the idyllic aspects of Cornwall, there are pockets of deprivation. “Becoming the smallest city in the UK would bring a buzz to Marazion, pride to local people, and a real opportunity to help boost inward investment and create jobs,” said Stokoe, whose house is so close to the waves that his windows become draped with seaweed in stormy weather. “Apart from for holidays and tourism, south-west Cornwall has been an area that has all too often been overlooked, forgotten and ignored by the rest of the country. Making Marazion a city would show that Cornwall is no longer a Cinderella county.” The current smallest city in the UK by population is St Davids in Pembrokeshire, Wales, with a population of about 1,600. Marazion takes heart that St Asaph in north Wales (with a 3,355 population) was made a city as recently as 2012. Perhaps, inevitably, the campaign has not been welcomed by everyone. The town’s motto is semper eadem (always the same) and there were naysayers on the town council. Derek Laity, the town mayor, did not sound too enthusiastic, saying: “Marazion is very proud of being a Cornish town. It is our belief that it is one of the oldest, if not the oldest, chartered town in the United Kingdom.” But he added it would be “fitting” if the Queen considered the application. The chair of Marazion’s chamber of commerce, Paul Elliott, who runs a B&amp;B, is bullish about the contest and – jokingly – said it would be a “kick in the teeth” for St Davids if the campaign was successful. He admitted that the town did not expect to win, but would do well out of the publicity anyway. “People have heard of St Michael’s Mount, because people like Michael Portillo make programmes here. But not so many have heard of Marazion.” Joanie Willett, from the University of Exeter’s Institute of Cornish Studies, said: “Given the disproportionate amount of policy time that cities get compared to rural areas, this seems like a really good move. “It also recognises that the area’s visitor economy sees a regular throughfare of hundreds of thousands of people, and asks us to question what we mean by population, and whether this can also come to mean transient populations.” Wendy Stoten, a therapist, said Marazion was a beautiful old charter town. “Having smallest city status would draw attention to how wonderful it is. St Michael’s Mount is like our cathedral, and well visited to say the least, but Marazion is very worthy of being explored too.” Marazion facts The town’s curious name may be a corruption of Marghas Bighan, which means “little market” in Cornish. Through the ages there were many versions of the name before Marazion stuck. At low tide, Marazion is connected to St Michael’s Mount, a rocky island crowned by a medieval church and castle, by a stone causeway half a mile in length. For centuries it has been a place of pilgrimage – and is now a popular tourist attraction. As with many Cornish communities, keystones of the economy were historically farming, fishing and tin mining. The shallow water of Mount’s Bay made it perfect for netting pilchards. Henry Francis Lyte, who wrote the hymns Abide with Me and Praise, My Soul, the King of Heaven, was a curate in Marazion in the 19th century. John Wesley, the founder of the Wesleyan church, preached in the town. Marazion now features a sailing club, a gig-rowing club, a snooker club and a Quaker meeting house. There is a football team, a choir and the Marazion Wives’ Club, which hosts talks to inspire and celebrate. It also puts on a daylong summer festival – the Folly Fest – and a Father Christmas parade in the winter. A favourite locals’ watering spot is the Marazion Hotel and Cutty Sark Bar. In the 1950s, Pathé News turned up to film an item there about a beer-drinking horse. There is at present only one city in Cornwall: Truro, which is 25 miles to the north-east. The last time the UK government asked for applications for city status was as part of the Queen’s diamond jubilee celebrations in 2012. It was granted to St Asaph in Wales, Perth in Scotland and Chelmsford in England.Allegra Stratton has stepped down as the government’s spokesperson for the Cop26 climate summit after footage emerged of her joking about a party at Downing Street during the peak of lockdown rules in December last year. Boris Johnson told a coronavirus press briefing on Wednesday that Stratton had been an “outstanding spokeswoman … I am very sorry to lose her”. But he added: “I take responsibility for everything that happens in this government and I have throughout the pandemic.” In a statement sent to journalists and read out to TV crews in front of her home, Stratton – Johnson’s former press secretary – said she deeply regretted joking with other No 10 aides during a rehearsal for a later-dropped plan for filmed Downing Street press conferences. “The British people have made immense sacrifices in the battle against Covid 19. I now fear that my comments in the leaked video of 20 December may have become a distraction against that fight,” she said. “My remarks seemed to make light of the rules, rules that people were doing everything to obey. That was never my intention. I will regret those remarks for the rest of my days and offer my profound apologies to all of you for them.” Saying she remained proud of her work on Cop26, Stratton said: “I understand the anger and frustration that people feel. To all of you who lost loved ones, endured intolerable loneliness and struggled with your businesses – I am sorry and this afternoon I have offered my resignation to the prime minister.” Stratton moved to her Cop26 role after the planned Downing Street briefings were axed. A former journalist for the Guardian, BBC and ITV, Stratton also worked for the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, before switching to No 10. Earlier Downing Street said Stratton and another No 10 aide, Ed Oldfield, who was named in the video, had not been suspended. Oldfield has not offered any comment since the videos emerged. A number of senior journalists and former colleagues of Stratton said she was being scapegoated for a party which, during the video, she said she had not even attended. Nazir Afzal, a senior prosecutor who has been a vocal campaigner for the victims of Covid-19 after losing family, said: “I accept Allegra Stratton’s apology, but she was not the problem. A good leader doesn’t blame the staff. A good leader takes responsibility.” Robert Peston, ITV’s political editor, who had worked with Stratton while she was a journalist, said her resignation was confirmation the event had taken place. “She is a model for many in modern politics … in that she has taken responsibility and quit without prevarication. “It would be nonsensical for [Stratton] to have resigned if the Downing Street party had never happened, and she wasn’t conspicuously making light of it. So she has just blown up the prime minister’s ‘I’ve been assured the party never happened.’” Jo Goodman, co-founder of Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice, said it was hard to accept Stratton’s apology. “There was simply no way she could have stayed in the position after the pain and hurt her words have caused bereaved families over the past 24 hours,” she said. “If she’s truly sorry, she now needs to tell the full truth. That means coming clean on what happened, and who was there.”Once again Thomas Tuchel was left to reflect on Chelsea’s inability to take care of the small details. The European champions are not playing with the right attitude at the moment and although they almost got away with it this time it was not a surprise when they ended up relinquishing top spot in Group H to Juventus after this chaotic draw with Zenit St Petersburg. Tuchel was not a happy man. He did not want to dwell on confidence-boosting goals for Romelu Lukaku and Timo Werner. Tuchel had watched in despair when his side twice relinquished leads during their 3-2 defeat against West Ham last weekend and, just when it seemed that Werner had restored order against Zenit by driving in his second goal of the evening, Chelsea capitulated again, their shoddy defence crumbling in stoppage time and allowing Magomed Ozdoev to blast in a stunning equaliser for the Russian side. Chelsea, who could face Ajax, Bayern Munich or Real Madrid in the last 16, should have handled the situation better. Andreas Christensen was outmuscled in the air by the substitute Artem Dzyuba when Zenit went long and Ozdoev had space to shoot from 20 yards. The substitute’s drive flew past Kepa Arrizabalaga, who could not get a strong enough hand to it, and Chelsea had found a way to fall below Juve, who finished first after beating Malmo 1-0. “If you concede six goals in two matches my ambition to talk about individual performances is not so high,” Tuchel said. “We had a very good first 15 minutes and we forgot why we are the better team. Once we change our behaviour, we get punished. Our behaviour changes when we have a lead. This is something we should never do.” Chelsea, who began in pole position after smashing Juventus 4-0 last month, had made a deceptively commanding start under the roof at the Gazprom Arena. The signs were promising when they went ahead after two minutes, Ross Barkley swinging in a corner from the left and Sardar Azmoun inadvertently glancing the ball on for Werner to tap in from a yard out. At that stage it seemed that Tuchel’s decision to make eight changes would pay off. For 15 minutes Chelsea were dominant. Werner’s pace caused problems and initially it seemed that Zenit had no way out of their half. Yet Zenit, who drop into the Europa League, were allowed back into the contest. The ball kept running away from Lukaku, who looked rusty on his first start since 20 October, and Zenit twice went close to equalising midway through the half, Malcom shooting too close to Arrizabalaga and Azmoun heading wide. Chelsea briefly threatened to restore order, Mason Mount testing Mikhail Kerzakhov, but there were too many errors. Callum Hudson-Odoi, inconsistent at right wing-back, was booked and it was clear that Zenit had identified Saúl Ñíguez as a weak link on the opposite flank. This was another night to forget for Saúl. The Spaniard’s performances in central midfield have been poor and he was just as unconvincing in a defensive role, even though he almost scored in the first minute. Saúl lacked positional awareness and Tuchel will surely be having second thoughts about using him as an alternative to the injured Ben Chilwell, not least because it was the 27-year-old’s shanked clearance that led to Zenit levelling in the 38th minute. Chelsea were all over the place. César Azpilicueta was unable to head the ball to safety and when Douglas Santos crossed from the left Claudinho headed past Arrizabalaga after peeling behind Malang Sarr. With Thiago Silva and Antonio Rüdiger given the night off, Chelsea were a mess. Sarr toiled in central defence and there was also a lack of control in midfield with N’Golo Kanté, Jorginho and Mateo Kovacic missing. Tuchel had experimented, moving Reece James into the middle, but it was too easy for Zenit to thread passes behind Barkley and the England international. Too careless, Barkley was robbed in a dangerous position after 41 minutes. Christensen foolishly tried to play offside and Malcom sent Azmoun clear to finish after rounding Arrizabalaga. Filling in for Édouard Mendy, Arrizabalaga would make further crucial saves from Azmoun. Chelsea clung on and levelled in the 62nd minute, Werner playing a one-two with Barkley before gifting Lukaku his first goal since 14 September. Confidence restored, Chelsea pressed for a winner and first place should have been theirs when Christian Pulisic, on for Hudson‑Odoi, released Werner, who swerved inside before cracking a low shot past Kerzhakov. Instead Zenit left Tuchel bemoaning his side’s lack of focus.Good morning. Malcolm Turnbull welcomes climate-focused Liberal challengers, Russia calls for urgent talks with the US over Ukraine, and Nitram dominates the Aacta awards. Former prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has described the trend of climate-focused independents contesting traditional Liberal seats as a “very, very healthy development”. Turnbull, who led the Liberals to victory at the 2016 federal election, said “clearly a lot of traditional Liberal party voters feel the party has moved way off to the right”, and said governments being forced to work with crossbenchers was positive for “diversity in our parliaments”. Moderate Liberal candidates face challenges from at least five climate-focused independents at the forthcoming federal election. Scott Morrison’s federal Coalition currently holds a one-seat lower house majority. Russia has called for a high-level “discussion of strategic security on the [European] continent” with the United States, after a virtual summit between Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden appeared to make little progress on the issue. Biden said he was hoping to announce “meetings at a higher level” involving four Nato members, as he also ruled out sending US troops in response to the build up of over 100,000 Russian troops along the border with Ukraine. A former counsel assisting the Independent Commission Against Corruption has recommended an investigation into the purchase of more than $1m worth of environmental offsets as part of the WestConnex motorway project. A consultant who who worked on the project’s environmental assessment is part owner of the property on which the offsets are situated. A second consultant who holds shares in the offset site was employed as a conservation officer in the NSW environment department at the time the land, near Kempsey on the state’s north coast, was purchased in 2014. The consultants told Guardian Australia it was their understanding the offset requirements for WestConnex had not been developed at the time the property was purchased, but barrister Geoffrey Watson told Guardian Australia: “the department needs to investigate this matter to make sure its controls were appropriate.” Australia Social media posts allegedly by Queensland prison officers are being investigated, including calls for violence against “maggot” inmates. Greens MP Michael Berkman has described the posts as “degrading, discriminatory, and violent” and called for an inquiry. A man who left 90% of his $30m estate to his GP in a will altered just months before his death appeared “on the ball”, the solicitor who drafted the will has told a Sydney court. The GP denies striking a deal with the man, in exchange for keeping him out of hospital. A 25-year-old Victorian man has been charged with allegedly threatening Gold Walkley winning journalist, Mark Willacy. The investigative reporter has extensively covered alleged war crimes by Australian special forces in Afghanistan. Justin Kurzel’s controversial Port Arthur massacre film Nitram has won eight Aacta film awards, including best film and best film director. Last night’s ceremony was dominated by tributes to David Gulpilil. The world The father of far-right Chilean presidential frontrunner, José Antonio Kast, was a Nazi party member, documents confirmed by German officials have suggested. Kast, who also has close family ties to the Pinochet regime, narrowly leads his leftist opponent ahead of a 19 December runoff vote. Boris Johnson faces further scrutiny over his government’s honesty, with his former press secretary resigning following footage emerging of staffers exchanging jokes about a party at Downing Street during the height of lockdown in the UK. Finland’s prime minister has apologised for going clubbing, hours after a close contact tested positive for coronavirus. The 36-year-old Social Democratic leader, Sanna Marin, denies contravening social distancing guidelines but says she “should have used better judgment”. A two-and-a-half-year restoration of Rembrandt’s masterpiece, The Night Watch, has revealed a hidden sketch, detailing a series of changes to the 34 characters depicted in the painting. Use of a “calcium map” helped reveal the sketch, made with calcium-rich paint. Recommended reads How has the pandemic made you rethink your life? That’s the question the Guardian Australia health and wellbeing team are asking – so please send us your submissions. Have you reconsidered the way you work; the way you live? The relationships around you; or the life choices those around you make? Let us know. Death, taxes, and rising Australian property prices. If it’s beginning to sound like a broken record, that’s because it is, Greg Jericho explains: “Sydney house prices are now completely divorced from wages. In the past two years, wages in New South Wales increased 3.5% while at the same time apartment prices grew 17% and house prices a stunning 40%.” So is the trend set to reverse any time soon? On current evidence, not just yet. For many in Australia, it’s not the festive season until there are cherries. But thanks to a record-breakingly wet and cold November, in 2021 this may not be the case. As cherry grower, Barisha Batinich explains: “It’s caught some of our early areas off guard a bit, because we’re usually 60% through my whole farm at this stage, and really I’m only just 10% of the way at the moment.” So what does this mean for the NSW town of Young, the “cherry capital of Australia”? Ann Ding gets to the pip of things – and throws in some cherry recipes for good measure. Listen It’s a bill set up to protect the vulnerable from online trolls. But could powerful exclusions, including media companies, undermine the legislation’s effectiveness? On this episode of Full Story, reporter Paul Karp dissects the issue with Laura Murphy-Oates. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport NRL tsar Peter V’landys styles himself as a decisive leader, but on the issue of Covid vaccinations Australian rugby league’s boss has passed the onus of leadership onto clubs, Nick Tedeschi writes. In the Ashes battle of Australia vs Joe Root there’s a clear and immediate winner, even after just one day’s play at the Gabba. As Barney Ronay explains: “There is always talk about ‘targeting’ an Ashes captain. A simple dismissal isn’t enough. Captains must be assailed, hauled from their plinth like a tinpot town-square statue.” Media roundup Three in five Australian employers say vaccination status will affect their hiring decisions, the Age reports, with almost a third admitting to sacking unvaccinated workers. Scott Morrison will bring forward $1.3bn in manufacturing funding, according to the Australian, countering Anthony Albanese’s move to make manufacturing a core part of Labor’s election platform. And, Queensland’s peak medical body has called for 1,500 new hospital beds, the Courier Mail writes, as part of a plan to reduce strain on frontline workers. Coming up A Senate inquiry into the state of media concentration in Australia will hand down its long-awaited report. And if you’ve read this far … It’s a $66m beauty pageant. But authorities in Saudi Arabia are planning a major crackdown ahead of the popular regional event – after the discovery of Botox injections and other illegal “enhancements” led to the disqualification of 40 camel contestants. Camel breeding is a major business across the Middle East, but facial fillers, body part rubber banding, and lip or nose stretching has sadly become widespread in recent years. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.China’s economy has become heavily dependent on property development over the last decade. High-rise apartments have mushroomed across hundreds of cities to house a growing white-collar workforce, while glass and steel office blocks are dominating city centres, mimicking Shanghai’s glittering skyline. Valued at more than $50tn after 20 years of rapid growth, Chinese real estate is worth twice as much as the US property market and four times China’s annual income. George Magnus, an associate at Oxford University’s China Centre, says this real estate market ranks as the most important single commercial sector in the world. Leaders in Beijing, aware that the boom was running out of steam before the pandemic hit, have spent the last year trying to bring the ballooning, largely private-sector industry painlessly down to earth. Tighter regulations have curtailed borrowing binges and speculative building projects have begun to dry up. The overhang of debts in some companies has proved trickier to deal with, especially after it emerged that China Evergrande, one of the largest developers, owed $300bn. Funded by a growing Chinese middle-class and borrowings from international investors, Evergrande has grown to own more than 1,300 projects in more than 280 cities across China. Like many indebted companies, Evergrande used fresh loans to pay off old maturing loans until investors, concerned about its stability, refused to play ball without a huge hike in interest payments. In recent days the company’s share price has plunged and City analysts believe any ability to escape a government bailout has all but evaporated. Kaisa is another developer that has fallen into the same trap. It cannot find investors to finance fresh loans at interest rates it can afford. Such is the pressure on these companies, the central bank has eased short-term borrowing costs and is poised to go further with a cut to the headline interest rate. Property, though, is only one of Beijing’s headaches. The economy’s recovery is petering out and inflation is increasing, as it is in many other parts of the world. The Communist party leadership has also embarked on a battle for control of industries that have managed to secure a degree of autonomy. Xi Jinping, China’s president, is especially concerned that hi-tech businesses have become untethered from state control. It irks the Chinese leadership that Naspers, a Cape-Town-based tech investor, injected just $32m, in 2001, into an obscure internet firm that went on to develop the popular messaging and payment service WeChat. The internet services provided by that company, Tencent, are now used by hundreds of millions of Chinese, and Naspers’ shares are worth more than $200bn. Last year Beijing blocked the $37bn flotation in New York of the Ant Group’s affiliate company Alibaba and this year began to accuse billionaire tech owners of ignoring consumer rights and data privacy, fuelling excess debt, and fostering economic inequality. More than $1tn was knocked off the value of Chinese companies, but this failed to deter Xi. According to government sources who have spoken to the Financial Times, Beijing is preparing to force tech start-ups to raise money in China, restricting the main channels used to attract international capital. A hit-list of new companies in sensitive sectors has been drawn up to prevent their using variable interest entities (VIEs) to run their China businesses. VIEs are a legal structure used for decades by Chinese tech groups, including Alibaba and Tencent, to circumvent foreign investment restrictions and raise billions of dollars from international investors. Diana Choyleva, a renowned China watcher and head of the independent consultancy Enodo Economics, said: “China no longer wants to list its best companies and its potential future tech stars abroad – both from national security considerations as well as because it wants to offer better investment choices for domestic investors. The new Beijing stock exchange was just opened to serve innovation-oriented small and medium-size firms.” In the last week, the ride-hailing group Didi Chuxing has said it will delist from the New York stock exchange. Choyleva said the move was not so much to restrict foreign ownership of shares in Chinese companies as to make them purchase through domestic stock exchanges under the watchful eye of China’s financial regulators. “It’s not clear whether China is also banning foreign investors from buying these assets in domestic markets. I think it is much more about restricting and eliminating the VIE funding route.”A California man killed himself with a makeshift guillotine in an unusual and macabre case that resulted in the arrest of an alleged squatter who police say tampered with human remains. Police believe Robert Enger built the contraption at his Santa Rosa home as early as 2019, the Santa Rosa Press Democrat reported. Neighbors told the newspaper that Enger was friendly and an “unbelievable craftsman”, who also struggled with mental health problems for many years. But the nature of his death didn’t become clear until after a woman came across a skull in the bushes near her brother’s home and reported it to police earlier this year. Officials eventually determined the skull, which had scrape marks on it and a wire handle, was that of Enger. The 62-year-old was last seen alive in July 2019 when he was treated at a local hospital for a head injury that police now suspect resulted from a failed attempt to use the homemade device. Police think he died by suicide using the contraption, but that his remains, at least initially, went undiscovered and his home was empty until a man named Robert Melvin Ross III started squatting there in 2020. Police allege Ross lived in the house with Enger’s remains for months and invited others there for parties and to use methamphetamine. Law enforcement were called to the property on multiple occasions, and say it was “filthy” and “filled with debris, trash, foods, piles of stuff”, according to the Press Democrat. But they were not aware that Enger’s remains were under the debris. In 2021, a man told police he had attended a party at the property with Ross and saw what he believed were the decomposed remains of a human. He said Ross at one point “proceeded to remove the skull” and scraped it with a knife, the newspaper reported. Police later found Ross, who told them he had discovered Enger’s body at the bottom of the contraption. “Robert Enger placed himself under that contraption, manipulated it, was killed, and then his body was manipulated later by Robert Ross and others,” said Anthony Turner, a violent crimes detective with the Santa Rosa police, to the Press Democrat. Ross has been charged with the unauthorized entry of a dwelling and unlawful handling of human remains and pleaded no contest to possession of a memento from human remains, but has since asked to withdraw that plea and said he signed it “under duress, meaning the contract is null and void”. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org • This article was amended on 9 December 2021 to remove details about the death which were not in accordance with Guardian editorial guidelines.The government is facing growing pressure to relaunch furlough and other emergency financial support schemes after imposing working from home orders in England because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. Business leaders and unions warned that failure to provide assistance to companies and their workers in the hardest-hit sectors of the economy risked squandering progress made since the easing of pandemic restrictions earlier this autumn. Some reacted with anger, accusing the prime minister of trying to “save his own skin” by announcing the curbs as a diversion from the week’s political scandals. Ruby McGregor-Smith, president of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “The government must once again stand shoulder to shoulder with business and provide a package of support to ensure that we get through a challenging winter without serious damage to our economic recovery.” Warning that Treasury support and steps to fix the sick pay system were glaring omissions from the government announcement on tighter restrictions, union leaders said furlough would be needed for the hardest-hit sectors of the economy. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “Requiring people to work from home over the busy Christmas period will hit jobs – unless ministers bring back furlough. Cleaners, receptionists, conference and banqueting staff and hospitality and retail workers will be short of work if people don’t come into offices,” she said. “Ministers must reassure workers in hard-hit sectors like hospitality, leisure and travel that their livelihoods are secure.” Manuel Cortes, general secretary of transport union TSSA, said: “Many more workers are going to feel the pinch as plan B kicks in. The government must bring back the furlough job retention scheme to ensure no one loses their jobs as a result of the new restrictions.” Boris Johnson has told employers in England their staff should work from home where possible from Monday and announced mandatory vaccine passports for nightclubs and venues hosting large crowds. Matthew Fell, chief policy director at the CBI, said the fresh restrictions were a “big setback for businesses”, especially in hospitality, retail and transport, at a key time of year for sales. “It will be vital that the impact of these restrictions is closely monitored, and that the government is ready with targeted support as required,” he said. Even before Johnson’s Wednesday announcement, concern about Omicron had already dented consumer confidence, hitting sectors of the economy where face-to-face interaction is most prominent, such as in hospitality, travel and leisure. Pubs, hotels and restaurants had already reported a wave of Christmas party cancellations, while tighter controls on foreign trips have led to travel and tourism firms suffering a drop in winter holiday bookings. Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said the new rules would have a “devastating impact” on venues and questioned the timing of the announcement. “Is this sound evidence-based public policymaking, or is this an attempt to move the news agenda on from a damaging story about the Downing Street Christmas party? It feels that nightclubs and bars have been thrown under the bus by the prime minister for him to save his own skin.” The trade body, which represents nightclubs, theatres and other venues, said its members’ businesses in Scotland and Wales – where similar steps to those being planned for England have already been announced – had seen a drop in trade of up to 30%. Hospitality industry leaders said there had already been a downturn in business due to mixed messages from the government, while warning that orders for office staff to work from home would hit footfall in city centre establishments over the crucial Christmas period. Alex Proud, owner of the three Proud Cabaret venues in London and Brighton, said bookings were down by more than a quarter already, while the passport scheme would trigger further cancellations. “This is armageddon for us. It’s a disaster that doesn’t need to happen.” Martin Williams, the boss of M Restaurants and the Gaucho steak chain, said jobs in the hospitality sector would be put at risk. “Any government measures need to be offset with further support to our sector in terms of an extension on business rates and a permanent VAT reduction,” he said. Despite fears over the fallout from the latest measures, economists said the new controls were relatively light touch compared with earlier phases of the pandemic, meaning a muted impact for the economy as a whole. Paul Dales, chief UK economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said plan B would probably shave between 0.2% to 0.5% from GDP. “It feels fairly small, if people don’t buy train tickets, go to work or the pub near the office. It’s very different to shutting all retailers and hospitality,” he said. However, the launch of tougher controls such as the closure of non-essential retail, hospitality and schools would cause more damage. This could trigger a 3% fall in GDP in January, Dales said. Analysts at Barclays said the economy could be dragged down by between 4% and 5% in the first three months of 2022 in such a “worst-case scenario”. Economists are increasingly expecting the Bank of England to hold back from raising interest rates when its monetary policy committee meets on Thursday next week. However, the impact could be mitigated because businesses have adapted and found ways to continue trading through periods of restrictions and lockdowns, for example by using online channels. In a sign of the progress made since the start of the crisis almost two years ago, the US investment bank Goldman Sachs said it expected that under a “downside scenario” with “nationwide restrictions” imposed for three months, the economy could sink by just 1.7% in the first quarter of 2022. It stands in stark contrast to a collapse of almost 20% in the second quarter of 2020 during the first wave of Covid-19, which was part of the worst economic slump ever recorded. However, any move to further tighten controls would trigger an immediate contraction in the economy and turbo-charge demands for emergency economic support measures such as business grants, loans, tax cuts and furlough. Dales said: “If the chancellor didn’t revive the furlough scheme, the fall in the economy would be bigger or last longer.”Here is Jacob Steinberg’s verdict. Thanks for joining me, it’s been fun. доброй ночи! Thomas Tuchel has yet to kick off his post-game press conference yet – TV coveraged moved swiftly on to the 8pm games. We’ll have Jacob Steinberg’s report online shortly. Before I sign off, a tip of the hat to Timo Werner – two goals and an assist tonight, and showing glimpses of the player who lit up the Bundesliga with Leipzig. After all that drama, Chelsea are left in second place – not the end of the world by any means, but it could mean a tougher tie in Monday’s draw. They can’t be drawn against an English side, of course, so their possible opponents are Bayern Munich, Real Madrid, Ajax and the winners of Group G. You would imagine they would prefer the latter, and who knows – maybe Juve will land PSG. Their other possible opponents are Atlético, Sporting and whoever emerges from Groups E-G tonight. Simon Burnton is on hand for Chelsea’s clash with Juventus in the Women’s Champions League: You can join Scott Murray for Manchester United v Young Boys, as Ralf Rangnick rings the changes with United’s progress secured: Moise Kean’s header proves enough for Juve, who edge Chelsea to top Group H despite their 4-0 loss at Stamford Bridge. Football remains a funny old game. That’s the final whistle, and Chelsea’s second-half recovery mission fails at the last. Zenit were good value for the draw, and put up quite the fight for a team guaranteed to finish third in the group. The midfielder, who has only been on for 15 minutes or so, was given time to shoot – but still did brilliantly from 30 yards out, smashing a half-volley into the roof of the net. Kepa got a touch, but Ozdoev’s shot simply had too much sauce. Apologies, Chelsea fans – Zenit are level, thanks to a brilliant strike from Magomed Ozdoev! 93 mins: Or not – a couple of injury stoppages mean Chelsea have seen out half the allotted time without any trouble. 90 mins: Six minutes of added time. Hold on to your hats! 88 mins: So, without ever really getting control of the game back, Chelsea have turned this around. A couple more minutes to hold on, and they’ll escape this belter of a game still on top of the group. As with Lukaku’s leveller, Chelsea move through the gears at a frightening pace. From a standing start, Pulisic plays a neat one-two with Ziyech and finds Werner, who is just onside. He cuts inside his marker and fires clinically into the far corner! Nothing wrong with the finish here, though! Werner sweeps home after another fine attacking move, and after the VAR checks the necessary lines, the goal is given! 83 mins: Chelsea are still struggling for any forward momentum, although Pulisic digs out a cross that has Kerzhakov worried – but Werner’s header is awkward and devoid of power. 80 mins: Zenit win a corner, Chelsea clear it away at the second time of asking. The shots-on-target count is level at six each. Zenit made a third change – why not – with Magomed Ozdoyev replacing Kuzyayev in central midfield. It’s still 1-0 to Juventus, so Chelsea still need a winner to top the group. Azmoun does go off, replaced by Dzyuba, and Malcom is replaced by Aleksandr Erokhin. 75 mins: Lukaku’s evening is over, his goal drought over at least, even if he looked pretty rusty at times. Kai Havertz replaces him, while Azmoun is keen to continue, wagging a finger at Semak in the dugout. Another Chelsea change, Saul’s stint at wing-back ended as Marcos Alonso comes on. 74 mins: Mostovoy brings down Douglas’ long ball brilliantly and cuts back towards Azmoun, who goes down in a heap after clattering into Sarr. Replays show he ran into the centre-back, and he has to limp off and see the physio. 73 mins: A couple more Zenit corners, the second of which is hoofed downfield by Sarr. Zenit regroup and charge forward once more ... Don’t forget, you can join Simon Burnton for part two of Chelsea’s big European night here: 70 mins: Another great save from Kepa! Claudinho’s cross is met by a thumping header from Azmoun, low to Kepa’s left – but the keeper gets down brilliantly to keep it out. He’s had a great game tonight. 68 mins: Having paid the price for a more passive approach in the second half, Zenit push forward again, backed by their sky-blue wall of fans behind Kepa’s goal. Actually, it’s more of a “laser blue”, as made famous by third-tier Manchester City in 98-99. 66 mins: Zenit win a rare corner but Chelsea break and Werner pounces on a mistake from Krugovoi – but there are enough defensive colleagues to crowd him out and spare the substitute’s blushes. 64 mins: That superb assist to the assist is Barkley’s last action of the game. He goes off, replaced by Hakim Ziyech, and Christian Pulisic is on for Hudson-Odoi. Danil Krugovoi is on for Zenit, replacing Rakitskiy in central defence. This is a lovely goal. Barkley and Werner play a one-two, with the former playing a perfect through ball that draws the keeper out of goal. Werner gets to it first and prods sideways to Lukaku, who is onside. He takes a touch and wallops it into the empty net! 60 mins: James’ free kick is headed away but Chelsea build up again patiently ... 59 mins: Douglas nods, or chests, the ball back to his keeper, who can’t keep the ball in play. A cheap Chelsea corner, but nothing comes of it – until Lovren oafishly hauls Werner down to hand Chelsea a dangerous free kick ... 57 mins: Chelsea are pressing higher and forcing mistakes from their opponents – but still look vulnerable when Zenit are able to spring forward. The next goal will be huge, if you’ll forgive my stating the obvious. 55 mins: Lukaku gets on the ball on the edge of the area but can’t adjust to get his shot away. The ball falls to Saul, who stings Kerzhakov’s palms with a fierce strike from a narrow angle. 52 mins: Barkley carries the ball upfield but with Werner and Lukaku standing still, he opts to shoot from distance. His effort is on target, but Kerzakov is right behind it. 50 mins: Wendel, who has impressed in central midfield, is forced off with an injury. Andrei Mostovoy comes on to replace him. He’s a winger and not a direct replacement; it looks like Malcom will tuck into midfield. 48 mins: Hudson-Odoi finds space on the right, but his low cross is cut out. We’re back under way, with Chelsea looking to push upfield from the get-go. A reminder that it’s still Juventus 1-0 Malmö in Turin, so Chelsea would need to win here in order to top the group. They are through regardless, but as runners-up they could only draw Bayern, Real Madrid, Ajax or the winners of Group G (Lille, Salzburg, Sevilla or Wolfsburg). If I were Tuchel, I wouldn’t like those odds. Here come the teams. It doesn’t look like Thomas Tuchel has made any half-time changes, which is somewhat surprising. Some half-time reading. Sadly, Timo won’t be joining this list of early winners: Chelsea made a perfect start, going ahead after 90 seconds through Timo Werner. For the next 20 minutes there was little to worry about, but Zenit fought back in style, scoring two quickfire goals and missing chances at a third as Chelsea’s defence fell apart. More soon. 44 mins: Werner gets upfield in response, but is crowded out by a gaggle of Zenit defenders. This has been great knockabout stuff, like the halcyon days of Masters Football. 42 mins: Zenit really should be two goals clear, and when Thomas Tuchel stops being furious, he’ll be grateful to Kepa. Another diagonal sets Azmoun away, and he tries to lift the ball over the keeper – but Kepa gets a big left hand to it! Ever since some snipe or other said Chelsea looked likely winners, they have completely lost their way. That was a very poor goal to concede, reminiscent of Leipzig’s first against City last night as possession was lost, and a hopeful through ball cut their defence apart. It goes from bad to worse for Chelsea as Sardar Azmoun beats the offside trap, rounds Kepa and puts the hosts ahead! Chelsea gave possession back to Zenit after Hudson-Odoi kicked out at Douglas, earning a yellow card. They work the ball forward, and a poor clearance gives Douglas space to whip a ball in. With Chelsea’s back three still at sea, Claudinho nips in to flick a header beyond Kepa. One-one! But now the hosts are level, Claudinho heading home Douglas Santos’ cross with nobody near him! 36 mins: At the other end, Azmoun motors into the penalty area, pursued doggedly by Christensen, but shakes him off at the byline. Saul is in the right place to clear it away ... 34 mins: Oof, Chelsea come very close to a second! Lukaku provides an inch-perfect cross towards Mount at the far post – but Kerzhakov is off his line to block his shot! 32 mins: A spell of Zenit pressure ends when Douglas Santos is caught offside from his own throw-in. He trots back downfield with a rueful shake of the head. 28 mins: Chelsea win a corner, and could certainly do with a repeat of their early set-piece success. It’s a similar tactic, with Saul flicking on Barkley’s cross, but it ends up on the roof of the net. 26 mins: Another chance for Zenit, with Azmoun hooking a cross towards Claudinho, whose header has plenty of power but no direction. They’re finding the gap between Chelsea’s back three and midfield four with increasing regularity. 25 mins: Big save from Kepa! Zenit have come back into the game, and they really should be level here. Malcom is put clean through on goal by Claudinho, but his shot is very well saved by Kepa Arrizabalaga, who races off his line smartly and blocks with his thigh. 23 mins: A warning for Chelsea as Zenit quickly play through them on the break – but Malcom’s shot is blocked when he had better options in front of him. “That was a fabulous finish … by Timo Werner’s standards,” honks Justin Kavanagh. 20 mins: Zenit pass it around midfield without much urgency. Malcom and Reece James give each other a little shove off the ball, after the Brazilian is brought down by Christensen’s challenge. Juventus 1-0 Malmö: The hosts lead in Turin through Moise Kean, but it won’t matter as long as Chelsea win here. Which looks likely, even at this early stage. It’s an interesting one, given how incredibly effective James is in his preferred position. But it’s working nicely so far. 14 mins: It’s cleared, and while Zenit win it back, the move ends when Lovren is unable to keep the ball in play to the left of goal. 12 mins: Zenit attempt their first real foray forward and Claudinho seeks out Azmoun at the back post – but Azpilicueta is there to head behind. From the corner, Barrios’ hesitant shot deflects off Sarr. Another corner ... 9 mins: It looks like Saúl is playing left wing-back, with Callum Hudson-Odoi on the other side and Reece James in midfield. It’s all very fluid, though, while Zenit look static by comparison. 7 mins: Chelsea win a corner after defensive dithering from Barrios, but Lukaku is caught offside. 5 mins: Chelsea keep breaking at pace, causing the Zenit backline no end of problems. This time, Dejan Lovren is on hand to cut out Werner’s attempted cross, after the German had made a surging run into the area. 3 mins: What a start for Chelsea – and they almost break through again, with Lukaku’s pass to Werner cut out smartly by Karavaev. Barkley’s corner takes a touch off Azmoun and lands in front of Timo Werner, who taps in from a couple of inches out! 1 min: Saul breaks forward almost straight from kick-off, and his shot from a tight angle is turned behind. From the corner ... Chelsea players, and a number of Zenit players, take the knee and are met with risible whistling from the crowd. The teams are heading out of the tunnel, with Roman Abramovich up in the gods watching on. By the way, the space-age Gazprom Arena will also be the venue for May’s final. Here are the pre-game thoughts of Thomas Tuchel: “We need fresh legs, because we want to play a high intensity game. It’s a moment to trust other players and to push them ... we don’t want to [just] manage games. “We miss Jorginho, Kovacic, Kanté – Romelu is back, let’s see how long he can play. It’s crucial because we need everybody in shape. Rom is missing rhythm and game minutes, that’s why he starts today.” Stat alert: If Chelsea secure top spot in Group H, it’ll be the first time since 2006-07 that all four English clubs have topped their Champions League group. In that season Manchester United, Liverpool and Chelsea all reached the semi-finals (Arsenal went out in, er, the last 16) but it was Milan who won the trophy. So, Thomas Tuchel has rung the changes from the weekend defeat to West Ham – only Andreas Christensen, Reece James and Mason Mount remain in the team. Romelu Lukaku starts up front, with Saúl another notable selection. The on-loan midfielder has had a rough time of it at Chelsea so far, but could make amends tonight. Sergei Semak goes with a line-up that’s close to his strongest, with Sardar Azmoun in as the lone striker ahead of Artem Dzyuba. Four Brazilians – Douglas Santos, Wendel, Malcom and Claudinho – plus Colombia’s Wilmar Barrios start for the hosts. Zenit (5-4-1): Kerzhakov; Karavaev, Barrios, Lovren (c), Rakitskiy, Douglas Santos; Malcom, Kuzyaev, Wendel, Claudinho; Azmoun. Subs: Odoevskiy, Krugovoi, Byazrov, Mostovoy, Sutormin, Erokhin, Dzyuba, Ozdoev, Kravtsov, Kuznetsov, Khotulev. Chelsea (3-4-3): Arrizabalaga; Azpilicueta (c), Christensen, Sarr, James, Barkley, Saúl, Hudson-Odoi; Mount, Lukaku, Werner. Subs: Mendy, Bettinelli, Rüdiger, Alonso, Thiago Silva, Pulisic, Loftus-Cheek, Ziyech, Havertz. Referee: Serdar Gozubuyuk (Neth). Chelsea’s European title defence got off to a slow start, before a dramatic lurch into top gear against Juventus last time out. The 4-0 victory was so emphatic, it seems strange that they could still miss out on top spot in the group to the Italians, who host Malmö this evening. As long as they match Juventus’ result tonight, Chelsea will win the group and be seeded in Monday’s last-16 draw. Juve may be an indifferent rabble this season but Thomas Tuchel must assume they will see off Group H’s bottom side in Turin, so winning is the aim at the futuristic, snow-capped Gazprom Arena. Tuchel is without Jorginho, N’Golo Kanté and others, with the coach keen to make amends for the league loss to West Ham. Zenit were stubborn opponents in their 1-0 defeat at Stamford Bridge but with their Europa League ticket booked and a big game against Dinamo Moscow on Sunday, their focus may not be so sharp this evening. Kick-off is at 5.45pm GMT, 8.45pm in Saint Petersburg. давай!Some of the Tory backbenchers looked furious. The others just appeared bewildered to have been fooled for so long. Taken for mugs, like the rest of the country. But they needn’t have been. After all, Boris Johnson was always going to be Boris Johnson. A liar is gonna lie. He speaks, he lies. He’s a man without moral authority who degrades and poisons everything with which he comes in contact. A sociopath whose main pleasures are self-preservation and laughing at those to whom he has a duty of care. There had been a few boos from the opposition benches and a silence from his own that Johnson tried to style out as he took his place for PMQs. But his eyes gave the game away. Bloodshot, furtive pinpricks. The telltale signs of the chancer who feels his world beginning to close in on him. Boris started with the non-apology. “Let me get this straight,” he said. A sure sign he was about to start lying. There again, breathing is also a sure sign Johnson is about to start lying. He was absolutely furious. But only that the video had been leaked. It would have been far better if its existence had never come to light. But now that it had, he was very, very angry with Naughty Allegra Stratton and her mates for undermining lockdown guidelines by being caught practising their excuses for a hypothetical Christmas party. Boris wasn’t angry about the party itself, because that had never happened. It was just entirely coincidental that Stratton had joked about a party on the same date as had been reported, had said she went home before the party that didn’t happen started, and had appeared confused about how best to explain it. In the end she had settled on a cheese and wine party that wasn’t socially distanced. As a crap improviser, Allegra was up there with Boris himself. Within seconds we were on a mind-bending trip through the looking-glass as Johnson announced there would be an investigation, headed by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, into the party No 10 had spent a week saying hadn’t happened. And if it was found that the party that hadn’t happened had actually happened after all, then Boris would be sure to throw a few members at the bottom of the Downing Street heap under a bus. Reality was soon distorted further. Boris could not confirm that Case had not been at the party that had never happened, so it was possible the cabinet secretary would end up having to interview himself. Before confirming the party had not been a party because no one had thought to bring him a “secret Santa” present. That still hurt. Johnson also later made clear that Case’s remit only extended to the one party on 18 December. All the other Downing Street lockdown parties that hadn’t happened – including ones that Boris had definitely attended – would not be investigated. To save Johnson the effort of sacking himself. Even by Boris’s standards, this opening address was a shambles. It didn’t fool anyone. Keir Starmer kept his questions sharp and focused. No one believed the prime minister, so could he at least show some self-respect by admitting the truth. Leadership started at the top, and the reason there had been so many illegal parties at No 10 was because everyone working there knew Boris didn’t give a toss about the rules. The rules were for the little people. Like Tricia, who had not been able to say goodbye to her mother in person while staff at No 10 were having a knees-up and rehearsing their lies. Like the Queen, who had sat alone during Prince Philip’s funeral. Just not for Boris and his cronies. They could do what they wanted. Johnson had no answer. He was bang to rights, but just lacked the self-respect to acknowledge it. So he debased himself further by repeating the same nonsense that not even he believed, before accusing Labour of playing party politics with Covid. Another lie, as Labour has consistently voted with the government on health measures. But once you’ve started lying, it’s hard to break the habit. There was no respite for Johnson when Starmer was done. The SNP leader, Ian Blackford, was for once not shouted down when he called on Boris to resign. Rishi Sunak could even be seen nodding vigorously. It’s an ill wind and all that. Labour’s Rosena Allin-Khan wondered how Boris sleeps at night. The answer was simple. He sleeps on one side of the bed and his conscience sleeps on the other. God knows where Carrie sleeps. The Tory William Wragg said he hoped Boris wasn’t planning anything like a Covid press conference as a diversionary tactic later in the day. Though that’s precisely what Johnson had in mind, because at 6pm he appeared in the same room where Stratton had recorded her video, flanked by his two window-dressing stooges, Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance, aka Bill and Ben the Flower Pot Men, to give a press conference. Hard new medical data had suddenly come to light, he said – it was the first time Downing Street parties had been classified as hard medical data – and he was going to have to move the UK to Covid plan B status at least 24 hours earlier than planned. Inevitably, almost all the questions focused on Partygate. Where was the leadership? How come Allegra Stratton had been the only one to take responsibility for what takes place in No 10 by resigning? And she hadn’t even been to the sodding party. Wasn’t it about time the prime minister accepted that rules had been broken while he was in charge? Why not investigate all the parties? Boris hummed, hahed and dribbled. No fully formed, intelligible sentences emerged. Other than that, he thanked Allegra for whatever she had done. He couldn’t quite remember what. Still the questions came. It was now a matter of trust. Why should the public accept the new restrictions when there was every chance Boris wouldn’t be following them himself? Boris cleared his throat. Because the public were better than him. They would suck it up even though they knew he was lying through his teeth. For once, Johnson was probably telling the truth. • A Farewell to Calm by John Crace is published by Guardian Faber, price £9.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. • John Crace and Zoe Williams will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 13 December. Join the conversation in person or online by booking tickets here.Omicron cases could exceed 1 million by the end of this month on the current trajectory, Sajid Javid has told MPs, describing the new variant as “an even more formidable foe”. In a statement delivered to the House of Commons, the health secretary said that there were 568 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant but that the estimated current number is “probably closer to 10,000”. In a statement on Wednesday evening, he said: “The UK health security agency (UKHSA) estimates that the number of infections is approximately 20 times higher than the number of confirmed cases, and so the current number of infections is probably closer to 10,000. “UKHSA also estimate that at the current observed doubling rate of between two and a half and three days, by the end of this month, infections could exceed 1 million.” Javid said there was now confidence that Omicron is “far more transmissible” than Delta, but he said there was still a lot to learn about the new variant. He said Delta cases had doubled in around seven days, and that Omicron was spreading at an even faster rate. “Based on the latest data from here and around the world, our latest analysis is that it’s been around, it’s between 2.5 and three days.” The statement followed scientific advice to ministers on Tuesday that provided a stark outline of the potential consequences of failing to take action to suppress the spread of the virus. In a consensus statement on Tuesday, the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling advisory committee predicted: “If initial estimates of transmission advantage and immune escape from South Africa are applicable to the UK population, there is the potential for a very substantial peak of infections much larger than occurred during the winter wave of January 2021.” Even if the severity were half that of Delta, this could be outweighed by the sheer number of infections, the scientists said. Assuming Omicron has some transmission advantage and some degree of immune escape – the scenario judged to be most probable – the scientists said it was highly likely that “very stringent measures” would be required to control growth and keep R below 1. The government’s Sage advisory committee said Omicron was on a steep upward trajectory in the UK, with probably thousands of daily infections already occurring. At this rate, Omicron is projected to become the dominant variant within a few weeks. Without any changes to existing measures, the number of hospitalisations from Omicron could reach 1,000 per day or higher in England by the end of the year, with a peak likely to be higher than 1,000 to 2,000 Omicron hospital admissions per day. “For it to be below this level, there would need to be only a small degree of immune escape and very high protection from boosters against Omicron,” the minutes said. The Sage advice, released on Wednesday, also suggested additional infection control measures should be considered in hospitals, care homes and prisons to help prevent the spread of the highly transmissible variant.The Metropolitan police has said it will not investigate the Downing Street Christmas party widely reported to have been held last year. In a much awaited statement, the force said it had a policy of not retrospectively investigating alleged breaches of coronavirus laws. But policing and prosecution sources told the Guardian there was no reason in law for police not to investigate, and essentially the Met’s decision was a choice. A former Met police chief said the force was acting as judge and jury. Labour MPs had written to the Met asking for an investigation days ago, as pressure exploded after an ITV News video surfaced of No 10 aides joking about the party held at a time when many believed the rule forbade it. The Met said: “The Metropolitan Police Service has received a significant amount of correspondence relating to allegations reported in the media that the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) Regulations were breached at gatherings at No 10 Downing Street in November and December 2020. “All this correspondence has been considered by detectives in detail, as well as footage published by ITV News. “The correspondence and footage does not provide evidence of a breach of the Health Protection Regulations, but restates allegations made in the media. Based on the absence of evidence and in line with our policy not to investigate retrospective breaches of such regulations, the Met will not commence an investigation at this time.” The statement leaves open the prospect that the Met’s stance could change if an inquiry announced by Boris Johnson unearths any evidence of wrongdoing. It is to be conducted by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary. The Met said: “The Met has had discussions with the Cabinet Office in relation to the investigation by the cabinet secretary. If any evidence is found as a result of that investigation, it will be passed to the Met for further consideration.” The former Met police chief Brian Paddick, now a Liberal Democrat peer, said: “It is the police’s duty to investigate if there is reason to believe a crime has been committed. It’s a matter for the Crown Prosecution Service to decide whether it’s in the public interest to prosecute, not the police.” A policing source who has worked extensively on Covid and its enforcement told the Guardian there was no ban on retrospective investigations into alleged breaches. The Crown Prosecution Service, which authorises proceedings in England and Wales, also believes there is no ban on prosecuting people for Covid breaches retrospectively, an informed source said. The policing source said: “Across the country there are currently investigations into alleged breaches dating back a similar amount of time [to the Downing Street party], where the alleged breach is enough to justify a retrospective investigation. “Each investigation must pass a public interest test – that is, is it in the public interest to put resources, time and effort into an investigation. It is up to the discretion of the force, and ultimately subjective.” The source added that a factor can be whether not investigating undermines the wider effort to enforce rules to fight the virus.