Inflation across the 19-member eurozone soared to 4.9% in November, outstripping City forecasts and putting pressure on the European Central Bank to review its policy of ultra-low interest rates. With some investors reacting to the news by accusing the ECB of allowing inflation to run out of control, the European statistics agency Eurostat said its early flash reading of inflation in November had reached the highest level since relevant records began in 1997, two years before the euro was launched. High gas prices and the cost of imported goods were blamed for the inflationary surge. Energy prices, including oil and gas, jumped 27% from November 2020, Eurostat said, to increase the headline rate from 4.1% in October. France suffered a 3.4% inflation increase, its highest in a decade, but it was in Germany among the bloc’s largest economies where prices rocketed, taking the inflation rate to 6%. In Estonia, the inflation rate jumped 8.4%, while in Lithuania it reached 9.3%. Other developed economies have also been buffeted by similar inflationary pressures since the summer. The US recorded an inflation rate of 6.2% in October, the biggest 12-month jump since 1990, while annual prices increased over the same period by an average 4.2% in the UK. On Wednesday, the British Retail Consortium said overall shop prices increased in November at their fastest pace since May 2019. The BRC-NielsenIQ shop price index said the 0.4% jump, after a drop in October of 0.3%, was in response to rising food prices and the slowing of non-food deflation. The BRC figure is based on the prices of a range of 500 food and non-food items in shops, hence why it differs from the consumer prices index used by the Office for National Statistics, which also takes in the costs of transport, utility bills and eating out. Charles Hepworth, investment director at GAM Investments, said the eurozone’s jump above the average 4.5% forecast by City economists “continues to point to the impossibly incongruent argument from central bankers that this cost push inflation is transient”. Until now, like most central bank governors, the ECB’s Christine Lagarde has insisted that inflationary pressures would prove to be temporary and would probably begin to wane in 2022. Hepworth said this position would come under strain, despite the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 and its potential to negatively affect the recovery from the pandemic. “It may be wishful thinking on the part of Lagarde when she declares that price pressures won’t run out of control – they already are and it’s difficult to follow the argument that it will abate soon,” he said. The eurozone’s core inflation rate, which strips out potentially volatile items such as alcohol, energy, food and tobacco, also spiked higher in November to an annual rate of 2.6% from 2%. Some analysts said the strength of rising core prices above the ECB’s 2% target showed the headline inflation rate was already having secondary effects through higher wage demands. However, ECB officials are expected to take a more cautious view, holding back from announcing any big policy changes while tests are carried out on the effects of Omicron. Were the variant to start affecting growth levels, then prices such as oil would probably drift lower, easing inflation rates worldwide. Jack Allen-Reynolds, senior Europe economist at Capital Economics, said: “The Omicron variant has increased the level of uncertainty even further, but for now, we suspect that it will have a fairly small impact on inflation.”Big tech has two faces. One face presents a new form of company: inclusive, socially liberal, very much with the zeitgeist, supporting the Democrats rather than the Republicans, and different from anything that has gone before. Strip away the makeup and a different face appears: the face of a monopoly seeking to protect itself from rivals. Over the years, the giants of Silicon Valley have used their financial clout to buy up smaller companies that might pose a threat to their market power. Facebook’s acquisition of the online image platform Giphy was simply the latest example of big tech gobbling up the competition, because in their time Amazon, Google and Apple have all adopted the same tactic. This is not a new form of capitalism: it is the old form of capitalism tarted up. To its credit, the UK’s competition watchdog has now seen enough of this sort of anti-competitive behaviour and insisted that Facebook sell Giphy in its entirety – the first time it has demanded a deal involving one of the big tech companies should be unwound. The ruling by the Competition and Markets Authority said the acquisition would increase Facebook’s already “significant market power” in two ways – by driving traffic to Facebook-owned sites and by forcing rivals such as Twitter and Snapchat to provide more user data to access Giphy gifs. Britain’s regulators are sometimes accused – often with justification – of being captured by the companies they are supposed to be keeping in check. That criticism cannot be levelled at the CMA, which has proved it is a watchdog with real teeth. No question, the CMA’s decision to take on Facebook over Giphy represents an escalation of the battle between the regulators and big tech. At stake is more than simply a matter of ensuring competition between social media platforms and that innovation is encouraged rather than stifled – important though those issues are. The new monopolists are as rich as the robber barons of yesteryear, but wield far more influence. The CMA decision is important because it suggests regulators are starting to ask themselves a simple question: can this power and influence be wielded responsibly or does the public interest require big tech to be broken up in the way Standard Oil was dismembered in 1911? Erdoğan is losing his economic war Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, must have been delighted by his country’s latest growth figures. Output was up by 2.7% in the third quarter, 7.4% annually, and is now 12% above its pre-pandemic level. For Erdoğan, that will be proof that the faint-hearts are wrong to doubt his unorthodox approach to economic policy, in which the response to rising inflation is to cut interest rates rather than to raise them. Maybe Erdoğan is the maverick economic genius he clearly thinks he is. But after instructing the central bank to cut interest rates for three months running, inflation is approaching 20% and the currency is in freefall. Its latest fall on Tuesday took it to a record low against the US dollar. Erdoğan’s response has been to say Turkey is fighting an economic war of independence. If that is the case, it is a war his country is losing. The third quarter growth figures are now ancient history and the economy is certain to contract in the final three months of 2021. Hyper-inflation looms and at some point the brakes will be slammed on. It is a question of when not if. Not easy being green The report by the public accounts committee into the government’s green homes grant voucher scheme makes depressing reading. The business department’s target was to make 600,000 homes more energy efficient, but only 47,500 were upgraded. Of the £1.5bn allocated, £314m was spent – and £50m of that was administration costs. Meg Hillier, the committee’s Labour chair, described the scheme as a “slam dunk fail” and it’s hard to disagree with that conclusion. The idea was to create jobs and reduce carbon emissions but the scheme was badly planned and rushed through at the start of the Covid-19 crisis. In the end it achieved neither its employment nor its environmental objectives. The waste of public money is merely one aspect of the damage caused by the scheme’s failure. State action and public money will be needed to help retrofit homes and decarbonise the economy. Unfortunately, the botched voucher scheme will be seized upon by those who say Ronald Reagan was right when he said the nine most terrifying words in the English language were “I’m from the government and I’m here to help”.The non-fungible token or NFT has taken the No 1 spot in the annual ranking of the contemporary art world’s most influential movers and shakers – marking the first time a non-human entity has topped the list. ERC-721, the specification for the “non-fungible token” on the Ethereum block-chain, tops the 20th Power 100 list published by ArtReview, after a year in which it upended the art market by bringing together contemporary art and millennial meme culture. ArtReview said NFTs had given rise to a whole new generation of collectors and allowed artists to find ways around the traditional gatekeepers of the market. “NFTs have turbocharged a new crossover between pop culture and contemporary art, even if you can’t avoid the fact that the NFT explosion is driven by a feverish speculation over cryptocurrencies,” JJ Charlesworth, editor at ArtReview, said. “But the broader principle behind NFTs is perhaps more important – the idea of digital assets and virtual collectibles are a seductive prospect for artists making art in an increasingly online, virtual culture, and won’t be going away any time soon.” The most valuable NFT to date is a collage by digital artist Beeple, which sold for £50.3m at Christie’s in March. Musician Grimes sold a collection of digital artworks for almost $6m (£4.4m), while the original photo behind the 2005 Disaster Girl meme sold for $473,000 (£354,000). Collins Dictionary even made NFT its word of the year. Following the Black Lives Matter movement last year, the new Power 100 list reflects the degree to which ideas rather than specific artworks reflect a shift in the industry. At No 2 is the anthropologist Anna L Tsing, and No 3 are Indonesian collective ruangrupa, who champion collaborative practice and will curate the Documenta 15 exhibition in Kassel, Germany, in 2022. American artist Theaster Gates is at No 4, followed by German visual artist Anne Imhof at No 5. The list also speaks to the art world’s inherent contradictions. While NFTs and cryptocurrencies have been criticised for their environmental impact, the past year has seen artists, curators and galleries reflect on the climate crisis and capitalism. Among these are Indigenous Australian collective Karrabing Film Collective (No8), curator Lucia Pietroiusti (13) and artist Olafur Eliasson (15). Artists whose work relates to the manifold injustices raised by the BLM movement continued to feature heavily. At No 9 is Carrie Mae Weems, whose photographs and installations address Black female subjectivity, and at 11 is Kara Walker, whose work also tackles issues of race, gender and violence. Achille Mbembe (14), Felwine Sarr and Bénédicte Savoy (16) and Koyo Kouoh (38) have all led the calls for the restitution of looted objects to their places of origin. Mark Rappolt, editor-in-chief, ArtReview, said there were “significantly fewer” western museums on the list this year, which in part reflects the reality that they are no longer driving the dialogue about contemporary art so much as reacting to it. “This may in turn reflect the slower pace of their processes or bureaucracies, but also the extent to which efforts to initiate dialogues about restitution, race and gender are coming from outside rather than within established orders,” he said. The list was compiled by 30 unnamed panellists and collaborators from around the world. Previous number-ones have included Damien Hirst, the artistic director of the Serpentine, Hans-Ulrich Obrist, and the German artist Hito Steyerl. The Power 100 Top 10 1 ERC-721 2 Anna L Tsing 3 ruangrupa 4 Theaster Gates 5 Anne Imhof 6 Fred Moten 7 Cao Fei 8 Karrabing Film Collective 9 Carrie Mae Weems 10 David Graeber and David WengrowThe first female leader of Manchester city council has pledged to put the safety of women and girls at the heart of her administration, and believes too much urban planning is “male-led”, which has created public spaces that do not feel safe for everyone else. Bev Craig, who takes office on Wednesday, said she previously had to explain to male colleagues that “as a woman, I’ve been taught if you want to go for a run in winter, it’s probably best to go to the gym. Don’t go near the Fallowfield loop [an off road cycling and walking route that has been plagued by muggings]. And sure as hell don’t go near a park.” Plans for public spaces tend to be led by men “who don’t have exactly those worries”, she said, adding: “If you think about any urban projects over a considerable period of time, not just in Manchester, they’re generally male-dominated. Architecture is often male-dominated.” Last year, Manchester’s longstanding leader, Sir Richard Leese, a proponent of the skyscrapers that have been erected around the city, appeared to dismiss safety concerns around Piccadilly Gardens, one of Manchester’s main civic squares. Responding to the notion that it had become a no-go area for many after dark, he said: “I just don’t get it. I’m a 68-year-old bloke, I’m the sort of person who is supposed to be petrified of spaces like that and I just am not.” Craig, who at 36 is almost half Leese’s age, said there had been “a generational shift in politics more broadly, about recognising that actually, people experience the city differently and we need to be open to those experiences.” Leese, a former youth worker from Nottinghamshire, is retiring after 25 years in the top job, saying he wants to spend more time with his grandchildren. He was instrumental in the city’s rebirth after the IRA bomb in 1996 and went on to play a key role in Greater Manchester’s push for devolution. Craig is also an adopted Mancunian. She dreamed of moving to Manchester from Northern Ireland after secretly watching Russell T Davies’s Queer As Folk, set in Manchester’s Gay Village, in her bedroom with the sound down. Football also drew her to Manchester: while Leese supports City, she is a big United fan. She came out as a lesbian aged 14 after joining an LGBT youth group. Her politics began to form there when she realised “the only political party at the time that would even speak to us was Sinn Féin”. Craig joined the Labour party in 2009 while working for Blackburn council as an equalities and inclusion policy officer and was first elected to Manchester city council in 2013. Leese is often viewed as a prickly figure who goes on the attack when criticised. Craig sees herself differently: “I’m naturally quite collaborative, in terms of my style. And I like talking to people, even when it’s a difficult conversation.” A “visible theme” of her leadership would be “not being defensive about things”, she added. Craig pledged to use Manchester Labour’s near-monopoly – 94 out of 96 council seats – to demonstrate “political bravery” by focusing on tackling inequality and climate change. “Political bravery in leadership is the space that Manchester has occupied in the past and can occupy in the future,” she said. She promises “clear and decisive action” on carbon reduction, putting the city’s poorest communities at the heart of her agenda. One idea is setting up a council-run solar farm to provide cheap, sustainable energy to the most deprived parts of the city. She has recently started cycling again after an accident and wants to see more low-traffic neighbourhoods “when done properly”. She wants to move towards a car-free city centre, but not at the expense of gridlocking suburbs such as Cheetham Hill, where almost half (46.8%) of children are growing up in “absolute low income” families, where households have less than 60% of medium income. Craig said she wanted Manchester to continue to grow, but as a “genuinely inclusive city”. Developers will have to “demonstrably contribute to our city”, she said, explaining that they will have to pay so-called “section 106” contributions, which can be used to improve local amenities, as well the inclusion of affordable homes. She added that “to do business in this city means that you have to believe in the city, you have to invest in the city, and you have to invest in our people.”Scott Morrison says he is “very disappointed” by Liberal senator David Van’s interjections while Jacqui Lambie was speaking in the Senate but has also taken aim at Labor for conduct in the lower house. On Tuesday senators Sarah Hanson-Young and Penny Wong said they had heard growling and dog noises directed at Lambie during Senate question time. Hanson-Young said the interjections were “inappropriate” and noted that growling while a female senator was speaking on the same day that the sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, released a landmark report calling for an overhaul of its toxic workplace culture showed the difficulty of achieving change. Van has since apologised and owned up to making verbal interjections, but denies that these included animal noises or growling. On Wednesday, Morrison told reporters in Queanbeyan that “all parliamentary leaders continue to have to uphold the standards and I expect that of my team and I was very, very disappointed about that act”. Morrison said he had not yet spoken to Van as he “only learned of it late last night”. Asked if he would insist that all MPs and senators read the Jenkins report, Morrison said that was “exactly the instruction” he had given. “I would expect all parliamentary leaders to be seeking to uphold those standards,” he said. Morrison also appeared to blame Labor for poor standards. In Tuesday’s question time, Anthony Albanese called the leader of the house, Peter Dutton, a “boofhead” for seeking the call while the Labor leader was making a point of order. Morrison said he had been “in the parliament a long time”. “Just last week the interjections that I hear in the chamber coming across,” he said, in response to a question about Van. On Tuesday, the Senate president, Slade Brockman, said he did not hear the interjection during question time, but asked senators to “reflect and withdraw if they did do what was stated”. On Tuesday afternoon, Van told the Senate he had reflected on his behaviour and acknowledged “that interjections are always disorderly”. “I acknowledge I was making interjections while Senator Lambie was asking a question during question time,” Van said. “And while I do not accept the characterisation of my interjections in the manner raised in points of order in that time, by other senators, I do regret the interjections and I apologise to Senator Lambie and to the Senate unreservedly. “I commit to holding myself to the highest standards in the future.” Liberal senator Hollie Hughes later posted on social media that “no one else seemed to hear” the noises that Hanson-Young and Wong had both complained about, claiming that the incident “didn’t happen”. Labor MP Graham Perrett noted that Van had told news.com.au that he had interjected which “may have been misheard as a dog noise because he was wearing a mask”. Van replied that he did not make “any kind of animal noise at all”. The shadow women’s minister, Tanya Plibersek, queried “what happened to a bit of common decency”. “This isn’t rocket science,” she told Guardian Australia. “People need to treat each other with respect. I think that’d go a long way to help improving the workplace here at parliament.” On Wednesday, the financial services minister, Liberal senator Jane Hume, said that Van had been “suitably chastened” and “had apologised” although “he did deny making dog noises”. “I personally didn’t hear the noises that Senator Van made, but you’re right, we should be setting the standards in Parliament House and treating each other with respect,” she told ABC News Breakfast. “Now, question time is always robust, the chamber is very noisy and there’s an awful lot of accusations that get flung across the chamber. “With that said, I would like to see particularly my party take the high ground on this and if we have something to say, we’ll find our voice and use our words.”CNN has suspended Chris Cuomo indefinitely after details emerged about how he helped his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo, as he faced accusations of sexual harassment. Questions have hovered over the CNN anchor’s future since the release of documents by New York’s attorney general on Monday indicated a greater involvement in his brother’s efforts than the network previously knew. The new evidence showed that the primetime host used media contacts to glean information about women accusing his brother, the then New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, of sexual harassment – then sought to make his sibling aware of forthcoming coverage. The network said on Tuesday: “We have suspended Chris indefinitely, pending further evaluation” as a result of the new details. Cuomo is one of the network’s most visible faces and Cuomo Prime Time, the daily show he anchors, is often CNN’s most-watched show of the day. The CNN anchor had pressed sources for information on his brother’s accusers and reported back to the governor’s staff, and he was active in helping craft their response to the charges, according to emails and a transcript of his testimony to investigators working for the New York attorney general, Letitia James. Chris Cuomo had previously acknowledged talking to his brother and offering advice when the governor faced the harassment charges that led to his resignation. But the information released on 29 November revealed far more details about what he did. Andrew Cuomo resigned in August to avoid a likely impeachment trial, after an investigation led by James found he sexually harassed at least 11 women. Monday’s releases show Chris Cuomo growing frustrated with his brother’s advisers as they scrambled to respond as more women came forward with harassment allegations. The anchor pressed for greater involvement in crafting his brother’s message and offered up his journalistic sleuthing to find out what other allegations might be looming. A transcript of an interview with the younger Cuomo showed that at one point the TV host texted Melissa DeRosa, his brother’s top aide, to say “I have a lead on the wedding girl”. It was a reference to Anna Ruch, a woman who accused Andrew Cuomo of attempting to kiss her at a wedding. Chris Cuomo told investigators a “source” told him about Ruch and a friend told him that “maybe she had been put up to it”. The broadcaster also used his contacts to warn his brother, via DeRosa, of yet-to-be-published media reports regarding allegations against him. On 7 March, as rumors swirled that more women were about to come forward, DeRosa texted Chris Cuomo: “Can u check your sources.” He replied, “On it.” “When asked, I would reach out to sources, other journalists, to see if they had heard of anybody else coming out,” Chris Cuomo said in the July deposition. The anchor did his show on Monday night without mentioning the topic. In the past, he has said he has never reported on his brother’s situation for the network and never tried to influence coverage. On-air in August, he said: “I tried to do the right thing,” adding he “wasn’t in control of anything”. Cuomo interviewed his brother on the air a number of times during the first two months of the pandemic. It was a hit with viewers, although it violated CNN’s policy of not having Cuomo report on his brother.One in six Australian birds are now threatened, according to a once-in-a-decade study that finds the climate emergency is pushing species closer to extinction. The action plan for birds is a major scientific study led by Stephen Garnett of Charles Darwin University, with input from more than 300 bird experts. It finds 216 out of 1,299 species are threatened – up from 195 in 2011 – with the climate crisis pushing more birds on to the list or increasing the threat status of those in danger. Among them are 17 birds found in cooler, high-elevation rainforests in Queensland that either appear on the list for the first time or are now more threatened than they were a decade ago. They include the fernwren, a little brown bird with a loud voice, whose numbers have declined by 57% since 2000, pushing the species from near-threatened status to endangered. Others are the golden bowerbird, which is now considered near-threatened, and the Victoria’s riflebird, which appears on the list for the first time as vulnerable species. Sean Dooley, of BirdLife Australia, said it was estimated there were 6 million fewer individuals across those 17 species than there were in 2011 and “that is almost unequivocally due to climate change”. “What really stands out from the action plan is how quickly climate change is impacting our birds,” he said. In New South Wales, eight birds were found to have become more threatened as a result of the 2019-20 bushfires, including the rufous scrub-bird and the south-eastern glossy black-cockatoo. The action plan examines the state of Australia’s birdlife, how individual species are faring, what actions can be taken to halt and reverse declines and where there have been conservation successes. The plan considered 1,299 bird species and found the Mukarrthippi grasswren, a subspecies of striated grasswren that lives in the central west of NSW, had the lowest population numbers of any Australian bird. The subspecies was only formally declared last year and the plan estimates there are as few as three pairs remaining. Another bird, the grey range thick-billed grasswren found in western NSW, was found to have greater numbers as a result of increased monitoring effort sparked by the previous action plan, but its population is still estimated to be only 50 to 60 individuals. Of the 216 in-danger species, two are possibly extinct, 21 are critically endangered, 74 are endangered, 87 are vulnerable and 32 are near-threatened. The report finds 96 species are faring worse than a decade ago and require listing in a higher threat category. There were 23 birds whose conservation status was found to have improved and could be downlisted. Garnett said the report could be summarised as “mixture of concern we’re going to lose some animals” but it also showed “we don’t have to give up, there’s a lot we can do to make difference”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said the independent threatened species scientific committee, which advises the federal government, was already assessing some of the birds the plan recommended for a threatened listing and the Mukarrthippi grasswren had been recommended for a critically endangered listing under NSW laws. The plan lays out actions – such as improved fire management and removal of predators – that can be taken to improve the trajectory for different species. Garnett said there were several birds on King Island off Tasmania, including the King Island brown thornbill and the King Island scrubtit, whose numbers would improve if land clearing ceased on the island. The report highlights species where focused conservation measures have led to improved population numbers, including for the Norfolk Island green parrot, which moved from critically endangered down to vulnerable as a result of work to protect their nests. “The results tell us clearly that without changes, many species will continue to decline or to be lost altogether,” said. “However, within our report we also have some clear instructions on how to avoid these outcomes. The 2020 report also illustrates how conservation action can turn things around when well-resourced and implemented.”Omicron is a clear and present reminder of the need for us to be ready to dial up our protection measures at short notice. This is what staying in control of the coronavirus requires. The new variant has appeared on the horizon just as we have taken larger steps in eastern Australia to ease restrictions with the virus circulating in the community, and further easing of rules on mask wearing expected soon. New South Wales announced mask rules will be largely removed once the fully vaccinated rate reaches 95%, or 15 December, whichever is earlier. If Omicron does not put a spanner in the works, the idea is to contract the mask rules to select, higher risk settings including public transport, ground and air, as well as ride share, and for front of house hospitality workers in indoor settings if not fully vaccinated. Masks are also strongly encouraged in any indoor settings where distancing can’t be maintained. We may not know whether we have a new variant in the community that needs more careful management until after it has already landed among us, so the horse may have already bolted before any response can be put in to effect. Focusing masks in areas where they can do the greatest good, in the closed indoor settings associated with public or shared transport, or hospitality where unvaccinated workers mix with patrons, at least takes some of the transmission risk out of these everyday activities. The NSW rules are largely consistent with the Victorian rules on masks, especially after mid-December when mask wearing in retail is forecast to be eased there as well. Victoria also requires masks to be worn in hospitals and aged care, and some venues may set their own rules in either state on masks indoors. Keeping masks on in higher risk settings is wise as it preserves a low level of precaution that suppresses transmission risk, and that can be dialled up or down as needed when faced with a higher level of threat. Dialling up existing low-level precautions is likely to enable more rapid responses than a standing start. Low level precautions that focus on the more vulnerable sections of the community, such as aged and disability care residences, and the areas most prone to transmission among strangers such as public transport, also protect us from the worst if a threat does emerge that is only apparent once already in the community, which is always the problem with a highly infectious pathogen like the coronavirus. Unfortunately, this time, a quick response to tighten international borders did not prevent at least one person unwittingly bringing the Omicron variant into the community with news that a case visited the Central Coast in NSW soon after arriving on Saturday, before the arrival quarantine settings changed. Later that same day, the rules were changed to make hotel quarantine a requirement for any arrivals who had visited southern Africa within the previous two weeks, whether vaccinated or not. Even modest precautions might make that little bit of difference to soften the risk of widespread community transmission, so the fact that mask wearing indoors outside the home in NSW is still in place is a good thing, as it happens. Similarly, testing all arrivals and having quarantine arrangements in place that can accommodate a change in public health orders at short notice is also something that other countries where Omicron is now already in the community no doubt wish they had. The two together mean that even if we do discover a potential threat after it may have already had the chance to land onshore, we can use the intel gathered on border control processes to enable a rapid response, stepping up testing and contact tracing measures. This is what we need to have a fighting chance to keep new variants contained until we have ascertained the risk they may pose, and the most appropriate way to respond. As NSW vaccination rates nudge closer to 95%, or on 15 December, we will know more about Omicron and what that means for the planned further easing. Whatever happens, we need to be prepared for questions to be raised about emergent variants. Dialling up basic public health safety measures like masks is an important control mechanism, and when operating early in an outbreak, you get the best epidemiological bang for the buck as many infections can be prevented when transmission is slowed – it’s much easier to stop a ripple than a wave. • Catherine Bennett is chair in epidemiology at Deakin UniversityThat’s it from me, Samantha Lock, reporting from Sydney, Australia. Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage on our new blog here. Summary Stricter coronavirus testing is set to be required for all travellers to the US amid Omicron variant concerns, the Washington Post reports. All eligible adults in the UK should be offered a Covid booster jab by the end of January, British prime minister Boris Johnson announced. The Omicron variant was present in Europe at least 10 days ago, according to health authorities in the Netherlands. Austria extends lockdown to 20 days after lawmakers voted to extend a nationwide lockdown by 10 days on Tuesday, bringing the total lockdown ending on 11 December to 20 days. Germany’s constitutional court has ruled that sweeping restrictions to stem Covid infections such as curfews, school closures and contact restrictions were lawful, in a decision that could pave the way for further curbs. Greece has said it will fine people over the age of 60 who have not received a first Covid-19 shot €100 per month from 16 January. All travellers entering Ireland will now have to show negative Covid tests. An expert committee voted to recommend the US Food and Drug Administration authorise Merck’s Covid pill for high-risk adults, the first of a new class of antiviral drug that could tackle Omicron and other variants.The drug, molnupiravir, is likely to be approved for older and more vulnerable people at greater risk of severe illness. Brazil reports first Omicron cases in Latin America after detecting two cases of the Omicron Covid strain on Tuesday, the country’s health regulator, Anvisa, said. Slovenia has halted use of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine after experts confirmed a death in September was related to an extremely rare blood-clotting condition. Poland records highest Covid deaths since April with 526 deaths in the past 24 hours. Israel’s health minister says boosters may protect against Omicron. The US Food &amp; Drug Administration says it is evaluating the effectiveness of authorised Covid vaccines against the Omicron variant and expects to have more information in the next few weeks. Japan confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant. A Namibian diplomat in his 30s is thought to have tested positive for the variant. Stricter coronavirus testing is set to be required for all travellers to the US amid Omicron variant concerns, the Washington Post reports. The Biden administration is believed to be preparing stricter testing requirements for all travellers, including returning Americans, according to three federal health officials. The move is part of an enhanced winter Covid strategy Biden plans to announce on Thursday, the publication added. US officials will require everyone entering the country to be tested one day before boarding flights, regardless of their vaccination status or country of departure. Administration officials are also considering a requirement that all travellers get retested within three to five days of arrival. Authorities are reportedly debating a controversial proposal to require all travellers, including US citizens, to self-quarantine for seven days, even if their test results are negative. It’s Samantha Lock back on deck and ready to take you through all the Covid news. Let’s start off with some Covid numbers out of Australia before I dive in. The state of Victoria has just reported 1,179 new Covid cases and six deaths in the past 24 hours. NSW has recorded 251 Covid cases and no deaths. Ukraine recorded 10,554 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, according to local media Ukrinform, down from a late-October peak when daily cases topped 27,000. A further 561 people died from Covid-related causes, the Ukrainian Health Ministry said, down from 756 deaths on the same day last week. Ukrainian authorities ordered on Monday that arrivals from seven African countries must complete a mandatory 14-day quarantine, to prevent spread of the Omicron variant. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, here in London as Samantha Lock in Australia takes over from here. Lawmakers in Austria voted to extend a nationwide lockdown by 10 days on Tuesday, bringing the total lockdown ending on 11 December to 20 days. The government said this will be the maximum time. About 67% of Austria’s population is double vaccinated, lagging behind other Western European nations. Austria detected 8,186 positive Covid infections on Tuesday, down from a peak of 15,365 positive tests on Wednesday last week. Cases began surging in early October, prompting heightened restrictions. The lockdown means people can only leave home under specific conditions – such as exercise and other activities for “physical and mental recovery,” work and essential shopping. Austria also reported its first Omicron strain case on Sunday. An expert committee voted to recommend the US Food and Drug Administration authorise Merck’s Covid pill for high-risk adults, the first of a new class of antiviral drug that could tackle Omicron and other variants. The drug, molnupiravir, is likely to be approved for older and more vulnerable people at greater risk of severe illness. The treatment is given within five days of the start of symptoms and is taken as 40 pills over five days. Molnupiravir works differently from existing vaccines. That might give it the edge over Omicron. The New York Times reports the details of how it works: Health officials around the world have been counting on the new pills to reduce the number of severe cases and save lives. If Omicron causes a surge in severe infections, it could make them even more important. Scientists have yet to run experiments to see how well the pills block Omicron viruses from replicating. But there are reasons to think they would remain effective even if the variant can sometimes evade vaccines. The pills do not target the spike protein [that Omicron mutated]. Instead, they weaken two proteins involved in the virus’s replication machinery. Omicron carries only one mutation in each of those proteins, and neither looks as if it would stop the pills from doing their jobs. Lloyd Austin, the US defense secretary, said National Guard members who refuse the Covid vaccine will be barred from federally funded drills and training required to maintain their Guard status. “Vaccination is essential to the health and readiness of the force,” he wrote in an internal memo, first reported by Associated Press. All members of the US military are required to be vaccinated unless they obtain an official waiver. According to National Guard Bureau figures, about 70% of Guard members were vaccinated with at least one shot on 22 November and 63% were double vaccinated (and the precise figures may be higher). Here’s the UK’s Covid infections visualised. Today saw a further 39,716 Covid cases, down from 42,482 on Tuesday last week. New infections have rarely dropped below 30,000 a day in recent months. Canada will ban fliers from a further three countries – Nigeria, Malawi and Egypt – to suppress the Omicron variant, the Toronto Star reports. Canada has detected five Omicron strain cases so far, at least two from travellers from Nigeria. Last week Ottawa barred travellers who had recently visited South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Mozambique Premiers in Ontario and Quebec are calling for tougher measures and greater testing from Ottawa. Brazil has detected two cases of the Omicron Covid strain, the country’s health regulator, Anvisa, said on Tuesday, the first infections of the variant recorded in Latin America. The two infections are related and linked to travel from South Africa. Reuters has the details: Anvisa said a traveller arriving in Sao Paulo from South Africa and his wife had both apparently contracted the variant. The traveller landed at Guarulhos international airport on 23 November with a negative test for Covid-19. But before a planned return trip, the couple tested positive and the samples were sent for further analysis, which identified the Omicron variant. The samples will be sent for a second confirmatory analysis, the regulator said. Slovenia halted use of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine after experts confirmed a death in September was related to an extremely rare blood-clotting condition. The country’s health minister, Janez Poklukar, told reporters the temporary ban implemented in September would become permanent. A 20-year-old woman died in September after a rare brain haemorrhage and blood clots after vaccination. With more than 16 million Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine doses being administrated in the European Union until the end of October, six deaths linked to the jab have been confirmed, according to the Slovenian authorities. In April the US lifted an 11-day pause to Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine, with the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention saying the risk was “very low”. “The vaccine’s known and potential benefits outweigh its known and potential risks in individuals 18 years of age and older,” the FDA and CDC said. Slovenia has vaccinated 54% of its population, lagging behind the EU-wide rate of 68%. The country of 2.1 million people experienced record Covid infections above 3,000 a day this month, but new cases have since fallen from the mid-November peak. Russia reported 1,229 Covid-related deaths on Tuesday, according to figures from the Moscow Times, up from 1,207 reported deaths on Tuesday last week. Russia also detected 32,648 new Covid infections on Tuesday, the lowest since 15 October. Russia’s latest wave peaked in early November, when the country was reporting record totals sometimes above 40,00 cases a day. Anna Popova, the head of Russia’s Rospotrebnadzor consumer and health watchdog, said on Tuesday that Russians flying into the country from some locations must quarantine for 14 days, and New Year’s Eve travel was discouraged. The validity of health passes obtained by a negative PCR test, she said, will also be reduced from 72 to 48 hours, as part of a package of measures designed to block the Omicron strain from gaining a foothold. Poland reported the highest daily Covid death toll since April, with 526 deaths in the past 24 hours, according to figures reported by Polskie Radio. That’s the highest since 540 people died on 29 April, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University. The country detected 19,074 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, taking Poland’s seven-day average to 23,191 new daily infections. Poland’s Covid cases have rocketed since the start of October. Health minister Adam Niedzielski said last week the country’s fourth wave is expected to peak in early December, with up to 35,000 daily cases. The Polish government banned flights from seven African countries this week to prevent the spread of the infectious Omicron variant. Alongside, cultural institutions such as churches, sports centres, hotels and restaurants across the country will only be allowed half-capacity between 1 and 17 December. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Tuesday warned Americans against travel to Poland over Covid concerns. This is Jem Bartholomew taking over the global Covid blog from Lucy Campbell from here. The Greek prime minister’s decision to impose 100-euro monthly fines on unvaccinated over-60s appears to have had a dramatic effect; within hours of Kyriakos Mitsotakis announcing the measure about 6,000 people in the age group had requested appointments to get the jab. The average inoculation rate among the over-60s had previously been 2,600 a day, according to media reports citing government statistics for those requesting a first jab. Penalties kick in from 16 January. Infection rates in Greece have surged in recent months – along with fatalities. Mitsotakis said he took the drastic step because it had become quite clear there were “needless deaths” among citizens in the age group. An estimated 580,000 Greeks who are 60 or older remain unvaccinated. Of that number only 60,000 had elected to be inoculated in November when the government announced further restrictions for those still resisting the shot, Mitsotakis said in comments ahead of a cabinet meeting on Tuesday. “And it is primarily those over the age of 60 who are being hospitalised and unfortunately many are losing their lives,” he noted in a televised speech. “It has troubled me taking this decision but I have no doubt that it will help save human lives.” Compared with other smaller European countries, such as Portugal and Denmark which has immunised 99% of the age group, Greece has seen a death rate that is 10 times greater. Out of a population of about 11 million, 18,157 people have succumbed to coronavirus. Prior to the fine being announced the centre-right government had enforced twice-weekly rapid tests on those who remained unvaccinated at a cost of as much as 80 euro a month. For many Greeks that, combined with a 100 euro monthly penalty, would have made the price for the choice almost impossible to keep up with. Mitsotakis also announced that free self-tests would be distributed in December and early January in a bid to root out asymptomatic carriers of the virus. The money raised from fines will be placed in a special fund created to support the increasingly stretched public health service, he said. Spain detected a second case of the Omicron variant on Tuesday and expects to confirm another two by the end of the week, while Basque authorities said they planned to declare a health emergency amid a rapidly rising caseload, Reuters reports. In Madrid, a 61-year-old woman who returned to Spain from South Africa via Amsterdam tested positive for the variant, which scientists fear may evade vaccines. A regional health department spokesperson said she had received two shots of the AstraZeneca vaccine and had no symptoms. Spain detected its first case of the variant on Monday in a 51-year-old man who also flew from South Africa via the Netherlands, but was on a different flight. Health authorities in Catalonia said they were analysing two suspected cases and preliminary results suggested they would also be confirmed as Omicron but definitive confirmation was not expected until Friday. With a nationwide vaccination rate of nearly 80%, Spain had until recently appeared to have escaped the wave of contagion sweeping Europe that has pushed governments to bring back highly restrictive measures, such as in Austria. But infection accelerated through November, with the two-week incidence reaching 208.5 cases per 100,000 people on Tuesday, rising more than fourfold in a month. With an infection rate of more than 480 cases per 100,000 people, the Basque region is among the worst affected. The regional government said it would propose a health emergency, a legal tool that would allow for capacity limits in indoor spaces and the closure of nightlife. Basque authorities also said they would ask the central government to bring back mandatory face masks outdoors, a requirement that Spain dropped in June. Germany’s chancellor-to-be, Olaf Scholz, supports making vaccination against Covid-19 mandatory, German media have reported, as neighbouring Austria is debating how to enforce obligatory jabs from February. Scholz, a Social Democrat, who is expected to be sworn in as Angela Merkel’s successor in the coming week, reportedly told a meeting of regional leaders he was in favour of a cross-party initiative to make vaccines mandatory, as well as requiring customers at non-essential stores to show proof of vaccination or recovery from the virus. “As a delegate I would certainly vote in favour, to make that very clear,” Der Spiegel reported Scholz as saying. The outgoing finance minister proposed a general vaccine mandate coming into effect from the end of February, by which everyone should have had a theoretical chance to receive two doses of vaccine of their own accord. Meanwhile, Germany’s southern neighbour Austria announced it is pushing ahead with plans to make vaccination against Covid-19 mandatory among its wider population from February, after consulting scientists and legal experts. “We didn’t want a vaccine mandate, let me make that explicit,” said the minister for EU and constitutional affairs, Karoline Edtstadler. “But 20 months on from the start of the pandemic we are in a situation that is dramatic if you look at intensive care units at hospitals.” Only a general vaccine mandate would get the country closer to its goal of avoiding a fifth or sixth wave of the virus, said Edtstadler, of the conservative Austrian People’s party. Austria is halfway through a 20-day lockdown, its fourth of the pandemic, after experiencing one of the steepest surges in cases in Europe. The chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, announced on 19 November that his government would prepare the ground for vaccination against Covid-19 to become mandatory from 1 February, which would make it the first country in the west to take such a step. Read the full story here: The discovery of a new and potentially vaccine-resistant Covid variant has concerned governments and unnerved markets around the world. Omicron has prompted the return of border closures and mandatory testing and mask wearing as countries attempt to slow its spread. The number of mutations on its spike protein – the part of the virus vaccines use to prime the immune system – has concerned scientists, but it will take weeks to determine the extent of the threat Omicron poses. The Guardian’s science correspondent Linda Geddes explains: Here is a recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Israel’s health minister has suggested that individuals fully vaccinated against Covid – and within six months of a booster – may also be protected against the Omicron variant. Without citing any data, Nitzan Horowitz told local reporters: “In the coming days we will have more accurate information about the efficacy of the vaccine against Omicron – but there is already room for optimism, and there are initial indications that those who are vaccinated with a vaccine still valid or with a booster, will also be protected from this variant.” The remarks come amid conflicting information about how effective various vaccines and therapies are likely to be against the new variant. All eligible adults in the UK should be offered a Covid booster jab by the end of January as ministers race to increase protection against the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson announced. Shortly before the prime minister’s press conference began, the UK Health Security Agency announced that a further eight cases of the Omicron variant had been discovered in England, bringing the UK total to 22. More here. Johnson also said he does not want people to cancel Christmas parties or school nativity plays because of concerns about Omicron. His remarks were markedly at odds with cautionary advice from Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UKHSA, who urged everyone in the UK to cut down their social contact as fears grow that existing vaccines will prove less effective against Omicron. More here. All nine cases of the Omicron variant in Scotland trace back to a “single private event” held on 20 November, Nicola Sturgeon told the Holyrood parliament in her weekly Covid update. The first minister told MSPs that all nine were tested on or around 23 November and that none had so far required hospital care, nor had they any recent travel history to the countries in southern Africa where the variant was originally detected. Story here. The UK recorded another 39,716 cases of Covid on Tuesday and a further 159 deaths within 28 days of testing positive, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. The US Food &amp; Drug Administration said it was evaluating the effectiveness of authorised Covid vaccines against the Omicron variant and expects to have more information in the next few weeks. The agency is currently evaluating the vaccines to see if and how well they work against the variant, acting commissioner Janet Woodcock said in a statement. She said if the review shows a modification to the current vaccines is needed, the agency and companies will work together to develop and test such a modification quickly. France registered about 47,000 new confirmed Covid cases over the past 24 hours, the highest one-day tally since 8 April at the height of the third wave of the pandemic. During the third wave in the spring, the seven-day average briefly rose above 42,000. On 8 April, France recorded nearly 85,000 infections. Authorities say the vast majority of patients now in hospital with coronavirus have not been vaccinated. All travellers, regardless of vaccination status, entering Ireland will have to show negative Covid tests, as part of efforts to slow the potential spread of the Omicron variant. Passengers will have to produce either a negative antigen test taken up to 48 hours before arrival or a PCR test taken up to 72 hours before entry. In either case, the test must be professionally administered. The new rules will apply to those who are double vaccinated or those recently recovered from Covid. Non-vaccinated travellers are already required to have a negative PCR result from a test taken within 72 hours prior to arrival into the country. The housing minister, Darragh O’Brien, said the new measures will initially apply for two weeks. The UK recorded another 39,716 cases of Covid on Tuesday and a further 159 deaths within 28 days of testing positive, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares to 42,583 infections and 35 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. Israel’s health minister has suggested that individuals fully vaccinated against Covid – and within six months of a booster – may also be protected against the Omicron variant. Nitzan Horowitz was speaking on Tuesday after another two cases of individuals infected with the variant were identified in Israel bringing the country’s total to four. Without citing any data, Horowitz told local reporters: In the coming days we will have more accurate information about the efficacy of the vaccine against Omicron - but there is already room for optimism, and there are initial indications that those who are vaccinated with a vaccine still valid or with a booster, will also be protected from this variant. Horowitz’s comments came after Israel head of Public Health Services, Dr Sharon Alroy-Preis, said that the first data about the efficacy of the coronavirus vaccines against the Omicron would be available during the course of the day. Horowitz’s remarks come amid conflicting information about how effective various vaccines and therapies are likely to be against the new variant. Earlier on Tuesday the German pharmaceutical company Merck said it expected its Covid-19 drug to be effective in treating the variant. Boris Johnson has said a fresh lockdown was unlikely amid concern over the new Omicron coronavirus variant after eight new cases were identified in England, taking the total number to 13. The Omicron coronavirus variant is raising concern worldwide given the number of mutations, which might help it spread or even evade antibodies from prior infection or vaccination. “I think another lockdown of the kind that we’ve had before is extremely unlikely,” Johnson told a media conference. “But we keep everything under constant review.” More here: The women’s World Cup qualifier between the Czech Republic and Belarus was postponed on Tuesday due to three positive Covid tests among the visiting team, a Czech FA spokesman said. The Czechs, who sit in third place in Group C behind the Netherlands and Iceland, were supposed to play the Belarusians, fourth in the group, at 5pm. “The visitors tested negative before they arrived, but then another round of tests was done, in line with the regulations, and three tests came back positive,” Michal Jurman said. “We don’t know whether the game could be played on Wednesday, or we will have to wait for the next qualification window,” he said. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, has said he wants to offer all adults a Covid-19 booster shot by the end of January, because of concern about the spread of the Omicron variant. “The target that we have set ourselves is to offer a booster to everyone eligible by the end of January,” he told a press conference on Tuesday. “As with the first jabs, we will be working through people by age group.” My colleague Andrew Sparrow is covering the briefing here: The US Food &amp; Drug Administration said on Tuesday it was evaluating the effectiveness of authorised Covid vaccines against the Omicron variant and expects to have more information in the next few weeks. The agency is currently evaluating the vaccines to see if and how well they work against the variant, acting commissioner Janet Woodcock said in a statement. She said if the review shows a modification to the current vaccines is needed, the agency and companies will work together to develop and test such a modification quickly. The new variant has sparked worries around the world that it could resist vaccinations and prolong the nearly two-year-old pandemic. The US health regulatory agency maintained that the authorised vaccines remain highly effective at preventing Covid-19 and serious clinical outcomes associated with the infection and urged people to get vaccinated. The FDA is also evaluating the potential impact of the variant on the currently available diagnostics and therapeutics. It said a preliminary review showed that high volume PCR and antigen tests, widely used in the United States, have low likelihood of being impacted by Omicron. A further eight cases of the Omicron variant have been identified in England, taking the total number to 13, the United Kingdom Health Security Agency said on Tuesday. “The individuals that have tested positive and their contacts are all isolating. Work is underway to identify any links to travel to southern Africa,” UKHSA said. The cases in England are in addition to nine cases found in Scotland, UKHSA said. As England’s total number of Omicron cases rises to 13, the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, is due to give a press conference shortly at 4pm. You can follow live updates from that briefing over on our UK Covid live blog: People travelling to Russia from countries with high risk of the Omicron variant will have to quarantine for two weeks, Anna Popova, the head of the consumer watchdog, said on Tuesday. Russia has not recorded cases of the Omicron variant on its territory as yet, she added. France has registered about 47,000 new confirmed Covid cases over the past 24 hours, the health minister Olivier Veran told lawmakers on Tuesday, the highest one-day tally since 8 April at the height of the third wave of the pandemic. The latest data will push the cumulative total of cases in France since the start of the pandemic to 7.67 million and the seven-day moving average of new infections well over 32,000, Reuters reports. During the third wave in the spring, the seven-day average briefly rose above 42,000. On 8 April, France recorded nearly 85,000 infections. Authorities say the vast majority of patients with coronavirus now in hospital have not been vaccinated. About 75% of the French population has now been fully vaccinated. On Monday, France registered its biggest jump in Covid hospital admissions since the spring, with the number of patients in hospital with the virus up by 470 to 9,860 and the number of patients in intensive care up by 117 to 1,749 people. Updated figures for Tuesday will be released after 6pm. The nine cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant in Scotland were all linked to the same private event, Nicola Sturgeon has said. “All nine cases are linked. They all trace back to a single private event on the 20th of November,” Sturgeon told the Scottish parliament, adding that none of the people who had tested positive for the variant had required hospital treatment. “We fully expect that there will be more cases identified over the coming days that are also linked to this event... however, the fact that all known cases are so far linked to this single event suggests that community transmission may still be limited,” the first minister added. There are now 14 confirmed cases of the new Omicron variant in the UK, nine of which have been identified in Scotland. More on this story from my colleague Libby Brooks here: The Dutch healthcare system scrambled to add intensive care beds for patients with Covid as the country registered a record weekly number of new infections on Tuesday. Although hospitals remain under extreme stress, scrapping routine procedures and planned care, the weekly infection figures reported by the National Institute for Health (RIVM) did show signs of stabilisation, rising just 1% from the week before to 155,152. The impact of new lockdown measures ordered by the prime minister Mark Rutte’s government on Friday are not yet reflected in the weekly numbers, as they only went into effect on Sunday. The new measures include the closure of bars, restaurants and most stores from 5pm to 5am, as well as work-from-home instructions and mask-wearing in secondary schools. Overall, there were fewer than 100 unoccupied intensive care beds in the Netherlands on Tuesday, with 595 taken by patients with coronavirus and another 500 by patients with other illnesses. With ICU admissions running at more than 40 per day over the past week, hospitals are trying to restore the peak capacity of 1,350 ICU beds achieved during the initial Covid wave in April 2020. A third of hospitals in the country have stopped offering care that can be planned in advance and almost a third have said they cannot always perform even critical surgeries that can be planned in advance, the Netherlands’ Care Authority (NZa) said on Tuesday, including some cancer and heart surgeries. Negative antigen or PCR covid tests will be required for all travellers - regardless of vaccination status - entering Ireland from Friday including those arriving from Great Britain, to slow the potential spread of the Omicron variant. Passengers will have to produce either a negative antigen test taken up to 48 hours before arrival or a PCR test taken up to 72 hours before entry. In either case, the test must be professionally administered. The new rules will apply to those who are double vaccinated or those recently recovered from Covid. Non-vaccinated travellers are already required to have a negative PCR result from a test taken within 72 hours prior to arrival into the country. The housing minister Darragh O’Brien said the new measures will initially apply for two weeks. Reuters reports that Ireland is studying 11 suspected Omicron cases after initial tests showed they had a trait distinct from the dominant Delta variant. The health minister, Stephen Donnelly, said it is likely the new variant is present in the country. The restrictions will mean financial setback for Irish diaspora planning to return home for Christmas, with an additional £150 for a family of five. It also means the common travel area is restriction-free in one direction only. The UK government announced on Sunday that PCR tests required for entry into Great Britain do not apply to people arriving from the island of Ireland, Channel Islands or the Isle of Man. Denmark has registered a total of four cases of the Omicron variant, its infectious disease authority said on Tuesday. All of the cases were connected to “travel activity” in South Africa, authorities said. Denmark said on Sunday it had registered its first two cases of the variant. Two new cases of the Omicron variant has been detected in Sweden, the Public Health Agency said on Tuesday. The cases were detected in tests taken less than a week ago from two persons who had travelled from South Africa, the agency said in a statement. Sweden’s first confirmed case was detected on Monday. In this instalment of the Guardian’s Lost to the virus series, Sirin Kale tells the story of the life and tragic death of John Eyers, a fitness fanatic who did triathlons, body building and mountain climbing, and became sceptical of the Covid vaccine. He contracted coronavirus at the age of 42. As new cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant are uncovered across the globe and threaten to spread in America, US officials are reacting by urging vaccinations and boosters instead of imposing restrictions which have increasingly provoked political fights. But the US should quickly invest in other tools as well, experts said, including testing, genomic sequencing and surveillance, better communication, and a strong focus on global vaccine equity to prevent the emergence of new variants. All of that would prepare America better to deal with a variant that many experts suspect is probably already inside the country, even if undetected so far. “Testing is the number-one thing that we really need to be on top of right now,” Katelyn Jetelina, assistant professor of epidemiology with the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, told the Guardian. PCR tests are very effective at identifying a key feature of this variant, known as an S-gene dropout, before full genomic sequencing takes place. And making all types of testing, including rapid tests at home, easy and accessible would help curtail the spread of Omicron and other variants, including the current Delta wave. “We’re ignoring what we were seeing in the UK and northern Europe and Germany, and ignoring what we saw in Michigan and Minnesota,” Larry Brilliant, CEO of Pandefense Advisory and senior counselor to the Skoll Foundation, told the Guardian. “That was a mistake. It was obvious that surge would come to the whole country.” Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: Testing, vaccines, sequencing – US experts call for multi-pronged approach to Omicron The coronavirus epidemic in Denmark is showing signs of stabilising, the country’s health minister said on Tuesday, citing vaccinations and third jabs as possible causes. “The reproduction number is calculated to 1. Other key figures such as incidence, positivity rate, etc. suggest that infection growth is slowing and that we have a more stable epidemic,” health minister Magnus Heunicke said on Twitter. The reproduction number is a measure of how many people on average one infected person transmits the virus to. A value of one means the epidemic is neither accelerating nor slowing. “[It] could among other things be due to immunity from vaccinations and revaccinations, as one in seven 12+ year olds has now received a 3rd shot.” More than 75% of the population has been vaccinated in the Nordic country, with 13.5% receiving a booster shot. Denmark has recorded record levels of more than 4,000 daily Covid infections in recent weeks from a low of around 200 in mid-September, but the country has so far avoided imposing tough lockdown restrictions. Several Chinese border cities are halting some non-container commodity imports by rail to reduce the risk of Covid clusters brought in from other countries amid a resurgence of infections in northern areas of China. China’s efforts to keep the virus out face increasing pressure as infections grow globally with the new threat of the Omicron variant, Mi Feng, a spokesperson for the National Health Commission, said on Tuesday. The city of Manzhouli in the northern region of Inner Mongolia said from Wednesday it would suspend taking some non-containerised rail cargo arriving from abroad that requires manual loading and unloading, including coal and fertiliser. The measure comes as Inner Mongolia reported a total of 41 domestically transmitted cases with confirmed symptoms on Sunday and Monday. More than half of the cases were found in Manzhouli. The outbreak is much smaller than many outside China, but Beijing has taken a zero-tolerance approach to clusters, with cities quickly imposing travel restrictions and closing public venues. Gene sequencing results on samples from a few Manzhouli infections indicated that the latest flare-up was caused by a virus source from overseas unrelated to previous outbreaks elsewhere in China, an official said on Tuesday. Erenhot, a key transit hub in Inner Mongolia next to Mongolia itself, halted some non-containerised imports by rail that need to be handled by hand, according to a local government statement. These included certain cargos for coal, oil, copper ore, zinc and iron ore. Erenhot did not report any new local infections over the weekend. Suifenhe, in northeastern Heilongjiang province on the border with Russia, on Tuesday halted some non-containerised imports, such as coal and fertiliser. Heilongjiang detected one domestically transmitted asymptomatic carrier on Sunday in a different city. The three cities did not say when the restrictions might be lifted. Authorities in China, where the virus was first identified in late 2019, vowed this month to step up virus control in border areas, demanding strict implementation of prevention measures on imported cargo. The northeastern cities of Hunchun and Dongning, both along the border with Russia, in mid-November suspended some non-essential imports by highway, such as wine, milk and chocolate. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc said on Tuesday prior analyses suggested its Covid-19 antibody cocktail, and similar drugs, could have reduced activity against the Omicron coronavirus variant. The drugmaker said analysis shows the individual mutations present in the Omicron variant indicate “that there may be reduced neutralization activity of both vaccine-induced and monoclonal antibody conveyed immunity”. Regeneron’s shares fell 2.2% to $639.95 before the bell, Reuters reports. Further analyses are ongoing to confirm and quantify this potential impact using the actual Omicron variant sequence, Regeneron said, adding that there was no direct data yet on whether the antibodies or vaccines confer less protection. The comments follow Moderna Inc’s chief executive officer, who said Covid vaccines are unlikely to be as effective against the Omicron variant as they have been previously. Stéphane Bancel told the Financial Times: “I think it’s going to be a material drop. I just don’t know how much because we need to wait for the data. But all the scientists I’ve talked to … are like ‘this is not going to be good’.” Bancel had earlier said on CNBC that there should be greater clarity on the efficacy of vaccines against Omicron in about two weeks’ time, and that it could take months to begin shipping a vaccine that would work against it. The comments set off fresh alarm bells in financial markets on Tuesday. The World Health Organization and scientists have also said it could take weeks to understand whether Omicron is likely to cause severe illness or escape protection against immunity induced by vaccines. Vaccine makers are already preparing for a situation where their current vaccines are less effective against the new variant, with several companies announcing on Monday that they had begun work on vaccines tailored for Omicron. Related: Moderna boss predicts current vaccines may be less effective against Omicron This week’s episode of the Science Weekly podcast explores the question on everyone’s lips at the moment: How worried should we be about the Omicron variant? Last week, the new variant was detected by scientists in South Africa. Since then, additional cases have been reported beyond southern Africa, including Belgium, Canada, Israel, Australia and the UK. And with the WHO warning that the Omicron variant poses a very high global risk, scientists around the world are scrambling to uncover clues about its transmissibility and how effective the current coronavirus vaccines will be against it. To find out what we do know about Omicron and what it could mean for the coming weeks and months, Madeleine Finlay spoke to the Guardian’s science editor, Ian Sample. You can listen to the episode here: Christmas parties and other festive social events should not go ahead if they are not necessary and working from home could be key in order to help slow the spread of the Omicron variant, one of the UK’s most senior health officials has suggested. Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, urged everyone in the UK to cut down their social contact – even if only by a little – as fears grow that existing vaccines will prove less effective against Omicron than against other variants. “Of course our behaviours in winter – and particularly around Christmas – we tend to socialise more, so I think all of those will need to be taken into account,” Harries told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. The former chief medical officer for England added: “So I think being careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to and particularly going and getting those booster jabs” would be important. She said that, even if vaccine effectiveness was reduced, booster jabs caused protection to “shoot up” and remained, therefore, a useful step. Harries said the advice from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) had “shown that, if we have significant surges in Covid cases, then actually working from home is one of the key ones to implement”. She said the number of Omicron cases identified in England remained low, adding: “So it’s a very early stage for this, I think, but certainly, if we see surges, then working from home will be a good thing to do.” Three more cases of the new variant were identified in Scotland on Tuesday, taking the UK’s total so far to 14. Harries spoke after the chief executive of the drugmaker Moderna said existing vaccines were unlikely to be as effective against Omicron as they had been against the Delta variant. There are growing fears that the new variant will plunge the world deeper into crisis and force the reintroduction of more restrictive curbs on people’s lives. In the UK, that has prompted particular concerns of Christmas plans being curtailed again. The government has touted a “plan B” for the winter, which includes tougher measures ministers have so far refused to enact; preferring limited restrictions and a drive to encourage take-up of booster jabs. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, is due to lead a Downing Street press conference on Tuesday as part of that effort. Get the full story here: Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Greece has said it will fine people over the age of 60 who have not received a first Covid-19 shot €100 per month from 16 January, as the country grappled with a surge in coronavirus cases. Germany’s constitutional court has ruled that sweeping restrictions to stem coronavirus infections such as curfews, school closures and contact restrictions were lawful, in a decision that could pave the way for further curbs. Germany reported a further 45,753 new coronavirus cases and 388 deaths today, but the seven-day incidence of cases per 100,000 people fell slightly for the first time in three weeks. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases reported that 452.2 people per 100,000 were infected in the last week, down from 452.4 on Monday and the first fall since early November. France’s Haute Autorite de Sante health regulator has backed vaccinating children aged five to 11 against Covid-19 if they were at risk of developing a serious form of the disease, or if they lived with vulnerable people. One person has tested positive for the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus on the French Indian Ocean island of Réunion, and six of his contacts are being tested. That makes it the first confirmed French case. The chief executive of the US drugmaker Moderna has predicted that existing vaccines will be less effective against Omicron than they have been against the Delta version, sending global stock markets sharply lower. In England face coverings become compulsory on public transport and in shops from today. That brings it in line with the rest of the UK. But unlike Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, people in England do not have to wear masks in pubs and restaurants. The UK is set to ramp up booster vaccinations and will halve the minimum gap between jabs to three months, aiming to administer 500,000 jabs a day. Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, has said the vaccination booster programme will be accelerated in the country, but that workforce issues will be the “biggest constraining factor”. Nine cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus have now been identified in Scotland. Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said that people could do their bit by reducing the number of social contacts they have. She said even if our “vaccines appear to be effective, but we find that the variant is more highly transmissible, having lowish grade infection, but in very large numbers of the population, it could still be a significant impact on our hospitals. The Omicron variant was detected in the Netherlands before two flights arrived from South Africa carrying the virus, Dutch health officials said. “We have found the Omicron coronavirus variant in two test samples that were taken on 19 November and 23 November,” the National Institute for Public Health (RIVM) said. “It is not clear yet whether these people have visited Southern Africa.” Japan has confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant. A Namibian diplomat in his 30s is thought to have tested positive for the variant at Narita airport near Tokyo upon his arrival on Sunday People in Norway should wear face masks in public transport and other crowded places amid a surge in coronavirus infections, prime minister Jonas Gahr Støre said this morning. EasyJet said near-term bookings had weakened since the new Omicron variant was identified amid concerns over travel restrictions, but it still expects passenger numbers to return to close to pre-pandemic levels by the end of the summer. Hong Kong will ban non-resident arrivals from 13 more countries Global vaccine-sharing network Covax has set aside 4.73m doses of AstraZeneca’s vaccine for shipment to North Korea. North Korea and Eritrea are the only countries that have yet to start their vaccination campaign against Covid, according to the World Health Organization. India stands ready to “expeditiously” send more Covid-19 vaccine doses to Africa to help fight the Omicron variant, New Delhi said in a statement. China also pledged to donate 600m vaccine doses to Africa while working to encourage Chinese companies to invest $10bn in the continent over the next three years. The Omicron variant is the subject of our Science Weekly podcast this week. To find out what we do know about Omicron and what it could mean for the coming weeks and months, Madeleine Finlay spoke to the Guardian’s science editor, Ian Sample. You can listen to it here. Andrew Sparrow has our UK politics and Covid live blog. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to continue bringing you the latest coronavirus developments from around the globe. The Covid-19 Omicron variant was detected in the Netherlands before two flights arrived from South Africa carrying the virus, Dutch health officials said this morning. “We have found the Omicron coronavirus variant in two test samples that were taken on 19 November and 23 November,” the National Institute for Public Health (RIVM) said. “It is not clear yet whether these people have visited Southern Africa.” Reuters report that at least 14 people on two flights from Johannesburg and Capetown arrived in the Netherlands on 29 November carried the new variant, the RIVM said. There’s more detail from Reuters here on that move in Greece to begin imposing fines on people who have not been vaccinated. “We are focusing our efforts on protection of our fellow citizens and for this reason their vaccination will be mandatory from now on,” Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis told a cabinet meeting. “Greeks over the age of 60 who have not been vaccinated must, by 16 January, booked an appointment for their first dose, or else they will face a €100 administrative fine every month.” Greece has recorded a rise in infections this month, with daily cases hitting record highs. The country this month barred unvaccinated people from indoor spaces including restaurants, cinemas, museums and gyms, even if they had tested negative for the coronavirus. The chief executive of the US drugmaker Moderna has predicted that existing vaccines will be less effective against Omicron than they have been against the Delta version, sending global stock markets sharply lower. Stéphane Bancel said while it would take two weeks to get data on how the existing vaccines perform against the new Covid variant – and whether it causes severe disease – it will take several months to tweak the current vaccines to tackle Omicron. “There is no world, I think, where [the effectiveness] is the same level … we had with [the] Delta [variant],” Bancel told the Financial Times. He suggested that pharma companies would struggle between targeting Omicron and the existing Covid variants, warning it would be risky to shift Moderna’s entire production capacity to an Omicron-specific jab. In the meantime, Bancel suggested there might be a case for giving more potent boosters to the elderly or people with compromised immune systems. Read more of Julia Kollewe and Graeme Wearden’s report here: Moderna boss predicts current vaccines may be less effective against Omicron Greece has said it will fine people over the age of 60 who have not received a first Covid-19 shot, as the country grappled with a surge in coronavirus cases. Reuters reports authorities said they would impose a €100 fine on every individual over the age of 60 who was not vaccinated. The measure will apply each month from 16 January. France’s Haute Autorite de Sante (HAS) health regulator has backed vaccinating children aged five to 11 against Covid-19 if they were at risk of developing a serious form of the disease, or if they lived with vulnerable people. Reuters remind us that last week, the European Union’s drug regulator approved the use of Pfizer-BioNTech’s Covid-19 vaccine for children between five and 11, paving the way for them to be given first shots. Andrew Sparrow has launched his live blog for the day, and that will be where you will be able to find UK Covid news. I’ll be continuing here with global coronavirus developments. Norwegians should wear face masks in public transport and other crowded places amid a surge in coronavirus infections, Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre said this morning. The centre-left minority government said it would seek to limit any potential spread of the Omicron variant, including by imposing longer isolation on those found to have been infected with it. Stoere also urged municipalities to accelerate a drive to give booster shots to all adults. “Vaccination is key to our Covid-19 strategy,” Støre told parliament. “We can avoid a lockdown,” he added. Reuters reports that Norway in September ended all domestic coronavirus restrictions, but opposition parties in recent days called on the government to take action to prevent the spread of virus and thus avoid another lockdown. London mayor Sadiq Khan said mask-wearing on public transport in the capital has fallen because the police no longer have the powers to enforce it. PA Media reports he told Times Radio: “One of the reasons why wearing a face mask is so important is because one out of three people who have this virus may not realise that they’ve got it. “You could be sitting next to somebody who is immunity-suppressed, who is vulnerable, who has been shielding, and you could inadvertently pass this deadly virus on to them. “Before 19 July, when we were able to use the British Transport Police and the Met police service to enforce this, and also have the ability to issue fines – the compliance rates were far higher.” Germany’s constitutional court has ruled that sweeping restrictions to stem coronavirus infections such as curfews, school closures and contact restrictions were lawful, in a decision that could pave the way for further curbs. The verdict came hours before chancellor Angela Merkel is due to meet with her successor, Olaf Scholz, as well as regional leaders of Germany’s 16 states on whether to toughen up restrictions. Helge Braun, Merkel’s chief of staff, told the RTL broadcaster the court decision would show “which of two paths we should go down”. Agence France-Presse report that Germany’s vice-chancellor-in-waiting Robert Habeck this morning called for tougher restrictions to slow the spread of the disease. “What has to happen is absolutely clear: contacts must be reduced,” the co-leader of the Green party said, also calling for unvaccinated people to be banned from “all public facilities” apart from essential shops. “We will need new uniform measures to get through the winter,” Habeck said, also urging Germany’s federal states to apply the “range of options” they already have, such as cancelling Christmas markets. “This is then - it must be said so harshly - a lockdown for the unvaccinated,” he said. Doctors and trade unions in the UK have joined forces with families bereaved by Covid to highlight issues ranging from border controls to the supply of face masks that they want addressed by next year’s public inquiry into the UK’s handling of the pandemic. The British Medical Association, Trades Union Congress, the Independent Sage group of scientists and human rights campaigners are presenting a united front with Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice to increase pressure on Downing Street to step up preparations for the inquiry. In spite of rising concern about the new Omicron variant found in parts of the UK, they believe the inquiry, which is due to start next spring, remains essential to “save as many lives as possible going forward”. “The fear of a vaccine-resistant variant is explicitly one of the reasons we’ve been calling for an immediate inquiry,” said Jo Goodman, co-founder of the bereavement group. “Can anyone disagree that we’d be in a better position to overcome the Omicron variant if we’d had an independent process for learning lessons from the first three waves?” However, Boris Johnson has yet to announce a chair for the inquiry, after promising the bereaved he would do so by Christmas, or set out the terms of reference. “The prime minister promised us that we’d be consulted on the scope of the inquiry that we campaigned for,” said Lobby Akinnola, a spokesperson for Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice. “We’ve heard no details since.” Read more of Robert Booth’s report here: Doctors and unions join bereaved families to highlight issues for Covid inquiry The Omicron variant is the subject of our Science Weekly podcast this week. To find out what we do know about Omicron and what it could mean for the coming weeks and months, Madeleine Finlay spoke to the Guardian’s science editor, Ian Sample. You can listen to it here. Dr Jenny Harries, head of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), said there is a current period “of great uncertainty” in understanding the new Omicron variant of coronavirus, but she did lay out the next steps she expected scientists to follow. PA Media told BBC Breakfast the booster dose of vaccine will “we hope, to some extent, counter the potential drop in vaccine effectiveness we might find with this variant”. Asked whether the UK will see a return to work from home guidance, she said: “The whole point about the booster programme and the introduction of mandatory face mask-wearing in enclosed public spaces is exactly to try and avoid that because we’ve made huge progress, we have great defences and, in the background, the dominant strain in the UK at the moment is very definitely Delta. “So these vaccines will help that, it will keep serious infection, serious disease and hospitalisations at bay, but we do need this time to try and understand the new variant, and we would much prefer that we have that precautionary approach and then take appropriate actions.” Asked what is needed for further measures to come in, she said experts will be looking at how the virus works and behaves, “and then, obviously, if it does start causing serious illness - and we have had no hospitalisations in the UK yet - then we’ll be looking at the characteristics of individuals who are admitted to hospital”. EasyJet said near-term bookings had weakened since the new Omicron variant was identified amid concerns over travel restrictions, but it still expects passenger numbers to return to close to pre-pandemic levels by the end of the summer. The airline reported a loss before tax of £1.1bn for the year to 30 September, wider than the £835m loss made in 2020, but the figure was better than analysts had expected. Johan Lundgren, the chief executive, said that while “many uncertainties remain as we navigate the winter”, the airline expects to benefit from a bounce back. “We’re seeing very strong demand into next summer” Lundgren said, “because there is very strong pent-up demand. We have more revenue for next summer than we had at this point in time for the summer of 2019.” Commenting on demand since the new variant emerged, easyJet said: “It’s too soon to say what impact Omicron may have on European travel and any further short-term restrictions that may result. Read more of Julia Kollewe’s report: EasyJet says Omicron variant already affecting bookings One person has tested positive for the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus on the French Indian Ocean island of La Reunion and six of his contacts are being tested. That makes it the first confirmed French case. Official researcher Dr Patrick Mavingui said the person was a 53-year old man who had travelled to Mozambique and made a stop-over in South Africa. The patient, who returned to La Reunion some two weeks ago, is in isolation, Mavingui told local French media. Reuters report French government spokesman Gabriel Attal Attal confirmed the case. “Six of his contacts have been put in isolation, three coming from his family circle and three from his professional circle,” he told Europe 1 radio. Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, has said the vaccination booster programme will be accelerated in the country, but that workforce issues will be the “biggest constraining factor”. Lucinda Cameron reports for PA Scotland that booster vaccinations are being extended to all those aged 18 and over in Scotland in line with the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) recommendation, with the interval after the second dose cut from six to three months. Yousaf told BBC Good Morning Scotland: “We have adequate supply including with the most recent JCVI advice but the biggest constraining factor is workforce, we’d have to go from a position of administering around about 500,000 flu and booster vaccines – don’t forget we’re also doing flu vaccines – a week to around about 700,000 a week, that is before yesterday’s advice came in. “Now with yesterday’s advice we suspect there’s an additional at least 1m doses added to the eligibility criteria.” He said authorities are working to ramp up the programme and “accelerate it as quickly as we possibly can”. Yousaf said calls to reopen mass vaccination centres do not take account of the “challenges and complexities” of the vaccination programme, and authorities do not want to take NHS staff away from other important duties. He told the programme: “The NHS is under significant pressure, what we don’t want to do is take people away from really core, important, significant duties and get them doing vaccinations. A quick snap from Reuters here that global vaccine-sharing network Covax has set aside 4.73m doses of AstraZeneca’s vaccine for shipment to North Korea, according to its allocation plan. North Korea and Eritrea are the only countries that have yet to start their vaccination campaign against Covid, according to the World Health Organization. North Korea has not officially confirmed any Covid cases, a figure widely considered to be unlikely. It has imposed strict anti-virus measures, including border closures and domestic travel curbs. Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that people could do their bit by reducing the number of social contacts they have. She said that even if our “vaccines appear to be effective, but we find that the variant is more highly transmissible, having lowish grade infection, but in very large numbers of the population, it could still be a significant impact on our hospitals. “And of course, our behaviours in winter and particularly around Christmas we tend to socialise more so I think all of those will need to be taken into account.” Asked about working from home, PA Media quotes her saying: “We’ve seen that not everybody has gone back to work and I’d like to think of it more in a general way, which is if we all decrease our social contacts a little bit, actually that helps to keep the variant at bay. “So I think being careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to and particularly going and getting those booster jobs which, of course, people will now be able to have at a three-month interval from their primary course.” Germany reported a further 45,753 new coronavirus cases and 388 deaths today, but the seven-day incidence of cases per 100,000 people fell slightly for the first time in three weeks. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases reported that 452.2 people per 100,000 were infected in the last week, down from 452.4 on Monday and the first fall since early November. Reuters note that the number of new cases was still 427 more than a week ago, but the pace of weekly increase has been flattening in the last few days. Chancellor Angela Merkel, her designated successor Olaf Scholz and regional leaders are due to meet later today to discuss how to respond to the crisis, especially after cases of the new Omicron variant were detected in the country. About 68% of the population of about 83 million is fully vaccinated, far behind the rates in southern European countries such as Portugal and Spain. Ten per cent of the population has received a booster shot. Here’s an updated map of the latest caseload figures across Europe. The other constant questioning line to UK junior health minister Gillian Keegan this morning has been what impact Omicron will have on people’s Christmas plans. I must confess to having some sympathy with the minister here, as, given the lack of confirmed scientific information about the variant, I don’t really see what answer she can realistically be expected to give. Here’s what she told BBC Breakfast, when asked particularly how the clinically vulnerable should be preparing for the holiday season: What we’re basically saying, you know, we’re being proportionate and balanced in our response, but continue with your Christmas plans. We don’t know, as Jonathan Van-Tam suggested yesterday, we don’t know an awful lot about the virus and about this variant. So we do need to wait for the information. But you know, be cautious. I think people who are extremely physically vulnerable are very cautious anyway. They continue to wear masks, they continue to consider where they go and make sure that they have the right arrangements in place. Be sensible, do what you feel comfortable doing. But we’re not telling people to not continue with their plans. We very much hope that we can continue with our Christmas plans. But of course, we were putting these measures in place now to build up our defence to it. Junior health minister Gillian Keegan has been doing the media round in the UK today, and she’s been on BBC Breakfast now. A couple of points of interest from that, firstly on whether the onus is on retailers to enforce England’s new face covering rules, which come into force today. She said: Well, it is actually the British public’s personal responsibility, to follow the rules, to wear the masks. Obviously shopkeepers have done an absolutely brilliant job of keeping our shelves supplied under very trying circumstances, and we thank them for their service and everything they do. And clearly there have been occasions where you know, that’s been confrontational. So you know, we have a lot of sympathy with that, but really, it’s for British public to please be sensible, please wear your mask. But it’s really the police who would enforce that. She added: Obviously, [retailers] will put signs up and ask people to respect the rules and obey the law and to wear a mask and you know, that’s reasonable. But really, it’s down to individuals. We’re all in this together. You know, it’s not for everybody to be carrying around being policed by shop assistants. Not at all. We all have to do the right thing. Just a quick note that shortly we are expecting European medicines agency boss Emer Cooke to start giving evidence to a European parliament committee hearing. I’ll bring you any Covid lines of interest from that in due course. Prof Adam Finn, a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in the UK, has said that the country had to “act immediately and not wait” after the discovery of the Omicron variant. PA Media quotes his appearance on BBC Breakfast, saying: I do think we need to take this seriously. It is a possibility that this will not turn out to be a major problem but there are lots of signs that suggest that it might. It looks like it’s quite a transmissible virus. We don’t really yet know whether it causes worse disease. It may well not do that. But the main question is whether it’s able to evade the immunity that we’ve got to some extent from the vaccine so far and the infections we’ve all had. And so because of that, and because of the possibility of a major wave, the thing to do now is to act immediately and not wait. Politico’s London Playbook sets up what we can expect politically in the day ahead … Boris Johnson will hold a press conference this afternoon where he will present the government’s plan to roll out coronavirus booster vaccines to all adults in the coming weeks. After Monday’s decision to expand the booster campaign, the question tens of millions of Britons are asking is when can they get their third jab – the prime minister will be giving details later on. From this morning you now have to wear a face mask in shops and on public transport [in England, this was already the case in the other nations of the UK], and isolate if NHS Test and Trace says you’ve been in contact with an Omicron case. New arrivals into the country have to stay at home until they’re cleared by a Day 2 test. Health Secretary Sajid Javid is speaking in the Commons ahead of today’s vote on the new measures, with a relatively minor Tory rebellion expected. Nine cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus have been identified in Scotland, the country’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, has said. Yousaf said there are five cases in the Lanarkshire area and four in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, up from the six identified across the two areas announced on Monday. Asked on BBC Good Morning Scotland if there was any connection between Cop26 or a recent South Africa rugby match, PA Media reports he said: “There’s nothing that links these cases or indeed the variant back to Cop26 or indeed the rugby match.” He added: “There’s nothing that indicates these cases or this new variant has come via the rugby or Cop26 but that work of course is still ongoing .” France’s minister for overseas territories left the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe on Monday night at an impasse over ways to end more than a week of violent protests sparked by Covid-19 restrictions. Before departing for more talks in neighbouring Martinique, Sebastien Lecornu told reporters that the Guadeloupe negotiations had been deadlocked over the “obvious and indispensable” demand that the various unions condemn the violence. Agence France-Presse reports that unrest in the former colonial outpost began with a protest over compulsory Covid-19 vaccinations for health workers, but quickly ballooned into a broader revolt over living conditions, and spread to next door Martinique. Both islands are now under curfew. On his arrival in Guadeloupe on Sunday, Lecornu vowed to stand firm on the obligation for health workers and first responders to be vaccinated against Covid by 31 December or face suspension without pay. But he insisted he was open to dialogue on other issues. The vaccine mandate for health workers, which was enforced in September on the mainland, has met with greater resistance in Guadeloupe and Martinique, where vaccine hesitancy is high. Gillian Keegan, the UK junior health minister, has said the government has the capacity to ramp up the rollout of booster jabs. She told Sky News on the issue of staffing: Well, we’ve used in the past NHS staff, community nursing staff, pharmacies, the GPs, volunteers, retired doctors and nurses. We’ve used that pool of staff in the past. So I guess they’re going to be looking at which of those they need to bring back in. We do have the facilities and we do have the people and we do the vaccines. So they’ll just be putting the plan together to see what’s what’s going to make most sense. The UK is aiming for 500,000 jabs a day in bid to outpace Omicron variant. In the UK, junior health minister Gillian Keegan is doing the media round this morning, and her opening interview has been on Sky News, where she has said: “I’d rather over-react than under-react” to the Omnicron variant. She said: We’re trying to get a balance and proportion. And it is difficult because it’s unknown. So we need to have some time where the world’s leading scientists basically sort of figure out what. We know it’s very transmissible. We don’t know whether the vaccine works or the other treatments. So the scientists do need some time for that. We think we’ve got the balanced and proportional response to it, but we will review it in three weeks. That will give scientists enough time to help you give us some insights. Here’s a quick summary of the changes in Covid rules coming into effect in England today. In England face coverings will become compulsory on public transport, and also in shops. That brings it in line with the rest of the UK. But unlike Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, people in England do not have to wear masks in pubs and restaurants. School staff and pupils in year seven and above are strongly advised to wear face masks in communal areas unless exempt Teachers and pupils in Wales or have been told they should wear face coverings in indoor settings. Educational and childcare settings should also continue to encourage staff and students to test twice weekly using a lateral flow device. There are 10 countries on England’s travel red list. Travellers need a negative pre-departure Covid test, a PCR test two days after arrival, and will need to stay in an approved government hotel quarantine. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from my colleague Samantha Lock in Sydney. I suspect we will be in much of a news holding pattern for the next few days, with increasing case numbers and global spread of the Omicron variant dominating headlines, but no real scientific consensus emerging yet on whether it has the vaccine escape capability that is feared while the work is done to research that. I’ll be bringing you the latest news from the UK and around the world. Japan has confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant, Kyodo news agency reports, citing unnamed government sources. A Namibian diplomat in his 30s is thought to have tested positive for the variant at Narita airport near Tokyo upon his arrival on Sunday, the publication said. Japan on Tuesday banned new foreign entries for at least one month in an attempt to stave off the new Omicron Covid variant. Prime minister Fumio Kishida said during a press conference: In order to avoid the worst situation, Japan will first prohibit the entry of foreigners from midnight on 30 November to the whole world as an emergency evacuation precautionary measure. For Japanese etc, in addition to nine countries such as South Africa, 14 countries where infection has been confirmed, and when returning from the region, we will implement strict quarantine measures at designated facilities according to the risk. Hi, I’m Samantha Lock with you to report all the latest Covid developments from across the world. In case you missed it, here’s a round-up of all the day’s leading coronavirus news stories. Hong Kong will ban non-resident arrivals from 13 more countries in addition to South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Non-residents from Angola, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Zambia will also not be allowed to enter the global financial hub as of 30 November. Additionally, non-residents who have been to Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Israel and Italy in the past 21 days will not be allowed to enter the city from 2 December. India stands ready to “expeditiously” send more Covid-19 vaccine doses to Africa to help fight the Omicron variant, New Delhi said in a statement on Monday. India also reported a daily rise of 6,990 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the lowest seen in the nation in 551 days, according to a ministry of health press release. China also pledged to donate 600m vaccine doses to Africa while working to encourage Chinese companies to invest $10bn in the continent over the next three years. China is battling a sudden cluster of cases in a Russian border city, after three workers in the Inner Mongolia city of Manzhouli were found to have Covid-19 during routine testing, prompting mass tests of the 300,000 city residents. The UK is set to ramp up booster vaccinations and will halve the minimum gap between jabs to three months, aiming to administer 500,000 jabs a day. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and US president Joe Biden have both issued public appeals for vaccination. Canada has confirmed an additional two cases of the Omicron variant, bringing the nationwide tally to five cases. Ecuador joins the growing list of countries opting to restrict entry to passengers traveling from or via South Africa as well as other African countries. Germany reported a daily rise of 45,753 Covid cases and 388 deaths, the Robert Koch Institute reports. Stock markets in Asia bounced back again as investors’ concerns about the new Omicron Covid variant eased. Singapore’s health ministry said two travellers from Johannesburg who tested positive for the Omicron variant in Sydney had transited through Changi airport. India stands ready to “expeditiously” send more Covid-19 vaccine doses to Africa to help fight the Omicron variant, New Delhi said late on Monday. The announcement follows a promise made by China to donate 600m vaccine doses to Africa. India said it had supplied more than 25 million doses of domestically made shots to 41 African countries, mostly through the global vaccine-distribution network COVAX. The foreign ministry said in a statement: The government of India stands ready to support the countries affected in Africa in dealing with the Omicron variant, including by supplies of Made-in-India vaccines. Supplies can be undertaken through Covax or bilaterally. It said the government had cleared all orders placed by Covax for supplies of the AstraZeneca vaccine to countries such as Malawi, Ethiopia, Zambia, Mozambique, Guinea and Lesotho, apart from delivering doses of the home-grown Covaxin shot to Botswana. It did not say how many doses have been approved recently. “Any new requirement projected either bilaterally or through COVAX will be considered expeditiously,” it said, also promising the supply of life-saving drugs, test kits, gloves, PPE kits and medical equipment such as ventilators as required. The chief executive of Moderna has predicted that existing vaccines will be much less effective at tackling Omicron than earlier strains of Covid-19, warning it would take months before pharmaceutical companies can manufacture new variant-specific jabs at scale. Stéphane Bancel said the high number of Omicron mutations on the spike protein and the rapid spread of the variant in South Africa, suggested the current crop of vaccines may need to be modified next year. Bancel told the Financial Times: There is no world, I think, where [the effectiveness] is the same level ... we had with Delta. I think it’s going to be a material drop. I just don’t know how much because we need to wait for the data. But all the scientists I’ve talked to ... are like ‘this is not going to be good’.” Bancel said scientists were worried because 32 of the 50 mutations in the Omicron variant are on the spike protein, which current vaccines focus on to boost the human body’s immune system to combat Covid-19. Most experts thought such a highly mutated variant would not emerge for another one or two years, Bancel added. Moderna and Pfizer are currently working on new vaccines to target the Omicron variant and data giving an indication of how the existing vaccines perform against the Omicron variant, and whether it causes severe disease, should become available within weeks. Despite reports of milder symptoms Omicron should not be underestimated, experts say. Anecdotal reports out of South Africa suggest the new variant may cause only mild illness. But although previous variants of the coronavirus have been associated with different symptoms and severity, it would be dangerous to assume that Omicron is a viral pussy cat. At a briefing convened by South Africa’s Department of Health on Monday, Unben Pillay, a GP practising in Midrand on the outskirts of Johannesburg, said that while “it is still early days” the cases he was seeing were typically mild: “We are seeing patients present with dry cough, fever, night sweats and a lot of body pains. Vaccinated people tend to do much better.” Meanwhile, Pretoria-based GP Dr Angelique Coetzee said many of the patients she’d seen were presenting with unusual symptoms, particularly severe tiredness, and none were reporting loss of taste or smell. Read the full story here. The White House has honoured Covid frontline workers in an elaborate holiday decoration display. The display was unveiled on Monday for US president Joe Biden and First Lady Jill Biden’s first White House Christmas. Nurses, doctors, teachers, grocery store workers and others are recognised in a gigantic gingerbread White House, which was made into a 158kg gingerbread village with the addition of a school and police, fire and gas stations as well as a hospital, a post office, a grocery store and a warehouse to honour workers who stayed on the job. Frontline workers are also represented in the iridescent doves and shooting stars that illuminate the East Colonnade hallway, “representing the peace and light brought to us by all the front-line workers and first responders during the pandemic,” the guidebook says. China is battling a sudden cluster of cases in a Russian border city, after three workers in the Inner Mongolia city of Manzhouli, were found to have Covid-19 during routine testing, prompting mass tests of the 300,000 city residents. The national health commission reported 21 new locally transmitted cases on Monday, 20 of which were all in Manzhouli. The mass detection has happened suddenly. Local media said two asymptomatic cases - which China classifies separately to confirmed cases - were detected on 27 November. Contact tracing and further testing had identified another 27 by Monday. Several cargo yards have been closed as a result, and flights, trains, coaches, taxis and city buses have been suspended. Schools have moved online, and hospitals have been limited to emergency care only. Authorities have also imposed controls on city exits, temporarily closed markets and cultural, sports, leisure and entertainment establishments, and put limits on weddings, religious gatherings, and restaurants. No confirmed cases had been reported from Inner Mongolia in more than two weeks, since the detection of four cases on 13 November, in Alxa League more than 2,300km to the south-west. Neighbouring province Heilongjiang this week suspended some rail freight imports to prevent potential transmission, local authorities said. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu India’s daily Covid-19 deaths rose by 190 on Monday, bringing the nationwide total death toll to 468,980, according to health ministry data. There were 6,990 new Covid cases reported in the past 24 hours. The figure is the lowest seen in the nation in 551 days, according to a ministry of health press release. India’s active caseload stands at 100,543 – the lowest in 546 days. The nation has been steadily reporting lower daily rises over the past few weeks. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and US president Joe Biden have both issued public appeals for vaccination. Trudeau said in a tweet on Monday night local time: Let’s be clear: getting vaccinated is the best thing you can do right now. So if you don’t have your shots yet, get them. And now that we have enough vaccine doses for every kid between the ages of 5 and 11 to get their first shot, make sure you get your kids vaccinated too. Biden issued a video call around the same time, saying: If you are vaccinated but still worried about the new variant, get your booster. If you aren’t vaccinated, get that shot. Ecuador joins the growing list of countries opting to restrict entry to passengers traveling from or via South Africa as well as other African countries. The head of the World Health Organization in Africa earlier urged countries to keep borders open, saying banning flights over the potentially more transmissible Omicron strain “attacks global solidarity”. The latest Covid numbers from Germany are now in. The country reported a daily rise of 45,753 Covid-19 cases and 388 deaths, the Robert Koch Institute reports. Germany’s top health officials have previously raised the prospect of a national lockdown, warning that a rapidly increasing number of coronavirus cases and a dramatic rise in the number of patients in intensive care meant contact reduction was the only way of tackling the crisis and avoiding “the road to chaos”. Stock markets in Asia have bounced back again as investors’ concerns about the new Omicron Covid variant eased. In Australia the ASX200 was up more than 1%, while in Japan the Nikkei was up 0.75%. It followed a stronger showing on Monday on Wall Street, where the Dow Jones industrial average closed up 0.6% and the broader S&amp;P500 was up 1.2% after some hefty losses on Friday, when news of the new strain shook confidence. Despite the positive open on Tuesday, advisers say some investors are still cautious about the impact Omicron could have in disrupting trade, travel and economic activity. James Rosenberg, a Sydney-based financial advisor at EL&amp;C Baillieu, said: There are so many unknowns about Omicron and the market has been jumping at shadows. After such a strong run and with elevated valuations, the market will always be susceptible to the odd shakeout on news that could bring risk. Hong Kong has banned non-residents from entering the city from four African countries and plans to expand that to travellers who have been to Australia, Canada, Israel and six European countries in the past 21 days due to fears over Omicron. The food and health secretary, Prof Sophia Chan, made the announcement at a press briefing. She said: Hong Kong’s very stringent system of boarding, quarantine and also testing requirements has successfully stopped the transmission of the three Omicron cases, that we have identified in our designated quarantine hotel, from going into the community. To prevent the Omicron variant from entering the community, the health chief said, Hong Kong should implement the most stringent measures. In addition to the eight southern African locations announced earlier, the government would also include all other overseas places that had detected Omicron cases in the list of group-A specified, or high-risk, places. The Hong Kong government said in a statement late on Monday that non-residents from Angola, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Zambia would not be allowed to enter the global financial hub as of 30 November. Residents could return if they were vaccinated but would have to quarantine for seven days in a government facility and another two weeks in a hotel at their own cost. The statement said: Non-Hong Kong residents from these four places will not be allowed to enter Hong Kong. The most stringent quarantine requirements will also be implemented on relevant inbound travellers from these places. Additionally, non-residents who have been to Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Israel and Italy in the past 21 days would not be allowed to enter the city from 2 December. Vaccinated residents returning from these countries would have to do three weeks of hotel quarantine. Hong Kong last week banned non-Hong Kong residents arriving from South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Covid numbers for Malaysia have just come in. Another 4,066 daily Covid-19 cases and 61 deaths have been reported for 29 November, according to ministry of health data. A total of 79.1% of the population have received at least one Covid vaccine dose, while 77.7% are fully vaccinated. Australia has created its first mRNA vaccine in Victoria, with scientists hopeful it could protect against Covid variants. The new vaccine was developed in Melbourne in five months by Monash University researchers, pharmaceutical manufacturer IDT Australia and the Doherty Institute. It is now subject to clinical trials and regulatory approvals, the Australian Associated Press reports. About 450 doses have been produced so far, enabling 150 people to take part in phase-one trials from January, with results expected later in 2022. Thailand has reported another 4,306 new daily cases of Covid-19 and 37 deaths, bringing the nation’s cumulative total to just over 2 million, according to recently released government health data. Canada has confirmed an additional two cases of the Omicron variant, bringing the nationwide tally to five cases. A further two cases of the variant were detected in Ottawa, Ottawa Public Health said late on Monday. Earlier in the day, Quebec discovered its first case of the variant, health officials said. Quebec health minister Christian Dube also told reporters that 115 travellers coming from countries affected by the new variant, primarily South Africa, were called and asked to isolate and test for Covid-19. Quebec’s first case was a recent traveler to Nigeria, public health director Horacio Arruda said, and was similar to the two cases Ontario province reported on Sunday. Singapore’s health ministry just announced that two travellers from Johannesburg who tested positive for the Omicron variant in Sydney had transited through Changi airport. The two left Johannesburg on 27 November on a Singapore Airlines flight and arrived at Changi on the same day for their transit flight, the ministry said in a statement, Reuters reports. Both had tested negative for Covid-19 before departure, it added. The ministry said most of the travellers had remained in the transit area at Changi airport. Of the seven who disembarked, six had been placed on a 10-day stay-at-home notice, while the seventh – a close contact of an infected individual on the flight – had been quarantined. The ministry said: Contact tracing is ongoing for airport staff who may have come into transient contact with the cases. China has pledged another 1bn Covid-19 vaccine doses for Africa while working to encourage Chinese companies to invest no less than $10bn in the continent over the next three years, president Xi Jinping said on Monday. China has already supplied nearly 200m doses to Africa, where vaccination rates have fallen behind. Xi said 600m doses would be donations and 400m doses would be provided through other means such as joint production by Chinese companies and relevant African countries, Reuters reports. China would also build 10 health projects in Africa and send 1,500 health experts, he said. Here’s quick snapshot of the latest global Covid-19 data. Hi everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the new Covid developments this Tuesday. It’s been a busy past few days on the Covid front with nations racing to close borders and reimpose restrictions after a new Covid variant was detected last week. The Omicron variant has now been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Italy, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia, South Africa, Sweden, Spain and Portugal. The head of the World Health Organization, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said the threat posed by the “highly mutated” Omicron variant showed what a “perilous and precarious” situation the world was in, as he warned that the pandemic would not end until every country has access to vaccines. Let’s dive right back in with a quick recap of all the key developments you may have missed from the past few hours. The World Health Organization said the Omicron variant was likely to spread internationally, posing a “very high” global risk where Covid surges could have “severe consequences” in some areas. The UK is to ramp up booster vaccinations and will halve the minimum gap between jabs to three months, aiming to administer 500,000 jabs a day. The UK also announced that all adults would be eligible for a booster jab as part of the country’s response to Omicron as the country recorded 42,583 new cases and a further 35 deaths. France recorded a big jump in Covid cases after the health minister said the country had entered the fifth wave of the pandemic last week. Omicron has been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia and South Africa. Sweden, Canada, Spain and Portugal reported their first cases linked to the Omicron variant. US president Joe Biden has said Omicron “is a cause for concern, not a cause for panic”. The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention is urging all US adults 18 and over to get booster shots. No further travel restrictions were planned for the US. President Xi Jinping said China would offer another 1bn doses of Covid vaccines to African countries and would encourage Chinese companies to invest $10bn in Africa over the next three years, Reuters reports. Poland, Ghana and Norway announced new restrictions on travel and socialising.A federal judge has issued a preliminary injunction to block Joe Biden’s vaccine mandate for health workers. The president had required workers in hospitals and nursing homes to receive at least one vaccine shot by 6 December. Fourteen states, led by Louisiana, sued in opposition to the mandate. The primetime CNN anchor Chris Cuomo was suspended. This was in light of new evidence that he used his position to gain intel on the women accusing his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo of sexual harassment. Chris Cuomo also tried to make his brother aware of upcoming coverage of the scandal, according to evidence released by New York’s attorney general. The Centers for Disease Control has updated its coronavirus-related travel advisories for Niger, Papua New Guinea, Poland and Trinidad and Tobago. The CDC now lists all four countries under Level 4, which is categorized as Very High for Covid-19. Officials advise Americans to avoid travel to these countries, and if travel to these countries is necessary, to make sure to be fully vaccinated before doing so. Mark Meadows, formerly Donald Trump’s chief of staff, has reached an agreement to cooperate, at least initially, with the bipartisan House committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol, according to reports. Meadows is providing records and agreeing to appear for an initial interview. Dr Mehmet Oz of TV fame is planning to run for senate in Pennsylvania as a Republican. Oz has attracted controversy for promoting treatments not supported by scientific evidence. – Maanvi Singh and Vivian Ho A federal judge has issued a preliminary injunction to block Joe Biden’s vaccine mandate for health workers. The president had required workers in hospitals and nursing homes to receive at least one vaccine shot by 6 December. Fourteen states, led by Louisiana, sued in opposition to the mandate. “There is no question that mandating a vaccine to 10.3 million health care workers is something that should be done by Congress, not a government agency,” wrote Terry Doughty, the US judge who issued to ruling. “It is not clear that even an act of Congress mandating a vaccine would be constitutional.” The primetime CNN anchor Chris Cuomo was suspended in light of new evidence that he used his position to gain intel on the women accusing his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo of sexual harassment. Chris Cuomo also tried to make his brother aware of upcoming coverage of the scandal, according to evidence released by New York’s attorney general. My colleague Oliver Milman reports: A transcript of an interview with the younger Cuomo showed that at one point the TV host texted Melissa DeRosa, his brother’s top aide, to say “I have a lead on the wedding girl”. It was a reference to Anna Ruch, a woman who accused Andrew Cuomo of attempting to kiss her at a wedding. Chris Cuomo told investigators a “source” told him about Ruch and a friend told him that “maybe she had been put up to it”. The broadcaster also used his contacts to warn his brother, via DeRosa, of yet-to-be-published media reports regarding allegations against him. “I would – when asked, I would reach out to sources, other journalists, to see if they had heard of anybody else coming out,” Cuomo told investigators. Chris Cuomo has acknowledged that he advised his brother on how to respond to a scandal that engulfed his administration, but the extent of his involvement has only now become clear. Read more: At the press conference, Omar played a threatening voicemail, which she said she received “hours after” she got off a phone call with Boebert. Boebert had phoned to ostensibly apologize for making offensive comments, but Omar called the interaction “unproductive,” noting that her colleague “doubled down on her rhetoric.” “I wish I could say the congresswoman is an outlier” in making Islamaphobic comments, Omar said during the press conference, referring to Boebert. On the voicemail, a male voice is heard threatening: “I would love an opportunity to take you off the face of the earth... you will not live much longer bitch.” At a Muslim Caucus press conference on the representative Lauren Boebert’s Islamaphobic comments, the congressman Andre Carson emphasized that his colleague’s conduct was dangerous. “Now let’s be clear, this is not about hurt feelings or mean-spirited words, this is about calling out individuals who deliberately incite violence and irresponsibly spread lies and misinformation,” he said. Ilhan Omar added: “The truth is that Islamophobia pervades our culture, our politics and even policy decisions.” Here’s more background on the incident: An expert committee has recommended that the Food and Drug Administration approve Merk’s Covid pill for high-risk adults. The drug, molnupiravir, has been shown to reduce hospitalization and death from the Delta, Mu and Gamma variants. The pill, which if authorized would likely be recommended only for patients who are older and have comorbidities that make them extra vulnerable to Covid-19, could be available by the end of the year. A similar treatment from Pfizer has been shown to be more effective than Merck’s drug, and will likely also get authorization in the coming weeks. Federal prosecutors began their aggressive cross-examination of the Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes on Tuesday, in Silicon Valley’s highest-profile trial in decades. Holmes entered the federal courthouse in San Jose, California, flanked by her partner, Billy Evans, and her mother for her fifth day on the stand fighting charges that she lied about the company’s core blood-testing technology. She faces 11 counts of fraud and up to 20 years in prison. Assistant US attorney Robert Leach targeted Holmes’s assertions that she did not know about the failures of the company’s proprietary tests, zeroing in on methods she used to quash whistleblowers and investigations into the company. Holmes previously testified she believed Theranos’s technology to be more accurate than it was due to successful early trials. She cited studies conducted by Schering-Plough (a pharmaceutical firm that later became Merck) and Pfizer, saying that at the time the numbers meant “our system was working well”. Read more: Joe Biden is speaking in Rosemount, Minnesota, touting the bipartisan infrastructure law. Representatives Ilhan Omar, Rashida Tlaib and Andre Carson are expected to hold a press conference soon about far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert and her Islamophobic remarks. The Centers for Disease Control heightened the coronavirus-related travel advisories for four countries: Trinidad and Tobago, Niger, Papua New Guinea and Poland. A stopgap funding bill is expected to be introduced in the House of Representatives soon ahead of the 3 December deadline. Joe Biden is speaking to widespread applause in Rosemount, Minnesota, but it appears not everyone was happy to see him. A pool report noted that about 100 anti-Biden people gathered near the location, one person waving a “Build Back Broke” sign playing on the Build Back Better Act. Others waved Trump flags and wore shirts with the coded “Let’s Go Brandon” message that translates to “Fuck Joe Biden” - while others waved signs just flat-out reading “Fuck you, Joe Biden”. Joe Biden is addressing the nation’s infrastructure now. He noted that in 2007, Minnesota was one of the first to sound the alarm over the country’s infrastructure when the I-35W Mississippi River bridge collapsed, killing 13 and injuring 145. “Our infrastructure used to be rated the best in the world,” he said. “According to the World Economic Forum, we now rank 13th in the world. We’re turning things around in a big way now, and it starts with roads and bridges.” Joe Biden took the opportunity to urge, once again, all Americans to not only get vaccinated but to get their booster shots. “The best protection is to get fully vaccinated, getting a booster shot,” he said. “I urge all Americans who haven’t gotten it yet to get it done, get it done today.” Joe Biden is in Rosemount, Minnesota to talk about the bipartisan infrastructure law. But first, he addressed the school shooting in Oxford, Michigan: “My heart goes out to the families enduring the unimaginable grief of losing a loved one,” he said. “You have to know that whole community has to be in a state of shock right now.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has more to say on the Build Back Better Act and the Democrats’ hope to pass it through the Senate by Christmas Day - 25 December. The Centers for Disease Control have updated their coronavirus-related travel advisories for Niger, Papua New Guinea, Poland and Trinidad and Tobago. The CDC now lists all four countries under Level 4, which is categorized as Very High for Covid-19. Officials advise Americans to avoid travel to these countries, and if travel to these countries is necessary, to make sure to be fully vaccinated before doing so. The Tennessee education department declined to investigate the first complaint under a new state law that bans some teaching approaches to issues of race and bias – a complaint that included a book about the Rev Martin Luther King Jr and the March on Washington. The bill, passed in the spring, includes among its targets critical race theory, or CRT, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. CRT is rarely taught below college level but Republicans across the US have exploited fears about it for electoral gain. The Tennessee complaint was filed by Robin Steenman, chair of the Williamson county chapter of Moms for Liberty, a conservative parents group, the Tennesseean reported. The 11-page notice alleged that a literary curriculum, Wit and Wisdom, in use by Williamson county schools and at least 30 other districts, presented a “heavily biased agenda” that caused children to “hate their country, each other and/or themselves”. The group took issue with several books adapted for younger readers on topics including King’s leadership of the civil rights movement of the 1960s, the integration of schools in California by the activist Sylvia Mendez and the autobiography of Ruby Bridges, the first Black child to desegregate an all-white primary school in Louisiana. The celebrity heart surgeon Dr Mehmet Oz, better known as Dr Oz, plans to run for Pennsylvania’s open US Senate seat as a Republican, the Associated Press reports. The AP writes: Should Oz run, he would bring unrivaled name recognition and wealth to a race expected to among the nation’s most competitive and could determine control of the Senate next year. Oz became a household name after gaining fame as a guest on Oprah Winfrey’s show. He has also experienced controversy, notably when in 2015 a group of prominent American physicians called on Columbia University medical school to sever its links with Oz for “an egregious lack of integrity” over the promotion of “quack treatments” not supported by scientific evidence, “in the interest of personal financial gain”. In 2016, Oz hosted Donald Trump on his TV show as the businessman ran for the White House. Oz was later appointed to a White House Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, alongside appointees including the New England Patriots coach, Bill Belichick, bodybuilder and former Incredible Hulk actor Lou Ferrigno, New York Yankees legend Mariano Rivera and the football star Herschel Walker. Calls for an apology continue today after a Fox News commentator stoked outrage by comparing Dr Anthony Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, to Josef Mengele, the Nazi “Angel of Death”. Lara Logan, a host on the Fox Nation streaming service, was discussing Omicron on Fox News Prime Time on Monday night. The news comes amid fears that the new Omicron variant will trigger a new wave of Covid cases and further deepen political divisions in the US over how to respond to the pandemic. Fox News has consistently given a platform to misinformation about Covid and measures meant to contain it. Bill Grueskin, a professor at Columbia Journalism School, responded: “The real issue isn’t [Lara] Logan’s insanity. It’s the complicity of Pete Hegseth, the Fox News host. He never interrupts or pushes back. It’s just another day at the office.” The American Jewish Committee called Logan’s remark “utterly shameful”. “Josef Mengele earned his nickname by performing deadly and inhumane medical experiments on prisoners of the Holocaust including children,” the AJC said. “There is no comparing the hell these victims went through to public health measures. An apology is needed.” Full story: Mark Meadows, chief of staff for Donald Trump, will cooperate with the House select committee investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, according to reports. Meanwhile, lawyers for Trump head to a federal appeals court today to once again attempt to stop Congress from receiving call logs, documents and other records that Trump had claimed were protected under executive privilege. Joe Biden waived that privilege, which belongs only to the person in office. This comes as sources tell the Guardian that Trump made several phone calls to his top lieutenants at the Willard hotel in Washington, just hours before the Capitol attack - purportedly to discuss how to halt the certification of Biden’s election win. Democrats set a goal of Christmas Day to at least pass the Build Back Better Act through the Senate. Meanwhile, several other deadlines loom in Congress - the 3 December deadline for government funding and the 15 December deadline for the debt limit. More than 100m adults are eligible for a booster shot but have not gotten one, said Jeff Zients, the White House Covid-19 response coordinator. “If you are one of the 100m who are eligible for a booster, get a booster,” he said. “If you have kids, get them vaccinated.” Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control, urged Americans to get their vaccines and their booster shots as soon as they can. “We have the tools and surveillance in place to identify the omicron variant,” Walensky said. “We also have the tools to prevent omicron from increasing the strain on our economy and healthcare system.” Dr Anthony Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, is holding a press briefing about the new omicron variant of Covid-19. Fauci says at the moment, there is too much unknown about the new variant. While the mutations make it look it may be more transmissible than the Delta variant - which in itself was more transmissible than the original virus - Fauci said at the moment, “It’s difficult to infer.” In terms of how effective the vaccines will be against the new variant, Fauci is still confident that the vaccine, with the added booster shots, will do a lot. “As with other variants, although partial immune escape may occur, vaccines and in particular boosters give a level of antibody that, even with variants like Delta, give you a degree of cross-protection, particularly against severe disease,” Fauci said. At the moment it’s still unknown if there are any unusual symptoms associated with the omicron variant. “But we do not know and it is too early to tell,” Fauci warned. The House committee investigating the January 6 Capitol attack had reportedly grown impatient with former Trump chief of staff Mark Meadows in recent weeks as he refused to engage with the panel. Meadows had defied his deposition in front of the committee on November 12, which CNN is further reporting in its story today “suggested the next step was a showdown that could lead the panel to begin a criminal referral process against him.” Meadows’ lawyer George Terwilliger had indicated that there wouldn’t be cooperation until a court had decided whether Trump’s claims that executive privilege protects him from cooperating (with Meadows hoping for a similar shield by extension), a matter currently before the federal court in Washington, DC. Joe Biden won’t extend such privilege to Trump and observers think Trump’s on a long shot, here, but one that’s at least succeeding in gumming up the works. But CNN further reports that “the tone appeared to have shifted in recent days”. Many more subpoenas have been issued in recent days to individuals whom the House panel wants to question and see materials from, relating principally to their conduct in the run-up to the insurrection and on the day. Those subpoenaed in the last week or feature so several Trump operatives, including Roger Stone and Alex Jones, and leaders of the far-right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers groups. Meanwhile, today Guardian US reports that hours before the deadly attack on the US Capitol, Donald Trump made several calls from the White House to top lieutenants who were basing themselves at the Willard hotel in Washington. He talked about ways to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win from taking place on 6 January in Congress - an essential part of the American democratic process that was delayed by the insurrection but ultimately not thwarted. Mark Meadows, formerly Donald Trump’s chief of staff, has reached an agreement to cooperate, at least initially, with the bipartisan House committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6 this year by extremist supporters of the-then president, according to CNN. Meadows is providing records and agreeing to appear for an initial interview, the cable news company is reporting in an exclusive published moments ago. “Mr. Meadows has been engaging with the Select Committee through his attorney,” committee chairman and Mississippi Democrat Bennie Thompson said in a statement. “He has produced records to the committee and will soon appear for an initial deposition. The Select Committee expects all witnesses, including Mr. Meadows, to provide all information requested and that the Select Committee is lawfully entitled to receive. The Committee will continue to assess his degree of compliance with our subpoena after the deposition,” Thompson added. Meadows’ lawyer George Terwilliger said in a statement to CNN that there is now an understanding between the two parties on how information can be exchanged moving forward, stating that his client and the committee are open to engaging on a certain set of topics as they work out how to deal with information that the committee is seeking that could fall under executive privilege. But the agreement could be fragile if the two sides do not agree on what is privileged information. News of the understanding comes as Trump’s lawyers argued in front of a federal appeals court in Washington that the former President should be able to assert executive privilege over records from the committee. “As we have from the beginning, we continue to work with the Select Committee and its staff to see if we can reach an accommodation that does not require Mr. Meadows to waive Executive Privilege or to forfeit the long-standing position that senior White House aides cannot be compelled to testify before Congress,” Terwilliger said. “We appreciate the Select Committee’s openness to receiving voluntary responses on non-privileged topics.” The revelation from Terwilliger comes as multiple sources tell CNN that Meadows has shown a willingness to cooperate and has entered a new posture with the committee. The agreement is a significant step in the once stalled relationship that comes after months of back and forth between the two parties. The report came as a decision was awaited from the House panel about whether to agree to refer Meadows to be charged by federal prosecutors with contempt of congress for stonewalling the investigation after being served with a subpoena. Former Trump aide Steve Bannon turned himself in to the FBI earlier this month after being similarly charged. The Philadelphia Inquirer is reporting that celebrity doctor and Trump adviser Mehmet Oz, who came into fame on the Oprah Winfrey show and for his at-times questionable medical advice, is expected to announce today that he will be running for US senate. Oz, who has previously testified before Senate subcommittee on consumer protection about diet supplements after he touted green coffee bean extract as a “miracle” weight loss product, will be running as a Republican to replace Pat Toomey, a Pennasylvania Republican who isn’t seeking reelection. Democrats want the Build Back Better Act at least through the Senate by Christmas Day - 25 December. Moderate Democrat senator Joe Manchin, who has been stymieing this bill from the beginning and siding with his Republican colleagues in criticizing the size of it, appears to have other plans. Other Democrats like Democratic whip Dick Durbin appear a bit fed up with Manchin’s antics around Build Back Better. So far for the month of December, urgent matters we have before Congress: government funding the debt limit Now add to that list - the Build Back Better Act. There are a lot of deadlines up ahead for the month of December - 3 December for government funding, 15 December for the debt limit. The arbitrary goal for Build Back Better, at least for the Democrats, appears to be Christmas Day - 25 December. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer is optimistic, though considerably less than Tim Kaine. And then of course, there are the Democrat wildcards of Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema - two moderates who have balked at the size of Build Back Better from the beginning. Lawyers for former president Donald Trump are heading to a federal appeals court today to attempt once again to stop Congress from receiving call logs, drafts of speeches and other documents related to the 6 January attack on the US Capitol that was led by a pro-Trump mob. A federal judge had previously rejected Trump’s claim that he could exert executive privilege, which Joe Biden had waived, allowing the National Archives and Records Administration to turn over the records. Judge Tanya Chutkan rejected Trump’s claims that he could exert executive privilege overriding Biden, saying, “Presidents are not kings, and Plaintiff is not president.” This comes as the Guardian reports that hours before the attack, Trump made several calls from the White House to top lieutenants at the Willard hotel to discuss ways to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win from taking place. The House select committee investigating the 6 January attack had subpoenaed these records in October. Trump ally Steve Bannon was charged with criminal contempt of Congress for refusing to comply with the subpoena - he too argued that the materials requested were protected under executive privilege. House Republicans are engaging in a catty Twitter spat right now, emojis and all. Some background: far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert made Islamophobic remarks about Democrat congresswoman Ilhan Omar. Some in the GOP have been coming out to criticize Boebert for her comments, including Nancy Mace and Adam Kinzinger, who called Boebert “trash”. In a pure high school mean girl move, Majorie Taylor Greene went not after the man, but after the woman, Mace, who called the comments disgusting, but had never called Boebert “trash”. “Nancy Mace is the trash in the GOP Conference,” Greene tweeted. “Never attacked by Democrats or RINO’s [Republican In Name Only]_ (same thing) because she is not conservative, she’s pro-abort [sic]. Mace you can back up off of Lauren Boebert or just go hang with your real gal pals, the Jihad Squad. Your [sic] out of your league.” Mace responded by quote-tweeting Greene and responding, “*you’re” - a a correction to Greene’s grammatical error. “And, while I’m correcting you, I’m a pro-life fiscal conservative who was attacked by the Left all weekend (as I often am) as I defied China while in Taiwan,” Mace continued. “What I’m not is a religious bigot (or racist). You might want to try that over there in your little ‘league’.” She quote-tweeted Greene again with, “This is what *bat emoji* *poop emoji* *clown emoji* looks like” - which can be interpreted as “this is what batshit crazy looks like”. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy delayed the House passage of the Build Back Better Act earlier this month with an expansive, record-breaking 8.5-hour long speech on the floor that pushed voting into the next day. House speaker Nancy Pelosi, who held the previous record for longest speech on the floor, called it a “temper tantrum” and periodically sent out press releases during the speech with the subject line, “Is Kevin McCarthy OK?” The White House was particularly harsh in their assessment of McCarthy’s delay tactics. “Kevin McCarthy said a lot of words, a lot of words, I just want to emphasize that over the course of eight and a half hours,” said White House press secretary Jen Psaki. “For those of you who did not watch all of it, he shared his wish that he could have been in Tiananmen Square. He mused about whether or not Abraham Lincoln was actually assassinated. He shared his thought or dream, I’m not sure, about picturing America in swim meet after World War II against every other country. “But in eight and a half hours, what he did not talk about was cutting the cost of childcare, cutting the cost of elder care, what we were going to do around the country to bring more women into the workforce, to protect the climate for generations to come. “That, in our view, tells us all you need to know about Kevin McCarthy’s agenda and what he supports.” But it appears McCarthy found fans of his speech somewhere: among donors. Former president Donald Trump put out a statement today commenting on how “everybody wants me on television” yet nobody wants to debate him on his false claims of election fraud during the 2020 presidential election. “Think of it, zero takers for the so-called ‘ratings machine,” Trump said in the statement. “The reason is, they know they can’t win.” Reminder that current democratically elected president Joe Biden, whose presidential victory during the 2020 election has been confirmed time and time again in court cases across the country, famously had to tell Trump, “Would you shut up, man?” during one of their debates. The Guardian’s Hugo Lowell is reporting that hours before the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, the former president called several of his top lieutenants at the Willard hotel in Washington to discuss stopping the certification of Joe Biden’s election win. The calls - and Trump’s remarks, in which he told the lieutenants that his vice-president, Mike Pence, was reluctant to go along with any plans to commandeer the certification joint session - reveal the direct line from the White House to the command center at the Willard. They also show that Trump’s thinking appeared to be in line with the motivations of the pro-Trump mob that carried out the attack to halt the Capitol attack and halted Biden’s certification. Read more here: It’s Tuesday, and the clock is ticking toward the latest deadline – Friday 3 December – for the federal government to run out of funding. And then we have the small matter of the debt limit, the arbitrary borrowing cap that is raised each year to prevent the US from defaulting on its debts – a move that would cause economic catastrophe. The treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, has said the US can meet its obligations till 15 December or so. A stopgap funding bill to extend government funding through mid- to late January is set to be introduced in the House of Representatives today. Republicans have indicated that we should not expect a government shutdown for the holiday season, and that we could instead witness the gift of bipartisan cooperation. With the debt limit, however? Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer informed his leadership team that he and minority leader Mitch McConnell were still in talks. Punchbowl News, a Capitol Hill-focused outlet, isn’t expecting the same high drama over the debt ceiling as back in October. In their morning newsletter, their reporters noted that McConnell’s remarks to them of “we’re still talking about it” contained “no saber rattling, no threats – nothing”. They called it “a pretty significant departure” from his “more hardline rhetoric”, believing it may signal “a very serious effort to come to an agreement and avoid a debt-limit standoff”.“Is it too soon?” is the question we ask ourselves, as the final collection from Virgil Abloh goes on show just a few days after the announcement of his death. It may have been one of his final professional wishes – and in keeping with his furious work ethic – to finish the show, yet there’s a brutal finality seeing it play out before our eyes. Emotions are running high as the show, streaming live from Miami, opens with Abloh’s voiceover talking about a return “to childhood wonderment”, while a repeating visual motif of a red hot air balloon suggests Oz and, perhaps, ascension to the afterlife. Still if every moment of today’s men’s spring/summer 2022 show – subtitled Virgil Was Here – is backlit by the idea he was working on the collection up until the very end, the main meat of the show, which is attended by Kanye West, Kim Kardashian and Pharrell Williams, is very much business as usual. Form was always mutable for Abloh, whether it was incorporating a tutu into Serena Williams’ tennis outfit or putting Timothée Chalamet into a harness on the red carpet, and this collection continues this idea. The collection is an absolute deconstruction of menswear norms: silhouettes droop, lines are hazy and the lines between smart/casual and male/female are blurred. A pink and white puffer jacket paired with a ballerina’s corset and a skirt? Why not: these garms are electrifyingly futuristic. Abloh’s work was always pregnant with meaning and his last two collections for Vuitton flowed like multi-ideological jazz: picked apart element by element, it felt like a perilously collapsable stack of ideas but when seen live, it made perfect sense. Both the spring/summer 2022 and autumn/winter 2021 Vuitton shows were mixtape-like riffs on black consciousness, featuring GZA from the Wu-Tang Clan, Saul Williams and the inspiration of James Baldwin’s essays. He attached the personal (whether it was the kente cloth his father wore or his architectural training via suits with built-in skyline dioramas attached) to the political, during an era which existed in the shadow of the Black Lives Matter movement. If this spring/summer 2022 collection lacks that narrative element, the clothes do the storytelling and remind you that Abloh was endlessly inventive, furiously reinventing with every hat, accessory or cut of trouser. As a final creative statement it seems to be an underlining of his core values. “I’m an autodidact, an explorer, and often I’m an amateur too. My career in that sense is an investigative exploration. It’s about how to be a black thinker in white spaces; it’s about inserting the black canon in art history books,” Abloh told Vestoj magazine, in an interview published before his death. “It’s about being a black voice that matters beyond the fringes. I want to be able to look back at my life and career and know that I left some inanimate objects behind, yes, but also a logic that changed the mainstream.” In the end, today’s show is an elegy for these wishes.NSW has experienced its wettest November since at least 1900, with some inland regions recording as much as four times the usual rainfall as the La Nina event in the Pacific took hold. The Bureau of Meteorology, which will later today release more details on last month and the spring for the entire country, said a range of towns from Bathurst to Forbes beat previous rainfall records by a fifth. Averaged across NSW, rainfall last month was 132.04mm, topping the previous record of just over 120.19mm set in 1917. It was also Australia’s wettest November, with an average of 72.62mm, beating the previous record of 70.14mm set in 1973. Australia recorded its coolest November since 1999. For the spring overall, rainfall in NSW and Australia was the most since 2010. Mean temperatures were the coolest since 2016. The record rainfall comes as many rivers in the state have a flood watch in place, with more rain on the way. Over the next week, places in the north east can expect falls of 50mm or more, the bureau said. “It was a combination [of] cloud cover and and we also saw just some cool outbreaks” during November, Agata Imielska, manager for the bureau’s NSW and ACT operations, said. With the background warming from climate change “these days are more unusual to what we generally see”, she said. Australia’s weather has been favouring wetter-than-normal conditions since the drought broke in early 2020. Back to back La Nina events, the second of which was declared by the bureau last week, point to another relatively damp and cool summer ahead for eastern Australia. During La Ninas, east to west winds blowing across the tropical Pacific strengthen, pushing rainfall westwards to Australia and south-east Asia. Given catchments are already wet across most of central and eastern Australia, it won’t take much rain to trigger more floods. “It’s absolutely primed for flooding,” Imielska said. Among inland towns, Bathurst broke its 113 years of records, with about 241.6mm of rain falling in its gauges. Forbes, which was flooded in part during November when the Lachlan River swelled, had 172.6mm. Other parts of Australia were particularly wet, including South Australia, which posted its wettest November on record. Victoria had 50% more rain than usual for the month, while the Murray Darling Basin as a whole tripled the usual rain, beating the previous record set in 1924. Western Australia, too, had almost twice the typical rain for November. For spring as a whole, NSW had its fourth wettest September-November period, with about two-third more rain than usual, while Victoria’s tally was up about one-quarter. Nationally, it was the 10th wettest spring on record, with 57% more rain than usual. Andrew Watkins, head of climate prediction services at the bureau, said the wet November in particular set up “massively different conditions” compared with a year ago even though the La Nina event itself is a weaker one than 12 months earlier. November 2020 was unusually dry, while this year, “the soil is wet, the rivers are full and the dams are brimming”, Watkins said. As a result, it won’t take much more rain to have a big effect in terms of flooding, with many parts of the country already sodden. This story was amended on 1 December 2021. An earlier version stated November was the coolest on record for NSW when it was the coolest since 1999.Northern Territory Police have arrested three people who escaped from Darwin’s Howard Springs Covid-19 facility earlier this morning. All three tested negative for Covid on Tuesday and have now been taken into custody. Earlier, police said the trio allegedly jumped the fence at the Centre for National Resilience just before 4.40am. “Police and staff at the Centre for National Resilience are currently confirming the absconder’s identities prior to releasing further information,” police said. Howard Springs is a large, open-air facility that is being used to quarantine Australians returning from overseas. It is also housing a number of residents from Katherine and surrounding areas, where an outbreak of Covid-19 erupted last month. The alleged escape comes a day after a returned traveller tested positive for the Omicron variant in the facility and the territory continues to fight Covid outbreaks in remote communities. The NT health minister, Natasha Fyles, confirmed on Tuesday that a man in his 30s had been diagnosed with the new variant. He arrived in Darwin on a repatriation flight from South Africa last week and his positive virus result was confirmed on Friday. “I can confirm today that the genomic sequencing has shown that the man does have the Omicron variant of Covid-19,” Fyles said. “So [it is] the first case for the Northern Territory.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The territory recorded no new cases overnight . “We have negative wastewater results right across Katherine, which is very pleasing, including Bicentennial Road which … we’ve been closely watching,” Fyles said. As of Tuesday, there were 58 cases of Covid-19 in the NT. International arrivals on repatriation flights are required to quarantine at Howard Springs for 14 days. Travellers who arrive on standard international flights into Darwin airport are permitted to quarantine for seven days at their homes or another suitable location. A 27-year-old man allegedly absconded from quarantine last week before being found on Darwin’s main strip.Not everyone in Japan is looking forward to observing the time-honoured tradition of drinking, eating, and drinking some more with groups of colleagues, even as the country begins to rediscover its gregarious side after 18 months of the coronavirus pandemic. December usually marks the start of the bonenkai (forget-the-year) party season, when men and women who spend hours together in the workplace get together for an evening of nomunication, a portmanteau of the Japanese verb to drink [nomu] and communication. But many will be approaching this year’s round of office parties with trepidation, according to recent surveys, even though a dramatic decline in Covid cases in Japan means bars and restaurants are again fully open for business. In an attempt to gauge the mood of the nation, the Asahi Shimbun newspaper asked online readers to share their thoughts on the eve of the bonenkai season, and found many would be mounting silent protest when they imbibe alongside their colleagues, and, crucially, their bosses. Many respondents said they dreaded the tradition, which is thought to have started among members of the imperial family during the Muromachi period (1336-1573), because of the pressure to mind their Ps and Qs in front of senior colleagues, while one described bonenkai as nothing but “utter torment”. Their reticence echoed the results of a recent survey by Nippon Life Insurance, which found that more than 60% of respondents believed that after-hours nomunication was “unnecessary”, while just 11% said it was an absolute necessity. The biggest single group of objectors cited pressure to observe the corporate hierarchy during what should be a carefree social gathering, while others regarded bonenkai as a form of unpaid overtime. More than a fifth simply said that they did not like alcohol. “The number of people who are questioning the need to meet over drinks has risen, as they became unable to hold parties due to Covid-19,” Tomoki Inoue, a senior researcher at the NLI Research Institute, told the Kyodo news agency. The Asahi survey found relief that the risk of a possible new wave of infections this winter had forced many companies to cancel bonenkai or hold them online. “I don’t need to worry about what other people think of me even if I don’t drink [at online parties],” one respondent said. “I like the casual atmosphere. I would prefer it if this style of drinking party continued after the pandemic as well.” Despite the lack of enthusiasm, the bonenkai is an important date in the workplace calendar, an opportunity to chew over the previous 12 months and bond over booze. The tradition is not confined to the corporate world, with schools and universities, public offices and local governments booking all-you-can-eat-and-drink deals at one of the busiest times of the year for Japan’s huge nighttime economy. One municipal government has written to staff imploring them to join in the festivities, according to the Asahi, while another promised to foot part of the bill if enough people signed up for their departmental bonenkai. Even as Covid cases remain low, there will be no immediate return to the pre-pandemic days, when the main health risk to revellers was a ferocious hangover. According to the corporate analysis firm Tokyo Shoko Research, 70% of companies said they would not hold bonenkai this year, although that compares with more than 94% who cancelled last December. Some respondents to the Asahi survey did not share the general sense of relief that many firms will be putting compulsory bonhomie on hold for another year. “Year-end parties helped me strengthen my relationships with my colleagues,” said a teacher from Osaka whose school has cancelled its staff bonenkai. “But I guess we should deny ourselves the pleasure since our students are exercising self-restraint” during the pandemic.Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes wept in court on Tuesday as a federal prosecutor grilled her over the nature of her relationship with Sunny Balwani, her former business and romantic partner, and her knowledge of problems at the company. Holmes, who faces 11 counts of fraud and up to 20 years in prison over charges that she lied about the company’s core blood-testing technology, had previously testified that she was emotionally and physically abused by Balwani. In Monday’s testimony, she said Balwani closely controlled how she ran the business, who she spent time with, and even what she ate. Balwani, who faces his own fraud trial in 2022, has strongly denied these accusations. Taking the stand for a fifth day, Holmes faced six hours of cross-examination from assistant US attorney Robert Leach, who questioned her over the relationship and also attempted to pick apart her assertions that she was not aware of problems with the company’s signature blood testing devices. Leach zeroed in on methods Holmes used to quash investigations into the company and underscored her role as the primary decision maker at Theranos. “Anything that happens at the company was your responsibility at the end of the day?” Leach asked. “That’s how I felt,” Holmes replied. Although Holmes has been on the stand since 19 November, Tuesday marked the first opportunity for federal prosecutors to grill her under oath. Leach sought to prove Balwani repeatedly alerted her to problems with Theranos devices. In one text shown in court, Balwani told Holmes “it is most maddening there is no focus in any chem teams and no product coming out”. In another he expressed concerns she was overstating the capabilities of its fingerstick technology. “He is not hiding his view, is he?” Leach asked Holmes. “No, he is not hiding his view,” she replied. At some points Holmes grew tearful when asked to read aloud romantic texts she and Balwani exchanged during their five years of running the company and living together secretly behind the scenes. “U are God’s tigress and warrior. You are extraordinary,” Balwani said to Holmes in one 2015 text message displayed in court. Holmes responded: “Coming from my tiger means the whole universe to me.” Holmes previously testified she believed Theranos’s technology to be more accurate than it was due to successful early trials. She cited studies conducted by Schering-Plough (a pharmaceutical firm that later became Merck) and Pfizer, saying that at the time the numbers meant “our system was working well”. Leach asked Holmes about her responses to reporting in the Wall Street Journal by John Carreyrou, which first revealed cracks in the shiny facade of the company, which had for years been a Silicon Valley darling. “I could not say more strongly the way that we handled the Wall Street Journal process was a total disaster. We really messed up,” Holmes said. Texts between Holmes and Balwani submitted into evidence showed how the CEO sought to suppress the Journal coverage of Theranos, hiring an external opposition research firm to thwart Carreyrou’s reporting. Holmes also expressed regret at her responses to the Theranos reporting as well as to whistleblowers like Erika Cheung, a former employee who previously testified during the trial that she was fired for raising issues with Theranos tests. “I sure as hell wish we’d treated her differently and listened to her,” she said. In previous testimony she also addressed the bombshell evidence introduced by the prosecution that she intentionally doctored documents to include logos of major pharmaceutical companies, which corporate partners took to mean they had endorsed Theranos technology. Holmes said she did so not to imply that the companies had vetted the technology but “because this work was done in partnership with those companies and I was trying to convey that”. “I wish I had done it differently,” Holmes told jurors. That piece of evidence was revisited in the cross-examination, when Leach asked Holmes whether she personally applied the logo to the documents. She said she did. Holmes was the third witness called by the defense after the prosecution spent 11 weeks presenting its case. Government attorneys called more than two dozen witnesses including former employees, investors and patients who testified that Theranos’s blood-testing devices did not work as advertised, returning inaccurate results. Witnesses also said many blood tests were being carried out by external labs rather than on Theranos devices. In opening arguments, Holmes’s defense attorney Lance Wade painted a picture of a hardworking young female executive caught up in the Silicon Valley culture that encourages entrepreneurs to push cutting-edge ideas. “In the end, Theranos failed, and Ms Holmes walked away with nothing,” he said. “But failure is not a crime – trying your hardest and coming up short, is not a crime.”Homeowners in New Zealand’s largest city will have to chip in around a dollar a week to plant urban forests, pave cycle lanes and reduce Auckland’s emissions, under the city’s proposal for one of the world’s first climate-targeted rates. Auckland’s mayor, Phil Goff, announced plans on Wednesday for a billion-dollar climate package to reshape the city’s infrastructure and reduce its carbon emissions, investing in electric ferries, cycling and walkways, and urban forests. “Auckland’s emissions are not remotely tracking in line with our target to reduce emissions by 50% by 2030,” Goff said. “Long after Covid-19 ceases to be a major threat to us, there will be the ongoing crisis caused by climate change. We can’t afford to put off any longer the action needed to avoid a climate disaster.” Goff said the proposed fund would plant 15,000 mature native trees in urban areas, 4,000 trees and plants for new forests; accelerate decarbonisation of the ferry fleet; and add new cycling and walking pathways – with a focus on boosting tree coverage, public transport and bike lanes for lower-income areas. The proposed rate, which equates to $NZ1.10 (57p) a week for owners of a median-value home, will raise an estimated $NZ574m over 10 years ($391m), with another $471m secured through central government co-funding and other sources, the council has said. All of the money raised will and used to fund climate action. The rate is the central feature of a “mayoral proposal” that lays out plans for the city’s budget, which will be voted on next year. A spokesperson for that mayor’s office said while other countries had developed a variety of climate-focused taxes, they believed the design of the targeted rate was a world first – and certainly a first for the country.The Sydney Morning Herald and Age’s European correspondent Bevan Shields has been appointed editor of the 190-year-old Sydney masthead. Shields, 36, replaces Lisa Davies, who resigned abruptly last month after five years in the role. The SMH deputy editor, Cosima Marriner, who has been running the paper since Davies’ departure, will be his deputy. Shields, who began his career as a health reporter for the Illawarra Mercury before joining the Herald, was federal editor and Canberra bureau chief for the mastheads before a two-year stint in Europe. The executive editor of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age, Tory Maguire, said Shields was an “exceptionally talented journalist and editor” who understood the history of the masthead. “The Herald’s foundation is the decades of agenda-setting, independent journalism produced by its newsroom,” Maguire said. “Bevan has proven to be an expert at journalism with impact, both as a reporter and as the leader of the metros’ federal politics bureau. He also has an instinct for audiences and what drives them to engage with, and then pay for, our journalism.” Shields and his counterpart at the Age, Gay Alcorn, have two layers of management above them and less control over the national editorial agenda since the structure was changed five years ago. The editors of the Herald and the Age, alongside the national editor David King, who oversees the mastheads’ federal politics, business, world and environment coverage, report to Maguire. Maguire was promoted in July by Nine’s managing director of publishing, James Chessell, to executive editor of the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald, WAtoday and the Brisbane Times. She joined the Fairfax/Nine group after Fairfax Media’s joint venture with the Huffington Post came to an end in 2017. Shields said he wanted the Herald to be “bold, brave and think big”. “The newsroom will set the standard for intelligent, fearless journalism that does justice to our extraordinary 190-year history and the special place the Sydney Morning Herald occupies in the hearts and minds of so many in Sydney and around Australia,” he said. The former editor-in-chief of the Herald, Darren Goodsir, said Shields had the “rare gift of being able to balance old-school journalistic qualities with the digital era”. In 2018 Fairfax Media shareholders approved a $4bn merger with Nine to create a multimedia company, ending the historic Fairfax brand which was founded when John Fairfax bought the Sydney Morning Herald in 1841. This year Nine Entertainment appointed the digital media executive Mike Sneesby to run the company, signalling the dominance of the television side of the business. The chairman of Nine Entertainment, the former Liberal treasurer Peter Costello, said Sneesby stood out among contenders for his strong leadership of the company’s “enormously successful” streaming service Stan, which he took from startup in 2014 to a market evaluation of $1bn, with 2.3 million subscribers. The Herald celebrated its 190th birthday this year.A 15-year-old student opened fire at his Michigan high school on Tuesday, killing three other students and wounding eight other people, authorities say. Oakland county undersheriff Mike McCabe identified the three students who were killed as a 16-year-old boy and two girls, ages 14 and 17. He said two of the wounded were undergoing surgery as of Tuesday evening and six others were in stable condition. One of the people wounded was a schoolteacher, authorities said. The suspect’s motives for the attack at Oxford high school in Oxford Township, near Detroit, were not yet known, McCabe said at a news conference. “A 15-year-old sophomore student of Oxford high school has been taken into custody and the handgun was recovered,” a statement from the sheriff’s office said. “There was no resistance during the arrest and the suspect has asked for a lawyer and has not made any statements as to a motive.” McCabe said investigators would be looking through social media posts for any evidence of a possible motive. McCabe said the suspect’s parents visited him where he is being held and advised their son not to talk to investigators, as is his right. He said as far as he knew, the suspect had no prior run-ins with law enforcement. The sheriff’s office said the first call to emergency services was placed at 12.51pm “about an active shooter at Oxford high school”, adding that the dispatch “received over 100 911 calls during the incident”. According to police, the incident unfolded in about five minutes and about 15 to 20 shots were fired. Oxford Township is a small town of about 22,000 people located roughly 30 miles north of Detroit. More than 100 police officers, including the FBI special agent in charge, and 60 ambulances responded to the incident. Officers arrested the suspect and recovered a semi-automatic handgun, the sheriff’s office said, adding that it did not think there had been more than one attacker. Authorities did not immediately identify the suspected shooter. A medical helicopter landed shortly after 2pm in the parking lot of the school. “I’m shocked,” said Tim Throne, Oxford community schools superintendent. “It’s devastating,” he said, adding that the school does not have metal detectors and did not believe there had been discussions about that in the past. According to McCabe, authorities knew how the student brought the weapon into the school but did not elaborate. Oxford high school students who were interviewed by reporters afterward described a chaotic scene in which a voice came on over the intercom to announce an active school shooter, according to the Detroit Free Press. They said they initially did not know whether it was a drill. The school was placed on lockdown, with some students sheltering in locked classrooms while officers searched the premises. They were later taken to a nearby Meijer grocery store to be picked up by their parents. The Michigan governor, Gretchen Whitmer, called the shooting “horrific”, adding: “My heart breaks for the students, teachers, staff and families of Oxford high school. The death of multiple students and the shooting of many others, including a teacher, is horrific.” Robin Redding said her son, Treshan Bryant, was a 12th-grader at the school but stayed home on Tuesday. She said he had heard threats of a shooting at the school. “This couldn’t be just random,” she said. Redding didn’t provide specifics about what her son had heard, but she expressed concern with school safety in general. “Kids just, like they’re just mad at each other at this school,” she said. Bryant said he texted several younger cousins in the morning and they said they didn’t want to go to school, and he got a bad feeling. He asked his mom if he could do his assignments online. Bryant said he had heard vague threats “for a long time now” about plans for a shooting at the school. “You’re not supposed to play about that,” he said of the threats. “This is real life.” School administrators posted two letters to parents on the school’s website this month, saying they were responding to rumors of a threat against the school following a bizarre vandalism incident. At a vigil at Lakepoint community church on Tuesday night, Leeann Dersa choked back tears as she hugged friends and neighbors. Dersa has lived nearly all of her 73 years in Oxford and her grandchildren attended the high school. “Scared us all something terrible. It’s awful,” Dersa said of the shooting. “We’ve had some tragedies with the young people dying through the years, and we’ve all come together and all helped each other and we’re still coming together with them and love them.” For Greg Hill, the day twisted his stomach in knots. His children attend the elementary school in the district, and he brought them to the vigil. “Just glad that our children are safe and now it’s time for the community to heal,” Hill, 40, said. Pastor Jesse Holt said news of the shooting had flooded in to him and his wife, including texts from some of the 20 to 25 students who are among the 400-member congregation. “Some were very scared, hiding under their desks and texting us, ‘We’re safe, we’re OK. We heard gunshots, but we’re OK.’ They were trying to calm us, at least that’s how it felt,” he said on Tuesday night. One student texted that she was hiding in a bathroom with a boy who also was seeking shelter. After deputies arrested the shooter, the girl ran from the school and was taken in by someone living close by until her mom could pick her up, Holt said. “That’s our community,” he said. “That’s who we are.”Louise is an Oompa Loompa. She has been an Oompa Loompa for more than 15 years. “It’s too much hassle to change it,” Louise tells me. Most of Louise’s internet presence is linked to the Willy Wonka-inspired email address she picked as a teenager. And she’s not the only one. Whether it is a Hotmail, Yahoo or Gmail address, young minds treat the option to create an email for the first time like they’re facing a bathroom wall with a felt pen. In the comments for a TikTok I made about teenage email addresses and regret, users rolled up to confess to being ladybuggz, cooldudes and kinkygurls. The number 69 appears with such abandon, I’m amazed there weren’t interventions to prevent its use. The responses grew and the comments morphed into a support group for people who took their first steps online with pride and an excessive use of underscores, only to facepalm years later. For the record, when my family had to pick an email address, I lobbied successfully for Nugget Man: inspired by my high school nickname. These choices prove there was a simpler time at the dawn of the internet, where we didn’t fully comprehend the role it would play in our lives. Yes, one day Sk8ter_boi_for_life would need to apply for a job via email. Natalie went with Nattie_Kewlolz when she was in year eight. “Basically, you had to have a Hotmail account to use MSN [the messenger service] so I think that’s where the … idea came from – it’d be an easy email to give people at school, in case they wanted to add me to chat.” But Natalie ran into problems when people asked questions about her email. “My mum thought it had something to do with me liking the soccer player Harry Kewell … as I got into my late teens and was applying to universities and better jobs, I realised I needed something a little more professional.” Many “clever” email addresses perish in the adult world. Setting up a first name dot last name address, so you can start fresh like a cowboy in a new town, has become a rite of passage. Lots of people in the comments on TikTok told me their parents could foresee the potential of the internet, and forced them to select sensible addresses. They’re probably world leaders and the CEOs of banks now. Of course, computer experts will preach the virtues of mail forwarding protocols that can re-route emails to a more sensible address; or the ability to create a new alias if you originally chose something like Kissandtell97. But the process of switching is always a hassle – no matter how easy they make it – and a lot is tied up in these email addresses. Pippa – who retained the handle PippagirlyyXO – says her teenage inbox “is full of documents and digital memories. I even have emails from dead friends in that inbox. It’s a time capsule, and deeply personal.” Initially, persevering with the address was fine; it just lived unseen in the backend of websites she logged into. It’s not until you have to say your email address out loud, over the phone, that the full weight of your choice crushes you with embarrassment. Pippa learned this while buying a house. “I remember the lawyer – who was younger than me – raised her eyebrow when she saw my email address,” she recalls. Now PippagirlyyXO sat next to life-altering contractual agreements. “I felt like an idiot from a bygone era,” says Pippa. “But I stuck by it.” People get sentimental about their first email addresses because they are like a ripped ticket stub to the online world. They are a way to hold on to memories, and also trace how you’ve changed. Recently, I retired a Hotmail address I’d had since I was a teenager and it felt momentous. Like I had just pushed it out to sea and shot a flaming arrow at it; on to email-halla, mighty friend. The progression from one email address to another might be a sign of personal growth, but they’ll always find a way to humble us in the end. Shortly after enjoying my new email address (and my new life), I had to email my dad. I asked him for his email address and he replied: Nugget Man. I was stunned. Nugget Man lived on. Email aliases have been slightly altered, and only first names used for digital privacy Did you select an embarrassing first email address, and have you kept it? Tell us in the commentsAustralian footballer Josh Cavallo would be welcome at next year’s World Cup, the chief executive of the tournament in Qatar has said, despite the country’s laws against homosexuality. The Adelaide United player, who became the world’s only current openly gay top-flight professional footballer when he came out last month, told the Guardian at the time he would be “scared” to play in the Gulf state. Homosexuality is illegal in Qatar and punishable by a penalties ranging from flogging to imprisonment and execution, but tournament organiser Nasser Al Khater assured gay fans they could feel safe there, as long as they act conservatively. “We welcome him [Cavallo] here in the state of Qatar, we welcome him to come and see, even prior to the World Cup,” Al Khater told CNN. “Nobody feels threatened here, nobody feels unsafe here. “I think, unfortunately, maybe he’s getting this perception because of reading a lot of these accusations or reading a lot of these news stories that shine a negative light. Qatar is like any other society in this world. Everyone is welcome. “Listen, public display of affection is frowned upon, and that goes across the board – across the board. Qatar is a modest country. That’s all that needs to be respected. Other than that, everyone is free to live their life. “They [gay people] will be coming to Qatar as fans of a football tournament. They can do whatever any other human being would do. What I’m saying is Qatar, from a public-display-of-affection factor, is conservative.” Homosexuality is potentially punishable by the death penalty for Muslims in the country under sharia law, although human rights reports have said there is no evidence any gay people have been executed for the offence. Same-sex marriages and civil partnerships are not recognised by the Qatari government and campaigning for LGBTQI+ rights in the country is outlawed. Al Khater accepted the World Cup could be used as a platform for protests to be made against Qatar but said that was not a concern for organisers. “All scenarios are open and all scenarios are on the table,” he said. “Are we worried about it? No, I wouldn’t say we’re worried about it”. A “danger index” compiled in 2019 to guide LGBT travellers rated Qatar as the second most dangerous place to travel for queer people, but Al Khater claimed the negative perception of Qatar from outside the country was unfair. “Over the past few years, it’s probably gotten a little bit worse,” he said. “And no matter how much the state of Qatar puts forward, in terms of really accelerating progress, that’s never captured, and that’s never reflected and that’s not ever something that’s communicated.” Qatar, which will host the global showpiece event starting in November next year, has been criticised for its human rights record in the buildup to the tournament, including its treatment of migrant workers. Cavallo, 21, received a wave of support from football fans and current and former players last month after opening up about his sexuality in a video posted to his club Adelaide United’s social media feeds. He told the Guardian’s Today in Focus podcast that the announcement had followed six anguished years of trying to hide his sexual identity from everyone he knew. “I read something along the lines of that [they] give the death penalty for gay people in Qatar, so it’s something I’m very scared [of] and wouldn’t really want to go to Qatar for that,” he said. “And that saddens me. At the end of the day the World Cup is in Qatar and one of the greatest achievements as a professional footballer is to play for your country, and to know that this is in a country that doesn’t support gay people and puts us at risk of our own life, that does scare me and makes me re-evaluate – is my life more important than doing something really good in my career?”Australia’s biggest privately funded “big battery” is being built on the site of the former Hazelwood power station in Victoria’s Latrobe valley, Macquarie Group and Engie say. The 150MW battery will use existing infrastructure at the Hazelwood site to connect to the electricity grid, the companies said in a statement. Engie shut down Hazelwood, which was Australia’s dirtiest coal-fired power plant, in 2017 and demolished its chimneys using explosives last year. The battery, which is already under construction at an estimated cost of $150m, is due to be up and running by November 2022. It will be smaller than the 350MW battery planned for the nearby Yallourn coal-fired power station when it shuts down in mid-2028. Macquarie and Engie said that in addition to storing electricity during off-peak times and delivering it back into the grid when demand is highest, the battery will help stabilise supply by helping to control the frequency at which it is delivered – something that is expected to become increasingly important as the amount of renewable energy in the system increases. The battery will be built, operated and maintained by Fluence, a joint venture between German electronics group Siemens and American power generator AES, under a 20-year contract. It will support the transition to green energy and help “ensure that electricity networks are resilient, reliable and flexible”, Greg Callman, the global head of energy technology at Macquarie’s Green Investment Group, said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Engie shuttered Hazelwood with just five months’ notice in 2017 – a scenario that the Victorian government has avoided with Yallourn by arranging with its owner to close the plant, which delivers about 20% of Victoria’s electricity, in 2028, four years earlier than planned. Before Engie closed it, Hazelwood produced about 25% of Victoria’s electricity and was responsible for about 14% of the state’s emissions. The nearby open-cut mine from which it sourced brown coal also burned out of control for 45 weeks in 2014 after a bushfire spread into it. Engie’s chief executive for Australia and New Zealand, Augustin Honorat, said the company had a “long-term commitment” to Hazelwood and the Latrobe valley that included remediating the site and acting as “the builder and owner of a new energy asset that helps with the decarbonisation of the energy system”.Australia’s second economic contraction caused by Covid has been less severe than feared as increased public spending and a swelling trade surplus cushioned a steep drop in household spending during the east coast lockdowns. The September quarter national accounts, released on Wednesday by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, showed gross domestic product fell 1.9% compared with the previous three months. That result surprised economists who had mostly tipped a 2.5%-3% contraction. At an annual rate, the economy expanded at a 3.9% clip. Still, the quarterly contraction still made it the third steepest on records going back 62 years. The worst fall was the 7% dive during the 2020 June quarter as the first Covid wave crested, while the June quarter of 1974 recorded a 2% retreat. “Given the backdrop of lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT, this is an impressively strong performance,” said Sarah Hunter, chief Australia economist for BIS Oxford Economics. The relatively resilient result for the September quarter provided a better platform for an economic recovery that is firmly under way. But this week’s emergence of the new Omicron Covid variant is a reminder that health risks remain very current. Still, the signs are that the economy was already well primed for a rebound. Household consumption grew 0.7% in parts of the nation that dodged the extended lockdowns in the September quarter. That expansion helped make up for the 8.4% drop of such spending in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. “This outcome highlights that once restrictions are eased and the virus is under control (either through low case numbers or high vaccination rates), the economy can recover rapidly,” Hunter said. “This finding is increasingly being confirmed by the labour market and retail spending data, and it’s likely that there will be a sharp turnaround in GDP in the December quarter.” Extra public spending helped keep the economy moving in the quarter, adding 0.7 percentage points to the growth rate. A swelling current account trade surplus, reaching a record $23.9bn in the quarter also added another 1 percentage point. Westpac economist Andrew Hanlan said a near doubling in the household savings rate to 19.8% as locked-down consumers curbed their shopping, and government payments rolled out, points to a swift recovery in spending that will bolster the economy. “Going forward, this sizeable household savings buffer will be drawn upon to help fund future spending – thereby supporting a strong rebound,” he said, adding the necessary qualifier that “this is subject to developments on the health front regarding the virus”. A quicker than predicted recovery could add to concerns that inflation will rise faster than currently forecast, prompting the Reserve Bank to move sooner to raise its record-low interest rates that now stand at just 0.1%. Soaring property prices, though, may be easing as a threat, according to the latest national home value index from CoreLogic out today. It showed that while prices rose for a 14th consecutive month in November, the pace has slowed to 1.3%, the lowest since January. Still, they are 22.2% higher for the year, lifting the median home value by $126,700. One thing economists are not so sure about is how much those rising house prices will translate into higher consumption because of the presumed “wealth effect”. Gareth Aird, the Commonwealth Bank’s chief Australian economics, said markets were trying to assess what the outlook means for prices and wages in the economy. “Our expectation is that a very strong economic expansion next year will be accompanied by an acceleration in inflation and wages growth,” Aird said. “On our figuring the unemployment rate will drop quite quickly from here and we expect the Australian economy to be at full employment by late 2022. “As such, our central scenario sees the RBA commence normalising the cash rate in November 2022.” Deloitte Access Economics’ partner Chris Richardson said the recovery from the Covid Delta strain had been even faster than Australia’s rebound through to mid-2021. “Australian families and businesses are getting better at juggling COVID. The pain this time around was less, and the recovery looks set to be even faster,” he said, adding his consultancy predicts the December quarter will claw back a gain of 2.0% when those accounts land in early February.Tel Aviv has been ranked the world’s most expensive city to live in thanks to the rapid rise in inflation that has pushed up the cost of a whole range of goods and services across the world in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. The Israeli city climbed five spots in the past 12 months to take the unwanted title away from last year’s joint winners of Paris, Hong Kong and Zurich, according to the authoritative ranking system compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). The French capital was joint second with Singapore, while Zurich and Hong Kong made up the rest of the top five. New York was in sixth, with Geneva in seventh, and Copenhagen, Los Angeles and Osaka rounding off the Top 10. London rose three spots to 17 in the annual ranking, with Sydney up one to 14, and Melbourne up two to 16. Tel Aviv’s surge up the table was partly due to the strength of the national currency, the shekel, against the dollar, as well increases in prices for transport and groceries. It was ranked the second most expensive city for alcohol and transport, and fifth for personal care and sixth for recreation. It made the top third in all 10 of the EIU’s major spending categories, with its index score up by 5 points since last year. The dislocation of the global economy as it recovers from the stop-start impact of pandemic-enforced lockdowns this year played a large part in the shake-up of the rankings. The price of energy and food have rocketed in some countries thanks to restrictions on trade, labour shortages and ongoing supply chain bottlenecks. The average cost of a litre of unleaded petrol has soared by 21%, the survey found. The data on 50,000 goods and services in 173 cities was collected in August and September as prices for freight and commodities rose. On average, prices rose 3.5% in local currency terms – the fastest inflation rate recorded over the past five years. The survey includes rental costs, but does not factor in property prices. Upasana Dutt, head of worldwide cost of living at the EIU, said: “We can clearly see the impact in this year’s index, with the rise in petrol prices particularly stark,” adding that while central banks are expected to raise interest rates cautiously, reducing inflation. Forty new cities were added to the rankings this year. The Scottish capital Edinburgh was the highest new entry on the charts, coming in at joint 27th on a par with cities with a high cost of living such as Auckland and Minneapolis. Two other new cities –Stuttgart and San Diego – also entered in the Top 50. Rome saw the biggest drop as it fell 16 places to 48, with a particularly sharp decline in the cost of groceries and clothing. Bangkok and Lima were the second-biggest movers down the rankings, with significant declines in all categories. Tehran was the biggest climber after it leapt 50 places to 29th thanks to continued supply-side constraints, goods shortages and rising import prices after the reimposition of US sanctions. The average inflation figure does not include four cities with exceptionally high rates: Caracas, Damascus, Buenos Aires and Tehran. Damascus was ranked the world’s cheapest city to live in, followed by Tripoli in Libya and Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan.Australia won’t lose its sovereignty under the Aukus deal, according to Joe Biden’s top Indo-Pacific adviser, who has sought to clarify his prediction of a “melding” of Australian, US and UK military forces. Kurt Campbell on Wednesday also said the US president had raised Beijing’s trade strikes against Australian export sectors in his recent virtual meeting with China’s president, Xi Jinping, as an example of actions on the world stage that were “backfiring”. Campbell accused Beijing of waging “dramatic economic warfare” against Australia by imposing tariffs and unofficial import bans on Australian wine, barley, seafood and coal over the past 18 months. He argued Beijing’s preference “would have been to break Australia, to drive Australia to its knees” – but it would not succeed. Campbell, a top adviser to Biden as the coordinator for Indo-Pacific affairs on the US National Security Council, is seen as a key figure in the formation of the Aukus deal security partnership, which was unveiled with much fanfare in September. He told a Lowy Institute conference on Wednesday the Australian plan to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines was an “enormous challenge” given that Australia “has no nuclear industry per se”. The 18-month study period would find out whether there were any “road blocks that were insurmountable”, but the leaders of Australia, the US and the UK would not have announced the deal they did not think it was an achievable goal, Campbell said. The former Australian prime minister Paul Keating has questioned whether the plans would diminish Australia’s strategic autonomy – a concern also raised by the Labor opposition, which has sought assurances from the Morrison government. Keating told a National Press Club event last month that if Australia were to buy American Virginia class submarines, “they’ll simply be part of the United States force directed by the United States”. The former PM blasted both major Australian political parties for backing Aukus, with Keating arguing the plan was all about hawkish national security advisers who “can’t wait to get the staplers back on to the Americans”. Those concerns were heightened when, in recent remarks, Campbell predicted Aukus would lead to “almost a melding of our services”. “I would think in the next little while we will have more British sailors serving on our naval vessels, Australians and the like, more of our forward-deployed assets in Australia,” Campbell told the US Institute of Peace two weeks ago. “This leads to a deeper interconnection and, almost a melding in many respects of our services and working together on common purpose that we couldn’t have dreamed about five or 10 years ago.” Campbell moved to clarify those comments when he addressed an Australian audience on Wednesday and was asked what he meant by melding and its implications for Australia’s freedom to make its own decisions. “Look, I’ve followed the Australian debate carefully,” Campbell told a Lowy Institute conference, The Indo-Pacific Operating System. “I fully understand how important sovereignty and independence is for Australia. So I don’t want to leave any sense that somehow that would be lost.” Campbell said the Aukus arrangement was “meant to be additive and create new capacities”. “I think what I’m suggesting is that Australian sailors will have the opportunity to serve on American vessels and vice versa. I think you can expect American submarines to port more commonly in Australian ports,” Campbell said. “I think we’re going to operate and share perspectives much more than we’ve done in the past.” Campbell made the point that “we’re already close allies”. He predicted the overall capacities and training would become “much more common as we go forward”. “And for Australia to learn and to become, and to master of nuclear technology of the kind that is presented in submarines will require the deepest, most profound kinds of engagements with submariners in the United States and Great Britain, who work on nuclear submarines,” he said. “That’s going to be extraordinarily important. And it ultimately is going to lead to a kind of strategic intimacy that we think is going to be very important in the time ahead.” Campbell, a former architect of the Obama administration’s “pivot” to Asia, carefully avoided weighing into Australia’s domestic political debate regarding Taiwan. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, has said it would be inconceivable that Australia would not join its top security ally if the US joined a conflict to defend Taiwan – prompting accusations from the opposition that the conservative figure was amping up national security as an election tactic. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said Dutton was out of step with the long-held US policy of strategic ambiguity – crucial to upholding the status quo across the Taiwan Strait. Campbell did not respond directly to Dutton and Wong’s interventions, but said he wanted to underscore that US policy “has not changed” and it was ensuring Taiwan had “the appropriate defensive articles to be able to deter aggression”. “You will have seen in the last several months, a number of countries speaking out more directly, including Japan, including Australia, Great Britain and others,” Campbell said. “The maintenance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait is in the strategic interests of all concerned.” Campbell said it was “a very delicate matter” but the US would be purposeful, determined and clear in its messaging “to secure the status quo in the future”. Earlier this week, Taiwan’s ministry of foreign affairs told the Guardian it was sincerely grateful for recent comments by Dutton and the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison. On Friday, though, the Chinese embassy in Canberra accused Dutton of fanning conflict and division. China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, said politicians like Dutton should refrain from “destructive” commentary, and argued the Aukus plan would brand Australia as a “sabre wielder” and a “dangerous guy”. Wang gave no indication Beijing was about to end the freeze on calls between Chinese and Australian ministers, saying speculation about war was “not a conducive environment” for high-level talks. Campbell said over time he believed China would re-engage with Australia, but on Australia’s terms. He said Biden had raised the trade actions against Australia in the conversation with Xi, because of “our assessment is that maybe some of the feedback loop in China is not working as effectively as it was in the past” – meaning frank advice is not getting to Xi. “And frankly, what better way to reach the leader – who may be a bit isolated at the top – than have a direct conversation with his No 1 counterpart?”White goods and electronics should be clearly labelled with repair information and “expiry” dates, according to a new report from the Productivity Commission. The commission’s report on the right to repair found the labelling system should be piloted in Australia. The commission has spent the past year reviewing the so-called “right to repair” in Australia and received more than 300 submissions and comments. Many consumers complained that companies were making it harder and more expensive to get devices repaired by anyone other than the manufacturer, and devices were lasting shorter amounts of time than consumers expected. The most common issues with phones, for example, are smashed screens or the need to replace the battery. Increasingly, the commission heard companies like Apple and Samsung were making it harder for consumers to repair product themselves – or get repairs done by anyone but the maker. The final report, released on Wednesday, found price was the major factor in people deciding between repairing or replacing a broken product. The inconvenience of getting a product repaired, and people wanting the most up-to-date device, were key reasons why people weren’t getting repairs done. The commission found there was “mixed” evidence on whether products were having their lifespans shortened in order to encourage people to buy newer devices, stating while it could not be ruled out completely, it was probably not widespread. People were much more likely to choose to replace their own devices with newer products and, in some cases, products were becoming more durable. The Australian government should trial a product labelling scheme within five years for products such as white goods or consumer electronics where people can see information on repairability and the durability of a product, the commission recommended. If the pilot is effective, it could be expanded to a formal scheme. The commission also recommended warranty regulations be amended to state that right to remedies under consumer law do not require consumers to have previously used authorised repair services or repair parts. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While finding that existing Australian Consumer Law provides rights for people to get repairs or replacements for defective products, the commission has recommended changes, including requiring manufacturers to provide software updates for reasonable periods, to enable consumer groups to collect common complaints about certain products to lodge as a “super complaint” for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) to investigate. The commission recommended state and territory governments find alternative dispute resolution processes for people with repair issues, to avoid matters ending up in the courts, and that the ACCC be empowered to seek penalties when suppliers fail to provide remedies when required to do so. The recommendations in the report are largely identical to recommendations in the draft released in June. However the commission has backed away from a recommended prohibition on warranty voiding clauses, or stickers placed on products that void the warranty if broken, arguing such a ban could increase the cost for manufacturers and consumers. Since the draft release of the report, Apple has announced it will provide spare batteries, screens and camera parts for iPhones 12 and 13 to allow people to repair their own iPhones.Expectations are growing that the health and aged care minister, Greg Hunt, will quit politics at the next election after more than 20 years in federal parliament. Zoe McKenzie, a former adviser to Andrew Robb and a Mornington Peninsula local, is already being touted as a possible replacement for the relatively safe Liberal seat. Hunt, who was first elected to the seat of Flinders in November 2001, has declined to comment on a report in the Australian Financial Review on Wednesday of his imminent retirement. The federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, who described Hunt as his “closest friend in this place”, paid tribute to the health minister when asked about his potential departure on Wednesday. “We are very dear friends and he has been an outstanding health minister through this crisis,” Frydenberg said. “The fact that Australia has one of the lowest mortality rates in the world, and the fact that we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world is due in no small part to the incredible work that all health professionals have done across Australia,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “And Greg as the health minister in this once-in-a-century pandemic has been outstanding.” Hunt was a parliamentary secretary in the Howard government and was made environment minister in Tony Abbott’s first cabinet before shifting to the Industry and Science portfolio under Malcolm Turnbull. Hunt took over the health and sports portfolios from Sussan Ley after she was embroiled in an expenses scandal in early 2017, and retained health following the 2019 election. At the last election, the former Liberal MP Julia Banks announced she would be running against Hunt as an independent in the Mornington Peninsula seat, leading to a small swing against him. The Liberal party hold Flinders on a 5.6% margin.New Zealand has enshrined protections for drug checking in law, in what advocates say is a world first. The country’s new law to protect pill testing – where organisations chemically test illicit drugs to monitor for dangerous contaminants – has been voted in by the government, and is expected to pass into law next week. “We’re the first country to specifically make legislation to protect drug checking,” said Wendy Allison, the managing director of drug-checking organisation KnowYourStuffNZ. While a number of countries, such as the Netherlands and Portugal have longstanding drug-checking services, many operate in a legal grey zone, she said – whereas New Zealand’s laws would explicitly protect the practice. “There are a number of countries that have been doing it under various different formats for a lot of different years. In the US and in the UK … They all operate in a legal grey area, that they’re not explicitly illegal. In the Netherlands it is supported, but it’s not legislated to protect the people who do it or the clients. That’s the difference here, is that we now have legislation that facilitates it.” New Zealand had temporarily allowed legal drug testing, but the new legislation makes it permanent, and allocates $800,000 of government funding to help carry it out. “This legislation is about keeping people safe,” the New Zealand health minister, Andrew Little, said in a statement. “The drug-checking services we have had running have detected and intercepted potentially deadly substances circulating in the community.” Little said that last summer, 40% of MDMA tested had turned out to be eutylone, “a potentially dangerous synthetic cathinone also known as bath salts, and linked to deaths and hospitalisations”. He said research by Victoria University for the Ministry of Health found 68% of festival-goers who used drug-checking services said they changed their behaviour once they saw the results. Across the Tasman, calls for pill testing after drug-related festival deaths in New South Wales received a cool reception from politicians. Australian data released last year found nearly two-thirds of the Australian public were in favour of pill testing at music festivals, but the policy had been rebuffed by leaders including the former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and the Victorian Labor government. Pill testing had been repeatedly called for in coronial inquiries, including this year in Victoria, in an inquest into deaths of four men and a boy who thought they were taking MDMA. “The conservative approach is, ‘well, just don’t take drugs then,’ but it’s plainly obvious that that is not stopping people from doing it,” Allison said. “What we do is provide more information that helps people assess the risks more accurately – and in a lot of cases that is making people approach drugs more safely, whether that be not taking them at all, or taking less, or not taking them with other substances.” “The funding announced … for drug-checking services at festivals will save lives,” the Green party drug reform spokesperson, Chlöe Swarbrick, said in a statement. “However, it’s just a start.” The party is advocating for $3m in funding for drug testing services and premises around the country. “It’s ludicrous to pretend drug consumption only happens at music festivals and not also bars, clubs and weekend parties … Everyone who needs these services should have access.”An average of two girls between 10 and 14 give birth every day in Paraguay, thanks to a toxic combination of widespread child abuse and draconian abortion laws, according to a new Amnesty International report. Paraguay has one of the highest rates of child and teen pregnancy in Latin America, a region that, as a whole, has the second-highest rates in the world. The country has long been plagued by sexual violence against children, with a string of high-profile cases prompting global outrage. In 2015, an 11-year-old girl known by the pseudonym “Mainumby” (Hummingbird) was forced to give birth despite condemnation from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the UN. But in addition to the alarming numbers of 10- to 14-year-olds forced to carry their pregnancies to term, Paraguay – which has a population of just 7 million – saw more than 12,000 girls aged between 15 and 19 give birth in 2019. “By action and omission, Paraguay is turning its back on its girls and teenagers as they face unimaginable abuses,” said Erika Guevara-Rosas, Americas director at Amnesty International. The Amnesty International report published on Wednesday points to inadequate action to tackle cultural tolerance of sexual abuse of children, stating that 80% of cases take place within the family circle. Perpetrators are most frequently the victim’s stepfather, father, grandfather, neighbour or uncle. “It’s rooted in the patriarchal and machista culture we have in our society,” Aníbal Cabrera, executive director of the Paraguayan Coordination Group for the Rights of Children and Adolescents (CDIA), said. “As long as we keep seeing this as normal, the abuse and violence will continue.” Cabrera said Indigenous children were especially vulnerable. A series of cases of horrendous sexual violence towards Indigenous girls caused outrage in 2020. Paraguay’s public prosecutor’s office recorded a daily average of 12 cases of sexual violence against children and adolescents in 2019. Health officials told Amnesty International that they suspect five cases go unreported for every one that is recorded. Paraguay’s strict abortion laws – some of the most extreme in the Americas – give child and adolescent abuse victims few options if they become pregnant. Abortion is granted only in very rare cases where the mother’s life is recognised to be in danger. “Girls have the right to a life free of violence. Forcing someone to continue with a pregnancy, particularly when it is the result of rape, is a form of ill-treatment that can be considered torture,” said Guevara-Rosas. Paraguay has shown no signs of following the path of countries in the region that have relaxed abortion laws. Paraguayan social organisations closely followed developments as neighbouring Argentina legalised abortion in 2020. Child and adolescent mothers face dire circumstances after giving birth. The report signals that a 2018 law promising consolidated comprehensive care for children and adolescents who survive sexual abuse has yet to be finalised and implemented. Highly conservative groups wield great political power in Paraguay, and both chambers of the country’s congress have declared themselves “pro-life and pro-family” in recent years. “That’s the double moral standards we see in Paraguay,” said Cabrera. “They declare themselves pro-life and pro-family but don’t allocate resources to institutions or to a programme to care for child victims of sexual abuse.” Conservative sectors have repeatedly blocked the implementation of comprehensive sexual education, a measure called for by the report as vital for combatting child sexual abuse and pregnancy. In 2017 the country’s education ministry outlawed all references to “gender theory and/or ideology” in the education system. Paraguay’s broader policies to guarantee the rights of children have also been criticised by international organisations. The government has repeatedly refused to investigate the killing of two 11-year-old Argentinian girls by state anti-guerrilla forces in 2020, despite continued pressure from the Argentinian government and international human rights bodies. “We have a real problem here: the state doesn’t accept its role as the body responsible for implementing public policy and for guaranteeing rights,” said Cabrera.A month ago, we took a detour from this footpath, wide around a bull and his harem that were sheltering under the trees. The beasts have moved to pastures new, but they’ve left two legacies: lush tufts of new grass, fertilised by decaying cowpats, and scores of noon flies (Mesembrina meridiana). They are basking on fence posts in the afternoon sun on another unseasonably mild November day. For an insect that spends its formative stages in semi-liquid bovine excrement, the noon fly is surprisingly beautiful, with its body of polished jet and wings like rippled glass, decorated with bright orange patches. Interesting too, because each will lay just five eggs, one per cowpat, releasing carnivorous grubs that prey on the larvae of dung flies and other coprophagous insects. Its life cycle, an integral part of agricultural grassland ecology, revolves around defecating cattle. In these dying days of autumn, the flies are sharing their fence post perches with other sunbathing insects, including harlequin ladybirds (Harmonia axyridis), which are recent arrivals in the dale. Native to east Asia, they were used to control glasshouse aphids in the US – a biological pest control measure with regrettable consequences when they escaped and reached Britain in 2004. They are now well established, competing with native ladybirds and predating their eggs and larvae. Harlequins come in coats of many colours and patterns, permutations on the theme of black spots on orange wing cases, or vice versa, plus an all-black morph, all of which may indicate an underlying reservoir of genetic variability that could be the key to future adaptation in our rapidly changing climate. And today, on the brink of winter, here is another winning trait: a prolonged breeding season. Among the adults seeking hibernation sites in crevices in the old wooden posts, there are more harlequin larvae. One, tail anchored to a post, is ready to wriggle out of its spiny larval coat, secrete new orange and black armour, curl like a gaudy miniature Egyptian scarab seal, and pupate. The days are getting colder, but there may still be time to metamorphose into an adult and crawl into hibernation before winter tightens its grip. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryA secret European intelligence report has concluded that Chechnya’s security services most likely stand behind the attempted murder in Sweden in 2020 of a dissident Chechen blogger. Tumso Abdurakhmanov, an exiled critic of Ramzan Kadyrov, Chechnya’s leader, barely survived the hammer attack last year in a bizarre assassination attempt that investigators said they traced to Russia. The intelligence report, obtained by the Swedish broadcaster SVT as part of its investigation into the attack, joins growing evidence that Russia has ordered a series of assassinations in Europe that have targeted dissident and other perceived enemies of the leadership of Russia and of Kadyrov. At least a dozen people have been targeted, including Sergei Skripal, formerly of the GRU military spy agency, in an attack with the nerve agent novichok, in Salisbury, England, during 2018. The Russian opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, was also targeted in a similar assassination attempt during a trip to the Russian city of Tomsk. “In conclusion, we find that Russia today has the same capacity as the Soviet Union once had to carry out assassinations sanctioned by the state,” said the report, which SVT said was produced by one of Europe’s intelligence agencies. “Several signs point toward the same direction. And the conclusion is that the instigators, organisers, co-ordinators, and operatives of extra-judicial executions are most likely to be found in the special units of the National Guard of Russia, especially in SOBR Terek [a spetsnaz unit based in Chechnya].” The Swedish security service, known as SAPO, told the broadcaster that the assassination was planned during a meeting in Moscow in 2019 and that the country was seeking a suspect with ties to the Chechen government who had helped organise the attempted murder. Interpol has issued an international warrant for his arrest. Bellingcat, the online investigative collective, shared travel records that showed that the man, Imran Khaskanov, left Sweden and went to Moscow and then Grozny, Chechnya’s capital, shortly after the attack took place. In its investigation, SVT said that Khaskanov had ties to one of Kadyrov’s top enforcers. His current whereabouts are unknown and he could not be reached for comment. Abdurakhmanov survived by turning the tables on his attacker, streaming live on Instagram from his bloodstained bedroom in eastern Sweden while he interrogated his attacker. “Who sent you?” he repeated. Two people have been sentenced to prison for the attack. Ruslan Mamaev, the attacker, was given a 12 year prison sentence. Elmira Chapiaeva, an accomplice, received a 1.5 year prison sentence. In the report, which was shared in advance with the Guardian, Abdurakhmanov was filmed gaining political asylum in Sweden more than six years after fleeing Chechnya.Christian Porter has revealed he will quit politics at the next federal election, leaving with bitter words about the “harshness” that comes with elected office. Porter, the former attorney general and leader of the lower house, said on Wednesday he had decided not to recontest his West Australian seat of Pearce. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, is also expected to quit at the next election after more than 20 years in parliament. Hunt is expected to officially announce his resignation on Thursday. Porter, in a statement on his website and Facebook, complained that one of the only certainties in politics was “that there appears to be no limit to what some will say or allege or do to gain an advantage over a perceived enemy”. “This makes the harshness that can accompany the privilege of representing people, harder than ever before,” he said on Wednesday. “But even though I have experienced perhaps more of the harshness of modern politics than most, there are no regrets.” Porter said “before each election, I have always asked myself whether I could absolutely guarantee another three years of total commitment to the electorate because people deserve that commitment, free of any reservations”. “After a long time giving everything I could to the people of Pearce, it’s now time to give more of what is left to those around me whose love has been unconditional.” Porter said a new Liberal candidate would best serve the needs of Pearce. He listed career achievements including lobbying for GST reform and securing funding for West Australian infrastructure projects. Porter has had a tumultuous year after he identified himself in March as the subject of an ABC story alleging an unidentified cabinet minister had been accused of rape in January 1988 in a dossier sent to Scott Morrison and three other parliamentarians. Porter strenuously denied the allegations but gave up the attorney general’s portfolio after launching a defamation action against the ABC and reporter Louise Milligan. In late May, Porter agreed to discontinue the case, after the ABC stated it did not intend to suggest Porter had committed the alleged offence and that it regretted that “some readers misinterpreted the article as an accusation of guilt against Mr Porter”. In September, Porter disclosed that unidentified donors had partly paid his legal fees for the case. He claimed as a potential beneficiary of what he described as a blind trust he had no access to information about the ultimate source of the funds. Porter maintained he properly disclosed his interests in accordance with both the rules and the ministerial standards, but he resigned as a minister in September on the basis the issue had become an “unhelpful distraction” for the government. Labor attempted to refer Porter to the privileges committee, a move defeated by the government, but the committee continued to consider a separate complaint from the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus. The committee concluded that he did not breach disclosure rules but called for an overhaul to protect the “intent and integrity” of the register and warned all MPs to provide the “greatest” possible disclosure. Porter’s ordinarily safe Liberal seat of Pearce could prove difficult to hold for the Morrison government, given its margin has been slashed to 5.2% by a redistribution and the Labor brand is riding high in Western Australia due to the popularity of the Mark McGowan state government.Donald Trump tested positive for Covid-19 three days before his first debate against Joe Biden, the former president’s fourth and last chief of staff has revealed in a new book. Mark Meadows also writes that though he knew each candidate was required “to test negative for the virus within seventy two hours of the start time … Nothing was going to stop [Trump] from going out there.” Trump, Meadows says in the book, returned a negative result from a different test shortly after the positive. Nonetheless, the stunning revelation of an unreported positive test follows a year of speculation about whether Trump, then 74 years old, had the potentially deadly virus when he faced Biden, 77, in Cleveland on 29 September – and what danger that might have presented. Trump announced he had Covid on 2 October. The White House said he announced that result within an hour of receiving it. He went to hospital later that day. Meadows’ memoir, The Chief’s Chief, will be published next week by All Seasons Press, a conservative outlet. The Guardian obtained a copy on Tuesday – the day Meadows reversed course and said he would cooperate with the House committee investigating the deadly Capitol attack of 6 January. In a statement on Wednesday, Trump called Meadows’ claims “Fake News”. Meadows says Trump’s positive result on 26 September was a shock to a White House which had just staged a triumphant Rose Garden ceremony for the supreme court nominee Amy Coney Barrett – an occasion now widely considered to have been a Covid super-spreader event. Despite the president looking “a little tired” and suspecting a “slight cold”, Meadows says he was “content” that Trump travelled that evening to a rally in Middletown, Pennsylvania. But as Marine One lifted off, Meadows writes, the White House doctor called. “Stop the president from leaving,” Meadows says Sean Conley told him. “He just tested positive for Covid.” It wasn’t possible to stop Trump but when he called from Air Force One, his chief of staff gave him the news. “Mr President,” Meadows said, “I’ve got some bad news. You’ve tested positive for Covid-19.” Trump’s reply, the devout Christian writes, “rhyme[d] with ‘Oh spit, you’ve gotta be trucking lidding me’”. Meadows writes of his surprise that such a “massive germaphobe” could have contracted Covid, given precautions including “buckets of hand sanitiser” and “hardly [seeing] anyone who ha[d]n’t been rigorously tested”. Meadows says the positive test had been done with an old model kit. He told Trump the test would be repeated with “the Binax system, and that we were hoping the first test was a false positive”. After “a brief but tense wait”, Meadows called back with news of the negative test. He could “almost hear the collective ‘Thank God’ that echoed through the cabin”, he writes. Meadows says Trump took that call as “full permission to press on as if nothing had happened”. His chief of staff, however, “instructed everyone in his immediate circle to treat him as if he was positive” throughout the Pennsylvania trip. “I didn’t want to take any unnecessary risks,” Meadows writes, “but I also didn’t want to alarm the public if there was nothing to worry about – which according to the new, much more accurate test, there was not.” Meadows writes that audience members at the rally “would never have known that anything was amiss”. The public, however, was not told of the president’s tests. On Sunday 27 September, the first day between the tests and the debate, Meadows says Trump did little – except playing golf in Virginia and staging an event for military families at which he “spoke about the value of sacrifice”. Trump later said he might have been infected at that event, thanks to people “within an inch of my face sometimes, they want to hug me and they want to kiss me. And they do. And frankly, I’m not telling them to back up.” In his book, Meadows does not mention that Trump also held a press conference indoors, in the White House briefing room, the same day. On Monday 28 September, Trump staged an event at which he talked with business leaders and looked inside “the cab of a new truck”. He also held a Rose Garden press conference “on the work we had all been doing to combat Covid-19”. “Somewhat ironically, considering his circumstances”, Meadows writes, Trump spoke about a new testing strategy “supposed to give quicker, more accurate readings about whether someone was positive or not.” The White House had still not told the public Trump tested positive and then negative two days before. On debate day, 29 September, Meadows says, Trump looked slightly better – “emphasis on the word slightly”. “His face, for the most part at least, had regained its usual light bronze hue, and the gravel in his voice was gone. But the dark circles under his eyes had deepened. As we walked into the venue around five o’clock in the evening, I could tell that he was moving more slowly than usual. He walked like he was carrying a little extra weight on his back.” Trump gave a furious and controversial performance, continually hectoring Biden to the point the Democrat pleaded: “Will you shut up, man? This is so unpresidential.” The host, Chris Wallace of Fox News, later said Trump was not tested before the debate because he arrived late. Organisers, Wallace said, relied on the honor system. The White House had not said Trump had tested positive and negative three days before. Three days later, on 2 October, Trump announced by tweet that he and his wife, Melania Trump, were positive. That evening, Meadows helped Trump make his way to hospital. During his stay, Meadows helped orchestrate stunts meant to show the president was in good health. Trump recovered, but it has been reported that his case of Covid was much more serious than the White House ever let on.The already huge backlog for NHS care in England will keep growing for years and could hit anywhere between 7 million and 12 million by early 2025, the National Audit Office (NAO) warned today. The NHS is facing a “daunting” task in operating on all those awaiting surgery and reducing the long waits for care many people are now facing, the NHS Whitehall spending watchdog said. Hospitals’ efforts to stop the waiting list soaring from its current 5.83 million will be hampered by the NHS having fewer beds, doctors and other staff, the NAO added. That could prevent it from being able to keep up with the growing numbers of people likely to end up on it in future. The NAO found that even in the best-case scenario the total number of people waiting for a new hip or knee, cataract removal, cancer care or other procedure by the time the next general election is due in December 2024 will still be more than today’s figure, which is the highest on record. “There is a real risk that the waiting list for patients seeking elective care will be longer in 2025 than it is today,” the government auditors said. “The NAO’s report has delivered a cold dose of reality about the scale of the challenge facing the NHS in the years ahead,” said Ruth Thorlby, the assistant director of policy at the Health Foundation. Renewed cancellations of NHS surgery caused by the new Omicron variant of Covid-19 could lead to the list ballooning even further, she added. The key to how much progress the NHS can make is how many of the 7.6 million to 9.1 million “missing” patients, who did not seek care during the pandemic until this September, finally do so in the near future. While the report says that number is unknown, “clearly many will”. “If 50% of ‘missing’ referrals for elective care return to the NHS and its activity grows only in line with pre-pandemic plans, the elective care waiting list will reach 12 million by March 2025. “If 50% of ‘missing’ referrals return and the NHS can increase activity by 10% more than was planned, the waiting list in March 2025 will still be 7 million”, the NAO said. The report comes as NHS England and the Department of Health and Social Care finalise an “elective recovery plan”, which will set out in detail how hospitals will tackle the growing number of people who are having to wait for care. It will propose scrapping tens of millions of hospital outpatient follow-up appointments to free up doctors to do more surgery, a greater use of private hospitals to treat NHS patients, and some patients being offered the chance to have their operation outside their home area. Ministers often portray the backlog as having been caused by Covid disrupting NHS services and making patients reluctant to seek care. But the NAO points out that the waiting list of people who should be treated within 18 weeks already stood at 4.43 million when the pandemic struck in March 2020 and that the target of dealing with 92% of them within that timeframe had been missed since 2016. However, the number of people forced to wait more than a year for treatment – which previously happened rarely – rocketed from 1,600 in February 2020 to 301,000 in September this year. The backlog is a “colossal challenge” for an NHS that is already very busy dealing with an unprecedented demand for care, said Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation. “However, the biggest intervention the government can take is to ensure the right numbers and mix of workers are available to deliver this scale of activity long-term. A record number of people are working in the health service currently but there are still simply not enough staff to meet the healthcare needs of the population.” An NHS England spokesperson said: “Treating more than half a million patients in hospital for Covid, as well as delivering a world-leading vaccination programme, has inevitably had an impact on some routine and non-urgent care. Yet since the pandemic began the NHS has performed millions of elective procedures and over 450,000 people have started treatment for cancer.”Paddy and Christine McGuinness: Our Family and Autism 9pm, BBC One Funnyman Paddy McGuinness lets his guard down as he candidly details his struggle to deal with his three children’s autism diagnoses. With his wife Christine, they ask questions that any parents would have – speaking with experts, autistic people and friends as they navigate family life. In searching for the positive without denying the difficulties, it’s sensitively done with a lot of heart. Hollie Richardson Panorama: Delivering Christmas – What’s in Store? 7.30pm, BBC One It’s time for one anxiety-inducing C-word to replace another. Yes, Christmas is coming, and reporter Jane Corbin is on hand to see if the UK’s supply chain can deliver in time. She speaks to HGV drivers and farmers, as well as addressing the energy-hike hangover families might have to deal with. HR Between the Covers 7.30pm, BBC Two Comedians Alan Davies, Sarah Kendall, Suzi Ruffell and the voice of Love Island, Iain Stirling, share their favourite books with Sara Cox, while also reviewing this week’s book club picks: Oliver Harris’s espionage novel Ascension, and Booker-longlisted The Garden of Evening Mists by Tan Twan Eng, who this paper called a “master of cultural complexities”. Ali Catterall Comedians Giving Lectures 9pm, Dave The enjoyable comedy showcase fronted by Sara Pascoe continues, with brief, themed standup sets that are then critiqued (gently) by Pascoe and the audience. Tonight’s guests include former Inbetweener Joe Thomas, Canadian comic Erika Ehler and the endlessly watchable Henning Wehn. Phil Harrison Work in Progress 9pm, Sky Comedy Abby McEnany’s dramedy winds further down its unique path, mixing realistic friendship scenes with blasts of sharp politics. There’s pure loveliness when Abby’s emotionally intelligent nephew visits her at work; in the back half of the double bill, Covid strikes. Jack Seale Positive 9pm, Sky Documentaries Marking 40 years since the first Briton was infected by a new virus that would be confirmed as HIV, here’s part one of a documentary series following what has happened since. It speaks with the people who fought back, such as one of the first HIV patients, the campaigner Jonathan Blake. HR Film choice Nowhere Special (Uberto Pasolini, 2020), 10.30am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Largely neglected during the ins and outs of lockdown earlier this year, Uberto Pasolini’s tragic drama is an exceptional achievement. James Norton plays gentle Northern Irish window cleaner John, single father to Daniel Lamont’s watchful young boy Michael. He is also terminally ill with cancer, and so sets out to find suitable parents to adopt his son after he dies. The weight of sadness in his search could have been too oppressive, but Pasolini’s sensitive directorial touch (the window symbolism is never overdone) and Norton’s nuanced performance make this a real treasure. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: Everton v Liverpool 8.15pm, Amazon Prime Video. Five other matches are available on Amazon Prime Video from 7.30pm.I do not know how you defy the odds, the mood and the global direction of travel towards hell in a new-variant handcart in order to make an uplifting, joyful, uncynical show that is still funny, but the good people (and they must be good people, with uncankered hearts and unwithered souls) behind The Big Leap (Disney+) have managed it. The 10-part comedy drama follows the lives of various Detroit residents who enter a reality show competition looking for amateur dancers to form a company of 20 to train under fearsome former ballerina Monica (Mallory Jansen) for a televised performance of Swan Lake. She wants the most talented dancers. Producer Nick (Scott Foley, having the time of his life in a wonderful part) wants the best backstories. Between them they settle on former factory worker Mike (Jon Rudnitsky), who has separated from his wife and is eking out a precarious living in the gig economy; breast cancer survivor (“Always plays,” notes Nick happily) Paula (Piper Perabo), who is also the executive responsible for the factory layoffs; and the disconcerting Lovewell twins Simon and Brittney (Adam Kaplan and Anna Grace Barlow). “Call research,” says Nick as he watches their audition piece, “and see how incest plays in the midwest. Twincest.” There is also non-fearsome former ballerina Julia (Teri Polo), whose marriage and life as an influencer are imploding; and former high school sweethearts and Michigan state dance-team stars Gabby (Simone Recasner, a newcomer, though you would never guess it from her perfectly pitched, effervescent-yet-grounded turn ) and Justin (Raymond Cham Jr). It’s an ensemble piece, but with this pair slightly foregrounded, particularly in the early episodes as they reunite after seven years of no-speaks since the high school rager at which Gabby found out that Justin was gay and that she was pregnant from a one-night stand. Justin’s dad threw him out; Gabby kept the baby – so college and dance scholarship plans did not work out for either of them. Thus is The Big Leap (the show within the show, not the show-show) fulfilling a need for everyone – including the final addition to the ensemble, footballer Reggie (Ser’Darius Blain), who is haemorrhaging money and sponsors after a video of him under the influence went viral on social media. The show-show doesn’t bother to hide its influences, but weaves them into something bold and colourful of its own. Its unflagging energy, as well as the official and impromptu dance scenes, remind you of Glee, but its witty, intelligent Pitch Perfect vibe prevents it becoming as emetic. It’s Unreal with heart and without the depth of cynicism. It offers an hour or so of realistic escapism, which is probably the best the market can bear at the moment. Gabby’s life as a single mother is harder than it would have been had her original ambitions been realised, but it is not dreadful. She is not miserable or defeated – just ready to take another shot. Julia is not downtrodden but equally ready to make a change when she finds that most of her husband’s overtime consists of watching porn in his study. And Mike has not (yet) been ground down by the system he now finds himself working in. It feels like a programme about second rather than last chances, and is all the better for it. It’s also just funny. There’s nothing I love more than a comedy montage scene of auditions, and The Big Leap makes it into my personal pantheon of greats, thanks to a) the fact that most of the auditionees turn up as Spider-Man, and b) Monica’s bad faith (“All we’re going to find here is type 2 diabetes”) and appalled commentary. “Oh,” she says as one maladroit attempts to dance their way to glory, “that just gave me a UTI.” Nick is the comic gift that keeps on giving, whether he’s being squirted with too much hand sanitiser by an overzealous assistant (“Am I going to reach in and flip a breech baby later, Alan?”) but the rest of the cast have their own comedy as well as dramatic chops too. It’s also got an ineffable charm that allows it to add up to more than the sum of its not inconsiderable parts. So take a leap – not even a big one – of faith, and just enjoy.Edie Falco has never been the type of actor to demand entourages and encores. Fanfares and fuss are just not her bag, and she has little time for pretentious thespiness. When other actors talk about their “Process,” as she puts it – with a capital P – she thinks, “What are you talking about?!” With her open, thoughtful face and wide smile, she looks as if she could be your friend from the local coffee shop, as opposed to one of the most accoladed American actors of this century, having accumulated two Golden Globes, four Emmys and five Screen Actors Guild awards, plus a jaw-dropping 47 nominations. This impression of straightforwardness and – oh dreaded word – relatability has made her subtle performances of self-deceiving characters even more powerful. As the mob wife, Carmela, in The Sopranos, she could tell Tony (James Gandolfini) what she thought of him staying out all night with his “goomahs”, or mistresses, but she couldn’t admit to herself that he does much worse to fund the life she loves. Similarly, as Nurse Jackie, in the eponymous TV series, her scrubbed clean face and sensible short hair belied her character’s drug addiction. So it feels extremely right that, when we connect by video chat, Falco, 58, is sitting – not in a fancy hotel room, or a Hollywood mansion, but in the endearingly messy basement of her New York house, where she lives with her son, 16, and daughter, 13. Power tools hang off the wall behind her, and she is leaning on a table strewn with what she describes as “God knows, some stuff”. “I’m in my office, or craft room, I don’t know what the hell you call it. It’s where I hang things and fix things and sew things,” she says. It’s hard to imagine Carmela firing up a drill, but then, Falco and her most famous character have pretty much nothing in common. For a start, Falco can’t cook. Wait, Carmela, the best cook in the state, maker of the greatest baked ziti God has ever known, can’t make bolognese? “Not even close. If you watch the scenes in the show where I’m supposed to be cooking, you’ll see the camera never showed my hands, because I have no idea how to do that. That food is not even the kinda stuff I eat. I was vegetarian on the show and I became vegan in the past 10 years.” Tony would never have stood for this. So how did she eat all that lasagne on The Sopranos? “We learned tricks so it looked like we were eating, but we weren’t. But Jim ate in every frigging take, and he ate between takes. There was one scene we were shooting, where he was eating a bowl of ice-cream, and in every take he ate and would then re-fill the bowl, and then at one point, I realised he’s not really listening to me – he had gone into a sugar coma! We had to stop and shoot the rest of the scene another day. He was like a five-year-old: ‘The ice-cream is good, I like it!’ I was like, ‘You gotta stop, you’re gonna get sick!’” Gandolfini died in 2013, at the age of 51, from a heart attack. “It’s sad. Just incredibly sad,” she says. Recently, she and one of her closest friends, Aida Turturro, who played the deliciously infuriating Janice Soprano, tried to watch the whole show, as they’d never seen it. They only lasted four episodes. “It was too fraught, and a big part of that is Jim. People die and you move on, then you see them on screen, and it is too shocking. And Jimmy and I were kids then! Neither of us knew what we were doing, but we worked in the same way, not preparing, but like kids in a sandbox. Aida and I watched a few episodes and I said, ‘This is killing me,’” she says. Falco and Gandolfini’s marital chemistry rang so true, their on-screen fights so devastating, that to viewers it felt as if they were really married, and it felt like that to Falco, too. “I adored Jimmy, but we didn’t hang out a lot. So when I looked in his face, he wasn’t Jim, he was Tony.” Also, she adds, the eight years she spent “married” to him on The Sopranos was “the longest intimate relationship” she has ever had. She is certain that it’s because people still think of her as an embattled wife, 14 years after The Sopranos ended, that she was cast in her latest role, as Hillary Clinton in Impeachment: American Crime Story, Ryan Murphy’s take on President Clinton’s affair with Monica Lewinsky. “I’m sure Ryan thought, ‘Oh Edie does fight scenes with husbands’, you know what I mean?” she says. I had never before thought about the connections between Hillary and Carmela but actually, they stack up pretty well: they are both women married to powerful men with definite self-control problems. They are determined to keep their marriages together even if it means compromising themselves to do so. And they also, to various degrees, lie to themselves. According to Impeachment, Hillary is genuinely shocked when Clinton finally tells her he did have an affair with Lewinsky, even though he had been accused before of having affairs. “I don’t know how Hillary could have got through the day if she let herself know [what her husband was doing], and Carmela’s whole life was denial. If she had thought about what her husband did to make money, she would have blown up the whole family.” But Falco is a Hillary supporter, so she takes care to emphasise that the former secretary of state is not EXACTLY like a mob wife: “I do think Hillary is a genuinely good person and is into public service. I do not believe that was the case with Carmela. She wanted what she had: house, kids, money,” she says. It’s a bit unfair to ask Falco to compare her character in Impeachment with her character in The Sopranos, given she played the former for a few days and the latter for eight years: “By the end, I really felt like a part of myself behaved like Carmela, like she was my alter ego,” she says. When The Sopranos’ creator, David Chase, phoned her a year or so ago to ask if she could do a monologue as Carmela for his Sopranos prequel film, The Many Saints of Newark, Falco was game: “And then, just like that, I was Carmela again, which felt so crazy, because I’m such a different person now to who I was then,” she says. I ask what she thought about Vera Farmiga’s performance as Tony’s mother in the movie, given how closely she resembled Carmela, playing up Tony’s Freudian side: “Right, that was weird to watch, the mannerisms. But she did a fantastic job,” she says. Was Falco annoyed that Chase ultimately cut her monologue out? “No not at all! It was just fun doing it, working with David. I honestly couldn’t care less about it not being in the movie. It’s always just about the work,” she says, and I actually believe her. Falco grew up on Long Island, the second of four kids, with an amateur actor for a mother and a jazz drummer father. “There was very little about my upbringing that was conventional. We had two creatively minded young people trying to make a family, so we really grew up feral,” she says. Her parents divorced and remarried each other twice, “and my mother had other husbands in between, so there was a lot of chaos.” Does she think that’s why her onscreen marriage to Gandolfini was her longest relationship, because she didn’t grow up with a template for marriage? “That’s it. But I’ve been in therapy since time began, so I can look on my childhood now with such love. It was a bunch of people really, really trying.” Her mother would bring her along whenever she was rehearsing a play, and Falco quickly got the acting bug. The problem was that she was terribly shy. She was talented, so she got into the State University of New York (Suny) Purchase (acting) programme, in the same era as Stanley Tucci and Ving Rhames. But, whereas the other kids were good at putting themselves forward and talking about their “process”, Falco stayed in the shadows, and her confidence plummeted. She has talked about her alcoholism in the past and I ask if she started to drink to compensate for her shyness. “Totally. I was a non-drinker for years, then I had my first drink at college and I found nirvana. It was the answer to all my problems, and the cause of all my other problems.” Did she just use alcohol? “Yes, but only because I didn’t have any money. I was a big fan of cocaine if it was around, but I could never afford any, and marijuana just gave me anxiety.” She would choose boyfriends based on whether they drank or not – “I’d wait to hear how quickly they’d mention alcohol, and that’s how I knew they were the next guy” – and convinced herself she worked better when she was hungover. But one March morning, when she was 29, she woke up in her apartment after a long night, saw she’d left her front door open, and knew she was done. Soon after that, her career began to take off, with small roles in films including Cop Land alongside Sylvester Stallone and Hal Hartley’s Trust, although she was still, she says, “a waitress for about 20 years”. When she auditioned for The Sopranos, she was certain Marisa Tomei or Annabella Sciorra would get the part, which allowed her to enjoy the audition and not worry about it. Was she scared when she found out she got it? “Not at all. I knew I could do it. An Italian-American housewife – this was someone I grew up with,” she says. After The Sopranos, Falco went into Nurse Jackie, which ran for seven seasons, one more than The Sopranos. Was it her idea to make Jackie an addict? “Never, never, never. That stuff’s way too close to me, and I had a hard time with the idea of a comedy about addiction. I said to them, ‘If the last season isn’t about her going to meetings and getting help, she has to be dead at the end, so people know what it’s like.’” Although the show ended with her character overdosing, it is left a little ambiguous as to whether she died. Were the programme-makers riffing on the infamously ambiguous ending of the Sopranos, in which many felt it wasn’t clear if Tony died? “I think they were just afraid of people getting upset. They wanted to leave the option open [that she survived], and I kicked and screamed. I don’t understand the decisions made by executives, but I’ve learned to make peace with them,” she shrugs. It was while she was working on Nurse Jackie that she adopted her daughter, having adopted her son while she was on The Sopranos. Was it hard to adopt as a single woman? “Not particularly, actually. I’d got to know Rosie O’Donnell, who had adopted kids when she was single, and she said, ‘When you’re ready, give me a call’. So I did, and she gave me the info, and a year later I was holding my son. I remember when they handed him to me –” she breaks off, choked by a sob. She puts her hand on her chest, trying to swallow it down. “Sorry! Gosh, I didn’t expect that, I’m sorry. I just remember looking at this little baby and thinking, ‘I have no idea how to do this!’ But here we are, almost 17 years later,” she says. At this point, we go off record, to talk about kids and parenting during lockdown. By now, it really does feel as if I’m talking to a friend. I ask if there is ever a point – in parenting, in work – where you feel like you do know what you’re doing. “No never!” she hoots. “That’s the pain, but it’s also the joy.” Impeachment: American Crime Story is on BBC Two on Tuesday at 9pm. The series is also available on BBC iPlayer. • This article was amended on 4 December 2021. The series is on BBC Two on Tuesdays, not Wednesdays as an earlier footnote said.This is proper police state stuff. The last-minute amendments crowbarred by the government into the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill are a blatant attempt to stifle protest, of the kind you might expect in Russia or Egypt. Priti Patel, the home secretary, shoved 18 extra pages into the bill after it had passed through the Commons, and after the second reading in the House of Lords. It looks like a deliberate ploy to avoid effective parliamentary scrutiny. Yet in most of the media there’s a resounding silence. Among the new amendments are measures that would ban protesters from attaching themselves to another person, to an object, or to land. Not only would they make locking on – a crucial tool of protest the world over – illegal, but they are so loosely drafted that they could apply to anyone holding on to anything, on pain of up to 51 weeks’ imprisonment. It would also become a criminal offence to obstruct in any way major transport works from being carried out, again with a maximum sentence of 51 weeks. This looks like an attempt to end meaningful protest against road-building and airport expansion. Other amendments would greatly expand police stop and search powers. The police would be entitled to stop and search people or vehicles if they suspect they might be carrying any article that could be used in the newly prohibited protests, presumably including placards, flyers and banners. Other new powers would grant police the right to stop and search people without suspicion, if they believe that protest will occur “in that area”. Anyone who resists being searched could be imprisoned for – you guessed it – up to 51 weeks. Existing stop and search powers are used disproportionately against Black and Brown people, who are six times as likely to be stopped as white people. The new powers would create an even greater disincentive for people of colour to protest. Then the media can continue to berate protest movements for being overwhelmingly white and unrepresentative. Perhaps most outrageously, the amendments contain new powers to ban named people from protesting. The grounds are extraordinary, in a nation that claims to be democratic. We can be banned if we have previously committed “protest-related offences”. Thanks to the draconian measures in the rest of the bill – many of which pre-date these amendments – it will now be difficult to attend a protest without committing an offence. Or we can be banned if we have attended or “contributed to” a protest that was “likely to result in serious disruption”. Serious disruption, as the bill stands, could mean almost anything, including being noisy. If you post something on social media that encourages people to turn up, you could find yourself on the list. Anyone subject to one of these orders, like a paroled prisoner, might be required to present themselves to the authorities at “particular times on particular days”. You can also be banned from associating with particular people or “using the internet to facilitate or encourage” a “protest-related offence”. These are dictators’ powers. The country should be in uproar over them, but we hear barely a squeak. The Kill the Bill protesters have tried valiantly to draw our attention to this tyrant’s gambit, and have been demonised for their pains. Otherwise, you would barely know it was happening. Protest is an essential corrective to the mistakes of government. Had it not been for the tactics Patel now seeks to ban, the pointless and destructive road-building programme the government began in the early 1990s would have continued: eventually John Major’s government conceded it was a mistake, and dropped it. Now governments are making the greatest mistake in human history – driving us towards systemic environmental collapse – and Boris Johnson’s administration is seeking to ensure that there is nothing we can do to stop it. The government knows the new powers are illegitimate, otherwise it would not have tried to avoid parliamentary scrutiny. These brutal amendments sit alongside Johnson’s other attacks on democracy, such as the proposed requirement for voter ID, which could deter 2 million potential electors, most of whom are poor and marginalised; the planned curtailment of the Electoral Commission; the assault on citizens’ rights to mount legal challenges to government policy; and the proposed “civil orders” that could see journalists treated as spies and banned from meeting certain people and visiting certain places. So where is everyone? Why isn’t this all over the front pages? Why aren’t we out on the streets in our millions, protesting while we still can? We use our freedoms or we lose them. And we are very close to losing them. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistA word of warning before you go toy shopping this Christmas: beware the rapping cactus. The toy, marketed as educational, may teach your children more than you want them to know, as a woman in Brampton, Ontario, discovered the hard way. The miniature, bright-green dancing cactus Ania Tanner bought sings in English, Spanish and Polish while squirming to the beat. After buying it for her granddaughter, Tanner discovered that one of the songs in its repertoire was an explicit tune about cocaine and hopelessness. “It just so happens that I am Polish, and when I started to listen to the songs and I heard the words … I was in shock,” she told CTV News. “I thought: what is this, some kind of joke?” The gyrating succulent performs a song called Gdzie Jest Biały Węgorz? (Zejście), or Where Is the White Eel? (Descent), whose opening lyrics are, according to various online translations: “The only thing in my head is five grams of cocaine / Fly away alone, to the edge of oblivion.” Later lines include swearing, graphic imagery and references to depression. A representative for the rapper, Cypis, says he had “no idea” the song was being used in a children’s toy. “He’s disgusted,” the spokesman, Zbigniew Florek, said. Walmart has since removed the listing for the toy. “These items are sold by a third-party seller on our marketplace website. We are removing the items while we look into this complaint further,” the company told CTV. It’s not the first time the issue has been raised. Reports in July described a Polish-speaking woman in Taiwan who bought the toy and had a similar experience. Dancing cactus toys have existed since at least December 2020. Since then, countless similar items have popped up, and remain available, on Amazon and Alibaba – although it’s not clear whether the early versions contained the Polish song. Amazon declined to comment. Alibaba did not immediately reply to a request for comment. Who manufactures the items is unclear. They are attributed to a variety of sellers, and the overwhelming quantity of cacti points to an apparent dropshipping operation. Dropshippers seek out cheap products – such as dancing cacti or talking plush hamsters – that they think could be big hits. They then act as middlemen between suppliers and buyers, hoping their items will be popular. Many of these items come from China. Often, the products exist there long before dropshippers swoop in. In the case of the dancing cactus, the dropshippers appear to have gotten their wish. The toys are a huge hit and have also gone viral on TikTok, where people have posted videos of people dancing with the cacti and babies interacting with the toys. The latest controversy may leave some parents feeling prickly about the cactus. For others, however, the song appears to have become a selling point. “Has the Polish song,” says one five-star Amazon review. “Sings ... a Polish song about cocaine use. 10/10 would buy for my 1 year old again,” writes another reviewer. And it could all pay off for Cypis himself, who posted a comment under the Where Is the White Eel? music video: “Grab the link to my new album. PS: Let the cactus be with you!” This article was amended on 9 December 2021 to remove a reference to a TikTok video that was included in error.It has been another record year for renewable energy, despite the Covid-19 pandemic and rising costs for raw materials around the world, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). About 290GW of new renewable energy generation capacity, mostly in the form of wind turbines and solar panels, has been installed around the world this year, beating the previous record last year. On current trends, renewable energy generating capacity will exceed that of fossil fuels and nuclear energy combined by 2026. New climate and energy policies in many countries around the world have driven the growth, with many governments setting out higher ambitions on cutting greenhouse gas emissions before and at the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow last month. However, this level of growth is still only about half that required to meet net zero carbon emissions by mid-century. Fatih Birol, executive director of the IEA, said: “This year’s record renewable energy additions are yet another sign that a new global energy economy is emerging. The high commodity and energy prices we are seeing today pose new challenges for the renewable industry, but elevated fossil fuel prices also make renewables even more competitive.” According to the IEA report, published on Wednesday, renewables will account for about 95% of the increase in global power-generation capacity from now to the end of 2026, with solar power alone providing about half of the increase. Raw material prices have risen as the world has emerged from the Covid pandemic and on the back of the energy price rises around the world. These price increases have cancelled out some of the cost falls of recent years in the renewable sector. If they continue next year the cost of wind power will return to levels last seen in 2015, and two to three years of cost falls in solar power will be wiped out. Heymi Bahar, lead author of the report, said that commodity prices were not the main obstacles to growth, however. Wind and solar would still be cheaper than fossil fuels in most areas, he noted. Permitting was the main barrier to new wind energy projects around the world, and policy measures were needed to expand use of solar power for consumers and industry. “We need a gear change to meet net zero,” he said. “We have already seen a very important gear change in recent years but we need to move up another gear now. It is possible, we have the tools. Governments need to show more ambition, not just on targets but on policy measures and plans.” China installed the most new renewable energy capacity this year, and is now expected to reach 1,200GW of wind and solar capacity in 2026, four years earlier than its target of 2030. China is the world’s biggest carbon emitter, but the government was reluctant at Cop26 to commit to the strengthening of its emissions-cutting targets, which many observers had hoped for. China is targeting a peak in emissions by 2030, which many analysts say is much too late if the world is to limit global temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, the Paris agreement target that was the focus of the Cop26 talks. Birol said China’s rapid expansion of renewable energy suggested the country could reach an emissions peak “well before 2030”. India, the world’s third-biggest emitter, also experienced strong growth in renewable energy capacity in the past year, but its target – set out at Cop26 – of reaching net zero by 2070 is also regarded as too weak by many. Birol said: “The growth of renewables in India is outstanding, supporting the government’s newly announced goal of reaching 500GW of renewable power capacity by 2030 and highlighting India’s broader potential to accelerate its clean energy transition.”After a day enduring midwinter winds whipping off Salisbury Plain, the ancient builders of Stonehenge may have warmed up with a prehistoric version of the mince pie, archaeologists have suggested. The hardy engineers of the great Wiltshire monument might also have kept themselves going by nibbling on their version of energy bars made of berries, nuts and animal fat. It has been established that midwinter was an important time of the year for the Stonehenge builders with ancient people bringing cows and pigs from as far afield as Scotland to take part in feasts at the site around the time of the winter solstice. Archaeologists have also found evidence of the collecting and cooking of hazelnuts, sloes and crab apples and other fruit, with remnants of charred plant remains discovered at Durrington Walls, the settlement inhabited by the builders of Stonehenge in about 2500BC. They knew how to grow cereal crops, so could have made pastry out of wheat, hazelnut or acorn flour. English Heritage, which manages Stonehenge, concedes it is a bit of leap, but it is putting forward the festive theory that the engineers could have combined the two into a version of the mince pie, possibly baked using a flat stone or ceramic pot heated in the embers of a fire, rather like a Welsh cake. Susan Greaney, a senior properties historian with English Heritage, said: “We know that midwinter and feasting were really important to the builders of Stonehenge and we have evidence which tells us that they had access to nutritious fruit and nuts, and that they may even have made and cooked recipes. “Adding meat fats to hazelnuts and fruit would have made a great energy bar, full of calories. Such foods might have been eaten for celebration as well as sustenance, with the sharing of food helping the community to bond, encouraging people to travel from far and wide to help build Stonehenge. We’ll never know for certain what recipes they favoured, but it’s fun to imagine travellers being greeted with a tray of mince pies.” The findings of fruit and nut gathering were made during the long-running Stonehenge Riverside Project, a collaborative directed by six academics from five UK universities Its excavations at Durrington Walls, a large henge monument 1.5 miles to the north-east of Stonehenge, revealed the remains of houses and middens – rubbish heaps – and provided an insight into life at the time of Stonehenge’s construction. Items such as pieces of ceramic and tools provided new information about the diets and lifestyles of the people who built and used Stonehenge. The origins of mince pies can be traced back at least as far as the medieval period, with recipes varying over the centuries from meat based savoury treats to the sweet, rich version favoured now. English Heritage volunteers will be baking Neolithic mince pies around the hearth in the recreations of Neolithic houses at Stonehenge every Monday in December, and mince pies inspired by the period will be on the menu in the cafe. The charity has also produced a recipe so that anyone can have a go at producing a Neolithic-style mince pie. Recipe: Neolithic-inspired mince pies (makes 6) To make these vegetarian, simply swap the lard for a vegan or vegetarian fat product. Ingredients: For the pastry: 2 x handfuls of emmer flour ½ handful of hazelnut flour Knob of lard A few drops of water For the filling: Four crab apples or small sour apples A few blackberries A few sloes Pureed rose hips (about a spoonful) A spoonful of honey Plus: A handful of whole berries A couple of crushed hazelnuts For the decoration: Some linseeds and a drizzle of honey for the tops Method: 1. Preheat your oven to 210C electric /190C fan/gas mark 5. Cut up your compote filling ingredients and put them in a saucepan on a medium heat, stew until tender. 2. Mix the flours with the lard and a few drops of water until you have a firm dough. 3. Create six circles for the pie bottoms, and six slightly smaller circles for the tops. Place the bases into cases in a muffin tin and spoon in cooked compote. 4. Take lids and brush one side with water and place water-side down, pressing the edges to seal. 5. Once all of the lids are on, brush their tops with water and sprinkle with honey, linseeds and crushed hazelnuts. 6. Bake for 20 minutes or until golden brown and firm to the touch.It was the tension between Janette Beckman’s shyness and her curiosity about people that helped spark a career photographing subcultures. “I realised that having a camera gave you licence to go up to strangers and say, ‘Hi, I’d like to take a picture of you,’” she says. This epiphany jump-started a 45-year adventure in street photography, documenting the punk and two-tone youths of 70s Britain, the birth of hip-hop in New York, Latino gang members in Los Angeles, bikers in Harlem, rodeos, rockabilly conventions and demonstrations from Occupy Wall Street to Black Lives Matter. As we talk on a video call, 62-year-old Beckman gives me a tour of her home studio in New York, just off the Bowery where the famous punk venue CBGB used to be. There’s a Salt-N-Pepa snowboard, a Keith Haring painting and gold discs from hip-hop stars Dana Dane and EPMD. On one strip of wall hang a selection of images from Occupy Wall Street in 2011, “for a book,” she says. And on another are pinned a vast selection of her images, for her monograph Rebels: From Punk to Dior. There are so many familiar shots. Salt-N-Pepa in 1987, sassy in leather and bling; Salt writes in the book that Beckman captured “the essence of who we were at that moment, young vibrant women on a mission to conquer this male-dominated genre called hip-hop”. The Beastie Boys pose in a comic huddle in 1985; Ad Rock writes: “Janette’s like a mind-reader … Her work is one OH-SHIT! after the next.” LL Cool J rocks a Kangol hat and carries a boombox on his shoulder. De La Soul gather on home turf in Long Island in 1990 – as DJ Maseo has it: “Janette caught us being us.” Beckman has a knack of prompting her subjects to bare their souls like it’s an act of defiance. “You form this intense relationship very quickly with your subjects, or that’s what I try to do,” she says. “I’m the antithesis of somebody like Annie Leibovitz, who would have 20 assistants and take the subject up to the top of the mountain or have a helicopter flying over.” Beckman likes to keep it simple. “Rather than go in with a preconception about who the person is, I don’t want to know too much because I want them to tell me who they are.” She captures the attitude, she thinks, by catching “a moment between ‘posing’, when the subject has a chance to breathe and be themselves”. Beckman’s fascination with portraiture started young. “Growing up in London,” she says, “I spent a lot of time in the National Portrait Gallery. And I would stare at people on the bus to school trying to imagine what their lives were like.” She started her art foundation course at Central St Martins, aspiring to be the next Egon Schiele or David Hockney. “I was living in this semi-squat in Streatham where we were all drawing each other, and all we cared about was art and music.” But she didn’t think she was good enough, and signed up for what was then the London College of Printing (now London College of Communication), “to do photography, as another way of doing portraits”. She soon became obsessed with the early 20th-century documentary photographer August Sander. “He was documenting people on the street,” she says. “They’re just really simple portraits.” One of Beckman’s most enduring images is of the British Nigerian twins Chet and Joe Okonkwo – who used to dance on stage with Madness and became locally famous in London for their sharp looks and lively conversation. Taken in 1979, it was featured in the first issue of the Face magazine. “It’s my homage to [Sander],” she says, “because it’s a really simple portrait, but it shows who these people are.” The Face, together with rival style magazine i-D, helped pioneer street style photography, and the editors gave Beckman free rein. “They would send me to an illegal boxing club in south London, or maybe some rock festival by Loch Lomond, where I could go and shoot the fans as well as the bands and they would do spreads of all the fans. That gave me licence to document all these youth cultures.” In 1982, Beckman relocated to New York. “Punk was on the wane by then, and there was that Thatcher-era, ‘everything’s shit in England’ attitude.” And she’d discovered hip-hop. “There was something about the energy which was so different from London. It was exciting.” The first hip-hop tour had come to London a few months before she moved. The stage was flooded with DJs, rappers, graffiti artists, breakdancers and double dutch girls, who did elaborate skipping routines with two ropes. “It was a renaissance moment for me,” she says. “Unfortunately the writer didn’t think so. He wrote something like, ‘This rapping is a fad, just like skateboarding’ – it was hilarious.” Little did he know that he was reviewing some of the godfathers and godmothers of rap; Fab 5 Freddy, Afrika Bambaataa, graffiti writers Futura and Dondi, and DJ Grandmixer DST. In the early 80s, New York was recovering from near bankruptcy and undergoing an incredible cultural renaissance, from hip-hop in the Bronx to the art scene downtown. Beckman lived in Tribeca, which was then “a deserted warehouse neighbourhood”. The famous Mudd Club, where Fab 5 Freddy taught Debbie Harry how to rap, was around the corner. “It was really great,” she says. “And it was dangerous.” Naive and brazen, she would wander around the Bronx or travel to America’s west coast to loiter in LA ganglands, searching for interesting characters. Hearing about these adventures reminds me of my own US road trips, where my female friend and I often found ourselves in strange backwaters we had been warned about, only to be greeted with kindness and curiosity. Beckman nods in recognition. “I think I got a lot of respect, because I’m British, I’m a smallish woman with a camera, not intimidating. So people trusted me. You are really a stranger on somebody else’s turf and they somehow respect you for being there and not being scared.” In recent years, Beckman has been invited to train her lens on high fashion. In 2019 she shot Dior’s autumn collection in London’s Kentish Town, against the walls where she’d once immortalised young punks. Dior’s creative director, Maria Grazia Chiuri, had commissioned her in 2016 to document the making of a collection at her Paris atelier. “I went to see the tailors, and to watch people sewing on sequins, models smoking in the backyard and being dressed, and the rows of shoes,” Beckman recalls. I ask whether shooting the fashion world felt less authentic than street photography, but she describes the job as “gritty, down-and-dirty, rather than superstarry. These worlds seem so glamorous, but behind that are working people trying to make the glamour.” Many of Beckman’s old New York hangouts have long since been gentrified and taken on a homogenised hipster veneer. When she moved to her current address, in 1996, it was “industrial, with parking lots and a lumber yard, a plumbing supply store”. Now it’s “really chi-chi”. Meanwhile, the internet means that no sooner is a new youth trend identified than a big brand is mining it for viral marketing content. But Beckman doesn’t believe any of this marks the death of subcultures. She mentions the black punk scene in Brooklyn, as documented by her photographer friend Destiny Mata, and says “there are always going to be subcultures. There are always going to be people popping up with new ideas, whatever age they are, and wherever they’re from.” She concedes, though, that the internet can pluck emerging cultures from their communities too soon, so they “don’t have time to marinate”. But Beckman continues to follow her nose and often that takes her away from coastal cities – to the Black Bikers Club in Omaha, say, or speedway races in Indiana. In 2017, after Trump’s election, Beckman began a three-year project called I Vote Because, for which she travelled through America’s swing states taking portraits and encouraging people to register to vote. “You got incredible stories from people in five minutes,” she says. “It was a dream job.” That’s not to say there isn’t plenty of underground activity in New York, from illegal girl fights in Brooklyn to a group of dirt bike riders in Harlem (also illegal) called the Go Hard Boys, who made an exception to their no-photography rule for Beckman. The bikes – as well as an affiliated dance school – are a diversion from drugs and other bad influences. She recalls her first time photographing them in 2008: “I was riding in the back of a flatbed truck down the Bruckner Expressway with these people doing wheelies. It was dangerous, kind of crazy when I think about it. But I was just so happy.” Rebels, From Punk to Dior by Jeanette Beckman is published by Drago at €60 A caption on this piece was corrected on 1 December; the Specials were photographed in Blackpool, not Southend.Saudi Arabia used “incentives and threats” as part of a lobbying campaign to shut down a UN investigation of human right violations committed by all sides in the Yemen conflict, according to sources with close knowledge of the matter. The Saudi effort ultimately succeeded when the UN human rights council (HRC) voted in October against extending the independent war crimes investigation. The vote marked the first defeat of a resolution in the Geneva body’s 15-year history. Speaking to the Guardian, political officials and diplomatic and activist sources with inside knowledge of the lobbying effort described a stealth campaign in which the Saudis appear to have influenced officials in order to guarantee defeat of the measure. In one case, Riyadh is alleged to have warned Indonesia – the most populous Muslim country in the world – that it would create obstacles for Indonesians to travel to Mecca if officials did not vote against the 7 October resolution. In another case, the African nation of Togo announced at the time of the vote that it would open a new embassy in Riyadh, and receive financial support from the kingdom to support anti-terrorism activities. Both Indonesia and Togo had abstained from the Yemen resolution in 2020. This year, both voted against the measure. The resolution was defeated by a simple majority of 21-18, with seven countries abstaining. In 2020, the resolution passed by a vote of 22-12, with 12 members abstaining. “That kind of swing – from 12 no’s to 21 – does not just happen,” said one official. John Fisher, the Geneva director of Human Rights Watch, said: “It was a very tight vote. We understand that Saudi Arabia and their coalition allies and Yemen were working at a high level for some time to persuade states in capitals through a mixture of threats and incentives, to back their bids to terminate the mandate of this international monitoring mechanism.” He added: “The loss of the mandate is a huge blow for accountability in Yemen and for the credibility of the human rights council as a whole. For a mandate to have been defeated by a party to the conflict for no reason other than to evade scrutiny for international crimes is a travesty.” Representatives from the Indonesian and Saudi embassies in Washington and the foreign ministry in Togo did not respond to a request for comment. The HRC first voted to establish a team of experts who would investigate possible violations of humanitarian law and human rights in Yemen in 2017. Yemen’s civil war had intensified in 2015 after a coalition led by Saudi Arabia, using weapons procured in the US and UK, intervened on behalf of the internationally recognised Yemeni government against Houthi rebels. More than 100,000 people have been killed in the conflict and 4 million have been displaced, activist groups say. Saudi Arabia, which is not a voting member of the UN human rights council, initially supported the effort. Reports by the experts – known as the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen (GEE) – grew more “damning” over the years, one person who closely followed the matter said. In 2020, the GEE recommended for the first time that the international community focus their attention on accountability for potential war crimes. They included five recommendations, including that the matter be referred to the prosecutor of the international criminal court by the UN security council. One person who followed the matter said: “I think that must have been the trigger moment when the Saudi coalition realised this is really going too far.” Nations that supported the measure, which was led by the Netherlands, were apparently caught off guard by the Saudis’ aggressive tactics. During the negotiations, none of the countries that would later change votes from abstaining to “no” raised objections to the resolution, which differed from the 2020 version in only one substantive way: it sought to extend the mandate to two years instead of one. Sources said it was not until about a week before vote that “alarm bells” began to ring for proponents of the measure, when they grasped that the Saudi campaign “was very different from previous years” – in part because Saudi had engaged with policy makers in individual capitals around the world. “You could see the whole thing shift, and that was a shock,” said one person familiar with the matter. Usually, voting positions are known days before a vote is taken. But in October, member countries resisted sharing what their final position would be, which proponents saw as a worrying sign that some countries were under intense pressure. Supporters of the resolution decided to proceed with the vote, even though its outcome was uncertain. “For the Saudis to win this battle at the expense of the Yemeni people is terrible. But it’s also a textbook case for other countries like Russia and China to torpedo any other investigation. It really shook everyone to the core. The scrutiny should be on those members of the council that couldn’t withstand the pressure,” said one person close to the matter. Members of the HRC serve for a period of three years. Of the countries that served both in 2020 and 2021, four changed their votes from abstention to “no” on the Yemen resolution: Indonesia, Bangladesh, Senegal and Togo. The vote came when the foreign minister of Togo was on an official visit to Saudi Arabia, and coincided with the announcement of the new embassy in Riyadh.Togo also announced that it would be receiving counterterrorism funding from the Saudi-based International Center for the Fight against Extremist Ideology. In the case of Indonesia, it is understood that Saudi Arabia communicated that Indonesian Covid vaccination certificates might not be recognised for Indonesians traveling to Mecca if the country did not reject the measure. One observer said the alleged threat showed Saudis were willing to “instrumentalise” their access to a holy place. One week after the vote, the UAE, an ally of Saudi Arabia in the Yemen conflict, invited Senegal to sign a memorandum of understanding to establish a joint Emirati-Senegalese business council. The aim of the council was for the UAE chamber of commerce to “boost cooperation” between the “two friendly countries”. The UAE did not respond to a request for comment.Farmers are anxiously awaiting further detail from the government on imminent changes to their subsidy payments, with many reluctant to trust the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) to manage the transition, the leader of one of the UK’s biggest farming organisations has said. “Quite a few have said to me: ‘Well, we’re not at all clear what Defra is doing,’” Mark Tufnell, the recently installed president of the Country Land and Business Association (CLA), told the Guardian. “[They say:] ‘We don’t think that Defra know what they’re doing,’ and ask me: ‘What do you know?’” The CLA represents about 28,000 farmers and owners of rural businesses in England and Wales, including some of the biggest landowners and a large number of smaller ones, with about 18,000 members farming less than 300 acres. Members are hoping for more details of post-Brexit support for farmers at the organisation’s conference on Thursday, where the environment secretary, George Eustice, will set out what support farmers can expect when their basic farm payments are cut by between 5% and 25% this year before being phased out entirely over the next six years. Further details on government plans could not come soon enough for farmers, said Tufnell. Brexit was one of the biggest upheavals in agriculture since the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, he noted. “And of course after the Corn Law repeal we then went into an agricultural depression that lasted all the way from the late 1800s through into the 1900s and the war period.” Brexit means the UK has left the EU’s common agricultural policy, under which farmers received about £3bn a year in payments allocated based on the amount of land they farmed. In future, there will be payments of “public money for public goods” – that is, farmers taking measures to restore nature, nurture the soil, improve air and water quality, and provide habitats for wildlife, in return for taxpayer-funded support under a system of environmental land management contracts, or ELMs. Tufnell said the future of farming was more than ever in the hands of the government, with trade deals, problems with the planning system, and the new system of ELMs. “We may end up with more people claiming from a limited pot, meaning that the individual will end up receiving less,” he said. Farmers are generally supportive about the move to a new payment system. Surveys by the CLA of its membership have found most farmers in favour, but many are still concerned about the detail, as only scant information has been available on how the ELMs will work. The basic payment will be reduced on a sliding scale, with those who have historically received most taking the steepest cuts, but even the lowest scale of reductions of about 5% this year would bring difficulties for many people, according to Tufnell. There are further huge risks if the government gets it wrong in the next few years as the old subsidies are phased out, he says. “If the government doesn’t come forward with the type of support that it’s talking about … it makes it much more difficult for those farmers who are in the less profitable category, the bottom 25% or even 50%, who have their basic payments cut, so they’ll only get about 25% of what they originally had. “They will find it very difficult to continue their farming business. They’ll need to look to other sources of income and I think they’ll find it quite difficult, particularly if they don’t get support in selling their product overseas.” Trade deals are another bone of contention. Until recently, the UK had only two agri-food attaches in embassies around the world to promote British farming and farm produce, even though food is one of the UK’s biggest export industries for goods, and the government is aiming to strike trade deals with dozens of countries in the aftermath of Brexit. On Tuesday, Defra announced a further eight agri-food attaches would be appointed. Tufnell said the increase was far too small to give the representation needed. Farmers fear they will be swamped by cheap food from abroad under new trade deals – such as that forged this year with Australia – details of which are signed in secret, without parliamentary scrutiny. At the least, farmers were hoping the government would help them promote UK farm produce abroad, but with only 10 globally that seems hard to achieve, says Tufnell. “Ten attaches is nowhere near enough. If the government is serious about promoting our world-class produce and ensuring British farmers are not undercut, then we need far more. Quite understandably, government wants to promote its free trade credentials, but seems reluctant to provide adequate resources to getting the job done properly. This leaves not just British farmers, but all of British industry vulnerable.” Higher prices for many staples, from wheat and barley to rapeseed, beef and lamb, would cushion the blow for many this year at least, said Tufnell. But some sectors would suffer more, he said, such as pig farmers, many of whom were unable to send animals to slaughter due to labour shortages last month, a subject joked about by the prime minister, Boris Johnson. Brexit has also meant supply and export issues with Europe. Tufnell said he ran into problems trying to export linseed to Belgium, as the lorryloads would normally have gone through France, but that would have involved even more paperwork. Eventually, it was sent by ship. Covid has also thrown a spotlight on rural infrastructure, with more people trying to work from home or considering a permanent move to the countryside, but hampered by the lack of broadband connectivity. “There is this great disparity between the urban and the rural [in connectivity],” he said, noting that the fine print of the autumn budget showed rural areas losing out by about £315m in the shared prosperity fund for levelling up. “We don’t really feel that fits with a levelling up agenda – it’s almost a levelling down.”Robust regulations must be put in place to protect the welfare of farmed animals before genome-editing procedures are approved for commercial livestock, ethicists have warned. Powerful gene-editing techniques have the potential to improve modern farming by making animals resistant to heat and disease, reducing methane emissions and increasing productivity, but the same approaches could also exacerbate animal welfare problems, the Nuffield Council on Bioethics says. Though farms have yet to embrace genome editing for animals, its potential in agriculture has driven intense research efforts around the world, leading to experimental animals that demonstrate the viability of the approach. In September, the UK government announced it would bring forward legislation that would pave the way for some genome editing to be allowed in animal breeding. “There is a need to ensure animal welfare is at the heart of plans to introduce genome editing into farmed animal breeding,” said Danielle Hamm, the director of the Nuffield Council on Bioethics. In a report on the social and ethical issues associated with genome editing in farm animals, the ethicists describe how genome editing could bring real benefits, for example by making pigs resistant to the common porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) virus, or preventing animals from growing horns that cause injuries to others around them. But other applications could have a major impact on animal welfare, they warn. Elizabeth Cripps, a co-author on the report and a senior lecturer in political theory at Edinburgh University, said a particular concern was the creation of animals that could tolerate poor conditions without it apparently having an adverse health impact. “That could mask the effect that they continue to live in unacceptable conditions,” she said. Another serious concern was the possibility of animals being bred that are no longer physiologically capable of having “a good life”. The ethicists are calling for an “urgent” public discussion before genome editing is approved for commercial farming, and for an independent body to work with breeders and oversee a “traffic light system” that ranks the welfare of farmed animals. Under the scheme, green would mean animals can live a good life in a well-managed husbandry system, amber would mean that further breeding may threaten the animals’ welfare, and red would indicate animals that do not have an acceptable quality of life and should not be used in commercial farming. Bruce Whitelaw, a professor of animal biotechnology at the Roslin Institute where Dolly the Sheep was created, said genome editing had much to offer agriculture. “We have already shown that this technology can reduce the burden of disease in livestock by producing at Roslin pigs resistant to the PRRS virus. If this application progresses to the farm this will have welfare benefits for the animals on that farm,” he said. “It is now timely to have a dialogue to explore how we can use genome editing to benefit agriculture and our food supply. From this, appropriate incentives can be identified which will drive fair and responsible livestock breeding.” Katrien Devolder at the Oxford Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics said: “Ideally, we would reform farming practices, rather than modifying animals to fit them. But if we can’t achieve the ideal, the best option may be to pursue genome editing while also taking steps to reform factory farming. For example, we could combine genome editing with higher taxes for meat, eggs and dairy from factory farms, or with structural support for the production of lab-grown meat, or alternative and more sustainable farming practices.”The government’s green homes grant scheme underperformed badly and risks damaging future efforts to deliver net zero, the public accounts committee (PAC) said. Hailed by the prime minister, Boris Johnson, as a key plank in his green industrial revolution, the grants only upgraded about 47,500 homes out of the 600,000 originally planned. They also delivered a small fraction of the expected jobs. The grants were intended to support the public in England to make their homes more energy efficient and move away from fossil fuel heating by installing heat pumps and solar energy. But the PAC said the scheme unveiled in 2020 by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), was poorly designed and had a troubled implementation. The Guardian previously revealed the grants were administered by ICF, an American corporation based in Fairfax, Virginia. Renewable energy businesses said the administration of the grants was chaotic, inefficient, confused and created long delays for the public and those installing the systems. MPs on the public accounts committee said more than £1,000 per home upgraded was spent on administration; a total of £50m or 16% of the total spend of £314m. This was a fraction of the £1.5bn budget promised to upgrade 600,000 homes. The scheme began operation in September 2020 and was scrapped abruptly in March this year after just six months operating. Cutting carbon emissions from homes – which emit 20% of the UK’s CO2 – is seen as crucial if the country is to reach net zero by 2050. Dame Meg Hillier, chair of the public accounts committee, said: “It cost the taxpayer £50m just to administer the pointlessly rushed through Green Homes Grant scheme, which delivered a small fraction of its objectives, either in environmental benefits or the promised new jobs. “We heard it can take 48 months – four years – to train the specialists required to implement key parts of a scheme that was dreamed up to be rolled out in 12 weeks. It was never going to work at this time, in this way, and that should have been blindingly obvious to the department. That it was not is a serious worry, I am afraid there is no escaping the conclusion that this scheme was a slam dunk fail.” The MPs said they were not convinced that BEIS had fully acknowledged the scale of its failures with this scheme. Hillier said it was vital to have a massive step-change in the way homes and public buildings are heated. “But the way this was devised and run was just a terrible waste of money and opportunity at a time when we can least afford it.” The report said the failure of the scheme had damaged confidence in government efforts to improve energy efficiency in private domestic homes. The way government was tackling the issue of domestic heating was “fragmented, stop-go activity” which had hindered stable long-term progress towards its energy efficiency ambitions. The government awarded the administration of the grants to ICF, who had promised to deliver it in six weeks – other companies said fully implementing such a system would take at least 15 weeks – but ICF was not challenged by the department to explain how it could deliver, the report found. In the end, the department launched the complex scheme without an IT platform that had been fully developed and tested to run it. ICF struggled to implement the digital voucher application system, leading to greater amounts of manual processing being needed for applications, contributing to the delays in processing vouchers. The report found the scheme promised to create jobs but its design and duration limited its impact on employment and its abrupt closure may have led to redundancies. • The headline of this article was amended on 1 December 2021. The UK government’s green homes scheme applied to England only, not all of the UK.Fissures and sinkholes are the norm in China’s Shanxi province. Intensive agriculture combined with major coal production has put huge pressure on water resources and sucked the earth dry, leaving the city of Taiyuan, with a population of 5 million, and the surrounding area suffering some of the highest subsidence rates in the world. Pipelines, roads, bridges and railways need constant repairs, and gaping cracks in buildings have resulted in entire communities having to be rehoused. Since 2003, the Chinese government has been trying to solve this problem by diverting surplus water from the Yellow River. Now satellite measurements, published in Remote Sensing of Environment, reveal that this mammoth feat of engineering – taking 1.2bn cubic metres of water every year – has partially solved the problem, with diverted water rehydrating underground pores and reversing the sinking trend. But it hasn’t worked everywhere: the pore spaces in clay-rich areas cannot be fully reopened. And even where it has worked, the bounce-back is limited. The biggest successes have been in regions where water diversion has been combined with water conservation, tree planting and modernising irrigation techniques. Other water-stressed and subsidence-prone parts of the world, including the Iranian central plateau, the US high plains and north-west India will do well to learn from the Chinese experience.A mother jailed for harming her baby has accused the courts of “injustice” after judges accepted she was a victim of abuse but ruled against an application for an appeal against her conviction made on the grounds that her violent ex-partner coerced her to lie at her trial. The woman, known as “Jenny”, was convicted in 2017 of causing or allowing serious harm after her child sustained skull fractures and bleeding on the brain. The baby’s father was her co-defendant but was acquitted on a lesser charge. Jenny told the jury that she dropped the baby after catching her cardigan on a cupboard. But the court of appeal heard in October that while she was in prison serving half of a five-year sentence she wrote to her legal team to claim that she had fallen to the floor when her former partner punched her. In Tuesday’s judgment, Lady Justice Macur, Mr Justice Jay and Mr Justice Murray accepted there was “ample independent evidence of domestic violence having occurred within the relationship” and that on the night in question the applicant was punched. They said in the context of other evidence, including her ex-partner’s initial allegations to neighbours and the emergency services that Jenny had thrown the baby to the floor – a claim he later retracted – that she was not a “convincing witness regarding whether this was the mechanism which led to [the baby’s] injuries.” Jenny, who says she lied during the trial to protect herself and her children from her controlling boyfriend said: “The justice system is fundamentally unjust. The Crown is ignorant about domestic abuse and I think this decision is cowardly. “The court is scared of what granting the appeal would mean – it would force them to acknowledge not just my story, but that of countless other victims criminalised as a result of abuse.” The court of appeal was told how Jenny’s ex-partner had subjected her to regular beatings, had locked her up, deprived her of food, and urinated on her – an experience amounting to torture, according Dr Georgina Clifford, an expert psychologist who submitted evidence to the court. Jenny said she was shocked by the result: “The court has given my abusive ex power over me again. The judges have agreed with what he always told me: that no one will believe me, that I’m crazy, that I should remain silent.” Emma Torr, legal director of the charity Appeal, which has been supporting Jenny, said she believed the court had failed to “properly understand how coercive control impacted on her ability to tell the truth at trial”. She said: “They didn’t find Jenny to be a credible witness, yet crucial evidence we presented from an expert psychologist went unchallenged by the court. The evidence showed Jenny had suffered from PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] with dissociative symptoms, meaning her ability to recall the events in question [was] impaired.” The judges found the expert’s report did “not provide a ground of appeal but rather an explanation for the applicant’s late disclosure of the domestic violence. However, this explanation is dependent upon the applicant’s accounts, which we found unpersuasive, not least her asserted amnesia about the events … and her selective memory recall.” Fresh evidence was presented to the court of appeal that on the night of her arrest Jenny was taken to hospital A&amp;E and diagnosed with “post-concussion syndrome” and that witnesses had heard Jenny shouting: “You hit me”. However, the judgment found Jenny and her co-defendant each withdrew the accusations of misconduct against each other for their mutual benefit. The judges concluded: “In these circumstances, we are not satisfied that it is either expedient or necessary in the interests of justice to admit the fresh evidence upon which the applicant purports to rely.” Naima Sakande, deputy director of Appeal, said: “I am deeply troubled by this decision. The court of appeal has not only slammed the door on Jenny but has risked silencing other women who have been wrongly convicted because they were too afraid to speak up about abuse. “The court has also decided that the trial jury would have been unaffected by Jenny’s new testimony, the history of abuse and the evidence that she was hit on the night in question. It is inconceivable to me that this would not have made a difference to their decision to convict.” She added: “The authorities say they are committed to ending violence against women but it is evident they are still a long way from understanding the complex issues involved in domestic abuse, including why a woman would delay reporting.”The executive producer behind blockbusters including Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman is to make Hollywood’s first feature film funded entirely by non-fungible tokens (NFTs), with a promise that those who invest will get a share of any profits and meet the stars of the production. Niels Juul, who has set up the production company NFT Studios to fund a series of films, hopes to raise between $8m and $10m (£6m and £7.5m) through the sale of 10,000 NFTs to the public and institutional investors. NFTs are a digital certificate proving that you own something, in this case part of a film. They have become a hot new financial trend lauded by some as a gold rush and regarded by others as the latest bubble, with a risk investors could be left out of pocket. Juul said the aim was to develop a new funding model for films to circumvent an antiquated Hollywood system under which smaller productions take up to eight years to reach movie or TV screens. “As a producer my biggest frustration is from the finance side, it is an ordeal,” he said. “The studios are mainly doing big franchise films, an independent film can take years and years. It’s hard getting investors for films and productions, especially at development stage, with the Hollywood system. We want to democratise it.” The film is ready to go, complete with a big name star and director attached, but Juul would not reveal their identities until an official announcement planned before the Berlin film festival in February. Shooting is expected to begin by April in Malta and London and a transatlantic premiere is planned for September. The film, A Wing and a Prayer, tells the true story of the Briton Brian Milton, who retraced Phileas Fogg’s round-the-world trip in a microlight after taking up a bet at the Reform Club, where Jules Verne’s fictional character was also a member. Juul has struck a deal with NFT Investments, a London-listed vehicle that funds opportunities in the market and which has paid $1m to take a 20% share in his production company to get the fundraising started. Investors have been told they will get a cut of any box-office profits and licensing rights, plus a chance to visit filming locations, meet the actors and attend the premiere. The digital artist Mike Winkelmann, better known as Beeple, made history in March when he sold an NFT for $69.4m. Big names to join the NFT trading bandwagon include Paris Hilton, Damien Hirst and even the London Royal Ballet dancer Natalia Osipova. Others are more wary. The Rabobank financial analyst Michael Every said earlier this year that he was gobsmacked by the “bubblicious stupidity” of the market.Top story: Severe Covid doubles risk of death in next year Hello, Warren Murray with a little bit about a lot of things, a sort of omni-chronicle. Boris Johnson has contradicted leading scientists and a senior health official who advised people to cut back socialising in response to Omicron, as he urged people not to cancel Christmas parties or nativity plays. Every eligible adult in the UK is to be offered a Covid booster by the end of January, and the PM said getting the third jab was the best protection. But Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, suggested people should also reduce their social contact – “being careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to, and particularly going and getting those booster jabs”. Prof Andrew Hayward from the UCL epidemiology institute said: “My personal view is that it is reasonable for people to reduce indoor mixing but on current evidence I would not want this to be enforced.” Patients who survive severe Covid are more than twice as likely to die over the following year than those who remain uninfected or experience milder virus symptoms, says a study led from the University of Florida. The increased risk of dying was greater for patients under 65, and only 20% of the severe Covid-19 patients who died did so because of Covid complications such as respiratory failure. The other 80% were from a wide variety of reasons not typically associated with the virus. The research suggests that serious coronavirus infections may significantly damage long-term health, showing the importance of vaccination. Eight more Omicron cases have been detected in England, according to officials – one each in Haringey, Sutton, Camden, and Westminster, two in Barnet, one in Liverpool, and one in north Norfolk. The total number in England is 13, while there are nine in Scotland: five in the Lanarkshire area and four in Greater Glasgow and Clyde. The individuals involved and their contacts were isolating, health officials said, with any links to travel to southern Africa being traced. The World Health Organization has said those not fully vaccinated who are vulnerable to Covid-19, including over-60s, should delay travel to areas with community transmission – more developments at our live blog. * * * School shooting kills 3 – A 15-year-old student opened fire at his Michigan high school on Tuesday, killing three students and wounding eight other people, authorities say. The suspect was arrested without resistance after the attack at Oxford high school, police said. According to police, the incident unfolded in about five minutes and about 15 to 20 shots were fired. More than 100 police including the FBI as well as 60 ambulances responded. Officers seized a semi-automatic handgun. Oxford Township is home to about 22,000 people located roughly 30 miles north of Detroit. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; The first accuser in Ghislaine Maxwell’s child sex trafficking trial has testified she was 14 when the Briton lured her into being sexually abused by Jeffrey Epstein. The accuser, called “Jane” in court, alleged Maxwell sometimes took part in the abuse. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty. &gt; CNN has suspended indefinitely its presenter Chris Cuomo after details emerged about how he helped his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo, who faced accusations of sexual harassment. &gt; The author Alice Sebold has apologised to a man exonerated last week of her 1981 rape, which was the basis for her memoir Lucky. Anthony Broadwater was convicted in 1982 and served 16 years in prison after being convicted of raping Sebold who was an 18-year-old student at Syracuse University. His conviction was overturned on 22 November because of serious flaws in his arrest and trial. Sebold said: “I will forever be sorry for what was done to him … I will also grapple with the fact that my rapist will, in all likelihood, never be known, may have gone on to rape other women, and certainly will never serve the time in prison that Mr Broadwater did.” &gt; Saudi Arabia used “incentives and threats” to shut down a UN human rights investigation of the Yemen conflict, sources with close knowledge of the matter have told the Guardian. In one case, Indonesia was allegedly told its people would face obstacles travelling to Mecca if it did not side with the Saudis. &gt; The former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows will testify before the Capitol attack investigation, while reserving his disputed claim of executive privilege. The panel’s chairman, Bennie Thompson, said: “The committee will continue to assess his degree of compliance with our subpoena after the deposition.” * * * Chechnya ‘ordered Sweden hit’ – A secret European intelligence report has concluded Chechnya’s security services most likely stand behind the attempted bludgeoning to death in Sweden of the dissident Chechen blogger Tumso Abdurakhmanov. The victim – an exiled critic of Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov – overpowered a man who attacked him with a hammer, then managed to livestream his interrogation of the assailant. The intelligence report, obtained by the Swedish broadcaster SVT, joins growing evidence that Russia has ordered assassinations in Europe targeting dissident and other perceived enemies of the leadership of Russia, and of Kadyrov. They include the poisonings of Sergei Skripal in the Salisbury attack, and of Alexei Navalny in Russia. In the Swedish case, two people were arrested and sentenced to prison. * * * ‘Green homes’ a sinkhole – The government’s green homes grant scheme underperformed badly and risks damaging future efforts to deliver net zero, the public accounts committee (PAC) said. The grants only upgraded about 47,500 homes out of the 600,000 originally planned, and delivered a small fraction of the expected jobs. MPs on the public accounts committee said more than £1,000 per home upgraded was spent just on administration; a total of £50m or 16% of the total spend of £314m. This was a fraction of the £1.5bn budget promised to upgrade 600,000 homes. Cutting carbon emissions from homes – which emit 20% of the UK’s CO2 – is seen as crucial if the country is to reach net zero by 2050. Today in Focus podcast: Roe v Wade v the south As the supreme court hears new challenges to Roe v Wade, American abortion rights hang in the balance. Lunchtime read: Bikers, rappers and rude boys Janette Beckman has spent four decades documenting underground movements from London’s punks and the birth of hip-hop to LA gangs and illegal girls’ fight clubs. How does she win her subjects’ trust? Sport The National Hunt jockey Robbie Dunne targeted his fellow rider Bryony Frost in a campaign of bullying and harassment which included “foul, sexually abusive and misogynistic language”, threats to “cause her serious physical harm … by injuring her at the races” and riding with undue aggression during races in 2020, the BHA’s independent disciplinary panel has heard. Ellen White broke the England women’s goalscoring record, reaching 48 with a hat-trick as the Lionesses demolished Latvia 20-0 in a World Cup qualifier at the Keepmoat Stadium. Concerns are growing for the wellbeing of Cardiff players and officials stuck in South Africa amid reports some squad members are experiencing panic attacks. Raphinha scored a stoppage-time penalty that was enough to secure a 1-0 win and all three points for Leeds against Crystal Palace at Elland Road, while Newcastle took the lead against Norwich despite Ciaran Clark’s early red card but Teemu Pukki made it 1-1 to earn the Canaries a point. Tiger Woods has said he feels “lucky to be alive” after a high-speed car crash in February left him fearing leg amputation, but he could make a part-time return to golf in 2022. Britain are out of the Davis Cup as Joe Salisbury and Neal Skupski were beaten by Kevin Krawietz and Tim Pütz after a defeat for Cameron Norrie and a win for Dan Evans. Norway’s Magnus Carlsen and Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi played to a fourth draw in as many games in the latest instalment of their €2m world championship showdown in Dubai. Adam Peaty, the British Olympic gold medal swimmer, has said he believes there is “not enough funding, not at all, and not in any sport” and called on the government to do more to support grassroots activity in the UK. And glowing tributes from across the game of football have been paid to Ray Kennedy – one of the finest players to grace Highbury and Anfield – after his death, aged 70. Business Inflation and supply chain problems in the global economy have combined to help make Tel Aviv the most expensive city in the world in which to live. The Israeli city has seen a big increase in the cost of food and transport this year, taking it surging past last year’s joint winners Paris, Zurich and Hong Kong, according to an annual survey. London was 17th, while Edinburgh went straight in at number 27 on its first year in the charts. If you’ve been watching the TV drama Succession, then the decision by Zara parent company Inditex to make Marta Ortega, daughter of the founder, Amancio Ortega, the new chair makes for fascinating reading. The FTSE100 suffered yesterday but is poised to open up 0.65% today, while the pound is buying $1.331 and €1.175. The papers The lead story in the Guardian print edition today is “PM clashes with health officials over new curbs”. Also on the front: “No new winter funding for crisis-hit care firms”. The care minister, Gillian Keegan, is expected to unveil a social care white paper to parliament on Wednesday, a long-term plan costing billions. But sources said there appeared to be nothing to boost care worker pay in the short term amid crippling staff shortages exacerbated by the pandemic. Separately this morning we report on a warning from the National Audit Office that England’s huge backlog for NHS care could hit anywhere between 7 million and 12 million by early 2025. The i’s splash this morning is “NHS booster jab for every adult by end of January” and the Times says there will be “booster jabs for 23m” by that time. The Telegraph looks further ahead, though the headline could be from late 2020: “New Covid restrictions to last until March next year”. The Daily Mail has “PM: Don’t cancel your Christmas” – that’s Boris Johnson speaking to us, not the paper speaking to him. The Mirror claims “Boris party broke Covid rules”. It questions “crowded parties” including a leaving do and an unofficial “festive bash” that were held at the end of last year. The Express says Rishi Sunak is touting “his budget tax cut for two million people” as it arrives today: “My actions prove I’m a low tax Tory”. The Financial Times says “Powell’s signal on more rapid taper for Fed bond buying spurs market sell-off” – of which more you may read here.The prime minister would have you believe that social media is where people hide behind faceless avatars to cause harm. Those who “go anonymously on to social media”, he said, “need to be responsible for what they’re saying.” According to Scott Morrison, those online bullies lurk only in the shadows, spewing lies and wreaking havoc, cowardly exploiting the cover of darkness. His comments came as he was announcing that a bill would be introduced to parliament this week which he said would help reveal the users behind anonymous “troll” accounts and make it easier to sue them for defamation. But those who cause the most harm in our society do not need to hide. They vilify, harass and abuse in plain sight, and are often rewarded for their trouble. The worst bullies in Australia are not anonymous trolls but those in power who do not wish to be challenged, using every weapon in their arsenal to maintain the status quo. Trust me, I know. I’ve had more death threats than flat whites. I’ve spent years opening my inbox to emails from strangers detailing their graphic fantasies of my execution (after I have been raped and flogged, of course). I’ve listened to pundits casually chatting about murdering me on national radio, politicians suggest I support dictatorships, seen over 200,000 words written about me in the press, all amounting to a “full-scale assault on [my] existence”. I know first hand what it’s like to be vilified and harassed, so naturally, I would welcome a genuine attempt to help. But this, no matter how the prime minister and his government try to dress it up, will not. Because here’s the kicker: Almost every single person who took part in the unrelenting tsunami of abuse and harassment against me did so using their real identity. The government’s proposed legislation, forcing social media companies to reveal the identities of anonymous accounts, is less about protecting the average citizen and more about the government’s singular obsession with control and power. Anonymity is not what protects bullies. Power is. Morrison has framed the bill as a pathway for individuals to sue anyone online for defamation. Let us ask ourselves: who has enough money to sue anonymous users of the internet? Who has the financial resources, legal knowhow, the time? I certainly don’t, but defence minister Peter Dutton does. When Dutton sued the activist Shane Bazzi for defamation, he told the court Bazzi’s since deleted tweet had “deeply offended” him, was “defamatory, hurtful and I took particular exception to it”. We all take particular exception to things people say about us. The Lebanese community took exception to Dutton saying it was a mistake to resettle Lebanese-Muslims in Australia. The South Sudanese community took exception to Dutton’s hurtful and offensive comments about “African gang violence”. I personally took exception to Dutton gloating when I lost my job at the ABC. But none of us were in a position to sue Dutton, for defamation or otherwise. “The rules that exist in the real world must exist in the digital and online world,” the prime minister has said. It is worth remembering our reality, where the rules in the offline world favour those in power. By attacking anonymity, this proposal entrenches inequalities further. As Digital Rights Watch reminds us, real-name policies leads to real-world harm. Anonymity online is one of the few things that ever so slightly levels the playing field, allowing us to explore and organise and play without fear. Whether it’s a woman creating a nameless account to help her leave an abusive relationship, a young teen exploring identity or our favourite political parody accounts, anonymity is foundational to the free and open internet. If the government is genuinely interested in online safety, there are plenty of avenues worth considering: updating archaic data protection laws, resourcing existing regulators effectively and tackling big tech’s harmful business model. Online safety is a vitally important issue but one that can only be dealt with by addressing the concentration of power in companies that are not accountable to their users. That is where the attention of any government seriously concerned with digital rights should be. Anonymity is a red herring, cloaking the fragile egos of cowardly men.Labor has helped pass a bill that will force charities to reveal their donors for all advocacy, after the Coalition agreed to drop its proposal to make voters show identification at the 2022 federal election. The deal has enraged the charity sector, which believed the Senate crossbench would have helped Labor block both the voter ID and political campaigner bills, but they will now have to declare donors with retrospective effect. On Wednesday the independent senator, Jacqui Lambie, announced that she would vote against the voter ID bill because there was “no way” the benefits outweighed the risks of discouraging legitimate voters. Despite the Morrison government’s determination to pass the bill in the final sitting fortnight of the year, the Coalition has struggled due to rebel Liberal senators withholding their votes over vaccine issues. Centre Alliance senator, Stirling Griff, likely the swing vote on voter ID, intended to send the bill to an inquiry. But the government overcame the impasse on the political campaigner bill, which aims to lower the threshold for entities such as charities to disclose political spending. On Wednesday afternoon Labor confirmed to Guardian Australia it had reached a deal with the government to pass a watered down version of the bill because it lacked the numbers to refer it to an inquiry and feared the crossbench could wave it through. Griff disputed that, telling Guardian Australia he would not have voted for a bill that applies retrospectively. The charities sector believes senators Rex Patrick and Jacqui Lambie would have held the same position, enough to block the bill. Under the deal struck between the Coalition and Labor the proposed legislation was changed to: Raise the new disclosure threshold from $100,000 to $250,000, closer to the current $500,000 threshold; and Rename political campaigners “significant third party”, to allay concerns charities’ status would be under threat for their advocacy. The bill passed the Senate on Wednesday evening with the Coalition and Labor voting together to defeat unrelated crossbench amendments. The charities sector is concerned that despite the $250,000 threshold, organisations like the Australian Conservation Foundation, unions, Voices for groups backing independent candidates, and climate groups including Australian Youth Climate Coalition and Farmers for Climate Action will now have to declare their donors. It is also concerned that the new definition of electoral expenditure will capture issues-based and awareness-raising campaigns that don’t aim to influence voters’ choice. Senior lawyer at The Human Rights Law Centre Alice Drury told Guardian Australia a coalition of 80 charities was “really disappointed about the whole process this bill has taken”. “The government has rushed through amendments to retrospectively capture charities it doesn’t like, in an effort to silence them,” she said. “We’re equally disappointed Labor has allowed this process to happen.” Drury said the bill has a “discriminatory” impact on charities, which must demonstrate they are non-partisan to maintain their charitable status, which could be imperilled by advocacy spending above the threshold. “Our major concern with this law is the threshold will act as a spending cap on charities. “It will effectively punish them by labelling them, and in the future if an issue comes up during an election year about eradicating homelessness or domestic violence to women and children, charities will feel they can’t respond.” Greens senator, Larissa Waters, said the party was “glad to see the back of the voter ID laws but secretly trading one legislative outcome for another is not how democracy is supposed to work”, labelling the deal a “cynical stitch-up between the government and Labor”. Although it insists the two issues are not linked, Labor has received a commitment from the Coalition it will not put the voter ID bill to a vote before the 2022 election, in recognition it lacks the support to pass it. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Wednesday, Lambie revealed that “nearly two-thirds” of 33,500 voters who responded to her poll on the bill opposed it, including a majority in every state and territory. Guardian Australia revealed the voter ID proposal in October. The bill was panned for its impact on vulnerable groups including Indigenous Australians and people experiencing homelessness. Even the government-chaired human rights committee found there was no evidence it was necessary. The Australian Electoral Commission had found instances of voter fraud were “vanishingly small”. Lambie told the Senate the bill prevents people voting for others, but “nobody knows” how often that happens and “that’s about all it does”. Lambie also conceded there were benefits in improving confidence in election results. But Lambie said there were risks of “unintended consequences” of “asking 16 million Australians to prove they are who they say they are” to stop “1,000 people doing the wrong thing” which hadn’t had a “measurable impact” on the election result so far. “There’s the risk this bill ends up making things worse, so, some people who are entitled to vote just won’t.” “Do the benefits outweigh the risks? No, no way, not even close.”Adrienne Shelly was an actor, writer, director; a doting mother, loyal wife, vibrant friend; a committed artist who grew from performance to playwriting to film, finally coming into creative bloom when her life was tragically, brutally cut short at age 40. She died mere weeks before the indie film she wrote and directed, Waitress, got accepted to the Sundance film festival; the romantic dramedy starring Keri Russell went on to become a sleeper hit and spawned the hit Broadway musical of the same name, the first with an all-female principal creative team. Shelly never got to see it; on the afternoon of 1 November 2006, she was strangled to death by a 19-year-old construction worker named Diego Pillco, after she walked in during his attempted robbery of the West Village apartment she used as her office. Pillco staged her body like a suicide, and she was found hours later by her husband, Andy Ostroy. If it weren’t for Ostroy’s doggedness in disputing the initial suicide ruling, and the identification of Pillco’s shoeprint in the dust of Shelly’s bathroom, the killing would have probably gone unknown and unsolved. The grim details of Shelly’s death are handled bluntly, upfront, in Adrienne, a new HBO documentary directed by Ostroy that is part loving remembrance to a lost wife, mother and relentlessly creative soul, and part exploration of navigating unfathomable grief with a small child – Shelly and Ostroy’s daughter Sophie was just shy of three when her mother died. The 100-minute film opens with home footage of a buoyant Shelly at a Halloween party with Sophie the night before her death, then cuts to news coverage that presumed suicide, an assumption Ostroy immediately rejected. From the day she died, Ostroy says, he was determined to find out what happened to Shelly, an early muse of indie film-maker Hal Hartley and later posthumous Sundance darling, and to make sure she was never forgotten. “It was really just a desire to humanize Adrienne, bring her back to life and show the world that she’s more than just a murder victim,” Ostroy told the Guardian of the film, which he began in earnest several years ago. “That she was a wife and a mother and a daughter and a sister and a friend.” Ostroy, a first-time director, set out to answer three questions: who was Adrienne Shelly, what really happened the day she died, and what was it like for a family to live through unthinkable tragedy? “The vision for the film was always very simple: life, death, aftermath,” he said. Life was clear – Ostroy kept a trove of home videos, on top of the many clips from Shelly’s films, starting with her debut as the lead opposite Robert Burke in Hartley’s The Unbelievable Truth in 1989. Born Adrienne Levine in 1966 to Elaine Langbaum and Sheldon “Shelly” Levine, Shelly, raised on Long Island, was a natural and enthusiastic performer. She performed early and often in school plays, and studied film production in college before dropping out a year early to pursue a career in Hollywood. (Her stage surname honored her father, who died suddenly of a heart attack when she was 12, a searing loss that resurfaces frequently in the film.) Blond, petite, doe-eyed, disarmingly emotive, Shelly found quick success along with Hartley, covering magazines and booking numerous underwritten roles. By her late 20s, Shelly had grown jaded with the expectations and rampant sexism in Hollywood. In old videos, she talks about the pressures of the industry to “be fuckable”, to say yes to everything, to stay hot or relevant. “I think I spent a lot of my 20s as if I was in some dark adventure of some kind, not really, really feeling myself alive, and I feel like a real desire to not live my life that way any more,” she tells a camera on her 30th birthday in 1996. She helped found a theater company and started writing her own material, staging her first short play in 1993. The film’s survey of her personal archives recount Shelly’s greatest desires: to find a life partner (she met Ostroy through a dating site in 2001) and to become a mother (Sophie was born in 2003). Waitress, written when Shelly was pregnant, was her creative darling, the culmination of years of work and frustration. Numerous friends from her childhood through to the set of Waitress recall Shelly as ebullient, remarkable, a unicorn, an alien, an old woman in a tiny beautiful body, special – “Adrienne was like no one else you’d ever meet in your life,” said Ostroy, echoing similar sentiments from Keri Russell, Paul Rudd, Cheryl Hines, Nathan Fillion, Burke, her mother and brothers, and many others. “When you were in her presence, you really felt, ‘Wow.’” Ostroy weaves the initial mystery, and fundamental unbelievability of her death throughout, walking through his memories of the discovery and the police investigation that followed. Late in the film, at an unspecified date in 2019, he visits the Coxsackie correctional facility in New York, where Pillco was sentenced to 25 years in prison, without parole, for manslaughter. Over several minutes, Pillco, through a translator, recounts the steps of Shelly’s death; Ostroy shares photos of Shelly, of Sophie’s childhood and teenage years, memories her mother wasn’t present for. “The point of that interview was to get the truth of what happened that day, which I did get,” Ostroy said. “And also to humanize Adrienne for him, so that rather than have a lasting image in his head of this panicked woman racing toward him calling out for the police, he sees a mother, a wife, a daughter, a sister. That he understood all the moments in the last 14 years that Adrienne missed, that Sophie missed, that I missed, that everyone missed. “And maybe when he goes to bed at night and lies his head down and stares at the ceiling, he thinks about that, and it makes him feel something that he didn’t feel before.” The meeting with Pillco is startling in its significance – Ostroy says he has no intention of ever communicating with him again – and its candor, but perhaps the most moving part of Adrienne is the film’s account of the aftermath: parenting through grief, explaining loss to a toddler, Sophie learning details of a person she barely knew in real life. The film almost serves as a manual for how to explain the inexplicable to a young child: in stark animation sequences, Ostroy reads diary entries recounting conversations from Sophie’s youth, ages two, three, four and seven, as she asks where mommy went, what happened to mommy, will they ever talk to the man who killed her, what happens when someone dies. Sophie, now an 18-year-old senior in high school, also participates in interviews with her father starting at 15. “One of the beautiful parts of the film is that I had conversations with her and got real emotion from her that I don’t think I would’ve gotten if there wasn’t a camera there,” he said. Prescribed questions, for a project about her mother, allowed for a level of vulnerability an ordinary conversation might not. She starts the film admitting to her father that she hadn’t cried about her mother in years. By the end, the missing feels not abstract but palpable, and the tears begin to flow. Grief is ongoing, fluid, non-linear; so is remembering. Adrienne is a film to honor a film-maker with so much left untapped, a woman whose name is on Broadway marquees yet unknown to the many fans of the film and show. The film cements her legacy “as an actor, as a writer, as a film-maker, as a creative force, as someone who had so much left to do”, said Ostroy. “I wanted people to fall in love with her, I wanted them to mourn and grieve her loss the way we do, and to feel that absence.” Adrienne is available on HBO from 1 December and in the UK at a later date“We the People.” “Liberty.” “Justice.” Words spelled out in quilted Daedalus-like mazes, in the new exhibition Another Justice: Divided We Stand, at the Kayne Griffin gallery in Los Angeles. All are associated with the ideals of the United States, revered like the stars and stripes of its flag. But stamped within the Liberty quilt is the word “inmate”. Capital, a green and white quilt, mirrors the stamp. Composed from prison uniforms and repurposed American flags, the quilts display the discordant harmony sewn together by capitalism and racism. The new exhibition by Hank Willis Thomas, Another Justice confronts a great American hypocrisy: freedom in “the land of the free” is predicated on the incarceration and enslavement of populations deemed less valuable by America’s hegemony. Through massive labyrinthine quilts and human-like sculptures, the exhibition interrogates the gossamer presented by American ideals against the grimy reality many Americans live day to day. “The thing about America: liberty, justice, equality are all terms that come to mind but, for millions of Americans throughout its entire history as a nation, that has never really been true,” the artist told the Guardian. “Looking at prison uniforms and recognizing that the stripes in the uniforms have the same size stripe as many American flags, I couldn’t help but make that correlation between the stars and bars and the bars that people live in all around the country.” Thomas explores enslavement and its legacy in his work and, though the exhibition deals with incarceration, he insists it is not a deviation from the subject. “The slave era is not something that is in the past. It’s something that we are actually living in today,” Thomas explains simply. Though the institution of slavery was abolished in 1865 with the ratification of the 13th constitutional amendment, the amendment allows for involuntary servitude to continue “as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted”. According to the World Prison Brief, the United States incarcerates about 639 people per 100,000 people, which is widely reported to be the highest rate of any country in the world. This exorbitant incarceration rate is often viewed as an extension and the modern evolution of chattel enslavement. Another Justice looks at how incarceration, like slavery, is sewn into the fabric of the United States both metaphorically and literally. Cotton, picked from the hands of enslaved Africans and African Americans, became a symbol of oppression, now worn on the backs of their descendants, who are trapped into the same peculiar institution. “To me, from a conceptual perspective, it’s very much about, yes, the fabric of our country, which is cotton, the fabric of our lives. So many of our ancestors, and then, people today of African descent, have a very unique and specific relationship with it. But also, [it’s] about having to navigate the complexity of our history and our present,” Thomas said. Though the United States outwardly values Enlightenment age exemplars, it is the dubious actuality which inspired Thomas to create Another Justice. “It really started with me finding these prison guard patches at a flea market, [with] some of them being very beautiful. I just started thinking about how complex our society is, where keeping people behind bars is a business and it’s a business that certain people take pride in and certain people make a lot of money off of,” Thomas said. He added: “I made these mazes to remind myself and others of the complicated pathways we have to navigate to get to walk these ideals.” This paradoxical paradigm emerges in the exhibited pieces, with one quilt adorned with hopeful stars and another sewn with stripes reminiscent of prison bars. One piece, composed entirely of stripes from the American flag, is inspired by a photo in which former president Donald Trump stood at the border fence, Thomas says. “Most people have an opinion about the criminal legal system, the criminal justice system, the prison industrial complex, law enforcement, [and] punishment. Most people have an opinion, whether it’s ‘Burn it down!’ or ‘Give it the most money you can possibly give it to keep it going!’ and everything in between,” Claudia Peña, director of For Freedoms, the artist collective and non-profit co-founded by Thomas, said. The organization collaborates with artists of marginalized backgrounds to imagine and reimagine a better future for America. Across from the Kayne Griffin gallery, the organization installed a billboard that tackles the issue of justice for indigenous people. Peña continued: “I think, when you look at a piece of art that was made by repurposing old prison uniforms, you necessarily have to think about your opinions. And standing in front of [this] art, you kind of have to interrogate your opinions a little bit too. It forces you to have a conversation with yourself or perhaps the people that you’re looking at the art with and to make sure, ‘Is this still what I think? Or, do I think something different?’” Though many are cynical about art’s potential to change political conversations, Peña, a transformative and restorative lawyer, believes art is a medium which holds the power to convert and alter. “When grassroots organizations or community organizations are attempting to do any consciousness-raising work – and that’s how you refer to educating communities about the issues they face and potential solutions – what everybody reports is that sharing statistics and data is not very compelling for people. But storytelling is. People are very interested in storytelling … Storytelling has been a basis of how we understand the world around us and art is nothing but storytelling.” Peña, a grassroots organizer herself, noted she was not immune to disdainful attitudes when she began organizing. But her own personal journey helped her realize the power of art in political conversations. “I’ve been very moved and inspired to dig more deeply about my own convictions by art that poses questions and art that challenges the black and white nature of political work.” Thomas hopes for a similar reaction from those who view the exhibition. “As an American, I have been trained to love the flag. I have been trained to believe in its values. But as a human being, as an African American, I have been forced to ask these questions. The show is much more about questions than it is about statements.” Another Justice: Divided We Stand, at the Kayne Griffin gallery in Los AngelesDowning Street should not wait for hospitals to start being overwhelmed by Omicron coronavirus cases before moving to “plan B”, senior doctors and NHS leaders have warned. Any delay in ramping up measures to limit the spread of Covid-19 would be “bizarre” and risk further adding to Britain’s already high death toll from the disease, one leading doctor said. Health experts criticised No 10’s insistence on Tuesday that it would only implement plan B once a spike in cases linked to the new Covid variant had led to more people being admitted to hospital. “This would be a bizarre approach, which if adopted risks the government once again acting too late and risking lives unnecessarily,” said Dr Paul Donaldson, a microbiologist and the general secretary of the Hospital Consultants and Specialists Association. Donaldson added: “The litmus test on plan B, which means simple measures such as working from home and extending social distancing, must at the very least be a sustained increase in hospitalisations – but before crisis levels are reached. “Acting once a crisis is reached would be completely self-defeating and would risk propelling us towards an NHS meltdown which then leads to yet another lockdown. Nobody wants that.” Dr David Wrigley, deputy council chair at the British Medical Association, said: “As doctors working on the frontline we can categorically say that the NHS and the wider health service are already overwhelmed. Waiting until the NHS collapses entirely is the worst decision that could be made and further risks patients’ lives.” They were responding to a Downing Street spokesperson who, when asked in what circumstances plan B would be introduced, replied: “Plan B remains an option we could introduce if the NHS starts to become overwhelmed and cases have increased. “I think it is important to understand that [it is] a variant of new characteristics, not seen anywhere in the world before – rightly, people first need to take a precautionary approach and then look at the evidence that we get before deciding what approach would be the right one to take. I would emphasise that while there are some concerning characteristics, we simply don’t know enough yet.” Dr Nick Scriven, a past president of the Society for Acute Medicine, said: “This sounds really scary and not what is needed. By the time data has been collected and then looked at it by whoever, it will be far too late to prevent infections and admissions. “The factor that seems to have been forgotten is that admissions lag behind infection by five to 10 days so we need to decide at least partially on rising infection and not just hospital admissions.” Under plan B ministers would recommend a return to widespread working from home, the use of vaccine passports, and mandatory wearing of masks in many settings. Bodies representing heads of NHS trusts in England urged ministers to take action immediately to avoid already hard-pressed hospitals becoming overwhelmed with Covid patients. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “Health leaders expect the government to act decisively to prevent an NHS crisis and not once it is too late, as this is what their patients and their hardworking teams deserve. “As it stands, hospitalisations owing to coronavirus are nowhere near what they were at the start of the year. However, if we are serious about supporting the NHS to tackle the growing waiting list and about stopping broader healthcare services from being overly disrupted this winter, then we cannot be complacent.” Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “We have consistently urged the government to take a precautionary approach. These are particularly difficult and complex judgments in the context of a new variant, but it is important to be clear about the need to avert such a scenario rather than respond to it.”The landmark 1973 supreme court case Roe v Wade guaranteed the right to an abortion in the United States. Now, nearly five decades later, that right is under threat as the court prepares to hear oral arguments in a new case, Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization. How could a decision that was not met with widespread protest at the time be under threat less than half a century later? Over the years, a vocal minority of socially conservative Americans have steadily gained political power, passed many state-level challenges to the decision and, in some extreme cases, resorted to violence and intimidation in an attempt to reduce access to abortion. Although six in 10 adults in the US say abortion should be legal in “all or most” circumstances, Congress has never enshrined the right to terminate a pregnancy in statute. That has left abortion access vulnerable during a period of sustained legal attacks during the Trump administration and led to the precarious position of abortion rights in the US today. Here are some of the key moments in the almost 50 years that have passed since the Roe v Wade ruling. 1973 In a 7-2 decision, the all-male supreme court ruled that the constitution protects the right to an abortion. Justices found abortion was a “fundamental” right for a woman’s “life and future”, and that Texas had violated the rights of “Jane Roe” when an abortion ban prevented her from obtaining one. “When the decision came down, we were elated,” said Eleanor Smeal, who was active in the feminist movement at the time and who is now president of the Feminist Majority Foundation. “It was a celebration, it was happiness, and people thought the fight was over – we won.” “The movement wasn’t thinking of, ‘Oh my God, we’re going to have to fight to protect this,’” Smeal added. “We couldn’t imagine anyone would hammer away.” The decision was preceded by decades of activism, with momentum decidedly on the side of those working to liberalize abortion laws. Constituencies as diverse as radical feminists, clergy and doctors came together to call for reform to criminal abortion laws. “There was a big movement for legalizing abortion before the supreme court decision. I think people forget that,” Smeal said. “We talk about back-alley abortion but [women] were dying”. People, especially those on low incomes, gained access to safe and legal abortion up to the point a fetus could survive outside the womb. Big-city hospitals shuttered “septic abortion” wards, where many poor people had died, infected and injured, from desperate attempts to end pregnancies. People also gained access to abortion through Medicaid, a public health insurance program for low-income people and those living with disabilities. Abortion joined contraceptives, legalized for unmarried people just one year earlier, as a newly available method of family planning. The anti-abortion movement as we know it today had yet to coalesce, but the stridently anti-abortion and anti-LGBTQ+ North Carolina US senator Jesse Helms did successfully pass the Helms amendment, which banned the use of foreign health aid to promote “abortion as a method of family planning” overseas. The amendment remains in effect. 1976 The Hyde amendment, a temporary budget rider that barred Medicaid from paying for abortions, passed in the House of Representatives with a large majority. It was encouraged by Catholic bishops, and, unlike in today’s polarized environment, votes were not split strictly along party lines. More than 100 Democrats supported the measure, and 32 Republicans opposed it. At the time, some representatives argued the Hyde amendment unfairly discriminated against poor people. The law, still in place, has made it far more difficult for low-income people to obtain abortions, often forcing them to pay hundreds of dollars for the procedure. Three-quarters of people who seek abortions in the US are low-income. The policy disproportionately affects people of color. This period would represent a turning point in Republican politics. Republican political activists such as Phyllis Schlafly worked to bring together evangelicals and conservative Catholics by uniting them in concern about women’s changing place in society and how they would exercise new rights, such as abortion. Until then, legal abortion had been supported by many Republicans. “Schlafly and her supporters argue that 1960s liberalism celebrates the individual and promotes the rights of the individual at the expense of the family and at the expense of a kind of moral order,” the Harvard historian Jill Lepore told On the Media. “Abortion becomes a linchpin” for this argument, she added. The same year, the IRS revoked the tax-exempt status of Bob Jones University, a Christian college that defiantly refused to admit Black students on “religious liberty” grounds. The Dartmouth University religious history professor Randall Balmer argued this was an important moment in activating white evangelical protestant voters, or the “moral majority”, who would join many Catholic voters in being receptive to anti-abortion political messaging. Evangelical opposition to abortion “was a kind of historical accident”, said Balmer, who details this history in his recent book Bad Faith: Race and the Rise of the Religious Right. “It allowed them to deflect attention away from the real narrative and to advocate on behalf of the fetus.” 1982 Pennsylvania passed among the most stringent abortion restrictions in the nation with the Abortion Control Act, which required minors to gain parental consent to obtain an abortion, imposed a 24-hour waiting period on women seeking abortions and required married women to notify their husbands if they were seeking an abortion. Although it was not the first state or city to enact such impediments, it became the most significant, because its law survived a court challenge. The early 1980s also saw the rise of the religious right with the election of President Ronald Reagan, who voiced support for a constitutional amendment to ban abortion. 1992 Litigation against Pennsylvania’s Abortion Control Act reached the supreme court in a case called Planned Parenthood v Casey. The court upheld the essential ruling in Roe v Wade but allowed states to pass more abortion restrictions as long as they did not pose an “undue burden”. The decision ushered in a new era of anti-abortion restrictions, which would come to be known as Trap laws, referring to targeted regulation of abortion providers. States passed hundreds of expensive and burdensome restrictions, often in an effort to test the constitutional limits of the court’s new ruling. The same year, President Bill Clinton said abortion should be “safe, legal and rare”, a phrase later seen as a symbol of the Democratic party’s acceptance of the idea that abortion was shameful. 1993 Even as Casey ushered in a new era of incremental abortion restrictions and abortion access dwindled, anti-abortion zealots saw the case as a loss. Frustrated, some turned to violence and intimidation, organizing blockades of clinics. Their tactics culminated in the assassination of Dr David Gunn, who was shot dead outside an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Florida. Eleven people have been murdered as a result of attacks on abortion providers since 1977. “Anti-abortion forces got very extreme in the 1980s and 90s,” said Laura Briggs, author of How All Politics Became Reproductive Politics: from Welfare Reform to Foreclosure to Trump. “First they started bombing clinics and murdering providers, and formed the nucleus of the alt-right that we’re now living with as white nationalists.” 1994 Two Planned Parenthood receptionists, Shannon Lowney, 25, and Leanne Nichols, 38, were killed and five more people injured at separate shootings by the same perpetrator in suburban Boston. The same year, Dr John Bayard Britton, 69, and James Barrett, 74, a clinic security volunteer, were shot and killed by an anti-abortion extremist outside another Pensacola clinic. 1998 A Canadian man shot Dr Barnett Slepian – a Buffalo, New York, abortion provider – through his kitchen window with a high-powered rifle. The perpetrator remained free for five years before he was apprehended. The same year, a nail bomb exploded outside a Birmingham, Alabama, abortion clinic, killing an off-duty police officer, Robert Sanderson. The man responsible, Eric Rudolph, eventually pleaded guilty to the 1996 bombing of the Atlanta Olympics, as well as bombings at two more abortion clinics and a gay bar. 2000 The FDA approved the drug mifepristone – the first pill available to end a pregnancy early in gestation. In the coming decades, the drug proved extremely safe and effective, and was used by millions. By 2017, mifepristone accounted for 39% of all abortions. However, it also became the target of attacks and disinformation. Some states required a doctor to be in the room when dispensing the medication, effectively banning telemedicine abortions. In others, anti-science disinformation about the ability to “reverse” a medication abortion was allowed to flourish. 2007 The supreme court upheld a federal ban on dilation and extraction, a procedure opponents call “partial birth abortion”. In a 5-4 decision, the court ruled a ban on the procedure was constitutional, even though it was designed to lead to fewer complications for pregnant people. The decision weakened Roe, which held that a pregnant person’s health should be paramount. 2009 Dr George Tiller was shot and killed in the entrance of his church in Wichita, Kansas, by an anti-abortion extremist. Tiller was one of the few abortion providers in the country willing to perform the procedure late in pregnancy. 2013 Texas passed a law that required abortion providers to have “admitting privileges” at local hospitals. The requirement proved impossible for many doctors to meet, shut down dozens of clinics in Texas, and was then replicated by other states. The midwest and south became the epicenters of anti-abortion legislation. The same year, North Dakota passed the nation’s first “heartbeat bill”, a ban on abortion after roughly six weeks. That is before most people know they are pregnant and before the vast majority of abortions take place. At the time it was passed, mainstream anti-abortion activists believed it was too extreme and would only serve to bolster Roe. 2015 A man opened fire at a Colorado Springs Planned Parenthood, killing three people and wounding nine more. His victims were later identified as Jennifer Markovsky, 35; Ke’Arre Stewart, 29; and Garrett Swasey, 44. The same year, the supreme court struck down Texas’s “admitting privileges” law in a 5-3 decision, ruling the burdens placed on people were unconstitutional. Nevertheless, the damage was done – most of the clinics that closed when Texas enacted the law remain shuttered. 2016 Donald Trump was elected president. Running as a Republican on the campaign trail, he said people who had abortions should be punished and promised to appoint supreme court justices to “automatically” overturn Roe. He was carried to victory with strong support from the religious right. Trump confirmed three justices to the court during his term in office – Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett – giving conservatives a 6-3 super-majority. 2019 Several more states passed so-called “heartbeat bills” – including Ohio and Georgia – even though the laws were blatantly unconstitutional and were blocked by courts. The author of the bills is an anti-LGBTQ+ conspiracy theorist whom anti-abortion activists once considered too extreme, but who found new purchase in the Trump era. Emboldened by Trump, the anti-abortion movement sees more grassroots efforts to outlaw abortion entirely. New York and Illinois expand abortion rights in response to near constant attacks in other states and from the Trump administration. 2020 The Covid-19 pandemic hit, and much of normal life came to a standstill. Hospitals and clinics across the country suspended normal operations. Ten states attempted to restrict abortion as a “nonessential” service. Courts intervened and many restrictions were lifted, though many measures had already sown confusion. The same year, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, hailed by some as the court’s greatest champion of reproductive health and freedom, died at age 87. The Trump administration quickly confirmed her successor – Barrett. 2021 By May, the supreme court agreed to consider Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, alarming activists who worry the case could be used to significantly weaken the right to abortion. The case focuses on whether Mississippi can outlaw most abortions at 15 weeks, a direct challenge to Roe, which provides a right to abortion up to the point the fetus can live outside the womb, widely regarded as 24 weeks gestation. A full-term pregnancy is 39 weeks. By mid-year, 2021 has already become the most hostile year for abortion rights legislation on record, with more than 90 restrictions put in place by states. In July, attorneys for Mississippi asked the court to use the Dobbs case to overturn Roe v Wade, and called the 1973 decision one which has “poisoned our national discourse” and “plagued the law”. By September, the supreme court had let Texas’s six-week abortion ban go into effect while it was litigated, halting the vast majority of abortions in the country’s second-biggest state. Experts called Roe v Wade a “dessicated husk” of a ruling. The court shocked observers again in September, when it allowed Texas to implement a six-week abortion ban. In effect, Texas nullifies the constitutional rights granted by Roe v Wade within its borders. If the Mississippi case leads to the fall of Roe v Wade when the court issues its decision in 2022, and abortion restrictions are left to the states, more than half would be likely to move to again make the procedure illegal. Dr Wendy Chavkin, a special lecturer in population and family health and clinical obstetrics and gynecology at Columbia University who helped found Global Doctors for Choice, said such a decisionwould set the US back decades. “If this thing goes wrong, we’re bucking the historic tide” of liberalizing abortion laws globally, said Chavkin. “It’ll be like some of those decisions that the US is – embarrassed is an inadequate word – but profoundly embarrassed by for years and we’ll have a lot of trouble ameliorating the harms that will result.”The red list of Britain’s most endangered birds has increased to 70 species with the swift, house martin, greenfinch and Bewick’s swan added to the latest assessment. The red list now accounts for more than a quarter of Britain’s 245 bird species, almost double the 36 species given the status of “highest conservation concern” in the first review 25 years ago. Birds are placed on the red list of the Birds of Conservation Concern report by a coalition of government wildlife bodies and bird charities either because their populations have severely declined in Britain or because they are considered under threat of global extinction. Swifts and house martins have been moved from the amber list to the red list because their numbers have more than halved – swift populations have fallen by 58% since 1995. They join other celebrated but now critically endangered long-distance migrants such as the nightingale and cuckoo, whose populations are plummeting owing to a combination of habitat loss, the disappearance of insect food sources and global heating both in British breeding grounds and along migratory routes to sub-Saharan Africa. Bewick’s swan is another endangered bird that undertakes an epic migration, flying between western Europe and the far north of Russia. It is under pressure from ingesting lead shot, loss of wetlands and climate changes causing shifts in its migrating patterns. The greenfinch is a familiar garden bird but has moved from the green list of least concern to the red list after its population slumped by 62% since 1993 following an outbreak of the disease trichomonosis. The infection spreads through contaminated food and water – sometimes on bird-feeders – and from birds feeding each other regurgitated food during the breeding season. While other endangered birds on the red list continue to decline (particularly “farmland” birds such as curlew and turtle dove) Britain’s largest aerial predator has moved off the red list. The white-tailed eagle is now on the amber list after a successful reintroduction programme that began in 1975, with the raptor spreading across north-west Scotland where there are now 123 breeding pairs. The species was hunted to extinction in 1916 so juvenile birds were first reintroduced from Norway. Offspring from the thriving Scottish population have been restored to the Isle of Wight, with the species likely to be returned to other coastal locations as historical persecution diminishes. Beccy Speight, the chief executive of the RSPB, one of the report partners, said the biggest-ever red list was more evidence that Britain’s wildlife was in freefall and not enough was being done to reverse declines. “We are seeing once common species such as swift and greenfinch now becoming rare,” she said. “As with our climate this really is the last chance saloon to halt and reverse the destruction of nature. We often know what action we need to take to change the situation, but we need to do much more, rapidly and at scale.” Dr Andrew Hoodless, the director of research at the Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust, said: “We need to better understand the effects of climate change on some species, as well as the impacts of changing habitats and food availability along migration routes and in wintering areas of sub-Saharan African migrants. For many red-listed species, however, improving breeding success in the UK is vital – we can and must make real and immediate improvements to this through better engagement with UK farmers, land managers and gamekeepers to encourage adoption of effective packages of conservation measures.” One small way people can help the house martin is to erect artificial nest cups under the eaves of homes, according to Juliet Vickery, the chief executive of the British Trust for Ornithology. She said: “It is both sad and shocking to think that the house martin, a bird that often, literally, makes its home under our roof, has become red-listed.”On 1 December, the US supreme court is set to hear oral arguments in what has been called the most important abortion rights case in almost half a century – a case that could redefine reproductive rights across the country and have repercussions abroad for generations. Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization could lead to weakening or overturning the landmark 1973 supreme court ruling, Roe v Wade, which effectively legalized abortion in the US. If that were to happen, tens of millions people of reproductive age across the country would be affected. On Wednesday, the court’s nine justices are expected to hear from the state of Mississippi, which has argued that the court should use the case to overturn Roe, and from the state’s last abortion clinic, which will argue to preserve abortion rights as they stand. What is happening at the supreme court? In Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, Dobbs refers to Dr Thomas Dobbs, Mississippi’s health department director, and the official who would enforce the law. Jackson Women’s Health Organization is the last abortion clinic in Mississippi, which is also known as the Pink House. The highest court in the US will hear from attorneys in the case, which centers on whether Mississippi can outlaw nearly all abortions at and after 15 weeks gestation. The case directly challenges the precedent in Roe v Wade, which guarantees the right to an abortion in the US. Roe v Wade protects the right to an abortion up to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb, widely regarded as 24 weeks gestation. A full term pregnancy is 39 weeks gestation. The court is now dominated by conservatives, with six of the nine justices leaning to the right. Abortion advocates see the Mississippi case as especially perilous for abortion rights because justices could have dismissed Mississippi’s law as unconstitutional under Roe. However, the court chose to take the case, indicating at least four justices see a reason to revisit the historic ruling. A decision is expected in June 2022, but the hearing on 1 December could provide clues as to the justices’ thinking. What could happen to Roe v Wade? Congress never enshrined the right to terminate a pregnancy in law. Instead, pregnant people in the US have relied on Roe v Wade for almost 50 years, and the precedent is now considered to be under threat. The justices could decide to dismiss the Mississippi case, upholding Roe v Wade. However, abortion advocates worry that the court could instead rule in a way that may weaken or even overturn it. The justices could decide that the 15-week law does not put a significant burden on people in Mississippi, and issue a ruling that would allow abortion to be banned at a much earlier stage of pregnancy. This is would considerably restrict abortion access and weaken Roe v Wade. If Roe is overturned, 26 states are expected to move to outlaw abortion in various ways, through state constitutional amendments, “trigger” laws which go into effect as soon as possible should Roe be overturned, or limits on abortion beginning at six weeks gestation, before most know they are pregnant. Nearly all of these 26 states are in the midwest and south. Together, states considered to be hostile to abortion are home to 58% of women of reproductive age, or 40 million of the 72 million women between 15 and 49 years of age. In just one example, Louisiana has a “trigger law” that will immediately outlaw abortion if Roe v Wade is overturned. Today, if a pregnant person in Louisiana wanted a safe legal abortion, they would drive 37 miles on average. However, if Roe v Wade were overturned, that distance would increase by 1,720% to 630 miles on average, because a person seeking an abortion in Louisiana would probably need to travel to Illinois, the closest state which affirms a right to abortion, to obtain one. Abortion advocates have warned that if Roe v Wade falls, the procedure could become both inaccessible and a criminal offense. Criminal justice experts have said abortion bans could lead to a wave of prosecutions under murder statutes and mass incarceration. Abortion advocates argue that the procedure would also still continue, but would no longer be safely performed in a legal, clinical setting, putting the health of pregnant people at significant risk. Abortion bans would also probably compound the ways the US already fails many pregnant people, namely by increasing the maternal mortality rate, which is already the highest among wealthy nations. Would overturning Roe v Wade make the US an outlier in abortion rights? In recent decades, there has been a longstanding trend toward liberalizing abortion laws in countries across the world. Since 1994, at least 50 countries have liberalized abortion laws, and now 970 million women or 59% of the world’s reproductive aged female population lives in a country where abortion is broadly legal and available. Most recently, there has also been movement to liberalize laws in Latin America, a region known for extremely punitive abortion bans. International law considers abortion rights to be human rights. The UN rapporteur for the right to health, Dr Tlaleng Mofokeng, told the Guardian if the US allows states to ban abortion it would immediately violate international human rights law, including the convention against torture, to which the US is a party. “If that gets overturned,” said Mofokeng of Roe v Wade, “it has catastrophic implications, not just for the US.”Even before I entered his class, I knew Mr Priamo, the sixth-grade teacher at my Catholic elementary school, as the small, powerfully built man who strutted the hallways, and especially the gymnasium, with the ease of an athletic star. In golf shirts and trousers that pulled too tight at the rear, he appeared to be in perpetual motion – an illusion enhanced by his booming voice and jangling keys, the storm of gum-chewing and cologne that encircled him. It was my first encounter with a kind of masculine drag, an adult embodying a role so fully and so well it was impossible to tell where the bit ended and the real person began. Having crafted my own persona as a low-key academic prodigy, I watched him as a cub might regard the leader of a rival clan. The prospect of submitting to the instruction of someone as brash and sports-metaphor prone as Mr Priamo intrigued me. He was my first male teacher – a relief, following a year in which two female co-teachers (eager to prove a point, it seemed to me, about wanting something too badly) had denied me the top scholastic prize, breaking a three-year streak. Though useless on the track and the basketball court, I impressed Mr Priamo due to the stealthy resolve with which I secured and guarded my standing in his class. Among the first things I learned under his tutelage was that to share a passion for winning is to share a lot. A word about Catholic schooling in 1980s Ontario: in addition to being publicly funded, it was, in my experience, exempt from the punitive milieu often associated with Catholic education. We said morning prayers, learned hymns for mass, and sat through religion classes that skimmed over dogma in favour of lessons in basic morality. There were no ruler-wielding nuns or scare-mongering priests; we left our sex-ed classes as clueless about actual sex as our secular counterparts did theirs. Much of our religious curriculum focused on initiation into various holy sacraments, beginning with first communion. It is perhaps no coincidence that enacting this high drama, in which seven-year-olds – the girls parading in wedding costume – ingest wafers they believe to be the body of Christ, marks the point at which my brief career in godliness reached its white-veiled peak. It happened that my year with Mr Priamo occurred in the midst of the sacrament-free stretch between penance at age nine and confirmation at 13. Penance proved a tougher ritual to love than that of communion: each month I shuffled into the confessional with a well-honed list of sins, each chosen to sit in tactful relation to the shameful things I had actually thought, said and done. That this might itself constitute a sin I understood to be a problem with no clear recourse, a predicament whose sophistication outranked that of the dialogue surrounding me, which at that time began and ended with the dauntless Italian at the head of the class. The source of Mr Priamo’s enormous appeal – his certainty about the chasm between right and wrong, the winner and everybody else – in time seeded trouble between us. My memory of that trouble hinges on a particular religion class, in which a return to the subject of sin and forgiveness opened on to a new and unforeseen domain: that of the mortal sin. For this type of sin, Mr Priamo said, there could be no forgiveness. A rude enough bulletin for those of us still struggling to admit to even minor imperfections, but the news got worse: according to Mr Priamo, the list included everything from suicide to missing Sunday mass. Sure that one of us was mistaken, and newly aware of having missed more Sunday masses than I had attended, I shot my hand into the air. Hearing myself question Mr Priamo, I felt lightning cracks of incredulity and began to let them show. Whether he was misinformed or caught out on the shifting sands of Catholic doctrine I cannot know; but in that moment he appeared only to harden against these pelts at his authority. As my classmates traced nervous doodles I grew bolder, posing hypotheticals and seeking contingencies, eventually forcing him to say out loud what this business of irredeemable sins implied: that missing a single Sunday’s mass would damn the faithful straight to hell. That class marked a first breach in my relationship with the Catholic church, it’s true. But of greater consequence was the vast, muddied expanse revealed to me when the tides of righteousness went out. This new terrain valued pursuit over dominance, doubt over certainty; it made room for ambiguity, for inquiry as a way of life. In challenging Mr Priamo, I discovered that respect for myself and for a beloved teacher can take many forms; that there is more to questioning than getting all the answers right. • Pure Flame by Michelle Orange is published by Harvill Secker (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Forty years after the first cases of Aids were discovered, goals for its global elimination have yet to be achieved. In 2020, nearly 700,000 people died of Aids-related illnesses and 1.5 million people were newly infected with HIV. This is despite scientific and medical advances in the testing, treatment and care of people living with HIV. Part of the reason is something that those affected by HIV know all too well: discrimination. The history of the response to this virus has long been hampered by stigma and it continues to disproportionately affect key groups – men who have sex with men; sex workers; transgender people; people who inject drugs and prisoners. According to UNAIDS, the United Nations programme on Aids/HIV, these communities account for 93% of new HIV infections outside sub-Saharan Africa. Social, state and symbolic discrimination and violence play a huge role in preventing people in these groups from accessing care and prevention services. It is difficult to protect yourself from HIV when, in some countries, having prevention tools in your pocket – whether it be sterile syringes or condoms – can lead to arrest. It’s hard to talk to your doctor about sexual safety or access antiretroviral treatment when homophobia permeates your society. Discrimination is directly related to stigma and they are mutually reinforcing, acting as catalysts for transmission. Punitive laws that infringe human rights also continue to hold back progress. The criminalisation of certain behaviours and jobs – such as drug use, non-disclosure of HIV status, and sex work – infringes on the rights and freedoms of key populations and their ability to access justice and health services. Often, this is a result of prejudice among law enforcement. Russia is one example of how pushing back on human rights, freedoms and personal autonomy also holds back the fight against HIV and Aids. In June, at the last UN high-level meeting on HIV and Aids, Russia submitted amendments to the final declaration to delete any reference to human rights, decriminalising sex work or harm reduction related to injecting drugs, claiming it was an affront to family values. How can we not make the connection between these views and the worrying progression of the HIV epidemic in Russia? Russian government estimates suggest that new HIV infections increased annually by 10% to 15% a year between 2006 and 2015. It is a trajectory leading to enormous prevalence rates in key populations (including its estimated 1.8 million injection-drug users) and a general population prevalence of more than 1%. As in other countries where homosexuality is subject to social repression, there is reason to believe that these estimates are very conservative because the impact of homophobia reduces estimates of certain population sizes and incidence. Alongside eliminating stigma, discrimination and criminalisation, nations need to consider how funding is directed. According to the Dutch organisation Aidsfonds, programmes targeting key, most at-risk groups in low- and middle-income countries receive only 2% of HIV funding. Yet marginalised people have long proven their ability to implement innovative solutions to protect fellow human beings in the face of epidemics, whether it be Aids or Covid-19. Community-led responses that respect human rights in the local context are highly effective. Peer testing, for example, is extremely effective in reaching those furthest from the health system. Cheick Hamala Sidibé, human rights officer at Arcad Santé Plus, has said that community-led initiatives during the Covid-19 pandemic by health workers in Mali – meeting people at home to offer HIV testing, distribute prevention kits and provide antiretroviral treatment – have pushed the government to improve its policy. In Morocco, a third of those testing positive for HIV in 2019 were screened by community health workers from ACLS – a member of Coalition Plus, an international network to fight Aids and hepatitis – even though it uses only 10% of the kits available nationwide. In Ecuador, out of 40,000 tests, Kimirina, another Coalition Plus member, detected 900 HIV-positive people – nearly six times higher than the rate achieved by the public health system. The new Global Fund strategy to fight Aids, TB and malaria places communities front and centre of the fight. Building on the fund’s proven impact, it’s vital that governments step up contributions next year in order to accelerate community-led responses. Communities have always been best on the frontlines and sustainable funding of interventions designed and implemented by and for key population groups will go a long way to bringing the global HIV response on track. Underpinning this must be a steadfast commitment to human rights; exerting political pressure to repeal punitive laws and enforcing laws to protect people from violence. Through this, we can, after 40 years, overcome discrimination and end Aids. Hakima Himmich is the founder of ALCS in Morocco and has chaired the international network Coalition Plus since 2012. Mike Podmore is director of StopAids, a UK-based network of 70 organisations, and a steering committee member at Action for Global Health UK and Global Fund Advocates Network.On the western slope of the Malvern Hills, along the border of Worcestershire and Herefordshire, there is a hairpin junction where a small lane leads downhill off the main road into the woods. It is common to see clusters of vehicles here, and if you stop to investigate you’ll find yourself among an ever-changing but faithful coterie, some of whom have travelled many miles. They are gathered around a spout in the side of the hill that gushes a constant stream of water, straight from the ancient rock. This is Evendine spring, one of more than 100 natural springs in the Malvern Hills, and according to the regulars, the finest-tasting of them all. Some of the visitors are drinking from cupped hands, most are filling plastic bottles, and the old lags are hauling multiple jerry cans into their vans. At weekends you may have to wait a while but the mood is always convivial, as if you’ve happened upon a secret society. I first discovered Evendine spring during the 2020 winter lockdown. Floored by long Covid, I holed up with my husband in a cabin by the River Severn near Hanley Castle, with views of the Malvern Hills to the west. As part of my recovery, I was planning to walk a little further each day with the aim of making it up on to the ridgeline. There were routes to suit any mood or energy level, from twisty wooded trails to stony moorland tracks and even the “99 Steps”, a Victorian-built staircase. Although steep, none of these could be considered long walks, but this was all about tiny steps. The previous winter I had happily hiked across Egypt’s Sinai desert, so there was a certain amount of physical and emotional adjustment to be made to my newfound circumstances – from a life of action and adventure to struggling to walk and breathe. The Malverns seemed like ideal rehab hills – small but perfectly formed, sandwiched between the cities of Worcester and Hereford, running just eight miles north to south, with a maximum elevation of 425 metres. My seeking solace in these hills was nothing new. There is evidence of human habitation dating back to the iron age, as well as bronze age burial mounds and ancient drovers’ tracks. By the 1850s the fashion for hydrotherapy saw visitors flock to Great Malvern, a classic Victorian spa town in the eastern foothills – all gabled villas and decorative bus shelters. The natural springs were developed into official tourist sites, housed in typically ornate buildings such as St Ann’s Well and Holy Well, which survive today. The town’s healing vibe remains strong: it has morphed into a well-heeled hippy hotspot of organic health food stores and alternative therapies. But it’s the hills that keep drawing you back. Ever present, looming over the town, urging you to leave the prim Victoriana behind and ascend to higher things, to drink from the springs that flow from the Precambrian rock, and to gaze across the nation from the windswept ridge. Although diminutive in comparison with other British hills, the Malverns have a mountainous feel that belies their humble dimensions, bursting forth, steep and sudden from the otherwise flat, featureless Severn Plain. Approaching from the east is the British equivalent of crossing the midwest prairie and seeing the Rockies looming in the distance. Each week, as I extended my walks by a few minutes, it was this promise of elevation that got me outside, putting one foot in front other, trudging up slopes in all weathers, motivated by some primal urge to stand tall on high ground. In pre-Covid times I made annual trips to the Spanish Pyrenees, where one of the great pleasures is to drink from the fuentes, the spring water spouts in the mountain villages. With no foreign travel on the agenda, my Malvern treks became a scaled-down, pandemic-friendly version of these adventures: we’d walk the hills, seeking out the spots where water breaks through the ancient rock. The wells and springs of the Malverns range from nondescript depressions in the ground to pipes sticking out of stone walls to the elaborate Victorian structures and fountains. Some of the sources are easy to find – in the streets, formalised for public use, while others are hidden deep in forested slopes, just a trickle in a dell. Not all flow as freely as Evendine; a few have dried up over the years, or have been sealed off and are identifiable now only by tell-tale clues: an ancient brass tap in a wall or a weed-choked stone trough at the roadside. My walks were gradually lengthening and my resolve was rewarded when a few days after Christmas (Zoom-heavy, alcohol-free), we awoke to a magical sight: snow had fallen on the Malvern Hills. This would be the day for the ridgeline. Along the sweeping curves of Jubilee Drive, the road that follows the contour of the hills’ western side, the branches of pine trees were bowed, heavy with fresh snow, in a scene that could have passed for the Alps. As I stepped out and started walking, the rare and thrilling crunch underfoot spurred me on. The slopes were alive with sledgers and dog walkers, families and solo hikers, everyone blinking and smiling at one another in the brightness and euphoria of a moment’s reprieve from the horrors of the past year. The Malverns are a line of 22 hills, including the evocatively named Hangman’s, Tinkers and Perseverance. I chose the latter. Slowly, breathlessly, I made my way up its rocky path, until the ridge appeared in front of me and, with just one more step, like at the raising of a curtain, I found myself before a frosted panorama, pure white, stretching out across the Severn Valley to the distant Cotswolds. Behind me, to the west, the snow-covered Welsh Marches and the Black Mountains, also glistened under the wintry sun. The whole nation was sparkling in every direction. They say that on a clear day you can see 13 counties and as far as 200 miles from the Malvern ridge. I have returned to this view in every season since – in the spring, when the bluebells and wild garlic carpet the slopes, and in summer when you share the hills with butterflies, a skylark if you’re lucky, and the dedicated hikers doing the “end to end”. Now the days are shorter, but the gold and amber of autumn brings a mellowness to a late-afternoon amble and the holly bushes are already dotted with berries. The Malverns may not be as expansive as the Brecon Beacons or as tickable as Snowdon, but they deliver everything you need from a hill walk: a sense of achievement and a higher perspective on whatever ails you. Evendine spring flows all year round and I always make sure to stop by before setting off up the hills; there’s a fundamental pleasure in drinking water straight from the ground, as if tapping into some ancient knowledge. Local lore claims that it started with Saint Oswald, a 10th-century archbishop of York, who knew of Malvern water’s healing properties and revealed this to a hermit who lived in the hills. Centuries later, in the 1920s, Alfred Watkins, the Herefordshire antiquarian who theorised the idea of leylines, claimed to have discovered a line that connected a number of wells along the Malvern Hills. True or not, a reverence for the waters remains. On my last visit, its merits were being discussed with the language and veneration usually reserved for fine wines or craft beer. “Hard … but also kind of sweet,” mused one of the jerry canners, who makes regular visits from Bristol. Another theorised that its flavour comes from the limestone that Evendine runs through, the only Malvern spring to do so. “I won’t drink anything else,” he said. “There’s something magic about it. I don’t know what, but it does you the power of good.” I fill my bottle and start walking up to the ridge. I think he might be on to something. • This article was amended on 3 December 2021. Saint Oswald was archbishop of York in the 10th century, not the first century as a previous version said.The number of people crossing the Channel has increased to 25,776 in 2021, up from 8,461 in 2020, according to Home Office figures. Those who want to cross gather at camps that have sprung up between Calais and Dunkirk. The police routinely destroy the makeshift camps and their occupants are dispersed to holding centres across the country, though many soon return to the coast in northern France. After a previous camp was destroyed by French authorities last week, a new one sprang up on disused railway tracks near to Grand-Synthe, a suburb of Dunkirk. A man tries to keep warm. Heating at the site was provided only by open fires on nights where the temperature regularly dropped below zero degrees. Two men carry logs back to their camp to build a shelter where they intend to sell cooked food A candlelit vigil is held at Parc Richelieu, Calais on Thursday evening to remember the people who lost their lives when their dinghy capsized while trying to reach the UK People charge mobile phones with equipment provided by Care4Calais, a charity which helps with food, hot drinks, power and charging stations, games and a grooming station Soap and mug on the floor at a migrant camp near Grande-Synthe, Dunkirk. The camp was used by several hundred people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, hoping to travel illegally to the UK. Mahan, 2, with his mother, Gwan, 28, from Sulaymaniyah, Kurdish Iraq, at a camp near Loon-Plage and Grande-Synthe Sands blow across the beach at Plage du Braek. Few, if any, crossings were attempted in the days after the disaster due to the worsening weather conditions Protesters demonstrate near Calais town hall after a meeting between Gérald Darmanin, the minister of the interior, and other EU ministers People wait by the roadside near Loon-Plage. Many of those trying to make the dangerous sea crossing have friends or family in Britain who will help with the £2,000 to £3,000 fee paid to people smugglers An occupant returns to their tent at a camp near the Auchan supermarket, near Grand-Synthe. People had only been camping in the canal-side area for a couple of weeks, after a larger and better-equipped location was demolished on the orders of the French interior minister, Gerald Darmanin A man cooks a meal of fried fish on an open fire laid out on disused rail tracks. Migrants occupy a handful of smaller camps around Calais and Dunkirk, often dominated by particular nationalities An abandoned dinghy on Plage du Braek People carry supplies and their possessions at a camp near Loon-Plage. The basic site had no toilets or running water A child’s toy car is left outside a tent. An informal camp, known as the Jungle, was demolished and shut down by the French authorities in 2016 Mala Rachman, who was living in a camp in Dunkirk, becomes upset after hearing the news of someone who died in the Channel crossing. Sarah Ali shelters with her 1-year-old son Maleek, from Sulaymaniyah in Kurdish Iraq Men shave and cut hair with equipment provided by the charity Care4Calais A shoe is left in the sands of Plage du Braek, near Loon-Plage A man prepares a drink while camped beside railway tracks near Loon-Plage. Charity workers say the camps are subject to regular raids by French police, with tents slashed or taken away, as well as being closed down when they are deemed to have become too large Migrants numbers near Dunkirk had more than doubled from an estimated 400 to more than 1,000 – the total swelled by Belarus’s decision to open its borders to migrants from Iraq Volunteers make hot drinks for people at a camp in Dunkirk People walk by the roadside near Loon-Plage. No refugee centre has existed in northern France since the UK and France reached an agreement that involved the closure of Sangatte camp in 2002 The beach at Loon-PlageWe are being pursued by Thames Water over a £1,000 bill which it alleges has accrued in six months. We suspect its recently installed smart meter is at fault, but three recorded-delivery letters and 10 phone calls later, I’ve been unable to get sensible answers. It began with a letter warning us that we were consuming 328 litres an hour, which would cost £5,970 a year. In the 10 years my family of three has lived in the house, annual bills have been about £400. Thames Water agreed to send an inspector who was unable to find a leak inside the property, but who nonetheless left a card stating that the meter indicated a leak. I hired a leak specialist through Thames Water’s list of recommended plumbers, who concluded there was no leak and questioned whether the meter was to blame. I sent this to Thames Water, but a bill for £1,016 was the only response. Customer services said the meter would be investigated. Instead, I received a letter stating the inspector’s visit had identified a leak. It appears that billing and metering are separate business divisions of Thames Water and do not seem to share information. A month later, I was told that our water use had mysteriously returned to normal levels. It was agreed that the meter would be changed. The technician discovered that it was producing inflated readings and that it had been incorrectly installed. However, Thames Water continued to blame a leak for our huge bill. Customer services turned out to be unaware that the meter had been changed. JB, London Your plight remains a mystery. Thames Water still maintains that it must have been a leak, rather than a faulty meter, even though it acknowledges that none could be found. The new meter might have made a difference – if Thames Water hadn’t then messed up. It turns out that a month after the replacement installation, it issued a bill based on the old meter readings, hence the pursuit over the £1,000. Whether it would have got around to noticing the mistake if I hadn’t waded in is anyone’s guess. “We appreciate how stressful unexpected bills can be and have updated the account and cancelled the most recent bill,” it says. “We’ll take updated readings to issue a new bill, as well as applying a leak allowance and a one-off payment as a gesture of goodwill to apologise.” Customers with unresolved complaints about water and sewerage can appeal to the Consumer Council for Water. In Scotland redress is offered by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsPenny Lane, who has directed a new music documentary centered on Kenny G, has no interest in music documentaries and would never voluntarily listen to a Kenny G record. “Biographical documentaries on musicians never appealed to me,” she said to the Guardian. “And I tend to like music that’s challenging or dark or conflicted. Kenny G’s music is none of those things.” Music critics overwhelmingly agree. So while Kenny G’s music may have made tens of millions of fans swoon over the last four decades, making him the bestselling instrumental artist of all time, critical reactions have toggled between a yawn and a sneer. That disparity intrigued Lane, who is known for creating highly unconventional documentaries like Nuts!, which retold the true story a doctor who tried to cure impotence with a goat testicle implant, and Hail Satan?, which dared challenge conventional views of devil-worshippers. Lane’s reputation for taking a creative approach to her subjects brought her to the attention of producer Bill Simmons as he was creating a new series of music documentaries for HBO. Simmons asked Lane to brainstorm one of her own and so, as she said, “I tried to think of a subject that would allow me to deal with this conflict in taste between the intelligentsia and the masses. From there, it was easy to get to Kenny G.” However improbable it seems, it was just as easy to get the musician to play along for the documentary, which has been titled Listening to Kenny G. “I loved the idea because it wasn’t just going to be a fluff piece about how wonderful I am,” Kenny G told the Guardian. “I wasn’t scared of what would be brought up in the film because I’ve lived with it since the 80s. Criticism didn’t affect me then and it doesn’t affect me now.” Yet, the way Lane’s film frames those criticisms affects a great number of subjects beyond Kenny G, including the relationship between music and identity, the contrast between mass taste and critical standards, the radically altered role of cultural gatekeepers in the age of social media and the nature of individuality itself. One of the issues that first drew Lane to the story is the unparalleled depth of identification that music inspires. “What’s interesting about music, as opposed to other art forms, is how tied it is to our personal and social identity,” Lane said. “You might really love a Toni Morrison novel or a movie by Steven Spielberg but there’s no one whose entire identity is built around announcing that – not in the way it would if you really love the Grateful Dead.” Because of the depth of that identification, criticisms of those who perform the music can feel like a personal attack on the listener. “People are very territorial about music,” Kenny G said. “If someone says, ‘I don’t like Elton John and you love him, you might think, ‘Well then, I don’t like you any more.’” Of course, those who make a living giving their opinions, as well as those who put their music out there to be enjoyed or judged, have to develop a thicker skin about such things. That sporting attitude is on joyful display in Lane’s film. The film gives nearly equal camera-time to music critics and the star, though the director said her original plan was to use far less of the latter. “Before I met him, I didn’t think about Kenny as a person,” she said. “I thought of him as a container for this idea I had. But he’s so charismatic on camera and so weird that the film expanded to make space for that.” First, however, the film concentrates on the most common criticisms, including the writers’ flinching reaction to what they see as the placidity of the music. “I’m sure I heard a lot of Kenny G while waiting for something – at a dentist’s office, or in a bank,” writer Ben Ratliff says in the film. “I associate his music with a corporate attempt to soothe my nerves and I didn’t like that. I’m being treated like an ant.” “I can’t be responsible for where my music is played or how somebody interprets it,” Kenny G said. “If he’s mad at me because he thinks my music is aimed at him while standing in line at the bank, he’s pointing the finger at the wrong guy. I play the music that’s from my heart. If the bank decides that this is nice music they want to play for their customers, that’s up to them.” Another common carp concerns the music’s lack of texture, which has resulted in it often being labelled “smooth jazz”. The term refers to an entire radio format, though Kenny G denies his placement in that world had a commercial origin. “When I was starting out there were no radio stations that would play this kind of music,” he said. “I was creating a style that had no home. That, in itself, is proof that it wasn’t targeted.” The mere fact that the word “jazz” appeared at all in that format, however, has caused confusion and controversy in the critical world. Most of the writers featured in the film identify as jazz aficionados and none see Kenny G’s music as worthy of the genre. In the film, critic Will Layman says of this music: “It’s sort of related to jazz but it isn’t jazz.” Noting the fact that the musicians in Kenny G’s band tend to support his solos rather than contribute their own, Layman said, “there’s no call and response, no dialogue among the musicians. This is not sex. This is masturbation.” Kenny G himself doesn’t label his music as jazz per se. To Lane, such genre arguments aren’t even relevant any more because the way we access music has changed so radically. “In a world of record stores, we had to put albums in a section, and you, as a person, had to ask yourself, ‘Am I the kind of person who goes to the pop section or to the jazz section?’” she said. “That’s not how it works any more.” Rather than thinking about genre, Lane thinks instead about the use of Kenny G’s music and what that says about its status as art. “This music is exceptionally useful for a lot of things,” she said. “It’s music for meditating or seducing somebody or getting someone out of a mall or calming them down in an elevator. Coming from the fine arts tradition, usefulness is not one of the criteria that we think of when we consider what makes art great. That turns it into craft.” In another light, his music can be viewed as a sport. The first way Kenny G got attention, before he was even signed to a label, was for a trick in his show where he would hold a note for a superhuman stretch of time. “That’s an athletic feat,” said Lane. “There’s no musical idea there.” On the other hand, Lane believes a few core ideas do inform Kenny G’s music and that understanding them is key to judging it fairly. “He wants it to be beautiful and he’s got this idea of what makes it beautiful,” she said. “Then he wants it to be technically perfect and he wants it to make him and others feel good and relaxed, like leaning back in a chair. That’s the intent and that explains the music.” But the intent others have found for his music can lead to some fascinating theories. In China, Kenny G’s song Going Home, has become the unofficial anthem for the end of the work day. Pondering that notion in the context of the communist regime’s relationship with its people, Ben Ratliff poses the question in the film: “Is Kenny G’s music a weapon of consent? Does it make people agree to comply?” “I laughed when I heard that,” the musician said. “It’s a clever way of looking at something. But here’s the thing: can all those millions of people be that wrong and that dumb? That they’re so coerced that they’ll just support any piece of crap because it’s forced down their throat? Or maybe, just maybe, the melodies I play and the way I play them is touching people and hitting a place that hasn’t been hit before.” Lane agrees that “there are people who love this music and relate to it in a very deep and personal way,” At the same time, she said, “it’s a different question as to what makes something quality work or valuable or great. It may seem like it’s all subjective opinion but these things mean something. My takeaway is not, ‘It’s all the same – Kenny G or Bach, what’s the difference?’ That’s absurd.” Lane acknowledges, however, that such views have become increasingly common. In the current world of legacy media, relativism rules, and few pop critics dare to actually criticize any more, especially when it comes to major artists. That’s the direct opposite of the blood sport that defined pop culture writing in earlier eras, including the ones that the writers in the film date from. “We have swung so far in the other direction,” Lane said. “It’s just, ‘let people enjoy things!’ Well, no! There are critiques worth exploring.” The current push against that view reflects more than just changes in the media. It also mirrors a protest by younger generations against any previously recognized hierarchies. “Everyone in the world now has a little soap box if they want one,” said Lane. “In that world, the value of old-fashioned gatekeeping would be seen as suspect.” This, despite the fact that such attitudes ignore who really holds the power in the world of pop culture. The influence of millions of fans and the impact of major artists overwhelmingly drowns out the voice of any critic, even if they all pile on at once, as they have with Kenny G. “Critics aren’t deciding who gets signed to a record label,” Lane said. “They’re not really deciding much of anything in terms of big power decisions.” Yet, within their circumscribed world, critics have a hold on the historical record. For that reason, and others, Lane wants her film to remind the foes of artists like Kenny G that “you’re not some kind of ultimate authority on this. It’s good to remember every once in a while that when you’re talking to somebody who loves a piece of music and you hate it to the point where you can’t believe that anybody could love it, in that moment you should ask yourself, ‘What am I missing that’s resonating so deeply with them?’ To me, that’s a lot more fun and interesting than to just to try to tell someone, ‘you’re wrong.’” Listening to Kenny G is available on HBO from 2 December with a UK date to be announcedFor people like me, sitting here quaintly typing into a Word document for some half-forgotten old thing called a newspaper, it’s easy to be dismissive of influencers. But, as I’ve learned from Olivia Yallop’s book, not only is that limiting my understanding of where we are as a society (and where we’re heading), my ignorance is partly the fault of the very industry in which I work. “Journalists and publications are very reluctant to promote the influencer industry,” complains one of Yallop’s interviewees, a makeup and style Instagrammer. “If you scroll down the Daily Mail’s sidebar of shame … it’s like influencers don’t exist,” she says. “This silence around influencers – the same silence that may have you wondering why you’ve never heard of many of those mentioned in this book, despite their millions of followers – speaks volumes,” writes Yallop. Indeed, this is a book packed with unfamiliar names and dizzying numbers. “Top kidfluencers include brothers Vlad and Nikita, aged six and four, whose shared YouTube channel has brought in an estimated $64 million.” YouTuber PewDiePie “has 106 million followers and is estimated to earn around $8 million per month”. And how about this: “In 2018, financial analysts shook their heads in disbelief as Kardashian sister Kylie Jenner wiped $1.3bn (£1bn) off Snapchat’s market value in a single day after tweeting, ‘Sooo does anyone else not open Snapchat anymore?’”. Yallop contextualises these ludicrous stats with an engaging analysis of online culture that also takes in world-changing events from the Capitol insurrection to the pandemic. After starting out in traditional advertising, Yallop jumped ship for a job in digital marketing when her agency started to lose out to social media. And who better to guide us through this bizarre and chaotic online world than an industry insider? She takes us to a VIP influencer party with a “million follower” policy. In an attempt to become an influencer herself, she tries out an influencer bootcamp and, in one particularly fascinating chapter, goes undercover to a meet-up for a “snarkers” session: a group of Redditors dedicated to hating on an influencer who was cast as a fraud in a viral posting. But Break the Internet is more than just a series of gonzo dispatches. It addresses the decline of traditional media, the philosophy of fame, the wild excess and inequality of late capitalism. “Shrinking newspaper circulations, rising scepticism towards experts, financial precarity, millennial burnout, and a shift towards viewing corporations, rather than governments, as responsible for solving social problems are all trends that have propelled – and in some cases been propelled by – the rise of influencing,” writes Yallop. This is a book that looks deeply at the commodification of the self, and the increasingly blurred line between leisure and labour. We often hear about influencers making six figures, but beneath that is an underclass, barely scraping by at the mercy of mysterious and fickle algorithms. “No labour movement will ever combat the inherent asymmetry of the influencer-platform set-up,” Yallop tells us. “Influencers are trapped in a permanent state of precarious codependency with their hosts: they don’t own their audience but merely rent it off a platform.” Behind our small screens is an unimaginable vastness, which Break the Internet manages to shape into something understandable, even to the influencer-ignorant such as me. It’s wryly funny in places, but there’s a kind of sadness to Yallop’s writing. The sadness, maybe, of someone too smart and thoughtful to be working in a space that is – all too often – utterly without meaning. • Break the Internet: In Pursuit of Influence by Olivia Yallop is published by Scribe UK (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.With that, we’ll wrap things up for the evening. Stay dry, wherever you are. Here were today’s major developments: Christian Porter has announced his retirement at the next election via a lengthy Facebook post. He has informed the prime minister of his decision. There has been significant flooding across Queensland south with an emergency declared for Inglewood and residents told to evacuate on Tuesday night. The state has recorded its second death linked to the flooding. Victoria recorded 1,179 new Covid cases and six further deaths, while NSW recorded 251 cases including a sixth case of Omicron. Queensland has recorded one new case this evening. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg says “cool heads” must prevail in regards to the new Covid strain. The marathon debate on Victoria’s pandemic bill is finally over and will return to the lower house to be debated once more. Everyone is very tired. An Indigenous woman has died in custody while being treated at a hospital in Melbourne’s west. And government MPs crossed the floor to vote for Craig Kelly’s vaccine mandate motion following a speech littered with inaccuracies about vaccination. Also in the Senate: Charities have welcomed the passing of the Autonomous Sanctions Amendment Bill through the Senate today, calling it a “positive step” in enabling Australia to respond to serious human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law. Save the Children head of policy and human rights lawyer, Simon Henderson: Australia needs a wide range of measures to be able deter and respond to violations against children in war. For too long, states, entities and individuals have been able to escape accountability for their involvement in some of the most heinous crimes imaginable against children. Save the Children is especially pleased to see the incorporation of an amendment that ensures that violations against children in war are adequately covered. The organisation has been calling for an amendment throughout the course of the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Inquiry. Save the Children appeared before the committee. Globally, grave violations against children in conflict – killing and maiming, recruitment, abduction, sexual violence and attacks on schools and hospitals – continue to increase. Just yesterday, Save the Children released a new report highlighting the increase of recruitment of children globally. This new Bill helps provide part of the answer as to what Australia can do to deter and respond to such violations of children’s rights.” In implementing the Act, it is important there is appropriate consultation with civil society and oversight mechanisms. Human Rights Watch’s Australia director Elaine Pearson on the targeted sanction amendments: “At long last, the Australian government has passed amendments to enable Magnitsky-style targeted sanctions for serious human rights abuses, serious violations of international humanitarian law, and activities undermining good governance and the rule of law, and serious corruption. This is a significant step to promote accountability for human rights in foreign policy, and we welcome the bipartisanship on this important issue. People who commit serious abuses or corruption with impunity should not be able to travel to Australia or hide their assets in Australian bank accounts. Targeted sanctions raise the cost of serious human rights violations. Australia is joining other democracies such as the US, UK, European Union, and Canada in adopting such measures and sending a message to abusive leaders everywhere that there are far-reaching consequences for their actions. The new human rights sanctions regime offers victims a chance to see a measure of justice for the harms they suffered. Now, it is up to the government to use these provisions without delay and sanction serious human rights abusers in a consistent, principled fashion.” The defence minister, Peter Dutton, says Australia’s like-minded partners across the region are “loud and clear” in their desire for ensuring continued peace and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific. Dutton has been active in recent weeks, making a range of public statements about the threat posed by China and attempting to paint Labor as weak on national security in the lead-up to next year’s election. But he will not directly name China in an address tomorrow to the Lowy Institute’s conference on the Indo-Pacific Operating System. The minister’s office has already distributed the transcript of his prerecorded speech, which will be played at 12.30pm tomorrow. He describes the regional trends as follows: “Today, our region – the Indo-Pacific – is of course far-more complex and far-less predictable than at any time since the Second World War. We are facing challenges including rapid military modernisation, tension over territorial claims, heightened economic coercion, undermining of international law, including the law of the sea, through to enhanced disinformation, foreign interference and cyber threats, enabled by new and emerging technologies. In the discussions I have with our like-minded friends in the region, the message comes through loud and clear: They share our interest in ensuring continued peace and prosperity. They want to see the Indo-Pacific Operating System characterised by order and stability.” (This language about the complex environment largely echoes last year’s defence strategic update.) Dutton says the Aukus deal with the US and the UK is about “more than submarines”, given that it also covers cyber, quantum and AI cooperation. He says it will “enable deeper practical cooperation in developing leading-edge military capabilities and technologies” - which will help to ensure Australia “remains a responsible and highly capable security partner in the Indo-Pacific region for decades to come”. But implicitly rejecting the criticism that some (including China) have made of Aukus as a retreat into the Anglosphere, Dutton says Aukus is just one example of a broader deepening of Australia’s partnerships with others in the region. He argues the strength and durability of some partnerships are “often underestimated and their development as defence security partnerships often overlooked”. He cites Australia’s relationship with Japan, saying their soon-to-be-finalised reciprocal access agreement will pave the way for joint exercises and disaster relief operations between the Japan Self-Defense Forces and the Australian Defence Force. Dutton says Australia wants to be seen across the Indo-Pacific region as a strong and reliable partner “that more than lifts its weight in securing peace in our region”. He says the Coalition has lifted defence spending to above 2% of GDP “because that’s what’s required to equip the Australian Defence Force with the kit it needs and to keep Australia safe and secure”. He says Australia is maintaining investment in its core military capabilities and continuing to develop new ones “to hold a potential adversary’s forces and infrastructure at risk from a greater distance, capabilities which send a clear deterrent message to any adversary that the cost they would incur in threatening our interests outweighs the benefits of so doing”. A Covid case has been detected on the Gold Coast. Queensland has recorded its second flood death in five days. Queensland Police has issued a statement about the death. The Forensic Crash Unit is investigating after a man died when his car became submerged in flood waters at Yalangur, near Toowoomba earlier today. About 8.20am, police and emergency services received a report of two utility vehicles that were both swept into a creek from Kelvinhaugh Yalangur Road. The driver and sole occupant of one of the vehicles managed to escape and is safe and well. Following an extensive response involving specialist police and emergency services, the driver and sole occupant of the other vehicle, a 73-year-old Roma man, was located deceased inside the ute. The NSW government has released a statement regarding the Industrial Relations Commission order earlier this week for the NSW Teachers Federation to stop strike action planned for Tuesday next week, and confirming the strike is likely to still go ahead. It says the order extends to any form of industrial action related to the federation’s current wage claims: I want to reassure you that we are doing all we can to ensure teaching and learning continues without disruption – especially given the difficulties and challenges students, parents and families have experienced during the course of this year. The current teachers’ award expires on 31 December 2021 and the department has been negotiating a new award with the Teachers Federation, with the assistance of the Commission. We have been unable to reach agreement on a final Award and the matter will be arbitrated by a Full Bench of the Commission, scheduled for May 2022. It says the department has made an application for an interim award to deliver a 2.5% salary increase for teachers and related employees as soon as the award expires. This is the maximum amount allowed per annum under the Industrial Relations Act. It would be effective from the first full pay period on or after 1 January 2022, ensuring our teachers and related employees don’t miss out. The department is strongly encouraging the Federation and its members to comply with the Commission’s orders. But we are also working to make sure our students and their families are supported should industrial action proceed. We will keep you updated as developments come to hand, both on our website and social channels. Principals will also be in contact about plans for your local school. Thanks as always to the splendidly switched on Amy Remeikis for guiding us through this afternoon’s turbulent news. I’ll be with you for the rest of the evening. And that is pretty much the second-last sitting day done and dusted. Cait Cassidy will take you through the evening like the absolute trooper she is, and make sure you check back on the site for what the Guardian’s Canberra team are working on to keep you informed tonight and into tomorrow morning (as well as the rest of the Guardian brains trust who have been beavering away on all the non-federal political news). You’ll have the wonderful Tory Shepherd with you early tomorrow morning, but I will still be around and I’ll catch you in the afternoon. And as always, Mike Bowers will be with you. We have almost made it – just one more day to go and then the parliament rises until at least February – unless an election is called before that. Greg Hunt is expected to make his retirement announcement official tomorrow, and we’ll be keeping an eye out on whether there are any more little surprises (the last sitting day of the year tends to be the day for those kinda things). There is also any clean up which has to be done – so keep an eye on last minute scrambles and deals as the government tries to put a full stop of the year. We’ll carry you all through it and beyond as it all unfolds. A very, very big and grateful thank you to everyone who came along with us today. We truly appreciate it – and mean it – when we say thank you. Your comments, messages and support get us all through. For all those going through a bit of a rough time, or struggling with some of the news, we see you too – and we hope you know you matter. We’ll be back tomorrow – until then, as always – please, take care of you. Update on that previous post: The government’s new sanctions legislation has just passed the Senate (after the Greens’ amendment failed). The Greens are trying to amend the government’s new sanctions legislation to require the minister to consider imposing sanctions on Myanmar military figures and others involved in the 2021 coup. Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, says she agrees “there is a case for additional targeted sanctions against those responsible” for the coup and the violence in Myanmar – but Labor won’t support this amendment, as it goes to the relationship between the parliament and the executive. Wong says Labor may not agree with government decisions on particular sanctions “but we do think in our system that the government of the day has to make that decision considering all of the information available to government”. The Greens senator Janet Rice defends her amendments: “This does not take away the power of the minister to be making that decision … It lays out a transparent pathway.” The amendments would require the foreign minister to prepare, within 30 days, a statement on whether or not sanctions will be imposed in relation to those responsible for the 2021 coup in Myanmar. More generally, under the Greens’ proposal, the minister would be required to make a statement to parliament on whether or not they agree with proposed sanctions against individuals proposed by a resolution of either house of parliament. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, tells the Senate that decisions are already subject to parliamentary scrutiny: “Senator Wong has made some salient points particularly in relation to the role of the executive.” The Greens’ amendment will fail, given that the Coalition and Labor are not supporting it. Payne says: The clear and plain fact that from time to time governments will need to exercise judgment in relation to these matters based on all of the information that is available to them … which is obviously a very serious and considered decision to be taken by government.” Payne says she shares the frustrations of a number of Asean members about the situation in Myanmar. Of the 105 comments on Christian Porter’s Facebook resignation post only 10 are visible. He has limited who is able to post on his content. Tony Burke is pretty happy with the screen producer offset win: Jobs have been saved and small businesses have been spared from a Morrison government tax increase because of a successful Labor amendment supported by the crossbench. Labor has always supported an increase to the screen producer offset to support the creation of more Australian TV content. But the government’s bill as it was originally drafted would also have doubled eligibility thresholds for many smaller firms – a tax hike that would have put those businesses and the jobs they create at risk. Labor on Wednesday moved amendments in the Senate to strike out this part of the bill. Those amendments passed. Minister Paul Fletcher then attempted to bully Labor into abandoning the amendments before the bill came back to the House of Representatives. But mere hours later the Government was forced into a humiliating backdown. The government has now adopted Labor’s changes because it knew it did not have the numbers in the lower house. The Morrison government abandoned the arts and entertainment sector during the Covid-19 pandemic. With their original bill they showed they were incapable of supporting one part of the arts sector without smashing another part. Labor’s sensible and responsible amendment has saved jobs and businesses. NSW Health has confirmed the sixth case of the Omicron Covid variant in the state: NSW Health can officially confirm a sixth traveller has been infected with the Omicron Covid-19 variant of concern. The fully vaccinated traveller, who recently visited southern Africa, arrived on flight QR908 from Doha to Sydney on 25 November and tested positive to COVID-19 yesterday. They are isolating in Sydney. Everyone on the flight has already been deemed a close contact and has been instructed to get tested immediately for COVID-19 and isolate for 14 days, regardless of their vaccination status. NSW Health is contacting all passengers and flight crew to advise them of their isolation requirements. They can also call NSW Health on 1800 943 553 for further advice. At this point in the investigation, NSW Health is aware of at least six people on this flight who had been in southern Africa in the previous 14 days. There is currently no evidence that transmission occurred on the flight. However, investigations into the five COVID-19 positive passengers on the flight, which includes two confirmed cases with the Omicron variant, are ongoing. NSW Health advises the following venue was visited by the sixth Omicron case. Liverpool Chemist Warehouse, The Grove Units 3 - 6, 18 Orange Grove Road Monday 29 November 8:10pm – 8:15pm Anyone who attended the venue at the times listed is a casual contact who must immediately get tested and isolate until a negative result is received. You should continue to monitor for symptoms and if any symptoms occur, get tested again. Josh Frydenberg was speaking with Sydney radio 2GB when Christian Porter’s retirement announcement came through: “He’s a valued colleague and friend, and has done a lot of good work in this place,” he said. The Senate is debating a bill to give the government the powers to impose international sanctions for a wider range of conduct, including malicious cyber activity and serious human rights abuses. See our story from August. Interestingly, the government is backing some amendments moved by Labor and the Greens. It is expected to pass today. The government introduced the Autonomous Sanctions Amendment (Thematic Sanctions) Bill 2021 in response to cross-party calls for Magnitsky-style laws to slap travel bans and bank account freezes on people over human rights abuses and serious corruption. Rather than proposing a standalone Magnitsky sanctions law, the government opted to amend existing sanctions legislation to add “thematic sanctions”. These measures “may address the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; threats to international peace and security; malicious cyber activity; serious violations or serious abuses of human rights; and activities undermining good governance or the rule of law, including serious corruption”. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, said it was a “significant reform” that would allow Australia to “define, defend and demonstrate” its values. Labor’s Penny Wong moved to amend the bill to also add serious violations of international humanitarian law. She also sought to change the title of the legislation to include Magnitsky-style and other thematic sanctions. Payne replied: “The government supports both these amendments.” The government is also backing the Greens’ amendment to require a review of these powers after three years. Labor, the Greens and the crossbench in the Senate have had a win – amending a Treasury Laws Amendment to include support for Australian screen content (for smaller producers) – something the government was against just a few hours ago, based on this statement from Paul Fletcher (as Tony Burke has just pointed out in the house): Labor moved the amendments, got the support, and the Senate amended the bill. It went back to the house, where the government was unsure of whether or not it had the numbers to fight the amendments – so it is agreeing to them to avoid a vote loss on the floor. So a victory for a long campaign Burke has been waging there, as well as Greens MPs, including Sarah Hanson-Young – and smaller Australian content makers will receive the benefits. Jim Chalmers was asked on the ABC about the SMH report that Labor was dropping its fuel standard policy: First of all, we said about a range of policies, not just in this area, that obviously a political party doesn’t take exactly the same agenda to one election that they took to the last election. We’ve said it right across the board, including in my portfolio. We’ll announce a comprehensive plan to get our emissions down, but to get our energy costs down, to get the cleaner and cheaper energy, so we can grab more of the jobs and investment and opportunity that come from the right approach to climate change. ... Look, we’ll [have] a comprehensive plan for climate change and all the policies which are necessary and we will make that clear in the coming weeks. It will be led by Anthony Albanese and Chris Bowen and the shadow cabinet and I’ll make my contribution there. We’ll strike the right level of ambition that grabs the opportunities and investment that have gone begging. We believe in doing something meaningful here. We think we can do something which shows good climate policy is good economic policy. There will be different components of that plan. It won’t just be like the pamphlet the prime minister handed down a couple of weeks ago. Five refugees and asylum seekers have been released from detention in the Park hotel in Melbourne, some after more than eight years in detention and held by Australia offshore. Five men, from Iran, Sri Lanka and Sudan, have been released, leaving 41 still in the hotel. The vast majority of those still detained in the Park hotel – commandeered as an “alternative place of detention” by the federal government – were brought to Australia in 2019 from offshore processing islands under the short-lived medevac laws. They were brought to Australia because doctors judged they required urgent medical attention for serious conditions. Most have not received the medical care they require. The Park hotel was the site of a Covid outbreak in October and November. At one stage almost half of the people detained there tested positive for Covid. At least one was taken to hospital by ambulance. Before it was a detention centre, and under its former name, Rydges, the hotel was used for hotel quarantine and was the epicentre of Victoria’s second Covid wave. A government inquiry found, “around 90 per cent of Covid-19 cases in Victoria since late May 2020 were attributable to the outbreak at Rydges”. And here is the link to the official statement Christian Porter has just made. Christian Porter has just put up this statement on his Facebook page: A message to the people of my electorate In 2013, you entrusted me to represent you in our nation’s Parliament. Between 2008 and 2013 I also had the honour of serving in the Parliament of Western Australia and before that I started in public service as a Crown Prosecutor at the Western Australian Department of Public Prosecutions (DPP) in 2002. Since joining the DPP 20 years ago, with a few short breaks, I have spent the best part of the last 20 years in public service. This week however, I made the decision that I will not recontest the seat of Pearce at the next Federal Election and I have informed the Prime Minister of that decision. It was at the DPP 20 years ago that I learned the great value in public service, of committing yourself to work that you believe in and that you believe is important. Some people spend long political careers working incredibly hard but nevertheless remaining distant from the great responsibility and honour of being in a ministry or representing their Nation in its Cabinet. In the years since 2008 I have been deeply fortunate to spend 11 years in ministries and only a few months in opposition. It has been a remarkable privilege to have been a State Attorney General and State Treasurer in Western Australia and to have been the Commonwealth Minister for Social Services, Industry, Science and Technology and serve as Commonwealth Attorney General and Industrial Relations Minister and Leader of the House of Representatives. Looking back at my time as a Minister the trust that was placed in me by Premier Colin Barnett and Prime Minister Scott Morrison, meant that for much of my time in Cabinet I was entrusted with multiple senior portfolios at once. That was a challenge that I always gave everything to and when working for the Australian public in these roles I never left anything in the tank. When you are an obsessive compulsive type and entrusted with work that you believe in and that you believe is deeply important, the by-product becomes that people in your life that deserve more from you, especially your family, get much less than they deserve. My little boy was born one day before I first became a Commonwealth Minister. He and his little sister have never known anything but their father’s regular absence and so the next part of my working life will be anchored around being close to them and being there for them. There are few, if any, constants left in modern politics. Perhaps the only certainty now is that there appears to be no limit to what some will say or allege or do to gain an advantage over a perceived enemy. This makes the harshness that can accompany the privilege of representing people, harder than ever before. But even though I have experienced perhaps more of the harshness of modern politics than most, there are no regrets. It has been the experience of a lifetime to work with great teams of men and women to drive change and to govern during remarkable times, including the most demanding time for Government since WWII. I feel that not a moment of the last 14 years was wasted and I am thankful for the opportunity and friendship provided by my Parliamentary colleagues and the men and women of the Liberal Party. I am forever grateful for the support of my family, friends and the dedication of staff (some who started with me 20 years ago). Ultimately, it has always started and finished with the people of my electorate. I started with the promise to fix the GST for the people of my electorate and while it took years I was part of the small group in Federal Cabinet that made it happen for WA. Since 2013 I have been dedicated to securing critical funding for projects that had been long neglected and would improve the lives of people in our local community. This included hundreds of millions of dollars to extend and widen the Mitchell Freeway, over a billion dollars to fund the Yanchep and Ellenbrook rail lines, completion of the $1 billion Northlink project (WA’s biggest ever road project), the Beverley Cornerstone project, the Northam Aquatic Centre and the Toodyay Sport and Recreation Precinct just to name a few. Before each election I have always asked myself whether I could absolutely guarantee another three years of total commitment to the electorate because people deserve that commitment, free of any reservations. After a long time giving everything I could to the people of Pearce it’s now time to give more of what is left to those around me whose love has been unconditional. The Federal Liberal Party have done great things for the electorate of Pearce and I know a new Liberal candidate can continue the trusted record of serving the needs of the electorate under a re-elected Coalition Government. The Hon Christian Porter MP Federal Member for Pearce 1 December 2021 Back to Amanda Stoker, and we are getting a new straw man argument for the government’s voter ID laws; just because there are not a lot prosecutions, doesn’t mean there isn’t a problem, is what Stoker is arguing on the (yet to be proven or explained) need to show ID before voting. Then she cites a joke as proof: You hear the old Labor slogan ‘vote early and vote often’ and references to the symmetry turning out to vote. Just because that couldn’t be documented because it’s very hard to run investigations against people who are in the cemetery, then it doesn’t necessarily mean there isn’t a problem to deal with here. The accusations that [it amounts] to voter suppression are really I think something of, something of a misleading line in the sense that there is such a long list of ways available to identify yourself, that it couldn’t possibly do anything but empower people to vote. And to suggest, particularly the suggestion it operates in a racially biased way I find particularly galling. It is fair minded and anyone who’s serious about the integrity of Australian elections should have no problem with this bill. But that said, we do what we need to do to get stuff done. ...The fact there hasn’t been prosecutions doesn’t mean there isn’t a problem. All it means is that the problem that we are trying to deal with is one that isn’t being captured by the things we currently measure. But ultimately let’s go back to the essence of it here. All Australians have some form of ID. The list of ways you can identify yourself is extraordinarily long. And in circumstances where there is no exclusion of any Australian as a consequence of the requirement to show ID, then having better accountability around double voting or people who have since passed voting is something that is in everyone’s interest, particularly when seats can often turn by double digits. Over in the senate Larissa Waters is giving notice that she will be moving this motion: I give notice that on the next day of sitting, I shall move—That: a) the Minister representing the Prime Minister attend the Senate at 12pm on the first sitting day of 2022 to provide an explanation of the Government’s response to the Australian Human Rights Commission report, Set the Standard: Report on the Independent Review into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces, including implementation of the recommendations in the report; and b) any senator may move to take note of the explanation required by paragraph (a); and c) any motion under paragraph (b) may be debated for no more than 60 minutes, and senators may speak to the motion for no more than 10 minutes each. The minister assisting the attorney general, Queensland senator Amanda Stoker has been asked on the ABC whether the government will be adopting all 28 recommendations in the Kate Jenkins report (as Jenkins wants). The short version is – TBA. It’s something that the government is very seriously considering. We haven’t rushed our response to it because it is serious and sobering reading that we want to work collaboratively with those across the aisle on. So we are giving that the serious consideration it deserves because I think everybody accepts that what is in her report is of great concern and in some respects it was expected after some of the matters that have come out of Parliament House over the course of the last year, that is nothing but impetus for action. Here is how that Craig Kelly motion played out, as caught by Mike Bowers: The Australia Institute is not happy with the reported deal having been done on the political campaigner deal (which Paul Karp reported on just before QT). The reported deal between the Government and the Opposition to pass the political campaigner bill with amendments is a terrible democratic outcome,” said Ben Oquist, executive director of the Australia Institute. In a bad day for Australian democracy, this deal to pass legislation will only serve to strangle charities with red tape. This legislation represents a huge attack on charities, a sector that makes a $129 billion per year contribution to the economy, including the direct employment of over 800,000 people. It was a bad process, and a bad outcome. There has been no notice, little public explanation, no sector consultation, and now a bill set to be rammed through the Senate with a guillotine. Today we are seeing the biggest attack on the Australian charity sector the public has never heard of. This outcome means the legislation will have faced no Senate inquiry. The irony of legislation that is supposedly aimed at increasing transparency, having no transparency itself seems to have been completely lost on the Government and Opposition. This change represents an attack on charities, our democracy and the right to advocate for positive change.” The government has named foreign policy analyst and writer Peter Cai as the new chief executive of the National Foundation for Australia-China Relations. This is quite the assignment, given the fact the relationship between Australia and China is at its lowest point in years. As the release issued by the foreign minister, Marise Payne, explains: “The Foundation brings together state, territory and local governments, business, education institutes, community and cultural sectors, and Chinese Australian communities to further build and strengthen Australia’s engagement with China. The Foundation is an important demonstration of the Government’s commitment to invest in people-to-people ties and practical cooperation between Australia and China.” Payne says Cai “has extensive experience in business, media, academia and government, including as Group Chief Advisor and General Manager for strategic relations at Virgin Australia, Research Fellow at the Lowy Institute for International Policy, as a journalist with The Australian, The Age and Sydney Morning Herald and at the Australian Treasury Foreign Investment Review Board Secretariat”. He has also served as a committee member of the Australia-China Business Council (NSW). Cai replaces Michaela Browning, whom Payne thanked “for her leadership of the Foundation during its establishment phase since early 2020”. OK, Amy Remeikis back with you – just after question time, Craig Kelly tried to move a motion to end vaccine mandates. He was able to give his speech, without anyone shutting it down – that seems part of a strategy to a) not make him a martyr and give more attention to anti-vaxxer causes and b) because some members of the government don’t want to scare too many of those voters completely out of the “tent”. So the motion was held and at least two government MPs crossed the floor to vote with Kelly: George Christensen and Llew O’Brien. We assume both of them will be dragged into the prime minister’s office for a friendly but frank discussion anytime now. Thank you to Tory for that – she will be back with you tomorrow as well. Now, as we unwind a little, here’s some of Mike Bower’s magic from question time. Thanks again, and now it’s back to Amy Remeikis! See you all tomorrow. Another one from Labor’s Bill Shorten: Single mum Sarah, who lives in Perth, has said publicly that a shock $70,000 cut to (her) 11-year-old autistic son Jonah’s NDIS plan means she will not only not be able to support a support worker once a week, she will probably have to quit her job to care for him. Why did the Morrison government cut Jonah’s plan? And Liberal minister Stuart Robert again: I will speak to the member to get the details in full confidentiality of the participant in question and will chase it up and have a look. The law has a requirement for a plan to be reviewed and updated as required. It is important for the House to understand the Morrison government over the last 12 months have put in $70n extra into the NDIS. It could be the largest estimate variation of any program of any government in our nation’s history. That gives an indication ... of the commitment of the entire House to the scheme. (Back and forth about whether the minister should know about this specific case). Robert again: The beauty of the NDIS is the scheme started in a bipartisan way and has continued. To everyone’s credit. The parliament should be proud of what we have achieved together with NDIS. It is an extraordinary world first, and a scheme no other country in the world has tried to put together, and the timeframe and in the way that collectively we have done it, over 470,000 participants, with permanent and significant disability, a social insurance scheme that every Australian can rely on, a scheme that enjoys the support of everyone in the House. A scheme whereby Australians find themselves in difficulty, they know there is a social insurance policy there to assist them. The issues of this particular case will certainly be looked into by the minister and the department because with over 470,000 Australians being cared for ... there are always opportunities to improve and to look at particular matters. The Morrison government is behind the NDIS and built the NDIS, the Morrison government finalised agreements with the states and continues to work cooperatively and collaboratively towards. This world first is something we should all collectively be proud of. Former Labor leader Bill Shorten is up now, asking prime minister Scott Morrison about NDIS funding and a specific case of a boy with Batten’s disease: Harper’s five years old. He has been diagnosed with Batten’s disease. Batten’s disease is a degenerative neurological condition that gives children living with (it) an average life expectancy from seven to 10 years. Harper had been funded for 24/7 home care under the NDIS but his funding was cut in half to only allow for three overnight care visits a week. Why is this, prime minister? The question goes to Stuart Robert, who is representing NDIS minister Linda Reynolds. I thank the member for bringing the matter to the House’s attention. The scheme is designed to provide funding (that is) reasonable and necessary. It sounds reasonable and very necessary. It is designed to go up and down the stages of someone’s life. I will speak to the minister directly to ensure the funding necessary for the various stages of this little child’s life, and if need be we will get the situation reviewed as is provided for under the law. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor to prime minister Scott Morrison: The Herald Sun revealed this week that border force officials are failing to even look at the vaccine certificates of (international) arrivals. Baristas need to see a vaccine certificate when people buy coffee in Sydney. So why don’t border force officials demanded the same thing from people entering Australia? Morrison says: I have tremendous respect and confidence in our border force, Mr Speaker. It was our government that established the border force and did an amazing job, but equally following on from the great work of stopping the boats and ensuring that Australia’s borders were secure, and they continue to do the job every single day. And in these practices, Mr Speaker, the border force put in place arrangements with international airlines to ensure that proof of vaccination is provided at the point of (arrival) and the border force was undertaking compliance activities with arrivals. Mr Speaker, that was further upgraded last week to ensure that not only is that done at the point of embarkation, but on arrival, with all of those arrivals coming through. So it is just simply false ... for those opposite to come and cast aspersions on the fine work done by our border force, Mr Speaker, in the middle of a pandemic. Shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus to prime minister Scott Morrison: Last night a senator told the Senate, and I quote: ‘Those who resist the introduction of an effective federal integrity body raise people’s curiosity. One has to ask, are they conflicted, why are they resisting the implementation of such a body?’. What conflicts are preventing the prime minister establishing an effective anti-corruption commission? Morrison brandishes a stack of papers, which looks very much like the government’s exposure draft, and says it’s a well-designed bill. We have done the work to ensure an ... effective integrity commission can be implemented in this country and there is only one obstacle to that being passed in this parliament – the Labor party. The Labor party don’t support this model, they don’t want this model, they want to be able to turn these matters into some sort of kangaroo court, where it can be used for politicking and game playing. The shadow attorney general on nine occasions has previously referred matters and wasted the time of the Australian federal police and has been dismissed ... So I do not take a proposal which is only two pages long from those opposite and consists of a couple of points as a serious proposal ... if you wish to support a serious proposal, here it is, I tabled it. (See further down the blog for the context of the palaver with the government blame-shifting to Labor). Labor leader Anthony Albanese to prime minister Scott Morrison: Australia is the only country in the OECD that doesn’t have a dedicated centre for disease control ... In March 2020 Labor pledged it would establish an Australian centre for disease control, why won’t the prime minister? Health minister Greg Hunt picks it up, and calls the idea an “American response”. The Australian outcome was one of the strongest outcomes in terms of saving lives and protecting lives and vaccination rates in the world. I understand that the opposition has a different approach, we have seen that pretty much throughout the pandemic, very little support for the measures that this government have taken that have saved lives on a scale that are seen around the world as one of the finest and strongest and most profound outcomes in terms of lives being saved – 30,000 lives being saved. And they may wish to propose the US response or the European response because that is what the CDC is. Oh dear, another point of order, followed by defence minister Peter Dutton again accusing Albanese of having a “glass jaw”. Speaker Andrew Wallace has a crack at Albanese. Here’s Katharine Murphy’s take on that: And then back to Hunt: If Australia had the rate of loss of life of the OECD, there would have been 30,000 lives lost. If Australia had the loss of life, sadly, of the UK, or the US, upon which the model of the opposition is based, the loss of life would have been 45,000. By contrast, we have gone down the Australian way and it has saved lives and it has protected lives, and that Australian way has been based on very simple principles, that we have a national incident centre where – with the chief medical officer co-opted for the duration of the pandemic to all of the discussions and a national security committee the prime minister has chaired – and all of the big decisions have been made based on medical advice, directly to the prime minister and the national security committee. (Then more, as before, on the Australian model, and he’s rightly proud of the current vaccination levels – you can see the latest at the top of the blog). Zali Steggall, the independent member for Warringah, asks prime minister Scott Morrison about “the allegations of abuse, assault, and bullying exposed yesterday”. They were “revolting and a stain on this place”, she says: It took the courage of Brittany Higgins to speak up publicly about an alleged rape in one of your own minister’s offices and condemnation for you and your government to take action ... despite a number of people in ministerial offices knowing about the allegations for two years. Will you implement in full and without delay, before the next election, all the recommendations of the report? Morrison responds: I was pleased to stand with the minister for women yesterday, Mr Speaker, and pleased to stand with the minister for finance and respond to that report and welcome it, Mr Speaker, and I’ll (look) forward to working through the multi-party process to ensure we can follow through on the report that was provided. And, as is his way, Morrison emphasises that it’s a problem for the whole parliament, not just his government: This whole parliament has this problem. And everyone in this building has this problem. And I think (human rights commissioner Kate) Jenkins has done an outstanding job in identifying many of the drivers that have led to this behaviour, not just recently, but over a long period of time. And those of us who have been in this building, I have absolutely no doubt the women who have served in this building, whether as members or senators or staffers or those who have been in the media gallery or other parts of this building, because the commissioner looked at all of the employees of this building and surveyed all of the employees of this building and she has laid out, I think, a very good and broad ranging report which addresses all of the issues that we will (need to take forward). Labor leader Anthony Albanese to prime minister Scott Morrison: Does the prime minister take responsibility for the fact that his failure on vaccines and purpose-built quarantine because the worst downturn in the OECD? Morrison responds: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I thank the leader of the opposition for his question. The policies that were put in place by the government as part of the cooperative arrangements we had with the states and territories ensured that back in March of 2020 we were able to quickly put in place a system of quarantine, Mr Speaker, that enabled Australia to have one of the lowest fatality rates in the world in relation to Covid. And, Mr Speaker, those quarantine arrangements were of course agreed with all the states and territories, strongly supported back in March, Mr Speaker. But it wasn’t just the state and territory leaders who supported those arrangements on quarantine, because, Mr Speaker, on 27 March the leader of the opposition tweeted this: “Australian Labor supports new quarantine laws using hotels for overseas arrivals.” Mr Speaker, that is what the leader of the opposition says. That is what he says, Mr Speaker. As usual what we have from the leader of the opposition is he supports hotel quarantine ... when we are announcing it, and then he comes into this place and says it is not appropriate, Mr Speaker, an each way bet on every single position. (Brief pause, a point of order on relevance from Albanese, and on we go...) Outbreaks occur and as a result of those outbreaks, as the member will recall, as a result of a limousine driver not wearing a mask in Sydney, that is where it started, and then went to other states, that is what we know. And we know the national vaccine strategy (we) had in place (to reach) high levels of vaccination rates by the middle of October this year, and that was reached. What we see from those opposite, Mr Speaker, is they want to support measures on the pandemic and on the other hand they oppose measures on the pandemic and they have each way bets. What they know about the Australian economy, Mr Speaker, as we have one of the strongest economies coming through this pandemic of any advanced nation in the world. And what is happening now is 350,000 jobs came back into that economy in the last five weeks, as we have opened up the economy. Former deputy prime minister Michael McCormack is talked over while he’s asking his replacement Barnaby Joyce a dixer. He’s asked to repeat the question and responds: “Do I have to?”. Speaker Andrew Wallace is having a snark at Labor for being “unruly”. We’ll see if the unruliness hits yesterday’s levels. Labor’s Jim Chalmers asks about the Australian economy’s contraction rate compared to other OECD countries. For treasurer Josh Frydenberg’s response, you can just copy and paste the chunk of text below, with some added comments about former Labor treasurer Wayne Swan and Chalmers riding his coattails. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is outlining the government’s economic credentials after the latest national accounts were released. He says: I can confirm to the house that (compared to other) major advanced economies, Australia has had the strongest recovery, Mr Speaker, across the world. A stronger recovery than we have seen in the UK, a stronger recovery than we have seen in Canada, a stronger recovery than we have seen in Germany, stronger recovery than we have seen in Italy, and a stronger recovery than we have seen in Japan. And the credit is due to the Australian people. To the hard work of 26 million Australians. They have faced the biggest economic shock since the great depression ... the first pandemic in a century, and we all remember those images last year, last March, of thousands of our fellow Australians lining up outside Centrelink, either having lost their jobs, and businesses were fearful of losing not only their business but also their homes. And the Morrison government responded with the strongest economic support this country has ever seen! Around $300m of economic support, more than all the states and territories put together. Programs like jobkeeper that saved 700,000 jobs, Mr Speaker, and the cash flow boost in the business and support payments, pensioners and carers and veterans and others on income support. So today the national accounts see business investment 9.1% higher through the year. In programs like homebuilder which was ridiculed by those opposite, but together with our other policies have seen 320,000 Australians get into a home over the last three years. We saw in the national accounts today, we saw dwelling investment up in the national accounts and dwelling investment is 11.4% higher through the year. And all that time we are providing economic support to Australians, what else are we doing, something those opposite would never do, providing tax cuts, the biggest tax cuts Australians have ever seen. Taxes cuts for families, tax cuts for small business and business investment incentives. While those opposite took $387bn of higher taxes to the Australian people, we have been supporting them with lower taxes, income, and business support and the net result is that unemployment today is lower than when we came to government. And the second-last question time of the year has begun, with treasurer Josh Frydenberg on his feet, coming in hot. Labor has done a deal to pass the political campaigner bill, with amendments, and has secured agreement from the government to drop the voter ID bill, which will now not be voted on before the 2022 election. Labor confirmed it did a deal to increase the threshold at which organisations such as charities have to declare electoral spending. The crossbench believes the deal includes: A threshold of $250,000 (up from $100,000) A new name of political campaigner, now to be called “large third party campaigners”; and Shifting liability from organisation officials, such as a secretary, for breaches of disclosure requirements to the entity itself. The deal is of great concern to the charity sector, which opposes the bill due to the expanded definition of electoral expenditure and the retrospective effect of the bill. Senator Stirling Griff told Guardian Australia he “never would have supported” the bill if retrospectivity stayed in, so he believes the deal was unnecessary. Labor claims that Griff, Jacqui Lambie and Rex Patrick would not commit to block the bill, so they’ve secured a watered down bill in the face of it possibly passing unamended. But the voter ID bill seems dead and buried. Earlier we reported Lambie is against it, and Griff still wants to send it to an inquiry. Liberal senator Hollie Hughes is telling the ABC she is one of the lucky (and rare) ones who’s never spotted any of the bad behaviour outlined in yesterday’s report into parliamentary workplaces. She said things have changed, and (in relation to reports of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault): I personally haven’t experienced it, have never witnessed it. (77% of people in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces have experienced or witnessed incidents). It’s an “absurdity” to say Labor is holding up the process of getting an integrity commission in place, shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus tells the ABC. As Katharine Murphy writes here, prime minister Scott Morrison is trying to shift blame for slow progress on the bill to the opposition. Shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus says the revelations in yesterday’s report into parliamentary workplaces were “shocking” and that the whole parliament has “more work to do”. If you haven’t caught up yet, a good place to do just that is political editor Katharine Murphy’s piece. I’m going to share it again in case you missed it: People always want to claim they got the political scalp... The debate on Victoria’s pandemic bill is over. Finally. Upper house MPs sat through the night and worked their way through each of the bill’s 58 clauses and 83 amendments. It will now return to the lower house – where the state government holds a commanding majority – to be debated once more. And now to the National Press Club, where a panel is talking about the case for a federal integrity commission. As always, an eloquent and multi-faceted question comes from the ABC’s Laura Tingle about what a commission could do that the audit office cannot. Transparency International Australia chief executive Serena Lillywhite says Australians might not think Australia has a corruption problem, but that it does happen. A commission would bolster the existing powers to investigate corruption, she says, and it would need to be properly resourced to do that effectively. Geoffrey Watson, barrister and director of the Centre for Public Integrity, adds that he doesn’t think people in federal parliament are “taking brown paper bags” ... but that there are issues “across the board”. House prices have never been so hot. Frydenberg skips over the complicated interplay of factors that have seen affordability dive – historically low interest rates, supply and demand issues, etc – and says: I have been concerned about the heat in the housing market and that is why when I met with the council of financial regulators I was very supportive of what APRA (the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority) did in increasing the serviceability buffer from 2.5% to 3%. That’ll take the risk out of the system by making sure people can pay their mortgages, he says. A question to Josh Frydenberg from the SMH’s Shane Wright, who wanted to know when the government would start thinking seriously about budget repair. Frydenberg reminds us that there is fiscal fun due before the budget: Obviously we will update those numbers for you, Shane, on December 16, which is the day of MYEFO (mid-year economic and fiscal economic outlook). Afternoon, all. I’m just stepping in for the lead up until question time, when I’ll hand you make to the inimitable Amy Remeikis. Wish me luck! Small announcement: Tory Shepherd will take you through the next hour – I’ll be taking a small, pre-planned break over the next couple of months, and Tory will be running the politics blog in the meantime. She’ll be great. I’ll be around this afternoon and will take you through the second half of the last day tomorrow. Have fun with Tory and I will see you soon. Amy x As has been roundly speculated (but not stacked up as yet, because nothing can be until the member either confirms it, or stands up themselves), Christian Porter is expected to announce his future before the parliament rises tomorrow. Like I have said, there are a lot of reports, and a lot of speculation, but there is no confirmation and Porter himself has said nothing either way. Senator Jacqui Lambie has released the results of her survey about whether to support the voter ID laws. Lambie said: Overall, nearly two-thirds of voters opposed the laws. In every state and territory, a majority of voters opposed the bill. In the Northern Territory, which is one of the jurisdictions people have focused on during the debate around this bill, the numbers were overwhelming. And on her position, Lambie said: I want to make it clear — when I do a survey, I don’t hand over the wheel and say whichever side gets the most votes decides how I’ll vote. On balance, I don’t think the laws do the job. I’ll be voting no on the Morrison government’s laws. Here’s the big reason why. I can accept that there might be a problem here. I don’t think there’s evidence that there is widespread voter fraud. I don’t think there is evidence that it’s becoming widespread. But it doesn’t take widespread fraud for it to potentially decide the election result. Josh Frydenberg is asked about Greg Hunt’s retirement at his press conference: I will wait to see but details of Greg Hunt’s comment you have referred to. Greg is my closest friend in this place. The godfather to his beautiful daughter Poppy, and he is the godfather to my daughter. We are very dear friends and he has been an outstanding health minister through this crisis. The fact that Australia has one of the lowest mortality rates in the world and the fact that we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world is in due to no small part to the incredible work that all health professionals have done across Australia, and Greg as the health minister in this once in a century pandemic has been outstanding. I will leave any further comments to see exactly what statements you are referring to. Here was the exchange on 14 November between David Speers and Greg Hunt: Speers: Just finally, speaking of next year. I’m pretty sure I’ve asked you this before, but the speculation continues. Will you still be around? Will you be running again? Hunt: Pre-selected and running. The shorter the answer, the more there is in the space around it. This is not unexpected – when David Speers asked Greg Hunt about his future a couple of weeks ago, Hunt didn’t exactly give a ringing endorsement. Now it is official: Here is the bit Josh Frydenberg has practiced in the mirror this morning. You can tell because he repeats the line he thinks is the most statesman like, just in case the TV cameras didn’t catch it the first time: There will be challenges ahead, but with vaccination rates here in Australia having reason to be among the highest in the world, we can and we must live with the virus and its variants. Omicron is not the first, and is unlikely to be the last variant that we face. But we must hold our nerve and cool heads must prevail. We must hold our nerve and cool heads must prevail. With world leading health and economic outcomes, Australians have put themselves in a very strong and indeed, the best possible position, going into 2022. And in Victoria, there is still no vote on the pandemic powers bill – despite an entire night of debate. The treasurer is running through the latest economy figures – Peter Hannam has taken you through the highlights a few posts down. Josh Frydenberg and his power point presentation will be coming up next. The only thing more awkward than one of the treasurer’s social media videos is when he is pointing to graphs on a screen. Northern Territory police have found the three people who escaped from Darwin’s Howard Springs Covid-19 facility earlier this morning. All three tested negative for Covid-19 yesterday and have now been taken into custody. The trio allegedly jumped the fence at the centre for national resilience just before 4.40am, Northern Territory police said earlier. Enquiries are continuing. While the tea leaves get scanned, here are a few interesting elements in the national accounts data that’s just landed. Blame households in NSW, Victoria and the ACT for the 1.9% contraction in the September quarter, since those in the rest of the economy kept spending. Household spending in these three jurisdictions fell 8.4% compared with a 0.7% rise for the rest of Australia, the ABS said. And thank the governments for increasing their spending to keep the economy ticking along. Private demand lopped 2.4 percentage points from GDP growth, which was partly offset by public outlays that cushioned some of the drop, adding 0.7 percentage points to growth. The record current account surplus nudging $23.9bn also did some heaving lifting, adding 1 full percentage point to the growth. Thank some high energy prices for much of that result. Economists, you may recall, were all geared up to “look through” this GDP drop because the focus is on a rebounding economy in the December quarter. The fact the drop of 1.9% was significantly better than the expected 2.5-3% fall will worry some, though, that we now run a risk of excessive economic exuberance since public spending continues to be strong. And those households that were locked down are loaded with cash. The ratio of household savings jumped to 19.8% in the September quarter from 11.8% in the June quarters. Also, household gross disposable income rose 4.6%, the fastest rise since December quarter 2008, the ABS said. That’s why there’s that risk of an overshoot in the quarters to come - unless Omicron or other Covid variants spoil the party. Scott Morrison made some remarks at the launch of the Wishing Tree Appeal in his office. It goes places: I’m looking forward to Christmas, I think we’re all looking forward to Christmas. I think Australians are coming together for Christmas and that’s really exciting. I think we’re looking forward to this Christmas, like few up until now, and this weekend I’m putting the lights up on the house. I’m looking forward to that and the ritual with the girls and with Jen, and I’m wishing everybody here a Merry Christmas. Anthony, Penny and Adam and of course, Barnaby and the great team at the Salvos and the wonderful support we get in the community for the Salvos. An interesting mixture here. Albo’s got a unicorn, I’ve brought the GraviTrax. That got me through quite a few lockdowns this year, I’ve got to tell you, as others went through puzzles and various other things. So the other thing I’m looking forward to, I think it’s going to be a bumper Christmas for our retailers who have been doing it really tough. So when you’re out shopping for Christmas, shop local, support your local small businesses, they’ve had a tough year. So why not give them a great Christmas present by doing your local shopping in your local shops, supporting the local businesses who stood by you during the course of this pandemic. And it’d be great to see them also having a bumper Christmas and as their staff are coming back and also looking forward to that great period of time. But Christmas is an important Christian religious festival as well, and something that’s very important I know to so many Australians and it is a great time of family and coming together. But for those of the Christian faith, it is a very important time of the year and we celebrate the birth of Christ. So enjoy the season and wishing everybody a very merry Christmas. And I’ll ask the Salvos to say a few words. The Greens are also pushing for this fund: Josh Frydenberg will hold a press conference at 12.30pm today. It’s in the Blue Room, which means – yup. Power point slides. Jim Chalmers has responded to the GDP figures. Question time will be a mess. You may notice that Scott Morrison didn’t actually answer the question there – he spoke about what had been done, and changed the question into one about what his government had ‘stood up’ against. But he didn’t answer the question – what could the latest inquiry into social media tell people that we don’t already know. It’s not a new issue, and there has been a lot of evidence put on the public record already. Scott Morrison is speaking about social media. Q: What could the government possibly learn about social media that hasn’t already been highlighted in things like the Facebook US Senate hearings, whistleblowers and the like? Morrison: Well, I think that’s very disappointing that you’ve put it in that way. I’m a parent. I’m worried about my kids online. The parents I’ve spoken to today are worried about their kids online. You know, Canberra sometimes can get really cynical, really cynical, and this is an issue that is burned in our hearts and in our actions over the course of our government. And we have stood up to the biggest tech companies in the world. You know, when you’re a prime minister you’ve got to have the strength to stand up to those who threaten Australia. You’ve got to have the strength to stand up to the big tech companies. We’ve done that on tax. We’ve done that even to protect the freedom of our own media and ensure that media companies could survive through this world. There are many journalists today employed, not just in this town but around the country, who are in those jobs because our government had the courage to stand up to big tech where other governments didn’t. It was our government that stood up to big tech after the Christchurch attacks, the massacres there, the terrorist attacks by right wing extremists, that ensured that we introduced laws which outlawed this violent extremist content online. It was our government that set up the first eSafety Commissioner. It was our government that ensured that we had the Online Safety Act. It is our government, which is one of the first in the world, the legislation we released today, which will come into the parliament when the committee comes back, which will ensure that publishers, so that digital platforms are treated as publishers and they must unmask the online trolls. So, when it comes to this issue, we’ve got a strong track record of standing up to those who would threaten Australian safety. And, frankly, it’s not just there. To those who would seek to coerce us in the region, we’ll stand up to them. As treasurer I stood up to the big banks, as treasurer we stood up, and as prime minister, to the big energy companies. I have a record of standing up to those who will seek to threaten Australia’s interests, whether they’re outside this country or inside this country, whether in the online world or within the real world. And that’s the strength that is required to lead this country. Angus Taylor has announced negotiations with gas suppliers and users over a voluntary code of conduct have concluded: The Code will apply to the negotiation of gas supply agreements in the east coast domestic market, and will provide: · standards to govern the conduct of gas suppliers in their interactions with gas consumers; · pricing principles, referencing the ACCC LNG netback price series; · increased transparency and certainty for gas consumers regarding negotiation processes; · an equitable dispute resolution process, overseen by the appointment of an independent arbiter; · a regular review process of the Code by an independent reviewer; and · the promotion of good faith dealings between suppliers and consumers. The voluntary Code forms one part of the Government’s gas-fired recovery measures that aim to unlock supply, deliver an efficient transportation network and empower consumers. This follows on from recent announcements, including the delivery of the first full National Gas Infrastructure Plan and Future Gas Infrastructure Investment Framework to ensure more supply can be unlocked and delivered to where it is needed. The Code will commence on 1 June 2022. The GDP data for the September quarter has just dropped from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, and it’s not so bad. The economy shrank by 1.9% in the quarter, which is better than the 2.5-3% drop expected from most economists. On an annual basis, the economy was steaming ahead at a 3.9% clip. Of course, the lockdowns in Victoria, New South Wales and the ACT were to blame for the September quarter drop. “This fall followed four consecutive rises since the 6.8% fall recorded in June quarter 2020 when the entire country was in lockdown,” the ABS said. “GDP in the September quarter 2021 was 0.2% below December 2019 pre-pandemic levels.” More to come, as they say... Greens senator Larissa Waters wants to amend the sitting calendar for 2022 to add in another sitting to allow for debate on a federal Icac and also the recommendations of the Jenkins review into parliamentary culture (the Greens are in support of all 28 recommendations). Waters has circulated this amendment: To add 28 February to 3 March and 8 March to 10 March 2022 to the 2022 sitting calendar. To move—That the days of meeting of the Senate for 2022 be as follows: Autumn sittings: Tuesday, 8 February to Thursday, 10 February Monday, 28 February to Thursday, 3 March Tuesday, 8 March to Thursday 10 March Budget sittings: Tuesday, 29 March and Wednesday, 30 March Winter sittings: Monday, 9 May to Thursday, 12 May Monday, 16 May to Thursday, 19 May Tuesday, 7 June to Thursday, 9 June Monday, 20 June to Thursday, 23 June Monday, 27 June to Thursday, 30 June Spring sittings: Tuesday, 9 August to Thursday, 11 August Monday, 15 August to Thursday, 18 August Monday, 5 September to Thursday, 8 September Monday, 12 September to Thursday, 15 September Monday, 17 October to Thursday, 20 October Monday, 21 November to Thursday, 24 November Monday, 28 November to Thursday, 1 December. As listed on page 4 of today’s Notice Paper A sixth case of the Omicron variant has been (most likely) found in NSW – but again, there is no need to panic or worry. It is a variant of concern, yes, but there is nothing to suggest we are going to see the same issues we saw with Delta. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said NSW Health is going through older tests (from before it was found in Australia) and so far has not identified any other cases. He says it is just a case of keeping an eye on the evidence: There are lots of discussions going on at senior levels in the government. But yesterday was national cabinet and I think it’s fair to say that there is a unity ticket with the national government, with Victoria and New South Wales, we’re not keen to see a return to lockdowns. And we’re just watching closely. It’s the first of December, which means it is World Aids Day. Greg Hunt has announced $50m in funding, which will extend access to HIV treatment in Australia: The theme of World AIDS Day 2021 is ‘End inequalities. End AIDS’ This year is the 40th anniversary of the first official report of the immune illness that would be later recognised as AIDS. In 2020, there were 633 new diagnoses of HIV in Australia and more than 29,000 people living with HIV. Minister for Health and Aged Care, Greg Hunt said, the Morrison Government was investing more than $39 million over 5 years to support people living with HIV in Australia, who are not eligible for Medicare, to access the treatment they need … “Our Government will also provide more than $11 million in new funding to Australia’s blood borne viruses and sexually transmissible infections peak bodies to continue their important work across the country,” Minister Hunt said. Nothing like a goodwill non-partisan seasonal gesture to make political points. Photos from Mike Bowers: AAP reports that an Indigenous woman has died in custody in Melbourne: An Aboriginal woman has died in custody while being treated at a hospital in Melbourne’s west. Corrections Victoria said the 30-year-old was transferred from a maximum security women’s prison in Deer Park, the Dame Phyllis Frost Centre, to Sunshine Hospital last week. She died at the hospital on Monday, surrounded by family. “The death of any person in custody is a heartbreaking tragedy and the team at Corrections Victoria sends its deepest condolences to the woman’s family,” Corrections said in a statement. “The Coroners Court of Victoria will formally determine the time and cause of death, in accordance with usual process.” The women at Dame Phyllis Frost Centre are being supported and a smoking ceremony is being arranged. Corrections said it recognised that all deaths in custody impacted family, friends, victims and the broader Aboriginal community and said staff were working to ensure they are supported. “Corrections Victoria has been providing support to the deceased woman’s family to ensure culturally appropriate notification and grieving processes are followed,” Corrections said. “The Aboriginal Justice Caucus was advised, and Corrections Victoria staff continue to work closely with the Caucus and the First Peoples’ Assembly of Victoria.” Kurt Campbell also said Joe Biden raised China’s economic coercion of Australia with Xi Jinping in their meeting. Campbell told the Lowy Institute event: Yeah. The president just briefly mentioned activities that China was undertaking that President Biden felt were antithetical to China’s interests. So there was a period in our discussion where the president, President Biden, tried carefully to say that some of the steps that China was taking, in his view, were backfiring. I think our assessment is that maybe some of the feedback loop in China is not working as effectively as it was in the past. And frankly, what better way to reach the leader – who may be a bit isolated at the top – than have a direct conversation with his No 1 counterpart. So President Biden was very clear and animated about what we had seen in Australia, border issues with India, all the things that I’ve mentioned, and just basically said, we were concerned. We’re concerned by some of these steps and what it signals with respect to China. Australia’s property prices have risen for a 14th month but the pace of the rise has begun to slow, according to CoreLogic’s national home value index. Housing values were 1.3% higher in November than the previous month, or the slowest rate of growth since January. From a year ago, prices are up 22.2%, adding $126,700 to the median value. “Virtually every factor that has driven housing values higher has lost some potency over recent months,” Tim Lawless, CoreLogic’s research director, said. “Fixed mortgage rates are rising, higher listings are taking some urgency away from buyers, affordability has become a more substantial barrier to entry and credit is less available.” Echoes then of this forecast twilight in the house price boom, as we reported a week or so back. The pace varies, as you’d expect, and Brisbane and Adelaide prices are still accelerating. The Queensland capital reported a 2.9% rise in “home values” in November, the most in about 18 years, while the South Australia capital’s 2.5% jump was the highest since February 1993. In Sydney the median value rose 0.9% in November to $1,090,276, while the next most expensive city was Canberra. The nation’s capital reported a 1.1% rise in prices last month, bring the median value to $882,519. Melbourne, meanwhile, reported a 0.6% advance, bringing the median price of a place to call home at $788,484. Darwin was the only city to report a retreat last month, with a 0.4% drop in prices. Joe Biden’s Indo-Pacific adviser Kurt Campbell has carefully avoided weighing into Australia’s domestic political debate regarding Taiwan. But he has stressed that as far as the US is concerned, it is a “very delicate matter” and the US will seek to be purposeful, determined, and clear in its messaging. At the Lowy Institute event, Campbell was asked about comments by the defence minister, Peter Dutton, that it was inconceivable that Australia would not join the United States in any conflict across the strait, and Penny Wong’s comment that this is out of step with the long-held US policy of strategic ambiguity. Campbell did not respond directly to those comments. But he said he wanted to underscore that US policy “has not changed”. He said the US effort was multifaceted, including taking the “necessary steps to ensure that we modernise, that we engage appropriately, that we have the right forces that we can bring to bear if we faced a crisis of that sort”. The US was also ensuring Taiwan had “the appropriate defensive articles to be able to deter aggression”. “You will have seen in the last several months, a number of countries speaking out more directly, including Japan, including Australia, Great Britain and others. The maintenance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait is in the strategic interests of all concerned. And that this is not just a narrow matter but a broader issue that has to be consulted and engaged more directly. I do just want to underscore that this is a very delicate matter. We understand the delicate role it plays in US-China relations. But we also believe that if the United States is purposeful, is determined, and is clear in its messaging, that we can maintain peace and stability and to secure the status quo in the future.” Earlier this week Taiwan’s ministry of foreign affairs told the Guardian it was sincerely grateful for comments by Dutton and Scott Morrison. Last week the Chinese embassy in Beijing accused Dutton of fanning conflict and division. Campbell said over time he believed China would re-engage with Australia, but on Australia’s terms: I think China’s preference would have been to break Australia, to drive Australia to its knees, and then you know, find a way forward. I don’t believe that’s going to be the way it’s going to play out. I believe that China will engage because it is in its own interest to have a good relationship with Australia. I believe that will happen naturally, and I think that China is a country that deep down, fundamentally respects strength fortitude and resilience. And I can’t imagine a country that has demonstrated that more clearly than Australia. The annual Kmart Wishing Tree event was held in the prime minister’s office this morning – it is meant to be an occasion where all the MPs come together and give gifts to children. Mike Bowers was there and said that this year it was used as a trolling exercise. Barnaby Joyce bought a “gem mining kit”. Anthony Albanese brought a trolley full of gifts – among them, an Eiffel Tower puzzle and a submarine. We’re sure the kids will just love them. Joe Biden’s top Indo-Pacific adviser, Kurt Campbell, has moved to clarify his comments about Aukus leading to a “melding” of US, Australian and UK forces. He says the deal will lead to “strategic intimacy” but Australia won’t lose its sovereignty and independence. Campbell is addressing a Lowy Institute event, The Indo-Pacific Operating System. The discussion about Aukus led to this exchange between Michael Fullilove, the Lowy Institute executive director, and Campbell: Q: You recently suggested that Aukus could lead to almost a melding of US, Australian and UK forces in the Indo-Pacific. What did you mean by a melding – and what implications does that have for Australia’s national sovereignty and its national freedom of decision and freedom of action? Campbell: Look, I’ve followed the Australian debate carefully. I fully understand how important sovereignty and independence is for Australia. So I don’t want to leave any sense that somehow that would be lost. That’s not the – this arrangement is meant to be additive and create new capacities. I think what I’m suggesting is that Australian sailors will have the opportunity to serve on American vessels and vice versa. I think you can expect American submarines to port more commonly in Australian ports. I think we’re going to operate and share perspectives much more than we’ve done in the past. And we’re already close allies. I think our overall capacities and our training will be much more common as we go forward. And for Australia to learn and to become, and to master of nuclear technology of the kind that is presented in submarines will require the deepest, most profound kinds of engagements with submariners in the United States and Great Britain, who work on nuclear submarines. That’s going to be extraordinarily important. And it ultimately is going to lead to a kind of strategic intimacy that we think is going to be very important in the time ahead. The NT police have put out a statement: Northern Territory Police are searching for three people who absconded from the Centre for National Resilience earlier this morning. At 4:40am, it was reported that three people from the Centre for National Resilience scaled the fence and fled the area. Police and staff at the Centre for National Resilience are currently confirming the absconder’s identities prior to releasing further information. Anyone who may have witnessed the incident or has any information is urged to contact police on 131 444. Northern Territory police are searching for “multiple” people who escaped from Darwin’s Howard Springs Covid-19 quarantine faculty this morning. A large number of police are searching the facility, and vehicles in the area. It is unclear how many people were involved in the escape but Guardian Australia understands facility management are confirming a headcount of those staying there. The incident is the second escape from the facility within a week, after a 27-year-old man allegedly absconded from quarantine last week before being found on Darwin’s main strip. Here is how the House sitting is shaping up for the second last day: Liberal senator Jane Hume says she wants to see more women in the parliament but doesn’t think quotas is how you get there. It has taken Labor about 20 years to *almost* reach gender parity in its representation – and it took quotas to make it happen. Hume says that doesn’t make sense for the Liberal party, because it is not a “top-down” organisation. (Perhaps she missed the reports Scott Morrison is considering using special powers to install his chosen candidates into seats, overruling the branches, as he prepares for the election – particularly in NSW, where the election at this stage, looks like being won and lost.) Hume: I think having more women in parliament is always a good thing and I would like to see the Liberal party put significant effort into putting more women in parliament. Are quotas the right way to go about it? I’m not entirely convinced yet. Quotas are something that work very well in the corporate sector and in an organisation that has a top-down and authoritarian approach. In the Liberal party we are a grassroots organisation where the culture needs to change from the bottom up. As female leaders in the Liberal party we have a real responsibility to make a difference with the grassroots part of our organisation to demonstrate to them the value of having more women in parliament and how the culture can change that way. And on the other issue the government was pushing: Here are some of the explanatory notes on what the bill plans on doing: The bill will address the issues raised by the High Court’s decision in Fairfax Media Publications v Voller [2021] HCA 27 (Voller), which made clear that individuals and organisations with social media pages that allow third party commentary may be publishers of comments posted by third parties for the purposes of defamation law, even if they were not aware of the comments. The bill will also provide new mechanisms for Australians to ascertain whether a potentially defamatory comment on a page of a social media service was made in Australia and, if so, to obtain the relevant contact details of the commenter. This will empower Australians to institute defamation proceedings in relation to the comment. In particular, the bill will: deem a person who administers or maintains a social media page not to be a publisher of third-party comment and thereby be immune from potential liability under defamation law deem the social media provider to be the publisher of material posted on their platform for the purposes of defamation law, which is consistent with the outcome of the Voller decision create a conditional defence for providers of social media services in defamation proceedings if the provider: has a complaints scheme that meets certain prescribed requirements, and complies with the scheme, and provides information to assist prospective applicants to identify and commence proceedings against an anonymous user empower courts to issue end-user information disclosure orders, which require providers of social media services to give the applicant the commenter’s relevant contact details and country location data in certain circumstances require social media companies to have a nominated entity incorporated in Australia that will be able to discharge key obligations under the Bill, and enable the Attorney-General to intervene in defamation proceedings on behalf of the Commonwealth, in certain circumstances. The exposure draft for the social media legislation the government is putting forward has just gone live. You can find it here. The Labor candidate for Reid, Sally Sitou has taken to social media to combat assumptions and rumours she is hearing about her candidacy, because of her Chinese heritage. In 2021. La Niña is really making itself known. AAP has an update on what is happening in NSW: Severe thunderstorms delivering heavy rain and large hail have again hit north and western NSW overnight. The Bureau of Meteorology warned on Tuesday evening a “tropical airmass with abundant moisture” was in place and severe thunderstorms were likely to produce heavy rain that could cause flash flooding, damaging winds and large hailstones. In the hours before the warning a 100km/h wind gust was detected north of the Queensland border. The storms were expected to impact as far south as Griffith in the Riverina region. Further rain expected on Wednesday threatens to add even more water into catchments at risk of flooding in the northern rivers region of NSW. A flood watch was issued on Tuesday for rivers there and on the mid-north coast, with possible renewed river level rises in the northwest slopes as well. Renewed river level rises and subsequent flooding possible along the Upper Macintyre, Gwydir and Namoi rivers are also of great concern. Daniel Hurst has an important story about when the government was warned about the worsening Afghanistan situation: The Australian government was warned in mid-July that the worsening security situation in Afghanistan and Covid restrictions were making it “extremely difficult” to help former Afghan employees escape the country, previously secret documents reveal. At least five weeks before the Afghan capital fell to the Taliban in mid-August, government officials predicted more people would seek to flee the country and they were discussing the possibility of chartering direct flights from Kabul to Australia. Guardian Australia can also reveal the governor general, David Hurley, sought a private briefing from the immigration minister in July about the program to assist former Afghan colleagues – as the government was facing increasing public criticism about its handling of the longstanding scheme. A bit of economic news out today. The ABS will release September quarter gross domestic product figures at 11.30am. Here’s how it looked for the June quarter when the economy was hurtling along at a 9% clip, year on year, and 0.7% versus the March quarter. Today’s “print” of the national accounts, as the industry likes to call it, will be less awesome and more awful, with an annual pace pared to about 3% growth as half the economy (Victoria, NSW and the ACT) was locked down. The headline figure, though, will the quarter-on-quarter dive, which is expected to be about 2.5% to 3%, making the July-September period the country’s second-worst on record. Only the 7% contraction in the June quarter of 2020 was worse. But, more than most, the numbers are very much in the rear-view mirror, as the economy is hurtling along. As the ANZ noted this morning, the third quarter is “old news now”. Data to date suggest that Q4 GDP growth will be very strong, with retail sales up a massive 4.4% month on month in October, consistent with our view that the recovery will be consumer led. The biggest risk to the outlook continues to come from the health front, and the new Omicron variant highlights the unpredictable nature of these risks. It’s those health risks that central banks, including Australia’s, have cited as among the reasons why they are inclined to tolerate higher inflation longer, rather than jacking up rates. Whether that leads to an overshoot on the current leg of the “W-shaped recovery”, or there’s another downward leg to come, remains to be seen. We are looking into this as well. South Australia has opened its booster program to anyone who is eligible – which means anyone who had their second dose of the vaccine at least six months ago. Rex Patrick is leading the charge to overhaul how freedom of information requests are dealt with by the government. As Paul Karp reports: Victoria and NSW have reported their daily Covid cases. There have been six deaths in Victoria. That also means you are going to hear a lot during question time about how well the economy is doing, through government dixers (and non-answers to opposition questions). The government really, really, really wants to make economic management one of the issues of the coming election, so prepare yourself for all of the economic talk. It’s national accounts day (huzzah) which we will bring you as soon as it drops (Peter Hannam will be all over it for you). Jim Chalmers was on Sky this morning, where he was asked about it: This is a really important snapshot of the national economy. The national economy is defined by skyrocketing prices and falling real wages, and in the September quarter by the second biggest fall in economic growth since these records were kept. You listen to the prime minister and the treasurer and they always want to talk about international comparisons, well of all the countries that have reported so far, Australia is expected to be absolutely last when it comes to economic growth. These are the costs and consequences of a Morrison government which got the initial vaccine rollout, quarantine and economic support so badly wrong. At this time last year, they were talking about a big recovery. We’ve heard all of this before. Instead, they delivered the second biggest downturn in the history of the national accounts. So we can’t be complacent. The Omicron virus strain is something that we need to be very attentive to. Complacency is what stomped on the green shoots of the beginnings of the last recovery and we don’t want to see that again. Meanwhile, we are thinking of all of those in the Queensland flood zones. As AAP reports: A town in Queensland’s south is facing rising flood waters, forcing the evacuation of more than 900 residents. An emergency was declared for Inglewood, in the Goondiwindi local government area, in the Darling Downs close to the NSW border on Tuesday night. Residents were told to head to an assembly point at Inglewood cemetery ahead of widespread flooding expected on Wednesday. “Significant flooding is expected to occur across the township in coming hours,” police said. Queensland Fire and Emergency Services assistant commissioner Stephen Smith said about 950 people had been moved to safety. “Our crews were working through the night assisting that operation,” he told Nine Network on Wednesday. Mr Smith noted there had been widespread flooding across central Queensland, the northern parts of the state and through the southeast and southwest. “Overnight there were areas that got up to 180mm of rain,” he said. What did Richard Marles think of Anthony Albanese calling Peter Dutton a “boofhead” in parliament yesterday? (Dutton accused Albanese of being “weak” and having a “glass jaw”.) Albanese made the comment just hours after the Kate Jenkins report was handed down, calling for more respect in the parliament. Marles: I don’t think that comment is of concern. But I think it is right that we need to be looking at culture across the parliament, and that includes the way in which we relate to each other. And I come back to the starting point that this is about ultimately trying to make sure that this is the example in the country of providing a safe and respectful workplace for those people who work here, and particularly women. And we need to be making sure that coming out of this report, we take this moment to change the culture of parliament forever. Richard Marles says Labor is all for the inquiry into social media giants (the prime minister announced that today). Marles told the ABC: We think that it’s important to be looking at the question of social media and the role that big tech plays in that. Obviously we absolutely support the thrust of what the government’s trying to do here, which is to stamp out behaviour or trolls on social media and to make that a safer place for the Australian community. Scott Morrison was asked about his senator David Van’s interjections in the Senate yesterday and he had this to say: I expect all parliamentary leaders to be seeking to be uphold those standards have been in the parliament a long time. Just last week the interjections that I was hearing in the chamber coming across, I mean, these are things that all parliamentary leaders continue to have to uphold the standards of and I expect that of my team and I was very, very disappointed about that. Still in the senate, Liberal senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells spoke during the adjournment debate about the need for a federal integrity commission that people could trust: In February this year, I spoke about integrity and conduct. Politics is about perception, and, regrettably, the public perception of our politicians is not good. Repeatedly, politicians from local, state and federal ranks have acted without integrity and contributed to the ongoing and deteriorating perception of the body politic. In any survey about the most trusted professions in our society, politicians usually rank amongst the lowest, and why wouldn’t this be the case, given the continued exposure of questionable activities over the years? Whether it’s alleged lies in election campaigns, dodgy preselections, misappropriation of public monies, personal benefits resulting from insider information, monies sequestered in overseas tax havens, abuse of office for personal advantage, dodgy land deals or connections with foreign governments, the list goes on and on. Negative public perceptions are compounded when politicians dig their heels in, spin the story and fail to take responsibility for their actions. They rely on the fast-moving media cycle and wait for the next story to take over the front page, and this frustrates the public even more. Modern democracies and the operation of open government must be accountable and transparent, thereby obviating any suspicion of skulduggery. In conclusion, those who resist the introduction of an effective federal integrity body raise people’s curiosity. One has to ask the question: are they conflicted? Why are they resisting the implementation of such a body? And when we speak of integrity, I’m once again reminded of the words of Marcus Aurelius, Roman emperor and philosopher: “If it is not right, do not do it. If it is not true, do not say it.” Here is what Liberal senator David Van told the Senate yesterday (he made a personal explanation later in the afternoon, but didn’t stand up at the time when president Slade Brockman asked if anyone wanted to withdraw their interjection at the time of the incident): As you asked us to reflect, I reflect on my behaviour in question time and I acknowledge that interjections are always disorderly. I acknowledge I was making interjections while Senator Lambie was asking a question during question time. And while I do not accept the characterisation of my interjections in the manner raised in points of order in that time, by other senators, I do regret the interjections and I apologise to Senator Lambie and to the Senate unreservedly. Mr President, I commit to holding myself to the highest standards in the future. Thank you. If you want to know how some government MPs are treating the government’s own social media law proposal, here’s just one example. Victorian Liberal senator David Van has apologised for interjecting while Jacqui Lambie asked questions in the sSenate yesterday, but has denied he made dog noises. He told journalist Samantha Maiden it may have sounded like an animal noise because he was wearing a mask. His colleague, Hollie Hughes had said on Twitter it didn’t happen at all (before Van’s apology for interjecting) and sarcastically praised Penny Wong’s “bionic hearing”. Here’s how Van responded to Labor MP Graham Perrett as part of an ongoing thread on the incident: Social media crackdowns must be playing well in focus groups: now there is an official inquiry. From the release: The Australian Parliament will put big tech under the microscope as it examines toxic material on social media platforms and the dangers this poses to the wellbeing of Australians. The inquiry, which will be chaired by Robertson MP Lucy Wicks, was announced today by prime minister Scott Morrison and minister for communications, urban infrastructure, cities and the arts Paul Fletcher. Prime minister Morrison said the inquiry builds on the world-leading legislation the government announced earlier this week to unmask anonymous online trolls. “Mums and dads are rightly concerned about whether big tech is doing enough to keep their kids safe online,” The prime minister said. “Big tech created these platforms, they have a responsibility to ensure their users are safe. Meanwhile, Labor isn’t confirming anything at this point, but the SMH is reporting the fuel emissions standards policy the opposition took to the last election is gone. That shouldn’t come as a surprise; Labor has been working up its 2030 emissions policy for a while and part of that has been shedding parts it faces government attack over. With all the talk of “mandates” back (the government has claimed Labor wanted to mandate what vehicles people could drive, which isn’t true) as well as “taxes” (the government has also claimed things like the fuel emissions standard was a tax on family) Labor has been working on minimising as many attacks as possible (which doesn’t always lead to the best way to build policy, but here we are). As Murph has been reporting, a 2030-35 target from Labor is expected very soon and it will be more ambitious than the Abbott-era policy the government is holding on to. With Labor starting its pseudo campaign this weekend (a campaign rally has already been announced) you can expect that policy announcement sooner rather than later. Once parliament is over, it’s game on for both sides. Scott Morrison wants to make today about his social media bill, which is actually just a defamation bill, containing elements already available in state jurisdictions (social media platforms have always been publishers, for instance). So you’ll be hearing a lot from the government about protecting young people and women from “anonymous trolls” on social media platforms. The legislation doesn’t do that though. It gives avenues for *some* people to be able to go to court to get an email address associated with an anonymous account. (And let’s not forget that when an actual pile-on is on, a lot of it comes from accounts with names and not everyone can afford to sue for reputational damage.) (Plus, just yesterday, the same day the Kate Jenkins report was handed down, the Senate didn’t exactly cover itself in glory when it came to respect.) We’re international news again: Turns out those in the Victorian parliament are probably the most sleepy in the country: It’s the second last sitting day of the year and the government still has things like the voter ID legislation to get through, so it’s beginning to cut things a little fine. There won’t be any federal integrity commission legislation from the government. We know that. Scott Morrison is blaming Labor for his government not bringing on the bill (which is now just an exposure draft) because for some reason, Labor not supporting the government’s proposal is a stumbling block for a government which carries a majority in the House and has brought on countless bills the opposition does not support. But that’s the logic we’re being offered up on this one. Labor doesn’t support the voter ID laws but, at this point, the government is pushing ahead with those. There’s also religious discrimination, which is off to a joint committee, which will meet over the summer holidays to report back by early February. Morrison wants that one wrapped up before the election, hence the rush. So we’ll probably at least squeeze in the February sitting before the next election, but again, there’s no guarantees on that. National cabinet met late yesterday and all the leaders agreed to hold the line on keeping domestic borders open, most likely anticipating a whole of country meltdown if Christmas is cancelled for the third year in a row. That, and no one knows enough about the Omicron Covid variant yet to want to make a decision which could end up looking a bit panicked. So far, there is no information warranting any other action than watch and wait (domestically at least). But there are a few more obligations for returning international travellers; in NSW those who don’t comply with quarantine/isolation rules face a $5,000 fine, up from $1,000, while Victoria is mulling whether to reintroduce a 14-day quarantine for returned travellers (no change as yet though). Speaking of Victoria, it should pass its pandemic laws today, after securing the votes it needed from the crossbench. We’ll keep you up to date with all the political news (and a little more, given Covid is still with us) with Mike Bowers, Katharine Murphy, Daniel Hurst, Sarah Martin and Paul Karp at your service. The entire Guardian brains trust is also chipping in, as usual, to make sure you know everything you need to know to stay up to date across the nation. It being a sitting day, Amy Remeikis is on the blog. Will there be enough caffeine? Probably not. But onwards anyway. Ready?An army of 3,000 staff will fan out from Marks &amp; Spencer’s head office this week with one mission in mind: meeting the Christmas boom. Staff whose day jobs typically range from human resources to procurement will head to its network of stores to help pick and pack Christmas online orders. With a shortage of delivery drivers, stock gaps and booming demand for online shopping, retailers are turning to increasingly creative ideas, from rail and air freight, cargo bikes and direct-from-store deliveries to chartering their own ships, to ensure they can meet demand at the busiest time of the year. After a lockdown-interrupted year, and with households sitting on record levels of savings, much rests on getting this right. Katie Bickerstaffe, head of M&amp;S’s clothing and home division, calls its stores a “critical part of our supply chain network for [picking up online orders]”. She said the retailer now handles 9% of online orders for its clothing and homeware business direct from 254 stores, compared with just 1% before the pandemic. Bickerstaffe describes the system as a “genuine competitive advantage”, enabling M&amp;S to make better use of stores and store staff during the peak shopping period. Workers, who are typically based at its head office in Paddington, west London, normally do one or two days helping with the Christmas rush in M&amp;S’s food department, but this year they will also do an extra day in stores, working on online orders. In a blog post, Bickerstaffe said: “Every year our 3,000 support centre colleagues go out into our stores to help deliver the best possible Christmas for our customers – service with a smile and a truly seamless experience. In the past the focus has always been on the final days – keeping the milk fridge full in the buzzing foodhall or being an additional colleague on the till, but part of delivering the best service now means meeting the growth of online and having orders ready quickly, so this year, for the first time, colleagues are going in to help with in-store fulfilment.” M&amp;S’s tactic of using stores as mini-distribution hubs, enabling shoppers to pick up orders made online locally and avoiding the need for costly lorry or van trips, has also been successfully used by other retailers including B&amp;Q. Other tactics have included chartering dedicated cargo ships to bring in goods, handing out hefty bonuses to attract and retain skilled drivers and switching to rail freight, which Tesco said had helped it keep its shelves better stocked than rivals. Tesco is not alone. At least four new UK rail freight services a week have begun from UK ports including Liverpool and central distribution hubs such as Doncaster in the last month to service rising demand. Each carries the equivalent of 50 to 80 lorryloads of goods around the country. Tesco began using a dedicated new train service on Tuesday, which runs from Tilbury in Essex to Scotland, carrying the equivalent of up to 40 lorry loads of goods. Last month three or four “wine express” trains began running from Tilbury and other ports to Daventry in the Midlands. Julian Worth, chair of the rail freight forum at the Chartered Institute of Transport and Logistics, said that the new train services could carry the equivalent of about 1,000 HGV lorry trips a day. While hold-ups with international shipping meant that the rail network handled about 5% less consumer goods in the first part of the year, compared with pre-Covid levels, Worth expects volumes to be “well up” this autumn as many more retailers, including smaller specialists, have turned to rail to solve their delivery problems. “Businesses started [considering rail transport] for decarbonisation and that has been turbocharged by the operational imperative of the driver shortage,” he said. “Businesses have accelerated their plans for modal shift by two to three years.” With fuel costs and staff costs on the rise, food and drink producers have also begun looking at building railway sidings or other facilities to bring goods directly to their warehouses by train. Bottled water producer Highland Spring is building a siding at its main bottling plant in Blackford, Perthshire, while baked bean maker Kraft Heinz has tested bringing in products at night by lifting them straight from a train parked on a line that runs beside its Wigan distribution centre. The efforts come as driver shortages have combined with poor weather and high demand during the Black Friday sales period to already cause disruption for some major retailers. John Lewis stretched its standard delivery pledge to 10 days from the usual five days on 23 November partly because of poor weather around the country as well as heavy demand after the Black Friday discount weekend. The company said it expected to shorten delivery times after that glut of orders had been dealt with. The last orders date for standard delivery for Christmas is currently 20 December, which is similar to last year when the industry was under severe pressure. Click and collect orders are expected to be possible until the 23rd, although this may change depending on the progress of the pandemic. M&amp;S said it was experiencing delays on deliveries to some cities including Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Leeds, Sheffield and York because of problems caused by the weather. A note on the retailer’s website said: “Due to adverse weather conditions, we are experiencing disruptions in our carrier services causing delivery delays. We are working closely with our carrier partners to get your order to you as soon as we can.” The total volume of items being ordered online across the UK for home delivery is currently below expectations according to one major provider, as shoppers are able to visit the high street unlike last November when the UK was in lockdown. Industry experts are expecting a last-minute flood of parcels as late deliveries of goods at ports finally arrive in warehouses and stores. “We expect to see a lot of volume roll into the last week in December because of delays in product availability,” said Bobbie Ttooulis, marketing director for Global Freight Solutions, which provides services for online retailers. With the rise of the Omicron Covid variant potentially prompting more people to order from their laptop, retailers will need every new tactic they can find to ensure deliveries arrive in time for Christmas Day.When David Tweed died in a crash in County Antrim at the end of October, Ian Paisley Jr, Tweed’s MP, spoke of his sadness: “David was a well-known Ulsterman.” He had been a “leading Ulster and Ireland rugby star”, a “political activist” and an “elected official”. He sent prayers to Tweed’s family at what he said must be “an unimaginably heartbreaking time”. Tweed was a former Democratic Unionist party councillor. Local DUP politician Mervyn Storey said he had known “Davy” and his family for most of his life and could not begin to imagine the sorrow they must have been plunged into. “Just on Sunday past he sat in front of me in church,” he reminisced. “He was a larger than life character and not just only in his physical presence.” Both men have had to revisit their early condolences. Tweed’s courageous and furious daughters immediately came forward to challenge what they described as a false narrative based on “blind loyalty”. His stepdaughter Amanda Brown put it starkly. “He was a predatory paedophile and a violent thug who smashed our mother’s face to a pulp,” she told a Sunday newspaper. She was eight when he first sexually abused her. He ruined her childhood. Five of his daughters spoke of horrific years of rape, physical and emotional abuse, of constant dread and terror. Victoria Tweed said he was a monster. His sister, Hazel McAllister, said he should have been in prison. Last Tuesday, Paisley and Storey issued a statement. They would want nothing in what they had previously said “to take away from the subsequent powerful and distressing words of his daughters who have bravely told of the horrific abuse they suffered”. They had never intended to add to any hurt. Members of the family acknowledged the retreat. However, Tweed’s violence against women and children was publicly exposed years ago. He was sent to jail for eight years for child abuse in 2012. Harrowing victim impact statements read out in court included the revelation that one girl tried to kill herself. Tweed admitted being violent to his ex-wife Margaret. She spoke of a 23-year marriage during which: “He would beat me black and blue.” He threatened her, and others, with loyalist paramilitaries. This threat was not idle. Tweed’s “political activism” included taking part in aggressive protests to which paramilitaries lent their muscle. I met him at many of these events – he was always happy to provide belligerent and sectarian soundbites. The Harryville blockade in 1996 was terrifying – he and dozens of other men strode around roaring abuse and menacing Catholics as they tried to go to mass at a Ballymena church. When the parish priest appeared, Tweed would shout at him: “Paedophile!” As a member of the Orange Order he was a stalwart in the 1990s at Drumcree and Dunloy, when the Order attempted to unite the unionist family, including its thugs, to derail the peace process. When the Ulster Volunteer Force played its part by burning to death the Quinn children in Tweed’s home town of Ballymoney, Tweed denied the murders were sectarian. After a loyalist gang beat to death Catholic teenager Michael McIlveen in Ballymena, Tweed said he had questions about how well brought up the boy had been. Tweed left the DUP in protest when his old hero Ian Paisley Sr signed up for power sharing in 2007. He became a councillor for the Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV) party. Its leader, Jim Allister, also declared himself “deeply saddened” by the death of Tweed, a “larger than life character”. It was “a devastating blow to his family and wide circle of friends”. After Brown spoke out, he denied any disrespect. He said Tweed’s conviction was overturned and he was “not going to be bullied into saying the court was wrong to acquit”. Brown said she was “disgusted”, pointing out that in 2016 the conviction was quashed on a technicality. A day after the DUP men pulled back, Allister acknowledged that some of his comments “whether as reported or because they could have been better chosen” might have added to the hurt felt by Tweed’s daughters. Since then Tweed’s brother-in-law, James Boyd, has revealed that his daughter, Gemma, killed herself in 2013. Tweed had abused her, he said, and “she couldn’t get past it”. A “service of thanksgiving” for the life of David Alexander Tweed was held at Ballymoney’s Hebron Free Presbyterian church. The order of service had a photograph of him in his Orange sash and bowler hat. Although the Order had expelled him when he was convicted of child abuse, some of the Orangemen present wore their sashes as a sign of respect. The “Qualifications of an Orangeman” state that he “should seek the society of the virtuous, and avoid that of the evil”. The Order’s grand secretary, Presbyterian minister Mervyn Gibson, said of the controversy: “We have no comment to make.” Mid-way through the UN’s 16 days against violence against women, it should be noted that Northern Ireland is the only region in the UK and Ireland that has no strategy to tackle gender-based violence, that it has the highest rate of domestic murder in Europe (sharing that dishonour with Romania). The latest rape statistics show that out of more than 1,000 cases reported to the Police Service in 2020-21, only eight led to convictions. Many recommendations made in a report by retired judge Sir John Gillen after the notorious “rugby rape trial” in 2018 have not been implemented. Earlier this month, Sinead McGrotty, who worked as a civilian in the police, told her disquieting story. She said a male detective subjected her to sexual assaults and rape threats which left her feeling violated and suicidal. She felt vulnerable as “a young Catholic girl” in a largely Protestant workplace, but reported him in 2012. The Public Prosecution Service found insufficient evidence to prosecute. An internal disciplinary process ignored most of the complaints. The detective admitted one incident of inappropriate touching and was fined £250. He was not suspended and kept his job. In August, nine years after her complaint, she got an apology from the chief constable for the way the situation had been handled. Last week the justice Minister, Naomi Long, was subjected to a pile-on of cruel and abusive social media posts directed at her weight and appearance after she spoke about potential new restrictions arising from the Covid pandemic. Long said she was strong and well supported, but added that she worried for “young women growing up surrounded by misogyny, sexism, bullying and body shaming.” She quoted Maya Angelou: “You may kill me with your hatefulness / But still, like air, I’ll rise.” Northern Ireland was well described as an “armed patriarchy” during the Troubles, but while the guns have long since been decommissioned, the mindsets of the patriarchs have not. Bullies and bigots are just “larger than life”. Women who have suffered at the hands of hateful, violent men need respect, compassion and justice. Here they have to bare their souls and fight like warriors. Susan McKay is an Irish writer and journalist whose books include Northern Protestants – On Shifting GroundOn Saturday morning the BBC broadcast an interview with the former England captain Michael Vaughan about accusations of racism, that he has repeatedly denied, made against him by his former teammate Azeem Rafiq. If it was a deeply uncomfortable experience for Vaughan, who has been dropped from the Test Match Special team covering the forthcoming Ashes, then he was at least optimistic. “How we move on from this situation is the key,” Vaughan argued with regards to the Yorkshire scandal exposed by Rafiq. “I firmly believe that it’s education, honest conversations, people admitting that things may have been said and sticking their hands up.” On the most serious accusation against him – that he told four Asian players including Rafiq in 2009 that there were “too many of you lot” – Vaughan was not sticking his hand up. Rafiq’s version of events has been supported by two of the other players, Adil Rashid and Rana Naved-ul-Hasan; Ajmal Shahzad says he did not hear it and praised the backing he had from senior Yorkshire players at the time. Vaughan reiterated that he had no memory of making the comment. He rejected Rafiq’s suggestion that he may have forgotten he said it because he did not fully grasp its overtones. Still, he told interviewer Dan Walker, he wanted to apologise to Rafiq. “I’m sorry for the hurt that he’s gone through.” It was a tough watch. As with many England cricket fans who came of age in the summer of 2005, Vaughan was my sporting hero. Still is, in many ways. We worked together at the Telegraph. I occasionally ghosted his column. He was unfailingly friendly, generous with his time, a devastatingly insightful analyst of cricket. The point of telling you all this is that for all the triumphalism in some quarters at Vaughan’s downfall on social media, none of this feels remotely pleasant or cathartic. But perhaps Vaughan’s greatest gift in his post-retirement life was his ability to play the game. Not cricket; the game of media cycles and bought takes, the ability to get just the right sort of rise out of the right sort of people. On Twitter he created a sort of clubbable, bloke-in-the-pub character who would declare it “vino o’clock” and share spiky banter with Australian and Indian fans. What Vaughan grasped above all was the essential disposability of opinion in the digital era. People wanted them; he supplied them; they reacted. Tomorrow, the game starts all over again. And so the curious timing of his interview – almost a year after Vaughan first became aware of Rafiq’s accusations, more than three weeks after his self-exculpatory Telegraph column – bore all the hallmarks of reputation laundry. Vaughan apologised for some of his more reprehensible older tweets, including one suggesting that Moeen Ali should spend his time in between Test matches asking Muslims if they are terrorists. But it also felt like an attempt to move on, rebuild his reputation, launch the comeback. “Society is a different place,” he claimed. “We all know things back then were wrong, and now things are right and getting better.” It would be easy to see why Vaughan might view his fate as essentially an accident of timing. In 1995, Henry Blofeld was commentating on TMS when he remarked upon a balcony overlooking the ground where people could watch for free. “The Jewish stand,” he called it. Four years ago, way back in 2017, Geoffrey Boycott told the audience at a corporate dinner at Edgbaston that he should “black my face” if he wanted to receive a knighthood. Both apologised and carried on working as normal. When first alerted to the accusations, who can really be surprised that Vaughan asked the investigation panel for guarantees of confidentiality and then withdraw his cooperation? But sure, let’s have some frank and honest conversations now. In the past couple of weeks Vaughan’s case has become something of a cause celebre on the right, which has neatly folded the BBC’s decision into their ongoing debate on cancel culture. A “show trial”, a writer in the Spectator called Walker’s interview. This is a fiction you can maintain if, like many commentators on the right, you are thick and vindictive. Vaughan is neither. “We’ve got too much ‘he said, she said, did they say’,” Vaughan told the BBC. “And I think we’ve got to move on from accusations of conversations from many years ago. There’s a bigger picture here.” On the central charge, however, he denies even the merest uncertainty or ambiguity over his version of events. And so what people call “cancel culture” is really just the sheer impossibility of engaging anybody in power on serious issues until the last possible moment. We needed Vaughan to be talking about this stuff – Rafiq and racism in Yorkshire cricket – years ago, instead of waiting until he was in the crosshairs. If the BBC had taken Blofeld’s antisemitic slur more seriously in 1995, or reckoned with Boycott’s domestic violence conviction before they rehired him in 2005, or taken a stand in 2017, we might not be here now. Ashley Giles, the director of England men’s cricket, has talked of the importance of “second chances”. Every day of cricket’s silence was a chance. Go back through history and there were opportunities to educate, to forgive, to have the difficult conversations that are deemed so crucial now. Instead the most powerful people in cricket simply clung to their omerta like a blanket, carried on cashing the cheques, consolidating their position, until nothing less than a biblical torrent of shame and rage could awaken them.The Morrison government’s anti-trolling bill purports to help the victims of online abuse by improving pathways to complain about defamation and identify anonymous commenters. But a close analysis of the bill, released on Wednesday alongside the announcement of a parliamentary inquiry into social media, suggests the biggest beneficiaries are media companies and other operators of social media pages, including community groups and businesses. Ordinary social media users will still face a tricky process to identify commenters, with alleged trolls able to refuse to take posts down or consent to being identified. So how will the proposed changes work and will they really help ordinary people pursue a defamation claim? What is the problem? The bill counteracts the high court’s decision in Dylan Voller’s defamation case, which ruled that media companies were liable as publishers of comments that other users made on their social media posts. In a paper on the changes, the government said this could have a “chilling effect on free speech” and see Australians and businesses with ordinary social media pages held liable. It gave the example of a busy cafe owner who doesn’t have the capacity to moderate comments on her page promoting her cafe. The bill also covers cases where a complainant does not know where a commenter is located, and does not know their identity or contact details, preventing them from starting a defamation case against them. How does the bill fix these? The bill deals with the liability issue by deeming that an Australian person or company with a social media page is not the publisher of third-party comments made by other users. Instead, it deems the social media company the publisher. The bill deals with anonymous trolling by providing social media companies a defence in defamation if they have a complaints procedure to help identify commenters that meets certain requirements. Who will the new publisher rule benefit? Prof David Rolph, a defamation expert at the University of Sydney, told Guardian Australia that deeming any organisation, irrespective of their size, as not liable for third-party comments on their social media pages “has the effect of alleviating any media organisation from an obligation of content moderation”. “Why would they moderate comments on their social media pages … if they’re never going to be found to be a publisher?” Social media page operators may still moderate for other reasons, including their own reputations, but defamation liability being removed decreases the financial incentive to do so. Which social media companies will it apply to? The bill requires social media companies with more than 250,000 Australian users to have a “nominated entity” in Australia to comply with the obligations, and also allows the attorney general to set rules applying the law to other social media companies. There are fines of up to $550,000 for companies that refuse to comply, with a further penalty of up to $27,750 for every day they refuse. Rolph said that online defamation cases were difficult to pursue and enforce against international social media companies that do not necessarily have a presence in Australia. “A reform that seeks to make social media companies subject to Australian jurisdiction and make judgments enforceable against them is an advance,” he said. How will complainants unmask trolls? There are two pathways for complainants to seek to identify anonymous commenters. A person can complain to a social media company, which then has 72 hours to take the complaint to the commenter. Social media companies can remove the comment and identify the commenter, but only if they provide their consent. The companies must inform the complainant of the outcome. The second avenue is to apply to a court for an end-user disclosure order. If the complainant can’t get contact details or can’t determine if the commenter is in Australia and the court determines they could have a claim for defamation, the court may require the disclosure of the user’s country and contact details including name, email and phone number. Rolph noted the new bill comes after the first stage of defamation law reforms added the threshold of “serious harm” before an applicant can make a defamation claim. This area of the law is still “untested” and it “may not be as easy to get these types of orders any more” as a result of needing to prove serious harm, he said. Rolph noted there is already a regime for defamation applicants to apply for “preliminary discovery”, and applicants may continue to use this method to identify commenters. Will the government help complainants? The bill allows the attorney general to intervene if the complainant starts a defamation case against the social media company; or in cases seeking an end-user information disclosure order. The attorney general can then authorise the commonwealth to pay the applicants’ costs if the case settles an uncertain area of law or assists a section of the public that is “socially or economically disadvantaged”. The discretion for the attorney general to pay costs appears to only apply in favour of the applicant, not the commenter being sued, although a court may order costs against the commonwealth once they have intervened. Are there safeguards? To prevent abuse of the system, social media companies are only required to act if the defamation claim appears genuine. Courts may refuse an end-user disclosure order if “disclosure is likely to present a risk to the commenter’s safety”. Rolph said that safeguard is “limited” to the safety of the commenter, but in some circumstances identifying an anonymous person making allegations, such as a claim of family violence, might put others at risk, such as family members. How do social media companies currently deal with complaints? Facebook has a form for people to fill out when they believe they have been defamed, so users can ask for the allegedly defamatory comments to be removed, although lawyers describe the process as cumbersome. Twitter’s process requires law enforcement or other authorities to request allegedly defamatory content be removed or ask for information that must come with a court order to remove the defamatory comments. Twitter argues its own processes, including removing accounts found to have engaged in abuse or harassment, and the introduction of powers to limit who can reply to tweets are improving the overall experience on the platform. Google has recently found itself party to multiple defamation proceedings in Australian courts in order for applicants to force Google to reveal the account information or IP addresses of people who leave allegedly defamatory reviews of businesses on its maps and search platforms. After orders are made in court, a letter is then sent to Google in the United States, who will then release account information or IP addresses. Internet service providers can also be required to identify who is behind a particular IP address. What is the social media inquiry? On Wednesday, the Morrison government set up a select committee to inquire into the harms of social media, to report back by 15 February. The inquiry will consider: “the potential impacts of online harms on the mental health and wellbeing of Australians”; age and identity verification; child safety and parental tools; transparency and accountability; and safe collection of data.“Has there ever been an instance of two teams meeting in the English third tier, with one going on to suffer successive relegations and the other going on to achieve successive promotions so that, two seasons later, one team was non-league and the others in the top flight?” asks Jake Lennon. “If not, what’s the closest we’ve had? Or has the equivalent happened overseas?” The short answer is yes – with Mark Tollerton the first of many to nominate Norwich and Stockport. “They finished at opposite ends of the League One table in 2009-10,” he recalls. “Norwich finished second in the Championship the following season while Stockport were bottom again, of League Two, completing journeys to the Premier League and the Conference (as it was still called then). In addition, the Canaries managed to stay in the top flight for three seasons while County were relegated again to the Conference North, so in 2013-14 the two sides were competing five divisions apart.” Chris Roe highlights the mid-80s as a fertile period for third-tier teams heading in different directions. Derby County and Lincoln City met in the 1985-86 season. “Both were in Division Three but by 1987-88 Derby were Division One and Lincoln were in the Conference (fifth tier),” writes Chris, who also points out that Middlesbrough and Newport County did the same, with Boro heading to the promised land in two seasons and Newport plummeting into the non-league wilderness. Mick McMenemie offers a notable rapid change of fortunes for two clubs in Scotland. “Livingston and Brechin played each other in the Scottish third tier in 2016-17 and both got promoted to the second tier. The next year Livingston got promoted again. Brechin never won a match and finished bottom. They then finished bottom of the third tier … then bottom of the fourth, but were saved from relegation by Covid-19. They finished bottom the next season anyway and now sit in the Highland League (regional fifth tier). While their former third-tier buddies, Livingston, beat Celtic at home, Brechin have been losing to the likes of Inverurie Loco Works.” It’s not quite the two-season four-division swing of the examples above but definitely worth noting. Paul Brack points out that, but for goalkeeper Jimmy Glass’s famous intervention, Watford and Carlisle would have been a perfect example: “In 1997-98, Watford won Division Two (third tier) while Carlisle finished 23rd and were relegated. In 1998-99, Watford were promoted to the Premier League via the play-offs. Carlisle were on course to drop into non-league on the final day, before Glass scored to rescue them.” Ross White recalls (along with others) a dramatic shift in circumstances for Leicester City and Yeovil Town. “On 25 March 2014, Yeovil led away at Leicester from the 22nd minute, before being denied by a Chris Wood header two minutes into second-half stoppage time. Two years, one month, and 12 days later, Leicester lifted the Premier League trophy as champions. On the same day, Yeovil lost 1-0 at home to Leyton Orient, confirming their 19th-place finish in League Two – 86 places below their former adversaries.” A brace wearing braces “Reading academy graduate Jahmari Clarke notched his first two senior goals in an away win over Birmingham – and upon watching his post-match interview I noticed a completely irrelevant detail – he has braces,” writes Calum Pettitt. “Is he the first player to ever score a brace while wearing braces?” He’s not. A brilliant spot from reader Louis Ostrowski, who pointed us in the direction of Chelsea’s 4-1 win over Swansea in 2011, when Ramires did just that. Outfield players shining in goal (2) In last week’s Knowledge, we looked at emergency keepers who used their hands to good effect. And there’s more. “You missed ‘Long’ John Hewie, Charlton and Scotland who often went in goal when Mickey Duff was either injured or sent off, no subs allowed,” writes Clive Denny. “He was a full-back but during his time at Charlton started in every position and was selected four times as the goalkeeper.” And we thought James Milner was versatile. If you’d like to know more about Hewie, there’s a good piece in Nutmeg. Philip Skeldon has written in with another terrific example from back in the day. “I think you should include Con Martin of Aston Villa in the 1950s,” he suggests. “When the regular goalie, Joe Rutherford, was injured, Con stepped up and played 26 league matches and one FA Cup tie in the 1951-52 season. He originally played Gaelic football which developed his handling skills. He was offered a contract as a goalie by Manchester United but opted to join Leeds as a centre half, later moving to Villa. He was one of my heroes as a young fan. I always remember him as enjoying himself with a broad grin. We badly need that spirit today.” KF Tirana midfielder Ali Mema surely had a broad one on his coupon when he starred in the Albanian cup final of 1963. “Mema managed to save three penalties in the shootout of the Albanian Cup final, which they won against KF Besa,” writes Erblin Maçi. “The match went to penalties after a two-legged final. KF Tirana’s regular keeper Metani was injured during the game and the substitute Beliu was injured in extra time, so Mema went in goal for the shootout. He saved three penalties from Thabit Rexha (at the time a single player could shoot all the penalties for a side) and KF Tirana managed to win 5-1. Here’s an excerpt from the local paper.” Hang on, in Albania in 1963 they a) had sub goalkeepers and b) allowed one player to take all the penalties? Truly, we had no idea. Anyone got any other local, historical peculiarities to report? Get in touch if so. Knowledge archive “Driving past Colchester United’s ground the other day I remarked to myself how close it was to the A12 – seemingly less than a goal kick from the road. Also, the stands are not the biggest, and it’s not a ‘bowl’ stadium, so I reckon it’s very possible to kick a ball out of the ground on to the A12,” mused Philip Genochio in 2011. “So two questions: Has a ball yet been kicked out of the ground on to the A12 and can any other stadium lay claim to being closer to a major road?” Well, no one has managed to reach the A12 from the Western Homes Community Stadium thus far, said Colchester United, although David Prutton did once belt the ball out of the stadium in the process of being sent off against Tranmere. The ground, though, was built with safety in mind, and the distance between stadium and road carefully calculated. Plenty of grounds share Colchester’s proximity to a major throughfare. The A23 in Crawley is certainly a road to avoid on a Saturday afternoon: “Broadfield Stadium is situated right next to the A23 and that is without even a stand separating them,” wrote Jamie Morrison. “Rather there is a net but that is regularly cleared by the non-league defenders’ efforts to put the ball into touch.” Can you help? “The Premier League table now has only four teams with a positive goal difference. Is this the fewest ever with a positive difference?” wonders David Ellemor-Collins. “Would Eddie Howe’s Bournemouth-Newcastle journey be the longest intra-England managerial move ever?” asks Richard Powell. “In the last round of Champions League games, Atalanta’s No 91 (Duvan Zapata) scored against Young Boys’ goalkeeper (Guillaume Faivre), who was also sporting No 91. Is this the highest instance of someone scoring against their opposite number?” muses Jim Hearson. Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU. And now we’re in December, be sure to send in any festive-themed ones too.Members of parliament have voted to legalise controversial mitochondrial donation in the first conscience vote since same-sex marriage in 2017. The legislation, known as Maeve’s law, will legalise partial DNA donations, allowing women to give birth without passing on a genetic disease. The bill amended the Prohibition of Human Cloning for Reproduction Act 2002 (Cth), and the Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002 (Cth), and was subject to a conscience vote. It passed the House of Representatives on Wednesday night, 92 votes to 29. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, told parliament that the law had been a “difficult issue” to resolve, particularly for those with religious beliefs. He spoke about the suffering of Kara Crawley who had the disease that had led him to become a patron of the Mito foundation. “Kara, she died almost five years ago next year, and she died of her 20th stroke” Morrison told parliament. “She was a beautiful girl. I knew her very well over many years, and I know that her parents Craig and Karen would be very pleased this day. “Karen also has that Melas mutation. Her young, other son, Braden, he has it and he’s now suffering from the condition, and his younger sister Samantha also has that gene. “I just pray this will give hope to so many Australian families. I do indeed thank the house for the way that they have dealt with this manner.” It is estimated about 120,000 Australians carry the genetic mutation that can lead to mitochondrial disease, withabout 1 in 5,000 at risk of developing serious illness. The disease affects the energy production within cell function and can be debilitating and often fatal. It is the second most diagnosed serious genetic disease after cystic fibrosis. The bill was first introduced to parliament by health minister Greg Hunt in March and is named after five-year-old Maeve Hood, the daughter of Joel and Sarah Hood, who live in Hunt’s Victorian electorate. Maeve has a severe type of mitochondrial disease which was diagnosed at 18 months. The new laws in Australia follow changes to legislation in the UK made in 2015. Mitochondrial donation had been illegal under Australian law as it is an offence to create a human embryo that contains the genetic material of more than two people, and contains heritable changes to the genome. The treatment involves replacing mitochondrial DNA from the mother with healthy mitochondrial DNA from the egg of a woman who is a donor. Those who voted against the bill in the lower house included the Nationals leader Barnaby Joyce, conservatives Angus Taylor, Michael Sukkar and Alex Hawke, and Labor MPs Matt Keogh and Luke Gosling.The Covid B.1.1.529 mutation was first identified by South African and Botswanan scientists early last week. Within 72 hours, it had been renamed Omicron and designated the fifth variant of global concern. By last Friday, the first cases had been detected in Europe, and travel restrictions were being imposed. Now, it seems, the variant may have been circulating in parts of the world for longer than anyone had previously realised. Quite what the Omicron variant has in store for the world remains to be seen, but the winners and losers are again likely to fall along lines of rich and poor. For our big story, David Cox and Linda Geddes survey the uncertain landscape. Then, in our longer-read section, the philosopher and author Kwame Anthony Appiah argues powerfully why the pandemic should be the basis for building a fairer global society. The death last week of 27 people attempting to cross the Channel from France to Britain caused shock in both countries and resulted in yet more unseemly squabbling between Paris and London, where politicians are under extreme pressure to deliver on their promises to halt the crisis. Meanwhile, the human misery continues unabated at ramshackle camps such as those in Dunkirk, as the Observer’s Tim Adams discovers. On Monday, Barbados lowered the Royal Standard and declared itself a republic, cutting ties with Queen Elizabeth as its head of state. Michael Safi was there to witness a cathartic moment in the Caribbean island’s history and find out how the move came about. In our Culture section, there’s a throughly uplifting feature about how actors and performers with Down’s syndrome are breaking through to the mainstream. And we go behind the scenes of Moulin Rouge! – the musical version of the Baz Lurhmann movie that’s now running in London, New York and Melbourne. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your home addressThree years ago, after nearly half a century on the stage, Billy Connolly officially retired from live comedy. For those missing the comedian’s storytelling, his reading of his memoir is surely the next best thing. After sharing reflective titbits such as “Seek the company of people who, when left alone with a tea cosy, will always try it on”, the Big Yin tells the story of his life. We learn of his deprived upbringing in postwar Glasgow and how his mother left when he was four, meaning much of the child-rearing was left to his Aunt Mona, who belittled and beat him whenever they were alone. He endured further trauma when his father sexually abused him between the ages of 10 and 14. But this is far from a misery memoir, as Connolly revels in stories of schoolboy rebellion and friendship, his discovery of music, comedy and his rise to fame. Ultimately, the joy of his adulthood outweighed the sadness of his childhood. “The worst thing was that [Mona] instilled in me a belief I was useless,” he says. “In my adult life it has been an enormous pleasure – and my greatest ambition – to prove her wrong.” It’s not surprising that Connolly’s comically dismayed rants are less intense than they once were. In 2013 heConnolly was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease, which is why, rather than putting pen to paper, he dictated this book using his smartphone. But the narrative nonetheless retains the winding diversions and wild anecdotes that we have long associated with Britain’s finest standup. The voice may be frailer, but the joyful wit is all present and correct. • Windswept &amp; Interesting: My Autobiography is available on Two Roads, 8hr 38min Further listening Good Omens Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett, Harper Audio, 12hr 14min Michael Sheen and David Tennant reprise their 2019 television roles as the angel Aziraphale and the demon Crowley in a new recording of the apocalyptic comedy, joined by Rebecca Front. Three Sisters Heather Morris, Zaffre, 13hr 18min The third book in the Tattooist of Auschwitz series, charting the lives of three girls living through the Holocaust, is read by actor Finty Williams.The World Health Organization has said those not fully vaccinated who are vulnerable to Covid-19, including over-60s, should delay travel to areas with community transmission, as more countries imposed curbs to combat the spread of the new Omicron variant. The moves came as the WHO said “blanket bans” would not contain the strain of the virus which it previously warned presents a “very high” risk globally. The United States will require stricter coronavirus testing at borders for all travellers, including returning Americans, amid Omicron variant concerns. US officials will require everyone entering the country to be tested one day before boarding flights, regardless of their vaccination status or country of departure. Administration officials are also considering a requirement that all travellers get retested within three to five days of arrival. Currently those who are fully vaccinated may present a test taken within three days of boarding. The move is part of an enhanced winter Covid strategy that the Biden administration plans to announce on Thursday. From Wednesday, a vaccination will be required for travel in and out of Canada. Japan said it would expand its travel ban on foreigners entering the nation to prevent those with resident status from 10 African nations from entering the country “for the time being”. Singapore said on Wednesday that it will require mandatory PCR testing for all travellers and additional antigen rapid tests for travellers on vaccinated travel lanes. All travellers entering or transiting through the city state after Thursday 2 December must undergo a pre-departure test within 2 days of their departure for Singapore and obtain a negative result. All travellers entering Singapore must undergo a Covid-19 PCR test on-arrival. Hong Kong will expand its entry ban for non-residents to three more countries, Japan, Portugal and Sweden, from Friday, authorities said on Wednesday, while Indonesia added Hong Kong to its travel ban list alongside several African countries. Scientists are racing to determine the level of threat Omicron poses to the world, a week since it was first detected in South Africa. Cases have since been found in countries across North America, Asia and Europe. Nigeria confirmed its first cases on Wednesday. While it is unclear what level of protection vaccines may provide, the WHO issued a warning against travel to potential Covid hotspots for unvaccinated, vulnerable people. “Persons who have not been fully vaccinated or do not have proof of previous Sars-CoV-2 infection and are at increased risk of developing severe disease and dying, including people 60 years of age or older or those with comorbidities that present increased risk of severe Covid-19 … should be advised to postpone travel to areas with community transmission.” The WHO also said blanket travel bans “will not prevent the international spread, and they place a heavy burden on lives and livelihoods”. It added bans can have other adverse affects include deterring countries from sharing epidemiological data. WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said it was understandable for countries to seek to protect their citizens “against a variant we don’t yet fully understand”. But he called for the global response to be “calm, coordinated and coherent”, urging nations to “take rational, proportional risk-reduction measures”. The European Union’s medical agency chief said on Tuesday that it would take two weeks to have an indication whether the current Covid-19 vaccines would be able to deal with it. The variant has emerged as much of the northern hemisphere was already bracing for a new winter wave of the pandemic - leaving even nations with high vaccination rates struggling to contain rising infection numbers and prevent health services from being overwhelmed. Governments, particularly in western Europe, have already reintroduced mandatory mask-wearing, social-distancing measures, curfews or lockdowns – leaving businesses fearing another grim Christmas. Greece went ahead Tuesday in making vaccines compulsory for over-60s, while Norway will offer booster shots to all adults before Easter, as preferable to a lockdown. Britain has set a target of delivering third jabs to all adults within two months. But while curbs were returning to many parts of the world, the Pacific island of Fiji ended 615 days of international isolation on Wednesday and reopened to tourists. Traditional dancers in grass skirts welcomed waving holidaymakers from Australia, the first of an expected flood of desperately needed tourists in the coming weeks. Fiji Airways chief executive Andre Viljoen said it was a “momentous” occasion, where tourism accounts for about 40 percent of the economy. “The international border reopening will reignite Fiji’s economy,” he told reporters. With Agence-France Presse and ReutersAndrew Marr is to join the New Statesman magazine as its chief political commentator as part of a new chapter in the veteran broadcaster’s career after his departure from the BBC. Marr announced last month he was leaving the corporation after 21 years and would be presenting political and cultural shows for the media company Global, including programmes on the talk-radio station LBC and Classic FM. On Wednesday, the New Statesman confirmed Marr was joining the magazine as its chief political commentator after the move was revealed in Politico. The 62-year-old will pen a weekly political column and contribute more widely to its coverage when he starts in February. Marr said: “It’s a huge privilege to be joining one of the great titles of British political journalism, the paper of Orwell, Priestley and Ali Smith – I grew up learning how to think by reading Christopher Hitchens and other NS writers – and I’m thrilled to be there as part of my new life which includes daily political broadcasting for LBC and Global. I have been looking for partners who won’t be leaning on my shoulder as I write – and it seems I have found them.” “I’m delighted Andrew is joining us,” said Jason Cowley, New Statesman’s editor-in-chief. “He has unrivalled contacts and experience. He is a terrific writer, as well as broadcaster, and I hope and expect his arrival as part of the team will make the New Statesman a destination for readers across the political spectrum.” Marr’s departure is part of a wider reshuffle among leading presenters and journalists at the BBC. Jon Sopel recently returned from Washington DC, where he will be replaced as BBC North America editor by the Scotland editor, Sarah Smith. The BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, is reportedly in discussions about stepping down with a potential move to Radio 4’s flagship morning news programme, Today. Nick Robinson, who presents the programme, has long been tipped as a potential successor to Marr in the Sunday morning politics slot, while another Today presenter, Mishal Husain, has been suggested as a potential successor to Huw Edwards as the host of News at Ten if suggestions that he is also planning to leave the BBC prove accurate. Marr was born in Glasgow and began his career at the Scotsman. In 1984, he moved to London to work as a parliamentary correspondent for the newspaper, before becoming a political correspondent. He joined the Independent in 1986 as a member of its launch staff, before leaving for the Economist, where he ultimately became the political editor. Marr returned to the Independent as political editor in 1992 and became editor in 1996. He left in early 1998, with some reports suggesting he was sacked, and took roles at different papers before arriving at the BBC in May 2000.Patients who survive severe Covid are more than twice as likely to die over the following year than those who remain uninfected or experience milder virus symptoms, a study says. The research, published in Frontiers in Medicine, suggests that serious coronavirus infections may significantly damage long-term health, showing the importance of vaccination. The increased risk of dying was greater for patients under 65, and only 20% of the severe Covid-19 patients who died did so because of typical Covid complications, such as respiratory failure. “We conducted a previous study that showed that patients with severe Covid-19 who recovered were at significantly greater risk of being hospitalised in the subsequent six months,” said ProfArch Mainous of the University of Florida, the lead author of the study. “This new study extended that to investigate mortality risk over the next 12 months.” The researchers tracked the electronic health records of 13,638 patients who underwent a PCR test for Covid within the University of Florida health system, with 178 patients experiencing severe virus symptoms, 246 mild or moderate Covid-19 and the rest testing negative. All patients included in the study recovered from the disease, and the researchers tracked their outcomes. The study found that patients who were very unwell with coronavirus had a significantly greater chance of dying over the next year, a trend that was particularly notable among those aged under 65. As these deaths frequently occurred long after the initial infection had passed, they may never have been linked to Covid-19 by the patients’ families or doctors, the study found. Most of the deaths that occurred in severe Covid-19 survivors were not linked with common complications from the disease – 80% of such deaths occurred for a wide variety of reasons that are not typically associated with the virus. This suggests that the patients had experienced an overall decline in their health that left them vulnerable. “Since we now know that there is a substantial risk of dying from what would likely be considered to be an unrecognised complication of Covid-19, we need to be even more vigilant in decreasing severe episodes of Covid-19,” said Mainous. “Taking your chances and hoping for successful treatment in the hospital doesn’t convey the full picture of the impact of Covid-19. Our recommendation at this point is to use preventive measures, such as vaccination, to prevent severe episodes of Covid-19.” Covid-19 can cause severe symptoms and death for vulnerable people, particularly those with underlying health conditions. Some people also experience long Covid, signs and symptoms that last for a few weeks or months after infection. Symptoms such as fatigue and shortness of breath can linger for months after the infection has passed.“I’d have said: ‘You’re having a laugh,’” said Ellen White, when asked whether she could have imagined, as a schoolgirl, becoming England’s record women’s goalscorer. Speaking after her hat-trick in England’s 20-0 drubbing of Latvia had taken her two clear of the record 46 goals by the legendary former Arsenal striker Kelly Smith, White was relieved. “We move on and don’t mention it again,” she said with a laugh, desperate for the spotlight to be diverted away from her. That humility has endeared her to many, says Smith, who feels her own tally could not have been passed “by a nicer person”. “She’s very humble, she’s very wise, she’s a very likable person within the team, on and off the pitch,” Smith says. “She’s just a delightful person really. She’s worked extremely hard to get to where she’s at and she deserves all the accolades.” The 32-year-old White began in Arsenal’s academy and enjoyed three years at the club with Smith, winning two league titles and two FA Cups, after returning from spells with Chelsea and Leeds Carnegie. She then joined Notts County, scoring her first Women’s Super League goal for them against Arsenal in style, from a free-kick after play-acting confusion between White, Laura Bassett and Alex Greenwood to catch their opponents off guard. After two years in Nottingham, during which she spent a season out after rupturing an ACL, White played for Birmingham before joining her current team, Manchester City, in 2019. “She’s had an outstanding career,” Smith says. “She suffered quite a few serious injuries, like myself, but battled back and fought hard to get back to a high level. Her game has really evolved. I used to play at Arsenal with her and she played on the right hand side of a front three, mainly crossing balls in, trying to get on the end of crosses, being more of a creator. Since she moved into the middle she’s become a deadly striker not just in the WSL but in international football.” White has credited the former England manager Phil Neville with having helped her control her positioning. “He initially told me to stay in the 18-yard box, which I was quite resistant to because I like to run about a bit and get involved, but essentially staying in the width of the goal is where you’re going to score goals,” she said in November 2019. “It took a while for me to change my game a little and really understand what he meant by that: being in the right place at the right time and the timing.” That change saw her take England by the scruff of the neck at the 2019 World Cup, scoring six of the team’s 13 goals in seven games as they made it to the semi-finals. White finished with the bronze boot, level on goals with the golden boot winner, Megan Rapinoe, and silver boot winner, Alex Morgan, but having made fewer assists. At the Olympics this summer she was similarly influential, scoring six times in four games, including a hat-trick in Team GB’s 4-3 defeat by Australia in the quarter-finals. “She thrives off big games,” says Smith. “The Euros, the Olympics, the World Cups, that’s where you want to perform and test yourself against the best. There’s nothing better than playing international football. She’s led the line, using her experience and knowledge of the game; she’s taken her game to another level. Her movement to find the ball in the box, her finishing is lethal – when you’ve got Ellen White in the box you’ve always got a chance of winning.” White is a very different type of player to Smith, much more the classic No 9 whereas Smith was more of a technician, and they will be remembered in the history of the women’s game in very different ways but as equally important and influential. “Ellen is an amazing finisher,” says her England teammate Fran Kirby. “She has so much composure when she goes one v one with a goalkeeper. She’s always thinking: ‘What if?’ What if the ball comes in that area? Even if it’s with the defender, she’s already thinking: ‘If they play a long ball there, where do I need to be to get on the end of it?’ I think what she has done so well throughout her career is just being there, at the right place, at the right time. And that is what you want from a No 9. “I think she’s really learned a lot about that the last few years, saving your energy for the right moments to defend but also to be able to put the ball in the back of the net, and I think over the years that is why she has scored so, so many goals and she’s going to go down in history as probably the best ever finisher-striker in the England Women’s team.” There are more goals in White, who has a lot more to give in an England shirt. She will lead the line at next summer’s Euros on home soil, and the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand the following year has to be on the cards. “She’s undroppable because of her goalscoring ratio and how she is performing in an England shirt,” says Smith. “She loves England games and she’s nowhere near retiring if she looks after herself and keeps performing the way she has been. Her career is in her hands.” White is one goal behind Bobby Charlton’s 49 and five behind Wayne Rooney’s 53 international goals and becoming England’s all time top-scorer across the genders is surely well in sight, even if she doesn’t like it being said. “Thanks for mentioning that – that’s great,” she quipped. “I’m just focusing on what I can control, playing for England, loving what I’m doing, supporting the team wherever I can to help the team win really. We don’t need to talk about it any more.”As new cases of Omicron continue to emerge in the UK, scientists are working full tilt to answer two vital questions: when did the variant arrive and is it spreading? While at first glance those queries may seem less important than those around vaccine effectiveness or disease severity, the answers may give important clues as to what is to come. If Omicron has been present in the UK for months, yet only now been detected, that may suggest the variant is unlikely to rapidly outcompete Delta and create a surge of infections or lead to significant rises in hospitalisations and deaths. However, the picture is far less certain should it be a recent arrival. The first case of Omicron was announced on 24 November by South Africa, with the first positive sample dating back to 9 November. Since then it has been found in multiple countries around the world, including the UK, where the first cases were reported on 27 November in two people in England with links to travel to southern Africa. As of Tuesday there have been 22 cases in England and Scotland. But the first known case is not the same as the first infection. Prof Oliver Pybus, the co-director of the Oxford Martin school’s programme on pandemic genomics, said that, in his reading, Omicron has likely been circulating for at least a month. “It’s possible that international spread started quite close to the end of October,” he said. Dr Richard Lessells, an infectious diseases physician at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, added emergence in October was “plausible” given that this was the tail end of the Delta wave in South Africa. “This is consistent with how and when we’ve seen other variants of concern emerge; for example, the Beta variant emerged last year towards the tail end of our first wave,” he said. Lessells said analytical work to estimate the time of Omicron’s emergence focuses on comparing patterns of genetic changes that accumulate over time in different samples of the Omicron variant. But when it comes to detecting cases of Omicron, there are a number of challenges. Many of those with Covid do not have a PCR test, while the sheer number of Covid cases in the UK at present means, despite high levels of surveillance, that only about 20% of PCR samples are routinely analysed to identify the variant involved. To boost the hunt, active tracing exercises are under way across the UK, including “loop back” exercises, where previously collected PCR samples are analysed to identify the variant they contain. One factor aiding such efforts is that Omicron has a mutation that means it comes up negative on tests for the coronavirus S gene. This was also the case for the Alpha variant, but not the Delta variant, meaning the test can give a quick – although not conclusive – indication of whether a sample might contain Omicron, enabling rapid contact tracing efforts. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, confirmed loop back exercises led to the identification of the six cases in Scotland announced on Monday; health officials have revealed they are currently looking at PCR tests dating back to 16 November. However, Dr Jeffrey Barrett, who is leading the Covid-19 genomics initiative at the Wellcome Sanger Institute, said routine surveillance appears to have picked up the first known Omicron cases in England and it is unlikely the variant has been in the UK for long. “We have good surveillance, so there’s basically no chance of Omicron in the UK in September or October,” he told the Guardian. “It’s likely that we haven’t got the very earliest case sequenced, but it was almost certainly in November.” But the date of Omicron’s arrival is not the only pressing matter. Among others is whether there could already be a degree of community transmission. Should that be the case, experts have warned tens of cases could turn into hundreds in just 10 days or so. While Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has revealed all nine Omicron cases detected so far in Scotland have been linked to a single private event on 20 November, none were in people with a recent travel history to countries in southern Africa, or known links with others who have travelled there. And, as Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh, noted, while it is just possible the nine account for all the cases in Scotland, there may have been other introductions, and other contacts from people in the event. With eight Omicron cases reported in England on Tuesday, taking the UK total to 22, testing and tracing efforts continue. But in the race to understand the variant, it seems there is still a long way to go.The Morrison government has struck a deal with some moderate Liberal MPs to support its contentious religious discrimination bill, agreeing to make immediate changes to protect gay students from discrimination in religious schools. But the proposed amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act, which were negotiated between Queensland MP Angie Bell and the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, may not be enough to win over all moderate MPs and see the bill pass through the lower house this week. Liberal MP Warren Entsch has said he would not vote for the bill if the government forced a vote before a promised parliamentary inquiry was complete. The positions of north Sydney MP Trent Zimmerman and Bass MP Bridget Archer were also not clear. However, Bell, along with Wentworth MP Dave Sharma, Higgins MP Katie Allen and Reid MP Fiona Martin, have all agreed to support the religious discrimination bill in the House of Representatives as a result of the concessions finalised on Wednesday. Under the change agreed to by Cash, the government will introduce consequential amendments to remove section 38.3 of the separate Sex Discrimination Act which allows religious schools to discriminate against another person on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy. Bell, who is the member for the Queensland seat of Moncrieff, said she had argued for the change as she had “a duty of care to the children of my electors, in this case students who identify as part of a minority group”. “No child should be rejected or be made to feel ashamed on these grounds by an educational institution. In Australia, every child has the right to access quality education so they can prepare for the real world,” Bell said on Wednesday. “As the necessary amendments have been made to strengthen the rights of children in religious schools, I support the prime minister and the attorney general with passage of the religious discrimination bill and will vote in its favour.” Sharma said that while he still had concerns about elements of the religious discrimination bill, particularly the statement of belief clauses, he would not block it in the lower house. “Preventing the ability of religious schools to discriminate against students and teachers on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity remains of fundamental importance to me,” Sharma said. “This amendment goes some way to addressing this concern, but further measures are needed and I will continue to push for these.” Allen said she was pleased with the changes and believed “the right balance has been found.” “The newly agreed amendments to the sex discrimination act to protect LGBTIQA+ children in schools is welcomed,” Higgins said. “This is a significant win for the safety of children in schools.” Martin said the changes would address the “unintended consequences” of passing the bill without making amendments to the religious exemption clauses in the Sex Discrimination Act. “Representing an electorate with a range of religious and culturally and linguistically diverse communities, I am supportive of the purpose and need for this Bill,” Martin said. “However, most Australians would agree that religious exemptions that allow LGBTIQ+ children to be expelled is unacceptable and runs counter to our nation’s value of a ‘fair go’.” Securing the support of the four moderates will not guarantee the government passage of the bill through the house, with others still reserving their right to cross the floor. Labor is attempting to sidestep the religious discrimination stoush by reserving its position on the Morrison government bill until after a committee inquiry, but may wave it through the lower house if the government forces a vote. On Friday, Morrison referred the bill to a joint human rights committee inquiry reporting on 4 February, despite previously calling for a Senate-only inquiry with no input from MPs. Labor argues that having backed down from that position it would be highly unusual for the government to attempt to force a vote in the House of Representatives before the committee reports, and is seeking to enlist support from Liberal moderates to prevent it happening. The Labor caucus agreed to reserve its final position until after an inquiry; pursue “procedural measures” to delay a vote; but, if forced, to “not oppose” the bill in the lower house. Entsch told Guardian Australia he welcomed the change, but would not comment on whether it had changed his position. “Of course any positive advancement is fantastic, but if I am going to deal with it I want to get an outcome and I don’t want to be chest-beating,” Entsch said. If Entsch, Zimmerman and Archer are still prepared to cross the floor to vote against the bill passing the lower house, the government will be reliant on the votes of the crossbench or Labor to pass the bill this week.It wouldn’t be an Ashes tour without England players getting chirped by the locals but the latest example left Jack Leach wondering whether the joke might be on Australia. “I was having some food the other day in Brisbane with Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad and some guy came over afterwards and started saying: ‘Hey guys, I just want to wish you the worst of luck at the Gabba.’ So that was quite funny,” Leach recalls. “He said to us: ‘It’s going to be a green-seamer at the Gabba’ and I was thinking: ‘I’m not sure that’s the best sledge to two of the greatest bowlers that England have ever had.’ So I think they were pretty pleased about that.” Certainly the wet weather in Queensland during the buildup period could result in two ring-rusty teams facing off in the first Test on 8 December and on a pitch that is similarly underprepared; the chief curator at the Gabba, David Sandurski, needs the torrential rains to stop if he is to deliver the bounce that Australia’s pace attack crave. Though a green-top still feels unlikely, the La Nina weather system that is currently buffeting the east coast and likely to roll into next week could still turn English thoughts to an all-pace attack; this, despite Ben Stokes returning from his recent hiatus and, in theory, as the fourth seamer, helping to accommodate a spinner in the final XI. Leach did not play a Test all summer while Stokes was absent but hopes Joe Root and Chris Silverwood, captain and head coach respectively, note how other left-armers have performed against Australia, not least Keshav Maharaj when South Africa won away in 2016 and at home in 2018. Keeping an end tight was the primary role, but Maharaj also accounted for Steve Smith three times among his 21 wickets. Another muse for Leach is Nathan Lyon who, though a right-armer, has picked up 200 of his 399 Test wickets at home and shown that finger-spinners can prosper on harder Australian surfaces and with the Kookaburra ball’s less prominent seam. “For years I’ve watched Nathan Lyon and he’s very impressive,” says Leach, whose own experiences in Australia include two stints in grade cricket and a Lions tour in 2017-18. “Just how strong his stock ball is and on wickets that don’t necessarily offer a lot spin-wise, he’s found ways to extract extra bounce, dip and all the other things. They’re the kind of things that I’ve been trying to add in but still sticking to my strengths as well.” So far on tour Leach has been restricted to bowling in the nets or in front of the mirror in his hotel room. When England’s warm-up match against the Lions was washed out for the second successive day on Wednesday, they had played only 29 overs of cricket out in the middle since arriving in Queensland and before Jos Buttler, Mark Wood, Chris Woakes and Dawid Malan had cleared quarantine after the recent T20 World Cup. The concerns here centre chiefly around the seam bowlers, not least those longer in the tooth. While the batters can still groove themselves in the indoor nets to some extent, the likes of Anderson and Broad must get miles in their legs before their return at the Gabba. The former is 39, while the latter, 35, is coming off the back of a calf injury that wrecked his home series against India and followed a lack of competitive cricket beforehand. Both veterans have been out to buy tennis shoes so they can bowl indoors but Phil Scott, England’s strength and conditioning coach, has also prescribed a series of long walks around Brisbane for all the seamers. To break up the monotony of this, these scenic yomps apparently include a series of cryptic clues to answer en route. More vexing than this treasure hunt is the fate of a tour that faces potential logistical disruption due to the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Both sets of players have grown weary of bubble life and it is understood the Australian team have already told Cricket Australia they would push back against any further restrictions. As such, there appears little chance of the fifth Test taking place in Perth after Western Australia’s state premier, Mark McGowan, insisted that players, support staff and the various broadcasters would first have to undergo 14 days of hard quarantine. This has led to New South Wales and Victoria jostling to host a second Test match in the series. Cricket Tasmania is also keen to stage what would be a first ever Ashes match in Hobart but appears to be an outsider, with international fixtures at the Bellerive Oval bringing in a fraction of the revenues made at either the SCG or MCG. Whichever ground wins, the finale would probably become a day-night Test as a result, ensuring the same primetime evening TV audience on the eastern seaboard as a match in Perth. Like the joke about a possible green top in Brisbane, England won’t mind dodging the bouncier soil of WA and playing a second pink-ball match in the series.The first accuser in Ghislaine Maxwell’s child sex trafficking trial testified in Manhattan federal court on Tuesday that she was just 14 when the British socialite allegedly lured her into Jeffrey Epstein’s abusive orbit. This accuser, who used the name “Jane” in court, alleged that Maxwell was sometimes present when this abuse occurred and participated on some occasions. Epstein, a New York financier and convicted sex offender who counted Bill Clinton and Prince Andrew among his acquaintances, killed himself at a New York City jail in August 2019, while he was awaiting his own sex-trafficking trial. Maxwell, 59 and the daughter of the late British press baron Robert Maxwell, was arrested in New Hampshire in July 2020. Maxwell is on trial for six counts related to her alleged involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor teenagers. She has pleaded not guilty. “Did there come a time in your life when you had sexual contact with Jeffrey Epstein?” the prosecutor Alison Moe asked when Jane took the stand. The witness answered in the affirmative. Moe asked her age at the time. “Fourteen years old,” she said. “Did that happen once or more than once when you were 14 years old?” the prosecution asked. “More than once,” she replied. The witness was asked: “Was there ever anyone else in the room?” “Yes,” Jane said. Moe then asked: “Who was most frequently in the room when you had sexual contact with Jeffrey Epstein when you were 14 years old?” “Ghislaine Maxwell,” Jane said. Moe also elicited testimony from Jane in an effort to establish that Maxwell groomed Epstein’s victims, by gaining their trust and gradually ratcheting up inappropriate behavior, to normalize abuse. Jane told the court she had met Maxwell in summer 1994, when she attended a renowned youth arts camp in Michigan, Interlochen Center for the Arts. “We were eating ice cream,” recalled Jane. “We were sitting around socializing, and we see this tall, thin woman approach us.” “She was walking a cute little Yorkie and the Yorkie came by us, and we asked if we could pet the dog,” Jane said. “We started chitchatting and petting the dog. The rest of my classmates had to go to class.” A man, who turned out to be Epstein, came and joined Maxwell. Jane said they expressed interest in her time at camp, telling Jane that they gave kids scholarships; Jane had recently lost her father to leukemia, and her family had fallen into bankruptcy. After they learned Jane was from Palm Beach, they asked for her mom’s phone number, she said. She gave them her mom’s contact information. When Jane returned from Interlochen, they called and invited her and her mother to tea, she said. During tea at Epstein’s house, he told Jane’s mother that he wanted to see Jane sing. In the months following this tea, Jane started spending time with Epstein every week or two; Maxwell was usually present, she said. They took her shopping and to the movies, “casual stuff”, Jane said. There were some somewhat odd things. “I remember, maybe the first time I went to the poolside, and I walked out there and there was at least four women and Ghislaine, all topless and some of them were naked,” Jane said. “I was just shocked because I hadn’t seen that before.” Jane said the first time Epstein had abused her was at his Palm Beach home, when he was telling her that she needed to focus on her desired career field in the arts. “He said: I know everybody, I know all the agents, I know all the photographers, I know the owner of Victoria’s Secret, so I can make things happen, but you’ve just got to be ready for it,” Jane recalled. “The conversation sort of ended abruptly. It was in his office. He just kind of took my hand and said: ‘Follow me.’” “He took me in the pool house and, on the right hand side was this couch, futon-looking thing, and he just proceeded to pull me over. He sat in the corner and didn’t say a word,” Jane said. Epstein pulled his pants down. “He pulled me on top of himself, and proceeded to masturbate on me …” “I was frozen in fear. I’d never seen a penis before.” Sexual encounters continued over the next three years during almost every visit with Epstein, about every two weeks, Jane said. When Jane was 14, 15, and 16, there were times when Maxwell was in the room during Epstein’s abuse; sometimes, she touched the girl’s breasts, she said. “There were hands everywhere,” Jane said of one encounter with Epstein and Maxwell. Jane described being in group sexual encounters with Epstein, Maxwell, and others. Jane repeatedly turned toward the jury as she spoke, and used hand gestures while speaking. She grabbed a tissue at one juncture, and kept it in her left hand for the majority of the later part of her testimony. At times, when she talked about sexual details, she would breathe deeply. Jane’s voice cracked at two points during her testimony. Jurors appeared to watch Jane’s testimony closely. Maxwell wrote several notes to her attorneys during Jane’s testimony, according to a pool report from inside the courtroom. Jane was called to testify second, following testimony from Epstein’s longtime pilot, Lawrence Paul Visoski Jr. During Visoski’s testimony, he discussed Maxwell’s relationship with Epstein as he saw it, saying Maxwell was “No 2” in Epstein’s hierarchy, with Epstein “No 1”. Later, Visoski said that this related to Maxwell’s handling of Epstein’s non-business affairs. She ran everything in Epstein’s life, such as managing his properties, that didn’t relate to his business. Visoski was asked by lawyers for Maxwell if he had ever seen Epstein engage in sex acts. “No,” he said. The trial continues. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalWhile this is a sometimes flawed production, with an occasionally uneven pace and a script that could do with more depth, its importance should not be underestimated. Derby theatre artistic director Sarah Brigham is at the helm of this ship, stuck in the harbour last Christmas, finally setting sail this festive season. What makes the production quietly revolutionary is its integration of British Sign Language and captioning. Brigham is a hands-on in-the-community kind of leader and staging this production in a city that, she says in her programme notes, has one of the largest deaf populations in the country outside London, is an excellent flag planted. That there were a number of people communicating via sign language in the auditorium seats is a testament to the vision. The story itself is largely well served. Jim Hawkins becomes a young woman, Gem Hawkins, as in Bryony Lavery’s National Theatre adaptation, one of a number of roles played by two actors on stage together. It is an intriguing decision to have some characters double like this; the soul of Oraine Johnson’s Captain Flint is manifest on stage by Becky Barry, but the script never gets under the skin of why. The question doesn’t get in the way of a joyous production and having two Gems for the price of one when they are as engaging as the two actors here – deaf dancer and actor Raffie Julien and April Nerissa Hudson – is a bargain. Both have the ineffable quality of connection with the audience that is vital for all shows, but especially at Christmas. Capturing a wide-eyed innocence and joy of adventure as they set off aboard the Hispaniola (the BSL for which is beautiful) as the avatars of the young audience members, they are both perfectly cast. The show is almost stolen by Nadeem Islam who, as Trelawney, gives an irresistible comic turn and Alex Nowak as Ben Gunn is amusingly surreal. This production will tighten over the run, ironing out one of the flaws, but half the applause here belongs to a greater cause. At Derby theatre to 31 DecemberSome Republican states are expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over vaccine mandates, a move critics say in effect pays people for not getting vaccinated. Four states – Iowa, Tennessee, Florida, and Kansas – have changed their rules on unemployment to include people who have been terminated or who have chosen to leave their jobs because of their employers’ vaccine policies. The partisan divide is striking, Anne Paxton, staff attorney and policy director for the Unemployment Law Project in Washington state, told the Guardian. “It’s very hard to regard this particular move as being based on anything much more than political reasons.” The development also comes as the new Omicron variant has emerged, triggering concern that the strain could already be inside the US. If so, it would likely see a new spike in infections in America. There are 30 states with Republican-led legislatures that could follow suit. “I would be very surprised if it stopped at this four,” Paxton said. Missouri is contemplating similar laws, while states like Maryland are considering “mitigating factors” around unemployment and vaccine rules. Some Democrat states, on the other hand, have said that leaving a job because of mandates will disqualify former employees from these benefits unless they have demonstrated exemptions. “Partisanship continues to be a sharp dividing line in vaccine attitudes,” the Kaiser Family Foundation reported in October, with 90% of Democrats and 61% of Republicans saying they have gotten at least one dose. Only 5% of unvaccinated workers said they have left a job over mandates, and unemployment is dropping swiftly across the country. Unemployment benefits are not equivalent to full-time wages, Dorit Reiss, professor of law at UC Hastings College of the Law, pointed out. But rules like these may form an incentive against vaccination. “It’s like offering a financial benefit for not vaccinating,” Reiss told the Guardian. “If the person would not get unemployment benefits if they refused to wash their hands at work and were fired over that, they should be treated the same way.” Unemployment law in the United States is governed partly by federal law, but states have latitude to set their own requirements or restrictions, Paxton said. Typically, when employees are fired or they quit because of a business’s policies they aren’t eligible for unemployment benefits, unless they have an exemption for established religious or moral objections, or medical reasons. “Benefits are for people who are unemployed through no fault of their own,” Paxton said. But the interpretation of fault can vary. And in recent weeks, the Republican leaders of these states have signed bills protecting benefits around vaccination mandates, essentially liberalizing unemployment rules around vaccines in conservative states. If states want to change the rules around unemployment benefits for those who clash with employers’ policies, they should change the rules for everyone, Reiss said. “They should pass a law that’s broader that says, ‘Anyone who’s fired for cause gets unemployment benefits anyway.’ And that’s fine. That’s a value judgment, and states can make it,” Reiss said. But “limiting it to vaccines alone, it’s sending a message that vaccines are not important, and that’s a bad message.” There were already marked differences along partisan lines in how states handle unemployment benefits. “The blue states tend to be more generous in their eligibility rules,” Paxton said. “They tend to have higher benefits. And the red states have a tendency to be on the stingy side.” In Florida, for instance, the maximum benefit is set at $275 a week, which is lower than the weekly minimum in Washington. Many Republican-led states also opted to end federal unemployment assistance earlier this year. “They were not trying to help people who were jobless in that respect,” Paxton said. “So it’s hard to take this very seriously as a substantive, well-thought-out policy move in these four states.” Instead, she said, the decision seems to be less about unemployment policy and more about political tools “to aggravate the partisan divide,” Paxton said. Nine states have introduced restrictions on the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for businesses with more than 100 employees and for federal agencies and contractors. Tennessee and Montana have banned private employers from mandating the vaccines, and seven other states have introduced wide-ranging restrictions on mandates, according to the National Academy for State Health Policy. After Florida restricted the rules, for instance, Disney World halted its employee vaccination requirements. When it comes to ending the pandemic, Reiss said, working around mandates like these is “going to make it substantially harder”.On a cold, steely grey day in a farmyard in Essex I meet Spike. Thick-set, broad-chested, narrow-eyed, he has a look that says “don’t mess with me”, and he has tiny, pointed ears that have been cut to make him look more intimidating. Spike is an XL bully; bully stands for American bulldog, XL means bred to be bigger. They are fashionable among a certain type of dog owner, says Ira Moss, founder of the rehoming charity All Dogs Matter. We’re at its kennels near Waltham Abbey in Essex. XL bullies – along with cuter, “more designery”, says Moss, French bulldogs, dachshunds, cockapoos and cavapoos – “were the top five lockdown dogs”. And they are being abandoned like never before. Sadly, it’s not just dogs. Animal charities and vets have reported everything from cats to cockerels being left. And they are braced for Christmas to be even busier. But back to Spike. Turns out he is a big softie. When he gets nervous, he wees, and Spike gets nervous a lot. He was imported as a puppy from Hungary, where ear cropping, illegal in the UK, still happens, and was bought by a young couple for £4,000 (prices rocketed during the pandemic). They lived in a flat, so Spike didn’t get exercised or socialised properly, and his owners couldn’t cope. “If they’d sold him online, they’d have had hundreds of offers for him,” says Moss. “Someone with a two-year-old in a flat could buy an XL bully and they are potentially taking home a weapon. There’s no legislation, you can just put them online and you don’t know what you’re taking home.” Unlike many, Spike’s owners did the right thing and gave him up to the charity where Moss and her team will try to find him a suitable new home. At the other end of Moss’s lead – scuttling around her legs, sometimes demanding to be picked up – is Mimi, another pandemic puppy. Mimi, a French bulldog, was one of a litter of six taken from someone who was breeding dogs in their council flat and handed over to All Dogs Matter by the council. Moss took Mimi home one night, her husband fell in love, and they ended up adopting Mimi themselves. “People think frenchies are cute, because they’ve got big ears, but they can be quite feisty.” I also meet Ash, a cockapoo with some anger issues; Zara, a shepherd, whose owner had issues of his own; Trigger and Millie, ex-racing greyhounds now happy listening to Christmas music in their kennel; and Diamond, a staffie, who was probably used for breeding then dumped when she got too old. The All Dogs Matter kennels are full to bursting; it has happened in the past few weeks, says Moss, and there’s a waiting list. The same is happening at all the dog charities. Dogs Trust, the largest dog welfare charity in the UK, has seen a 39% increase in phone calls to hand over dogs since 12 July, when “Freedom Day”, a week later, was confirmed. Traffic to the “giving up your dog” pages of its website in July was up 100% compared with February 2021, and 180% higher than in February 2020, before the UK’s first lockdown. “We think about one and a half million extra dogs were acquired in the last 18 months,” says Adam Clowes, the Dogs Trust operations director. “These people got dogs in a very strange time. They weren’t able to introduce their dogs to other dogs in the park, they weren’t able to access good-quality training classes, veterinary care was limited. So we’ve got a whole cohort of dogs that started life in not the real world, and as life starts to return to normal those dogs and their owners are struggling to cope.” Dr Sam Gaines, the RSPCA’s dog welfare expert, however, thinks the seeds of future problems were sown way before the pandemic. “Families and individuals suddenly found themselves at home with a lot of time and that encouraged them to go and get a dog or other pet on impulse rather than thinking about the commitment and responsibility that comes alongside,” she tells me. Because the supply in the UK couldn’t keep up with demand, Gaines says, there was a surge in puppy imports, as shown by the increased number of certificates issued for the commercial movement of dogs. “The fear was that these puppies had been bred in establishments and conditions focused on high volume over welfare. So you have puppies that have been bred in poor conditions, likely to have been taken away from their mothers at too young an age, and then transported for long periods of time and exposed to lots of stressful experiences which have a negative impact on their future behaviour.” It’s hard to quantify the issue, but Gaines says that anecdotally there’s been a greater demand for behaviour therapists and trainers. “So we were then concerned that you end up with a large population of new puppies coming into the UK with a host of potential issues, going to new owners who might not necessarily have thought about the long-term commitment.” Thrown into that mix was a series of lockdowns, which meant a lot of puppies didn’t go out and meet other puppies and other people. “In the absence of adequate or appropriate socialisation you can end up with dogs with a whole range of behavioural problems, for example fear-related behaviour towards other dogs, animals, people, not being able to cope with crowds or loud noises.” It’s perhaps not surprising that Spike in Essex, though handsome as hell, is lacking in self-belief and confidence. He ticks pretty much all the danger boxes above, plus he has had half of each ear hacked off into the bargain. There’s more, too. Dogs typically go through adolescence at about nine months (the exact age varies with breed). “It feels like all the training you have done has been wasted,” says Gaines. “They just switch off and ignore you. But they’re being overwhelmed by changes in their brain activity and hormones.” Not unlike human teenagers, in fact. Then, of course there have been the seismic changes in many owners’ lives and circumstances. “Particularly being able to afford a dog,” says Clowes. “Everything seems to be going up at the moment. Bills, food, all reasons why people are unable to cope with a dog.” Others have lost jobs, or had to move. “With the end of the eviction ban we did see a number of people coming forward: they were having to move house and the new accommodation wasn’t dog-friendly so they had to make the heartbreaking decision to give up the dog.” Are the Dogs Trust rescue centres full, too? “We have a dog in every kennel, and we have dogs with all our foster carers. I think we are at the start of a worrying trend. We are certainly not at the peak.” It wasn’t just new dogs that people were getting to provide companionship during the pandemic. According to figures from the Pet Food Manufacturers’ Association, by March this year 3.2m households had acquired a pet since the start of the pandemic. And again, it’s not just dogs that have been abandoned. Like the six rabbits and three guinea pigs found discarded in a cardboard box in Barnsley on 26 October. Sadly three of the rabbits were dead but the rest were rushed into RSPCA care. Then there was Charlie the cockerel who allegedly just turned up in someone’s garden and is now looking for a new life, and maybe new love. And on 14 November, a dog walker in Morpeth, Northumberland, was surprised to meet a 2ft iguana sitting on a fence – it didn’t have the courage to come down on either side, presumably. Nearby was a cardboard box containing vegetables – it’s believed the animal, now in RSPCA care, had been abandoned before escaping. No name provided, but I imagine he’ll end up being called Iggy. Or Eddie Lizard. On one of my own lunchtime lockdown runs around the local park last year, I had to hurdle (well, almost, let’s say dodge) a sizeable python. I didn’t stop – there were enough bystanders there already; people had been called – but I named it Monty, obviously. “We are seeing a whole range of species being abandoned,” says Gaines. The RSPCA says abandonments are up by about 20% this year compared with last year’s figures, and this time is always especially busy. Last December, despite England and Wales having strict restrictions in place, the RSPCA still received a call every minute and took 70 animals into care every day. This year, with the combined factors of soaring pet ownership, and higher bills and energy prices, it fears – and is braced for – a busy Christmas. And let’s not forget cats. The most recent survey by Cats Protection, the UK’s biggest feline welfare charity, in October found that the owned cat population of the UK rose to about 10.8 million in 2021, up 600,000 on 2020. Covid has been a factor in that rise, with 7% of owners surveyed saying they got a cat for reasons related to the pandemic, such as furlough or spending more time at home. But thankfully, so far Cats Protection has not seen an increase in cats coming into its centres. Sadly the story is different, albeit anecdotally, at Blue Cross. Caroline Oram, animal welfare assistant at the charity’s Bromsgrove rehoming centre, says there has been a rise in cats and kittens coming in. “Last month we had 25 kittens on site – that’s unheard of at this time of year. With the pandemic and vets only doing emergency calls, a lot of people didn’t get their animals neutered and now we’re seeing that rise.” She tells me about Mochi, who came in with seven kittens even though she was only seven months old herself. Mochi’s owner couldn’t cope. “The pandemic has shown us that things can change in a flash. People say ‘I would never give my pet up,’ but then they find themselves in situations they never imagined would happen. We’ve had people turn up with a cat saying they can’t cope because they’ve lost their job, or because of a move or a relationship breakdown or they just can’t cope. We don’t judge.” That phrase – we don’t judge – is one I hear from all of the charities I speak to. And that it is better to ask for help than just to dump your pet. Like one man decided to do outside the veterinary practice in Tottenham, north London, where vet Bosco Yeung works. “A lovely Range Rover pulled up outside; a man got out, dropped a crate with five beautiful black cats, got back in and drove away. None of the cats was microchipped.” Yeung says they have seen more abandoned cats over the pandemic – old cats and kittens. They’re getting animals dumped there every three or four weeks. He thinks it’s mainly for financial reasons. “Many of the owners just don’t have the money to get them treated. If you can’t afford it, you can’t afford it – you can’t even put food on the table let alone pay for your vet’s bill.” It’s been a difficult couple of years for the profession, he says. “The whole veterinary field is really stretched. We’ve lost a lot of our vets because we are all burning out. All the EU vets, and the Australian and New Zealand vets are gone – there is no cover.” More pets, fewer vets: it’s not a good combination. The black cats dumped outside in a crate went to Cats Protection. Among all the doom and gloom and abandonment, it’s perhaps worth remembering that a lot of pets have played a blinder over the pandemic, as Gaines says. “They were there protecting our mental health and providing much-needed companionship and a reason to go outside to have daily exercise. That attachment between pets and people is incredibly strong.” There’s potentially good news, too, from All Dogs Matter, a few days after my visit. A nice working-from-home couple from Hertfordshire are coming back to meet Spike for the third time. I hope he doesn’t get too nervous. If it goes well, they’ll take him home. Fingers crossed. Some names have been changed • This article was amended on 2 December 2021. Adam Clowes is operations director at the Dogs Trust, not operations manager as an earlier version said.Japan’s surprise attack on Pearl Harbor 80 years ago not only ensured the United States’ entry into the second world war. It inadvertently but categorically changed baseball history. One day after the attack, Major League Baseball’s owners were expected to approve the move of the American League’s St Louis Browns to Los Angeles for 1942 – 16 years before Walter O’Malley’s former Brooklyn Dodgers played their first season on the West Coast. The Browns felt so confident that they even scheduled a press conference in Los Angeles to announce the move on the afternoon of Monday 8 December 1941. But in the aftermath of the attack in Hawaii 24 hours earlier – and with the radio broadcast of US president Franklin D Roosevelt’s declaration of war resonating vividly in the nation’s consciousness – the owners unanimously rejected the move, at the Browns’ insistence. Had the owners approved the move, it would have changed the landscape of American professional sports, and might have generated more sweeping social, cultural and economic shifts. Ten weeks before Pearl Harbor, the Browns had completed their 12th consecutive losing season. Between 1933 and 1941, the club finished last three times in the eight-team American League and only twice reached as high as sixth place. In 1937, the Browns lost 108 games. Two years later, they dropped 111. No American League team would exceed either total until 2003. Fans responded by staying away. Through 1941, the Browns had finished last in American League attendance every year since 1926. Not even 100,000 fans bothered to go to Sportsman’s Park to watch the Browns in the entirety of the 1933, 1935 or 1936 seasons. The Browns were losing so much money that they dropped five of their minor-league squads, laid off their four scouts and needed a $25,000 grant from the league to survive. Meanwhile, the Browns’ tenants at Sportsman’s Park dominated the city. The Cardinals won five National League pennants and three World Series, took second place five other times and never finished lower than fourth between 1926 and 1941. During that period, such future Hall of Famers as Dizzy Dean, Joe Medwick and Johnny Mize helped the Cardinals attract nearly three times as many fans. So Harry Arthur, a Californian on the Browns’ board, persistently suggested moving them to Los Angeles, then the nation’s fifth-largest city and the biggest without major-league baseball. With the club having just lost $100,000 (nearly $2m in today’s terms), owner Don Barnes asked Arthur to go west to solicit interest. “Well, the result floored me,” Barnes told the Sporting News in 1957. AP Giannini, the Bank of America’s board chairman, agreed to provide major financing. The Los Angeles junior chamber of commerce guaranteed an annual attendance of 500,000 a season for the first five years, with financial compensation for any figure less than that. “That was all I wanted to know,” Barnes told the Sporting News. But Barnes faced two problems. First, he had to get the territorial rights to Los Angeles. At the time, major-league clubs could move only to cities where they owned minor-league teams. Since just 10 markets had major-league baseball, however, several large cities offered enticing opportunities. Barnes solved his first problem when he met potential investors in Los Angeles. While there, he talked with Philip K Wrigley, the chewing gum magnate who owned the Chicago Cubs and their top farm team: the Los Angeles Angels of the Pacific Coast League. “Wrigley was very cooperative,” Arthur told the Sporting News, “for he felt, even at that time, that Los Angeles deserved major-league ball.” Wrigley agreed to sell the Angels, their ballpark (also known as Wrigley Field, like its Chicago counterpart) and most of their roster for $1m (almost $19m today) to Barnes, who would transfer the PCL franchise to nearby Long Beach. Barnes would pay $250,000 down, followed by $30,000 a year for 25 years. “His terms of payment were very fair,” Arthur said. “You couldn’t have asked for a fairer deal!” When Cardinals owner Sam Breadon learned Barnes wanted to move the Browns, he committed $250,000 to get his competition out of town. Even with Breadon’s and Wrigley’s support, Barnes had to solve the problem of transcontinental travel at a time when railways predominated and air travel was primitive. Team presidents “were concerned over the safety of their players should the shift of the Browns to Los Angeles require their clubs to make trips out there by air,” Barnes told the Sporting News in 1949. After consulting with Trans World Airlines (TWA) and the Santa Fe railroad, which operated a route between Los Angeles and Chicago, the Browns devised a schedule allowing for two transcontinental trips by rail and one by air, with enough off days to make travel viable. The Browns would partially compensate other clubs’ travel expenses and would provide $1m in travel insurance for their own players. Negotiations concerning every aspect of the move were so secret that Barnes signed all pertinent documents as “Mister X”. “Everyone was sworn to secrecy, for we realized that a leak might wreck the Coast League and, at the same time, ruin our own plans to move the club,” Barnes said in 1957. “It was remarkable that with so many people involved in the negotiations over a period of several months, nobody broke our confidence.” With their logistics in place, Barnes, general manager Bill DeWitt, travelling secretary Charlie DeWitt and manager Luke Sewell arrived in Chicago to present the proposed move at the Winter Meetings, which would take place 8-10 December. Arnold stayed in Los Angeles to organize a press conference scheduled for 1pm Pacific time on 8 December. “While we were worried a bit about some of the owners, we had definite commitments from others,” Barnes said. “In fact, all of the owners were sympathetic with our situation in St Louis and seemed willing to help us.” But while attending an NFL game on 7 December, Barnes and his party heard about Pearl Harbor over the public-address system. “Our dream was shattered,” Barnes said in 1957. “With the scare of a West Coast invasion, we realized at once that Los Angeles was no place for the Browns.” The next day, Barnes made his presentation but asked the owners to reject it due to the oncoming war. The other 15 owners agreed. Ironically, the Browns then enjoyed their most successful period ever. With other teams’ stars fighting overseas, the Browns stocked their roster with militarily ineligible players. As a result, they not only compiled winning records in three of the next four years but won their only pennant in 1944. In a twist of fate, they faced the Cardinals in the World Series, losing in six games, all at Sportsman’s Park. By 1953, the Browns had returned to their woebegotten ways. Nevertheless, they still had the chance to be the only team standing in St Louis. The Cardinals were in financial trouble. Owner Fred Saigh had to sell the team after pleading no contest to federal tax evasion that January. A group from Houston offered to buy the Cardinals and move them to Texas. But just before he accepted that offer, Saigh sold the club to the Anheuser-Busch brewery, keeping the team in St Louis. Bill Veeck, the maverick promoter who owned the Browns, realized Anheuser-Busch had the resources to overwhelm his club. The 1953 season became the Browns’ last. Four days after their final game, Veeck sold them to a group from Baltimore that moved the club and renamed it, “Orioles”. Given the success each team would have in ensuing decades, imagine a World Series between the Los Angeles Browns and the Houston Cardinals.This televisual but still touching documentary tribute to actor Rita Moreno, who turns 90 this month, is released in the UK as a warm-up act to Steven Spielberg’s new film version of West Side Story coming out next month. Moreno is probably most famous for playing Anita in the 1961 film version of the musical, in a zesty, broad performance in which she whips the voluminous folds of her lilac party dress while singing America. It was a turn that earned her the best supporting actress Oscar, and she will be in Spielberg’s new version, too, but Rita-as-Anita in the lilac dress will probably remain the image that most often comes to mind when her name is mentioned. Director Mariem Pérez Riera celebrates a career that had a number of interesting twists and turns even if she never rose very high in the film firmament after her big moment. Instead, Moreno broadened out and performed on stage and on television: she appeared in the 70s opposite Morgan Freeman in the kids’ show The Electric Company and, from the late 90s to early 00s, played a nun in the prison drama Oz. Most recently, she found acclaim in the 2017 reboot featuring a Cuban-American family of the 70s sitcom One Day at a Time. An interview with Moreno, still sexy as hell and sharp as a stiletto, anchors the story as she recalls her childhood in Puerto Rico and New York. Then came a long slog as an all-purpose, any-ethnicity-that’s-needed ingenue (although the accent was the same each time) after she landed a contract with MGM because she looked like, in the words of Louis B Mayer, “a Spanish Elizabeth Taylor”. She coolly recounts being raped by her agent and having a tempestuous seven-year relationship with Marlon Brando that led to a botched, illegal abortion and eventually a suicide attempt once they split up. These traumas helped fuel a hunger for justice and support for leftwing political causes, especially women’s rights. An assortment of friends, family and fans, including Lin-Manuel Miranda and Eva Longoria in the latter category, raise virtual champagne glasses to salute the lady, and it’s enough to leave the audience feeling warm and fuzzy. Overall, she emerges just as vampish, feisty and fun as you’d expect, and as a gracious giver of speeches at ceremonies where she collects endless lifetime achievement awards, her biggest side-hustle next to acting. • Rita Moreno: Just a Girl Who Decided to Go for It is on digital platforms from 6 December.The Leeds United chief executive, Angus Kinnear, has compared calls for an independent regulator in English football and a transfer levy on Premier League clubs to Maoism and the Great Chinese Famine. They were two of 47 recommendations made by a fan-led review of football governance announced last week. Kinnear supports much of what was included in the review but took exception with two key issues which he said were “as flawed as they are radical”. He wrote in his programme notes for Leeds’ game against Crystal Palace: “Football is a private sector business and has flourished that way. Enforcing upon football a philosophy akin to Maoist collective agriculturalism (which students of ‘The Great Leap Forward’ will know culminated in the greatest famine in history) will not make the English game fairer, it will kill the competition which is its very lifeblood.” Up to 45 million died of starvation during the 1958-61 Great Leap Forward, a failed attempt at rapid industrialisation. Kinnear believes the proposed redistribution of funds could end up rewarding poor governance in the lower leagues. “Teams further down the pyramid do not need their means artificially inflated, they need to live within them … Redistribution of wealth will simply favour the lowest common denominator, clubs who excel in recruitment, player development or commercial enterprise will be punished, while less capable ownership will be rewarded for incompetence.” The former West Ham managing director outlined his support for many of the recommendations. “There was much to applaud,” Kinnear wrote. “Increased supporter consultation, heritage shares, renewed focus for the women’s game and improving equality and diversity (among others) will all be met with almost unequivocal support. “However, the two most significant recommendations are as flawed as they are radical. The first is the demand for independent regulation and the second is an increased transfer levy to redistribute increased funds further down the football pyramid. “These proposals have been conflated to address the very separate issues of the demise of Bury, the threat of the European Super League and the takeover of Newcastle United.”Aid donors are being urged to revolutionise the way money is spent to move away from colonial ideas and create meaningful change. Ahead of a two-day conference this week, activists from Africa, Asia and Latin America have called on public and private global health donors – including governments, the United Nations, private philanthropists and international organisations – to prioritise funding for programmes driven by the needs of the community involved, rather than dictated by preconceived objectives. In a call to action, Aspen Institute’s New Voices Fellowship want donors to offer flexible, long-term funding for sexual and reproductive health and rights and ensure leaders, those allocating grantsand programme teams reflect the communities and groups they seek to support. They also want the “tiresome barriers and bureaucratic loops and hoops” involved in applying for funds to be removed. “The time for a revolution in understanding the dated and colonial concept of ‘aid’ is long overdue,” said Tian Johnson, an African queer activist and founder of the African Alliance, a global non-profit working on health rights issues. Johnson said donors offered “short-term project funding that seeks long-term impact without paying civil society organisations’ staff a living wage”. “At the core of what we would like to see is an exercise in humility. And that requires giving up spaces, sharing power, looking around the boardroom table, looking at the faces and asking, ‘do you see the faces of those you purport to be supporting?’” Johnson said. Mariana Assis, a Brazilian human rights lawyer, said funders must trust those receiving grants to know what their communities need and listen to how they think problems could be best solved. Organisations should be allowed to experiment with ideas, innovate and even fail, she added. “Funders are often afraid of taking risks, but by avoiding them, they lose the opportunity to support innovations at the community level that constitute new and better models of sexual and reproductive care,” said Assis, pointing to self-managed medical abortions, which have been described as a gamechanger. “In Brazil and in other countries, grassroots activists have come up with the revolutionary idea of self-managed abortion as a way of addressing criminalisation, stigma and socioeconomic barriers. And yet, ideas like this, in their first stage of development, are rarely funded precisely because of their innovative and groundbreaking character. That has to change.” On Thursday, the Aspen fellows will host a two-day virtual festival to address the failings in reproductive health and rights funding. Speakers include Dr Tlaleng Mofokeng, the UN special rapporteur on the right to health.The Omicron variant has been causing issues for the hospitality industry in the UK, with pubs, bars and restaurants receiving cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties. Some businesses have also experienced cancellations due to those not able to, or no longer willing to, travel to the UK due to restrictions. We would like to hear from those working in hospitality about the impact travel restrictions and the new variant are having on their business or workplace. We are particulary interested in hearing about last minute cancellations due to a change in travel plans. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Mushrooms are having a moment. Cultural depictions of fungi are proliferating: from Seana Gavin’s psychedelic mushroom collages shown at Somerset House last year; to the bestselling book Entangled Life, by the mycologist Merlin Sheldrake; we’re seeing there is more to the fungus than meets the eye. Trials into the therapeutic potential of psilocybin – derived from “magic” mushrooms – are even returning to modern medicine. And after one of the wettest summers in memory, local mushrooms are flourishing as well. Fungi-spotting reports from the public to the Royal Horticultural Society are up 76% compared with 2020, because of a bumper year. We should rejoice in this new mycocentric perspective. Fungi have long been neglected – ignored by global conservation efforts (fungal networks are only now being mapped for the first time), disdained by fungophobes who fear they’re all poisonous, taught little in school and earth sciences – but there are myriad reasons to pay closer attention. Wandering into the world of fungi is mind-altering, and endlessly enchanting. And it’s available just outside your door. The mushrooms we see are the fruiting bodies – the spore-producing reproductive organs – of unseen and underground fungal networks that break down soil nutrients, and connect tree roots across long distances. And they are abundant in mild and temperate Britain and Ireland. Mushroom-spotting is easy to pick up. Unlike bird-watching or mammal-spotting, when you might be lucky to see one or two animals, you tend to see mushrooms in groups. They are an “always too many”, as the anthropologist Anna Tsing puts it, or “So many of us! So many of us!”, in Sylvia Plath’s words. The role of chance also makes mushroom-spotting enjoyably serendipitous; you never know exactly what you’ll see. Conditions have to be exactly right for puhpowee – the beautiful Potawatomi word for the force that causes mushrooms to push up from the earth overnight – to occur for every species. Each pops up at different intervals in the season, like an improvised fungal symphony. Their ephemerality makes the moment of discovery even sweeter. Mushrooms aren’t just stalks and caps. There is a vast range of shapes and structures. There are pestles and antlers, berets and crusts, hooves and fingers, cups and nests. Umbrellas, funnels, parasols; troops and tufts. The crackle-brittle pattern of a stinkhorn’s cap; the slimy slick exterior of a parrot waxcap; the shaggy wig of an inkcap, oozing away; the umbonate tips like tiny nipples. You want colour? There’s scarlet, saffron, ochre, candyfloss pink, turquoise, violet. Poetic names? Candlesnuff, witch’s butter, earthstar, lemon disco, sulphur knight, destroying angel. Smells? Aromas of apricot, almond, fish, radish, cheese. I personally love the weird stuff. I’m always looking out for the dark brown-red beefsteak fungus that drips a blood-like substance when cut; or bioluminescent fungi that glow in the dark (even though it’s unlikely I’ll see that in England). Hunting with children is particularly effective. By dint of their height, and clear-minded observational powers, children can spot all sorts of things invisible to the adult eye. Watching clouds of spores erupt from puffballs, or taking a specimen home to make spore prints, or simply trying to identify a mushroom then and there can deepen a sense of intrigue or kinship. In the UK, we have an amazing diversity of fungi but also barriers that stand in the way of people foraging or simply observing mushrooms, as is popular in France, Germany and other European countries. Laws of trespass and disconnection from nature have led to ecophobia and “fungus blindness”, as Sheldrake puts it, that have separated us from our fungal relatives. So we may benefit from a new relationship with fungi. Awe is good for our health and, while we may not have grand canyons or huge mountain ranges or charismatic megafauna in Britain, we do have awe in abundance through mushrooms. As we learn more about how fungal networks communicate and influence wider ecosystems, such as the woodwide web, fungi may have important lessons for the planetary crisis. The sheer gumption and brio of mushrooms may help us imagine new futures and possibilities. Mushrooms represent the possibility of transformation and the fundamental reality of ecological interconnectedness, collaboration and interspecies entanglement. Fungi also bind up carbon in the organic compounds they produce. They are strong enough to break through paving stones. Their process unseen and invisible until, oh, there it is. Thinking through fungi seems like a fruitful way to imagine a different kind of world. It would be remiss to write about mushrooms without paying tribute to Roger Phillips, the much-loved author and godfather of foraging, who died last month. For many, his books are the definitive guides to other species in our living world and his presence on Instagram in his final years was a source of knowledge, passion and wonder. For those starting out, a guide by Phillips is a good place to begin. Your local nature organisation or nature trust may run fungi-finding or foraging walks. The British Mycological Society and other societies hold events and talks. When you’re out, don’t forget to look down – on dead wood, around tree stumps and trunks – and up – for bracket or bracket-like fungi such as Chicken of the Woods. A loupe or hand lens can give a closer perspective particularly for resupinate fungi, which look like spills of paint on bark. You will come to love rain, because it will bring a bonanza of mushrooms. Your knees will get muddy from examining the bottom of hedgerows and ditches. Quick! Before all the leaves fall and the mulch puts most of them to bed. There’s still time. Lucy Jones is a journalist and the author of Losing Eden and The Nature Seed.Campaigners have criticised plans to develop two mega-prisons on the site of a rare bird and amphibian habitat in England. The government has been accused of reneging on commitments in the Environment Act to stop the decline of wildlife by proposing the development on the old Wethersfield airfield, which has become an important space for nature near Braintree, Essex. Seventy-four species of birds, many red-listed, nest nearby and the area comprises 75,000 trees and shrubs. The site also includes ancient woodland, as well as great crested newts and rare orchids. Red-listed birds on the site include turtle doves, lapwings and grey partridge. Rosie Pearson, a planning and environmental campaigner, said she hoped a local campaign would force the plans to be scrapped and allow the area to be rewilded instead. She said: “Already seven parish councils have come together to create a network, and a community action group has been created. It’s called Swap: Stop Wethersfield Airfield Prisons. “We are in the process of appointing experts to assist in the campaign, and we are working on a better alternative – to see the land sold to a rewilding buyer. We would love to see the site protected. There is a farm adjoining the airfield which has been bought recently for rewilding.” Pearson is convening a group of locals, including landowners, to develop and present an alternative plan for the site that would protect the wild areas from construction. Building work on the Wethersfield site could begin in 2023 if the proposals are approved. The government is reviewing responses to a consultation of residents conducted last month. Braintree district council put forward the location as a possible prison site a few years ago at the request of the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), and the council leader, Graham Butland, has said that the complex, comprising two 1,750-inmate prisons and 1,000 parking spaces, could bring funding and jobs to the area. The environment minister Victoria Prentis praised the idea, and said in the planning document: “As part of our work to drive down crime, we have committed to creating 18,000 additional prison places by the mid-2020s. We believe that, following detailed feasibility work, land next to Wethersfield airbase would be a good location for two new prisons as part of the prison estates strategy. “Our plans, if successful, would bring many benefits to the local community, such as hundreds of jobs during construction, careers within the prison sector and an increased spend in local businesses.” But nature charities say by backing such plans, the government is reneging on its promise to protect wildlife. Emma Marsh, the RSPB’s director for England, said: “We cannot keep pushing nature into smaller and smaller spaces and demand it fits in with our plans. Across England our wildlife is disappearing and wild spaces that are providing a refuge for our rarest species during the nature and climate emergency are under threat. “Our leaders in Westminster championed the Environment Act for delivering the world’s first legally binding targets for halting the decline of wildlife, and yet only a few weeks after being granted royal assent we now need to see nature included in all decision making, including planning, especially when compensation land could take a decade or longer to replace what has been lost under concrete.” The MoJ says the development will protect local wildlife. A spokesperson added: “The landscape design strategy for the new prisons seeks as a primary objective to protect local wildlife, plants and trees as much as possible. “A lot of care has been taken to understand the existing context of the site, through research, surveys and assessment, to respect the existing rural setting. The layout of the prisons have been designed conscientiously, to ensure that there will be minimal impact to the existing green infrastructure.” The local MP, James Cleverly, refused to disclose whether he would support the plans. He told the Guardian: “I have spoken with MoJ ministers, elected members and officials at Braintree district council and local people about the pros and cons of these proposals. This is still at the very earliest stages, and no formal planning application has been submitted. I will continue to engage with local residents and local representatives.” • This article was amended on 2 December 2021 to clarify the council’s actions in relation to the site.Batman’s least intimidating foe the Penguin, usually seen plotting the heist of Gotham City’s priciest jewels, has a somewhat less dastardly plan up his sleeve in his latest outing: he’s out to vaccinate the world. The feathered supervillain’s latest storyline was dreamed up by the actor Danny DeVito, who played the character in the 1992 film Batman Returns. Working with artist Dan Mora, DeVito has written the story Bird Cat Love for an anthology celebrating Batman’s enemies, Gotham City Villains, published on Tuesday by DC Comics to celebrate the 80th anniversary year of the character’s creation. Rather than depicting the Penguin up to his usual tricks, however, DeVito has him stealing all the world’s vaccines from the pharmaceutical companies who are hoarding them, according to an early report from comics site Bleeding Cool News – and then forcibly vaccinating everyone on the planet. The story, which also focuses on the romance between the Penguin and Catwoman, his crush from Batman Returns, ends with Batman and his allies reading a newspaper headlined “Bird and Cat Vanquish Virus”. “Since they’ve inoculated the planet and put an end to the pandemic, they’ve been awfully quiet,” muses Batman. “At first I was a little bit hesitant about doing the comic, but then I got into the fact that I’ve always been a big fan of Michelle Pfeiffer’s, and the Penguin obviously lusts after Catwoman. So I figured I’d put those two together, and then it was also in the middle of the pandemic, which we’re still fighting with. I thought it would be good if Penguin had a little bit of Robin Hood in him,” he told Entertainment Weekly. “That’s what Oswald wants: Get everybody vaccinated and give science a chance to get ahead of this. The thing mutates, and if we don’t give the vaccine to people all over the world, it’s going to keep mutating.” DeVito told Forbes that he had checked with Pfeiffer, who played Catwoman in the 1992 film, that she was happy with him writing the romance between their two characters. “I did call Michelle and tell her that I was doing it. I said ‘Look, it’s like my fantasy and it’s my dream come true to have an incredible romance with such a beautiful woman. Oswald, I’m talking about, and Selina.’ She was very excited to hear about it,” he said. The Penguin’s real name is Oswald Cobblepot, while Catwoman’s is Selina Kyle. • The headline on this article was amended on 1 December 2021 to refer to the Penguin, not the Joker.Alice Sebold’s publisher Scribner is pulling her 1999 memoir Lucky from shelves after a man was cleared of the rape at the heart of it. Anthony Broadwater was convicted of raping Sebold in 1982, and spent 16 years in prison. He was exonerated last week after a re-examination of the case found serious flaws in his arrest and trial. Lucky, which was published in 1999, sees Sebold recount how she was raped and beaten at the age of 18, in a tunnel near her university campus. She writes of how she saw a Black man in the street months later who she believed to be her attacker. After Broadwater was arrested, she failed to identify him in an identity parade, but identified him as her rapist on the witness stand. Microscopic hair analysis by an expert also tied him to the crime, but such analysis has since been deemed junk science. Sebold’s publisher Scribner issued a statement on Tuesday announcing that Lucky would be pulled while Sebold looked at revising it. “Following the recent exoneration of Anthony Broadwater, and in consultation with the author, Scribner and Simon &amp; Schuster will cease distribution … while Sebold and Scribner together consider how the work might be revised,” said the publisher. Pan Macmillan, Sebold’s UK publisher, has confirmed that it will be pulling the title too. Sebold herself also apologised to Broadwater, saying that her “goal in 1982 was justice – not to perpetuate injustice … And certainly not to forever, and irreparably, alter a young man’s life by the very crime that had altered mine.” “I am grateful that Mr Broadwater has finally been vindicated, but the fact remains that 40 years ago, he became another young Black man brutalised by our flawed legal system. I will forever be sorry for what was done to him,” she said in a statement. “It has taken me these past eight days to comprehend how this could have happened. I will continue to struggle with the role that I unwittingly played within a system that sent an innocent man to jail. I will also grapple with the fact that my rapist will, in all likelihood, never be known, may have gone on to rape other women, and certainly will never serve the time in prison that Mr Broadwater did.” In a statement to Entertainment Weekly, issued through his lawyers, Broadwater said: “I’m relieved that she has apologised. It must have taken a lot of courage for her to do that. It’s still painful to me because I was wrongfully convicted, but this will help me in my process to come to peace with what happened.”Good morning. The most important abortion rights case in decades, which will decide the future of abortion access across the country, begins today. The US supreme court is is scheduled to convene at 10am ET and is expected to begin hearing oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which centers on whether the state of Mississippi can ban abortion at 15 weeks gestation. Campaigners warn the case poses a direct threat to the legal underpinnings of Roe v Wade, a landmark 1973 decision that guaranteed the constitutional right to abortion. Presently, Roe v Wade protects the right to terminate a pregnancy up to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb, widely regarded as 24 weeks. A full term pregnancy is 39 weeks. Who is the case named for? It’s named for Dr Thomas Dobbs, the head of Mississippi’s health department, and Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the last abortion clinic in Mississippi. When will a decision be made? The court is not expected to issue a decision on the case until June 2022, but oral arguments may offer clues to the justices’ thinking ahead of the ruling. Why is the Mississippi abortion rights case so important? It could lead to weakening or overturning of Roe v Wade. If that were to happen, tens of millions people of reproductive age across the country would be affected. Trump tested positive for Covid few days before Biden debate, chief of staff says in new book Donald Trump tested positive for Covid-19 three days before his first debate against Joe Biden, the former president’s fourth and last chief of staff has revealed in a new book. Mark Meadows also writes that though he knew each candidate was required “to test negative for the virus within 72 hours of the start time … Nothing was going to stop [Trump] from going out there”. Trump, Meadows says in the book, returned a negative result from a different test shortly after the positive. Nonetheless, the stunning revelation of an unreported positive test follows a year of speculation about whether Trump, then 74 years old, had the potentially deadly virus when he faced Biden, 77, in Cleveland on 29 September – and what danger that might have presented. When did Trump admit he had Covid? Not until 2 October. The White House said he announced that result within an hour of receiving it. He went to hospital later that day. When will the memoir be out? Meadows’ memoir, The Chief’s Chief, will be published next week by All Seasons Press, a conservative outlet. Meanwhile, Meadows has agreed to testify before the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. Ghislaine Maxwell was present when Epstein abused me, accuser testifies The first accuser in Ghislaine Maxwell’s child sex trafficking trial testified in Manhattan federal court yesterday that she was just 14 when the British socialite allegedly lured her into Jeffrey Epstein’s abusive orbit. This accuser, who used the name “Jane” in court, alleged that Maxwell was sometimes present when this abuse occurred and participated on some occasions. Epstein, a New York financier and convicted sex offender who counted Bill Clinton and Prince Andrew among his acquaintances, killed himself at a New York City jail in August 2019, while he was awaiting his own sex-trafficking trial. Maxwell, 59, the daughter of the late British press baron Robert Maxwell, was arrested in New Hampshire in July 2020. Maxwell is on trial for six counts related to her alleged involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor teenagers. She has pleaded not guilty. How did Jane meet Maxwell? Jane told the court she attended a renowned youth arts camp in Michigan, Interlochen Center for the Arts, in summer 1994 and was approached by Maxwell while eating ice-cream. A man, who turned out to be Epstein, came and joined Maxwell. Michigan school shooting leaves three students dead and eight wounded A 15-year-old student opened fire at his Michigan high school on Tuesday, killing three other students and wounding eight other people, authorities say. Oakland county undersheriff Mike McCabe identified the three students who were killed as a 16-year-old boy and two girls aged 14 and 17. He said two of the wounded were undergoing surgery as of Tuesday evening and six others were in stable condition. One of the people wounded was a teacher, authorities said. The suspect’s motives for the attack at Oxford high school in Oxford Township, near Detroit, were not yet known, McCabe said at a news conference. The suspect’s parents advised their son not to talk to investigators, as is his right. The teenager’s father bought the gun – a 9mm pistol – on Black Friday, four days before the shooting, according to Detroit Free Press. Who was killed in the shooting? The victims have been named as Tate Myre, 16, Hana St Juliana, 14 and Madisyn Baldwin, 17, the sheriff’s office said. What do we know about the suspect? He is a sophomore from the Village of Oxford and was in class during the day, McCabe said. What has been said about the possible motive? Some of the parents of students at the school said their children had reported there had been rumors of possible violence at the school “for a long time”. Support the Guardian’s fact-based journalism As a subscriber to First Thing, we know you’re plugged into what’s happening across the US. Countless forces are undermining its democracy: from politicians and platforms to pundits and hyper-partisanship. The challenges we’re facing going into the new year and beyond are considerable – and fact-based journalism has never been more crucial. So we’re raising $1.25m to fund our reporting in 2022. If you can, please make a year-end gift to the Guardian In other news … The author Alice Sebold apologized on Tuesday to the man who was exonerated last week of the 1981 rape that was the basis for her memoir Lucky. Sebold said she was struggling with the role she played “within a system that sent an innocent man to jail”. The World Health Organization has said those not fully vaccinated who are vulnerable to Covid-19, including over-60s, should delay travel to areas with community transmission, as more countries imposed curbs to combat the spread of the new Omicron variant. Some Republican states are expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over vaccine mandates, a move critics say in effect pays people for not getting vaccinated. Four states – Iowa, Tennessee, Florida, and Kansas – have recently changed their rules on unemployment. Saudi Arabia used “incentives and threats” as part of a lobbying campaign to shut down a UN investigation of human right violations committed by all sides in the Yemen conflict, according to sources with close knowledge of the matter. The Saudi effort ultimately succeeded. Don’t miss this: how Pearl Harbor stopped the birth of the LA Browns and changed baseball history Japan’s surprise attack on Pearl Harbor 80 years ago not only ensured the US’s entry into the second world war. It inadvertently but categorically changed baseball history. One day after the attack, Major League Baseball’s owners were expected to approve the move of the American League’s St Louis Browns to Los Angeles for 1942. But in the aftermath of the attack, the owners unanimously rejected the move. Had the owners approved it, it would have changed the landscape of American professional sports, and might have generated more sweeping social, cultural and economic shifts. Climate check: renewable energy has ‘another record year of growth’ says IEA It has been another record year for renewable energy, despite the Covid-19 pandemic and rising costs for raw materials around the world, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). About 290GW of new renewable energy generation capacity, mostly in the form of wind turbines and solar panels, has been installed around the world this year, beating the previous record last year. On current trends, renewable energy generating capacity will exceed that of fossil fuels and nuclear energy combined by 2026. Last Thing: Japan’s party season loses lustre as workers dread drinking with the boss Not everyone in Japan is looking forward to observing the time-honoured tradition of the bonenkai (forget-the-year) party season – a period where groups of colleagues get together to drink, eat and drink some more, even as the country begins to rediscover its gregarious side after 18 months of the coronavirus pandemic. Many workers have said they will be mounting silent protest when they imbibe alongside their colleagues, and, crucially, their bosses. Respondents to a survey said they dreaded the tradition, while one described bonenkai as nothing but “utter torment”.Nearly 1,500 unhoused people are estimated to have died on the streets of Los Angeles during the pandemic, according to a new report that raises alarms about authorities’ handling of a worsening humanitarian crisis. Authored by researchers from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and a coalition of unhoused residents, the report analyzed the LA county coroner’s records to identify 1,493 cases of people who died between March 2020 and July 2021 on the streets and were probably unhoused. The most common cause of death was accidental overdose. The authors identified people believed to be unhoused based on the locations of their death, including freeway underpasses, parks, sidewalks, dumpsters, abandoned buildings, bus stops, tents, riverbeds, railroads and encampments. The 1,493 figure is probably an undercount. The coroner’s office only tracks fatalities that were “sudden, violent or unusual”. The data does not include unhoused people who were receiving medical care or hospitalized when they died. The count also excludes people who died while in shelters or cars. In encampment communities that have suffered losses, some residents live in fear that their friends and loved ones could be next. “When pillars of this community die, it’s such a hard hit,” said La Donna Harrell, an unhoused resident and organizer involved in the report, who lives at a street encampment in the San Fernando Valley that has lost multiple residents to sudden deaths. “We’re always hearing about this person or that person passing away and it’s a lot of heartbreak,” said Angie Campos, 36, who lives at the encampment in Van Nuys. Dying young on the streets The report presents the first detailed picture of deaths on the street during the pandemic, featuring individual stories of some of the lives lost over the last year and a half. The researchers found that: More than 35% of the 1,493 deaths occurred on sidewalks. The next most common sites were parking lots (13%), alleys (5.7%), tents (5.6%) and embankments (3.6%). The average age of unhoused residents who died was 47 years old. Black residents made up 25% of all unhoused deaths, while constituting only 8% of the region’s population. 48% of deaths were classified as accidental, 19% natural, 13% as homicides and 9% were suicides. The rates of accidental deaths and homicides were higher among unhoused people than among the general population in that time period. Nearly 40% of the accidental deaths were attributed to drug and alcohol overdoses, mirroring the sharp increase in overdoses in the broader population. Ananya Roy, director of the UCLA Luskin Institute on Inequality and Democracy, which produced the report, said the young age of death was particularly disturbing: “If we were to see this metric in any other part of the world, we would dismiss that place as one of great poverty, as a violator of human rights, as a predatory government that exploits its people. We’ve got to get serious about using that metric to understand the levels of impoverishment and abandonment here in the US.” Researchers say LA county is on track to surpass the number of unhoused deaths last year. It recorded 630 unhoused deaths in 2014 and that figure has grown each year by an average of 16%, according to the report. There were 1,267 unhoused deaths reported in 2019 and 1,383 in 2020, and the coroner’s office said it has seen 1,300 in the first 10 months of this year. The researchers say the deaths were particularly troubling because they came at a time when specific programs were put in place to protect unhoused people during the pandemic. “When people are passing away outdoors and on the sidewalks, that is a failure of the state,” said Chloe Rosenstock, co-author of the report and an organizer with Street Watch LA, an advocacy group for the unhoused. The majority of deaths were not from “natural” causes and were preventable, she said. In addition to the 1,493 deaths on the streets, researchers identified 418 people who died suddenly in motels or hotels who were probably unhoused residents living temporarily in hotel rooms. It’s unclear how many of the 418 people may have been housed in the rooms as part of Project Roomkey, one of the county’s signature efforts to protect unhoused communities during the pandemic, but the county has separately confirmed that more than 90 people died while in the program. For the motel deaths, the researchers found that the average age was even younger, at 44 years old. Nearly 60% of those deaths were attributed to overdoses. ‘He meant the world to me’ The crisis in part reflects the dangers and difficulties of life on the street for people who are unhoused, who often suffer from serious health challenges exacerbated by the conditions of outside living. But the fatalities also stem from inadequate and at times harmful government strategies that have failed to provide people with permanent housing and have focused on criminalization and clearing the streets, advocates say. The city of LA has increasingly cracked down on outdoor camping over the last year, including shutting down two public parks, removing unhoused residents from the Venice Beach boardwalk and passing a new ordinance restricting sleeping outdoors in certain areas. Meanwhile, efforts to get unhoused residents into permanent housing have faltered. City and county officials have argued that they connect unhoused residents to shelter or hotel rooms before they evict an encampment. But residents have complained about the strict rules at many of the sites, including curfews and limits on when residents can leave. The majority of residents have not transitioned from hotel rooms to permanent housing, and advocates say that many end up in more dangerous situations than they faced before, with isolation from their networks compounding struggles with addiction or leaving people without help if they overdose. The treatment services in the region have not kept pace with the crisis. One of the most high-profile encampment shutdowns, in March 2021 at Echo Park Lake, displaced 183 people. As of October, only four had received permanent housing, a county spokesman recently told the Guardian. “We need more resources, and we need better resources,” said Lashenee Gibson, 30, who was living at the Echo Park encampment until it was shuttered. Gibson said she and her husband, Arron, entered a Project Roomkey hotel in Orange county early in the pandemic, but the program did not lead them to permanent housing as they had hoped. They briefly stayed in a shelter after that, but they weren’t able to live together there and the Covid safety protocols were poor, she said, so they left and began camping in Echo Park where the others were gathering. “They just keep moving the homeless around,” she said. “It’s unnecessary, and it’s a merry-go-round that just keeps repeating itself.” The programs available to them typically involved being housed with people facing severe mental illness who weren’t receiving specific treatment, she said, which can create a difficult living environment. Gibson and her husband moved into another Project Roomkey hotel in LA this year, but stayed in separate rooms. In May, her husband died in the middle of the night, from an accidental overdose, she said. The program would not let her see his body or say goodbye. The two were not legally married yet and had planned to officially tie the knot the following week. “They didn’t care,” Gibson said. “Maybe it’s happened so many times, that they were just like, ‘She’ll be ok,’ or ‘Oh, it’s another one.’ It was just a simple throwaway … But this person meant the world to me.” Her husband, Arron, was 28 years old, and the couple had ambitions to run a meal prep business focused on healthy food. He was also an aspiring actor. “He was just always energetic and positive and making sure he always looked out for everyone else but himself,” she said. Gibson recently managed to get placement in a two-year housing program run by a not-for-profit organization: “I’m happy to have my own home, but I’m waking up to no one to share it with me.” Heidi Marston, executive director of the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (Lahsa), said in an email that Project Roomkey was launched to provide an immediate option for the most vulnerable unsheltered residents during the pandemic and to stop the spread of Covid-19 among the unhoused population. The program, she wrote, was built around Covid safety protocols, relying on wellness checks and establishing minimal in-person contact. “While our funding for Project Roomkey did not include money for life-saving measures, we partnered with several organizations to offer participants health care and mental heath care, and we deployed Narcan at each site to prevent as much loss of life as possible,” she added. “Once inside, our resources and harm reduction model can help people regain some of the health that they lost while being unhoused. While some may pass on after they come inside, I think it’s safe to presume that there were a lot of deaths prevented because of Project Roomkey.” “Experiencing homelessness negatively affects your health. It ages you ... It compounds your health conditions. You become sicker faster because you’re not getting the care you need in the first place,” Marston wrote, adding that deaths were frequent among this population: “The best thing we can do is get people inside.” Living in fear Harrell, the unhoused organizer at the Van Nuys street encampment, said the deaths in the encampments are hard on those that remain behind. Harrell is mourning her friend Tony Goodwin, a 61-year-old veteran, who suffered an apparent heart attack in September. Goodwin had recently entered a Project Roomkey hotel, but was kicked out of the program because he missed curfews, advocates said. “Tony was the one I leaned on. He’s the person I would go to at three in the morning when I was hungry,” said Harrell, who has organized vigils on the street for lost residents and helped set up a memorial with candles and flowers on the block. In addition to Goodwin, one other resident died unexpectedly while fighting cancer and another was hit by a car. “There wasn’t one person Tony didn’t help here and a lot of people depended on him,” said Angie Campos, who had camped next to him. “People would steal from him, and he’d say, ‘They probably needed it more than me.’” One person on the street didn’t get out of bed for days while mourning Goodwin, she said. Campos said that fentanyl was devastating unhoused residents struggling with addiction and that she wished there was easier access to treatment programs. City officials, however, have used a new law to designate the street where Campos and Harrell live as a site where camping is outlawed. It’s unclear when the residents might be forced out and a spokesperson for the city council president, who is pursuing the clearing, said there was no immediate deadline for the removal of tents and that the office was focused on outreach. “Authorities treat us like we are animals, like we’re a disease,” said Fernando, 43, who is living in a trailer on the block and asked not to use his full name. “They’re making these laws where we can’t sleep anywhere or they make us go to these dark corners. It just feels like they’re trying to get rid of us.” Unhoused people struggle with addiction because they often lack access to correct medications, he said, adding: “People have nothing and addiction keeps them out of this reality.” He said it felt as if the local government didn’t care when people on the street overdosed. The victims aren’t just random addicts, he said, but community members with friends and families mourning their loss.We’re interested in whether people in the UK are cancelling or scaling back plans to attend Christmas parties and other social events, after leading scientists and one of the prime minister’s most senior health officials advised the British population to cut back on unnecessary socialising in response to the Omicron variant. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Johanna Konta, one of the most successful British tennis players in the modern game, has announced her retirement from professional tennis at the age of 30. “There’s a lot of highs, a lot of lows, a lot of different emotions that come with being an elite sports person,” the former British No 1 said of her decision. “So for me, it was just important to give myself the space and the time to let emotions settle, let feelings settle. And I felt like I would just know when I was ready.” Konta reached a career-high ranking of No 4 in 2017 and was also the first British woman in more than 30 years to reach a grand slam quarter-final, contesting three semi-finals in total, including at Wimbledon in 2017. She also achieved the rare feat of clinching quarter-final berths at all four majors. Earlier this yearshe took her fourth and final career WTA title in Nottingham. Her biggest win came at the Miami Open in 2017. Konta was born in Sydney to Hungarian parents and moved to Britain aged 14 before representing Great Britain from 2012. In 2019 she led Great Britain out of the zonal divisions of the Billie Jean King Cup for the first time in 26 years. In recent years she has struggled with a knee tendon injury that has required constant treatment and has restricted her to a more limited schedule. She has fallen to No 113 in the world after starting the year ranked 14th, but said that her knee was not a significant factor in her retirement. She simply felt she could no longer endure the significant commitments of elite tennis. “I would love to still play on the biggest stages in the world and play at my best so it’s not at all that I don’t want to do that,” she said. “It’s just that … I don’t have the energy any more. It’s quite a nice place to leave it. I finished playing the sport, still loving the sport. I don’t think there is much more that I can ask of myself.” Konta said that as she began to reckon with the possibility of retiring this year, she reflected on how her dream was “eternal”. She loved tennis at the end of her career with the same passion she had started the sport with many years ago: “It was literally a very innocent, young girl’s dream and wanting to become a professional tennis player,” she said. “As I played through my career kind of realising that at the end, that I’m still playing as a young girl’s dream, it’s a really humbling thing to experience as an adult.” Konta was a late-bloomer who only reached the top 100 at 24 years of age in 2015 after spending most of her career on the lower-level ITF circuit. Despite the tendency for talented British players to be over hyped, she flew under the radar and few people expected her to carve out the career that she did. “It was not straightforward, it was not simple, it was not written in the stars,” she said. “It was earned and it was hard fought for. I feel very, very proud of myself and for the people around me who were with me on this journey.” Earlier this year Konta became engaged to the film producer Jackson Wade, and they have started a dog walking business together. Since playing the last match of her career at the Western &amp; Southern Open in Cincinnati against Karolina Muchova, she has also appeared as an analyst on Amazon Prime and BBC Five Live during tennis events. Since Konta became Great Britain’s first top player on the WTA in more than three decades, they have risen to even greater heights with Emma Raducanu. As she finished discussing the past 16 years of her life, she was asked what she feels her legacy will be. “I’m probably the poster child of somebody who carved out a career for them when all evidence pointed that it was not going to happen,” she said. “I think if I can give any hope, motivation or inspiration to anyone who ever felt they were too old or not talented enough or overlooked, anything along those lines, I think I would feel very happy with that.”Last week, we learned from virus sequencing and rapid reporting by South African scientists that there is a new variant with 50 mutations compared with the original Wuhan strain. It quickly was named Omicron and categorized as a variant of concern by the World Health Organization, a designation that hasbeen used for only four previous variants (Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta) among thousands of variants noted in the evolution of the Sars-CoV-2 virus. We do know a few things about Omicron, namely its sequence and the site of its abundant mutations, far more than previous variants of concern, and some at spots in the virus RNA that may substantially affect transmission or impair our immune system (or vaccine-induced immunity) to respond. That is all theoretical, since there have been other mutation-laden variants in the past that were picked up but turned out to be void of any clinical consequence. We also can deduce that Omicron must have originated from an immunocompromised host to have such an extensive number of mutations (from an initial Alpha variant lineage) to rapidly evolve in the person’s body. That phenomenon has been demonstrated with multiple previous cases whereby there are unrestrained virus mutations inside a person’s body due to an inadequate immune system defense. And the individual’s chronic infection subsequently transmits to other people. The other thing we know is that there has been an outbreak in the Gauteng province in South Africa and, after Omicron was flagged for the rest of the world, more than 15 countries have confirmed new cases, predominantly from travelers but now multiple community transmissions have been documented. To date, the pattern of hospitalizations in Guateng is the same as with the prior waves, no worse or better. It is likely that Omicron has been around for months, but only recently was there the first sign of a sudden rise in one place. Fortunately, it was diagnosed quickly, and the rest of the world was forewarned, far better than for the previous variants of concern. It remains unclear whether the proliferation of cases is related to high transmission, like Delta, or immune evasion, like Beta. Most likely because of the extensive mutations or what is known as “antigen drift”, it will behave more like Beta, with some immune evasion properties. The extent of that will be sorted out in the next couple of weeks by lab studies that look at the virus in culture and sera from people who are vaccinated to see how their neutralizing antibodies fare against Omicron. But no matter the results of these lab studies and what tracking of new cases around the world show, we have all the tools to prevail over Omicron. That includes mitigation measures like masks, especially medical grade ones, physical distancing, ventilation and air filtration. We have remarkably potent vaccines with 95% efficacy against symptomatic infections, hospitalizations and deaths. And even though these mRNA vaccines have some waning of effectiveness over five to six months, their efficacy is fully restored to 95% with a third shot (booster). Moreover, that third shot induces remarkably high neutralizing antibodies, much higher than the second vaccine dose, and much broader activity against variants. Furthermore, the T-cell response to vaccines are far less variant sensitive than neutralizing antibodies, which puts us in good stead for fully vaccinated people to reduce the risk of severe disease. Beyond mitigation and vaccination, we soon will have potent pills, when taken early in the first few days of a Covid infection, one with about 90% efficacy, to prevent hospitalizations and deaths. The protective benefit of pills such as Paxlovid is not expected to be affected by Omicron in any substantive way. There are many fully validated rapid antigen tests that should be made freely available as in many other countries to help diagnose infectiousness in people with or without symptoms, which can promote early use of treatments, such as anti-Covid pills. Accordingly, we are better positioned to defend against Omicron than we would have been earlier in the pandemic. We are also probably on the cusp of developing pan-sarbecovirus vaccines, which may protect against all future variants, and just needs a global prioritized, coordinated and funded effort to accelerate the process. Yet the paramount thing holding us back is human behavior: the unwillingness and resistance to use all these tools. Although Omicron is a source of concern, our problem now is lack of containment of Delta in the United States, with more than 90,000 new cases a day and more than 50,000 hospitalizations. We are the number one source of new infections in the world, and they are now all Delta. Had we managed to vaccinate more than 80% of our total population, as several countries have done, and used third shots to prevent any significant waning, we would have Delta contained. Our problem now is not Omicron, but rather not using the tools we have, which are getting better and better over time. Eric Topol is the founder and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, professor of molecular medicine, and executive vice-president of Scripps ResearchThe world described by writer-director Theresa Heskins in this tremendous adaptation is one of emotional stasis. Like the last two years of the pandemic, the enchanted palace is locked in a holding pattern. All the Beast can do is ask Bella to marry him. All she can do is refuse. The conversation circles in vain search of resolution: “Dinner … Marry me … No …” And yet Heskins keeps us gripped. Returning to the original 1740 story by Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot de Villeneuve, with touches of Snow White’s mirror, Cinderella’s sisters and Sleeping Beauty’s 100-year sleep, she explores that adolescent hinterland between animal nature and our socialised selves. Nicholas Richardson’s Beast is head, shoulders and elbows above Rhiannon Skerritt’s Bella, pacing the stage on jumping stilts, fearsome even as he struggles to be fair. She, being no pushover, keeps her principles intact. Even with her thirst for new experiences, she is ever level-headed. Fascinatingly, we also get the Beast’s backstory. The show’s real blood is not in the anaemic court, realised in silver greys in Lis Evans’s Louis XIV-influenced costumes, but in the all-red goblins led by a meddlesome Danielle Bird. “Wayward but not wicked,” she freezes Polly Lister’s ferocious Warrior Queen into a statue as punishment for her typical human violence. The boy prince is turned into the Beast as collateral damage. What we get rather less of is Bella’s backstory. We meet her in entrepreneurial mode as she launches a cleaning business, but once she is trapped in the palace, elegantly suggested by Laura Willstead’s superb set, we find out too little of what she has sacrificed to be there. Her dad is an ineffectual offstage voice and, unlike the Disney version, she has no other love interest. The Beast is hardly an attractive proposition, but, hey, what else has she got to do? If this takes the emotional temperature down a degree or two, it is no less of a sumptuous show. Vigorously acted, inventively staged and ravishingly scored (by James Atherton), it is rich and rewarding. On the way out, I hear someone say she’d like to watch it again. I’d happily join her. At New Vic theatre, Newcastle-under-Lyme, until 29 JanuaryTake your finger and touch your keyboard, think three times and off you go … We need your questions for the UK supremo of children’s television, Justin Fletcher. Fletcher, 51, generally has at least three different shows on each day as linchpins of the CBeebies schedule: Justin’s House, which has lately returned for a new series in the breakfast spot, and Something Special, now on its 12th series (and nearly 20th year). In Justin’s House – sadly now shot without an excitable pre-school studio audience – we track the domestic adventures of Justin along with housemates Robert the Robot and Little Monster, with frequent visits from neighbours and cream-cake mishaps. In Something Special, Fletcher visits various gentle attractions – a library, a water park, a zoo – with a couple of children with some degree of physical or mental impairment. A pioneering programme aimed at children with delayed learning and communication difficulties but enjoyable for all ages, it features Fletcher using, and explaining, Makaton, the sign and symbol language especially accessible for children. Fletcher’s most popular character, Mr Tumble, an amiably muddle-headed clown, also features on the show, alongside his family: Grandad Tumble, Lord Tumble, Aunt Polly, Chef Tumble and others, all also played by Fletcher. Fletcher’s auteurist approach also characterises Gigglequiz, the Fast Show-inspired sketch series in which he plays a wide variety of characters. He voices both Shaun and Timmy in small- and big-screen versions of Bristol-based animation studio Aardman’s Shaun the Sheep – including the 2019 Oscar-nominated Farmageddon, and the forthcoming TV special Shaun the Sheep: the Flight Before Christmas. Fletcher is the leading player in the annual CBeebies big-screen panto; this year playing Father Christmas in The Night Before Christmas, which is in cinemas from 4 December. He can also be seen as Billy Pastry in Beauty and the Beast at the Hexagon in Reading later this month. So what will you ask the son of legendary songwriter Guy Fletcher, who credits Phillip Schofield with early career advice, and whose annual Butlin’s residencies and Camp Bestival shows have earned a reputation as the most energetic and amusing live shows for under-sevens? Post your questions in the comments below; those from children especially welcome! The thread will close at noon GMT on Thursday 2 December and Justin’s responses will be published on 10 December.Two former Netflix employees who criticised comedian Dave Chappelle for comments directed at the trans community in The Closer, a special for the streaming service, have dropped labour complaints related to Netflix’s response to the saga, they announced this week. The decision brings a close to the most recent chapter of activism at the company and one of the more visible tech industry walkouts in the last few months. But the momentum of internal organising, particularly around social justice issues, has been building for years. “We are seeing a wave of [employee walkouts],” said Jess Kutch, executive director of the Solidarity Fund, which raises money to support employees engaged in workplace organising (including at Netflix). In October 2021 alone there were several walkouts in Silicon Valley in addition to the movement at Netflix, including at grocery delivery platform Instacart. And in November, Amazon workers in at least 20 countries staged a strike to demand the company pay higher wages and allow them to join unions. The groundwork for this particular brand and scale of internal activism was laid in 2018 when more than 20,000 Google employees walked out in response to news the company had given a $90m severance package to an executive forced to step down over sexual misconduct allegations (which he has denied). While strikes are often focused on wages and working conditions, increasingly workers are taking aim at company ethics and demanding more diversity, progressive policies, and commitments to LGBTQ rights. And they are waging their battles in a public forum, experts say, eschewing the internal pressure campaigns blue collar tech workers have historically relied on. “There have been isolated examples of this kind of thing for years, but employees are increasingly using the leverage of their labor to stand up for diversity and equity,” said Anastasia Christman, senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project. Here are some more key examples of worker actions within the growing wave of tech activism in recent years. Meta The most prominent and highly-visible recent example of employee activism comes via Frances Haugen, a former Facebook data engineer turned whistleblower who shared thousands of documents with the Wall Street Journal and Congress revealing the company knew of its negative public health impacts and refused to address them. While Haugen became the face of internal dissent at the company, unrest has been roiling beneath the surface for years. In June 2020, hundreds of employees staged a walkout to protest against the company’s content moderation policies relating to former president Donald Trump. More recently, Facebook content moderators – who are contracted by employment firm Accenture – staged a mobile billboard targeting the company’s CEO Julie Sweet. The plight of those workers has been covered extensively, with many saying they suffer from PTSD and other mental health problems from poor working conditions and lack of support surrounding the sensitive content they view. From our own Alex Hern: A group of current and former contractors who worked for years at the social network’s Berlin-based moderation centres has reported witnessing colleagues become “addicted” to graphic content and hoarding ever more extreme examples for a personal collection. They also said others were pushed towards the far right by the amount of hate speech and fake news they read every day. They describe being ground down by the volume of the work, numbed by the graphic violence, nudity and bullying they have to view for eight hours a day, working nights and weekends, for “practically minimum pay”. Google Google’s worker walkouts in 2018 over alleged sexual assault set the stage for other activism in the industry, but it was not the first time employees spoke out against company policies, and actions have grown since then. Also in 2018, Google discontinued its work on Project Dragonfly, a partnership with China, after protests over government censorship concerns. Social justice-related demands continued in the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests in 2020, during which Google employees demanded the company halt partnerships with police. Amazon As the second-largest employer in the United States, the working conditions of Amazon’s more than 1m warehouse employees has become the subject of close scrutiny. In 2021 one vocal warehouse worker was fired for speaking out against what he called unsafe working conditions during the Covid-19 pandemic, and the company saw a massive unionisation effort in Alabama. Meanwhile, white collar workers have organised to demand the company halt partnerships with police and improve its policies relating to climate change and the environment. Apple Known for its secretive corporate culture, Apple has remained largely unscathed by the rise in employee activism in recent years. But it recently entered the fray when employees criticised the company’s remote work policies, with a Slack channel called #remote-work-advocacy rising to more than 2,800 members. From an excellent piece in the Verge, Zoe Schiffer writes: The Apple value that underpins all of this, elevating the secrecy concerns from an issue of potential lost revenue to one of core company DNA, is “surprise and delight.” It’s the idea that Apple products should catch the public unaware, giving them something they want before they even know they want it. But the secrecy has bled over into other parts of Apple’s culture, too. Although the company specifically says that its policies “should not be interpreted as restricting your right to speak freely about your wages, hours, or working conditions,” the reality is that there’s a strong expectation that internal problems should be kept internal. But all that is changing, she reports. In May 2021, a group of female employees organised in response to the company’s hiring of an employee who had in the past written a book with misogynistic descriptions of women. Another group of employees later wrote a letter to CEO Tim Cook asking him to publicly support Palestine. Apple has not taken the rise in employee activism lightly, and fired an employee in October who was critical of the company’s handling of workplace misconduct allegations and who supported a movement to share personal experiences of discrimination and other labor violations at the company. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Since first being recorded in late 2019 in China, the Covid-19 coronavirus has spread around the world and killed millions worldwide. Having officially been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization at the start of 2020, 2022 marks the third year that the virus has impacted societies. Which countries are currently being hit the hardest? Total case counts are now in the millions in many countries, with the worldwide case count increasing by hundreds of thousands each day. However, differences in testing mean the number of cases may be understated for some countries. At the same time, dozens of countries have recorded over 10,000 deaths. The US and Brazil have each recorded over half a million deaths since the start of the pandemic. How is the disease progressing around the world? Larger countries tend to have higher numbers of both cases and deaths. But there are many other factors in play, such as the demographic profiles of the countries; countries with ageing populations may be hit harder because the disease is more dangerous to older people. Countries that have imposed social distancing restrictions, as well as those with advanced vaccination campaigns, have managed to avoid some of the worst peaks recorded around the world. Case rates – the daily cases per million people in any country – show how many European countries faced new highs in infection during last winter. The disease has caused tens or hundreds of thousands of deaths in many countries, hitting the US, Brazil, India, Mexico and Russia with particular cruelty in terms of total deaths. And while most countries experienced the first wave of infections in a similar fashion, albeit at different times, new variants are – for now – changing the way different areas are suffering from further waves. Is the world rolling out the vaccine fast enough? In December 2020, a number of countries began to approve vaccines and begin vaccination programmes. Many countries rolled out their vaccine programmes in early 2021, but concerns have been raised over the availability of vaccines in developing nations. Johns Hopkins University publishes cases and deaths data for most countries in the world (a notable exception being North Korea, which claims to have had none). But JHU concedes that it collects data from many sources, some of which disagree with each other. Even where the collection is less contentious there are significant differences in the ways countries test, and in the way they report cases and deaths. Belgium, for instance, attributes deaths to Covid-19 if the disease is a suspected cause, even if no test has been carried out. Cases and case rates by country Deaths and death rates by country Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.Since the first Pfizer vaccine against Covid-19 was injected into the arm of a British woman in December 2020, billions of vaccine doses have been administered worldwide. Dozens of countries now have advanced vaccination campaigns as they rush to protect their people and get their economies back up and running. Many are in a position where the most vulnerable people are fully vaccinated, raising hopes that the pandemic’s worst effects may be over. At the same time, many developing countries are struggling to buy adequate supplies and are suffering from new waves of the pandemic. Is the world rolling out the vaccine fast enough? Throughout the first quarter of 2021, a number of countries began to ramp up their vaccination programmes. Those with the most advanced vaccination campaigns – such as Israel, the US and the UK – quickly saw benefits, with falling death rates as their populations built immunity. At the same time, many developing countries still have been unable to procure supplies at the same pace. Vaccine rates by country In the table below, you can find out the number of vaccine doses per 100 people in each country to date. About this data This data is the latest available from Our World in Data. Differences in data collection and publishing schedules between countries may lead to temporary inconsistencies. Vaccinations mean the number of doses that have been administered to date. As most approved vaccinations required two doses, a rate of 100 doses per 100 people does not mean full vaccination coverage.The former US president Donald Trump has accused the Duchess of Sussex of being “disrespectful” to the Queen and the royal family. In a wide-ranging interview with the politician turned broadcaster Nigel Farage, Trump said he thought the Duke of Sussex had been “used horribly”. The interview with Trump, 75, whose presidency ended in January 2021, took place in Florida on Monday and will be broadcast on GB News. Speaking about Meghan, Trump said: “I’m not a fan of hers. I wasn’t from day one. I think Harry has been used horribly and I think some day he will regret it.” According to GB News, he added: “I think Harry’s been used and been used terribly. I think it’s ruined his relationship with his family, and it hurts the Queen.” In response to comments from Farage about Meghan using Duchess of Sussex headed writing paper to lobby members of Congress, Trump, the first US officeholder to be impeached twice, said: “She is trying do things that I think are very inappropriate.” GB News said he told Farage: “I think she’s very disrespectful to the royal family and most importantly to the Queen.” During the interview, Trump described the Queen as “a great woman, such a great person, a historic person”. GB News said the interview featured Trump talking about Boris Johnson, the presidential election, events at the US Capitol on 6 January, Black Lives Matter, the migration crisis in the US and the UK, antifa, and the question of whether he would run for office again. He said Johnson was making a “big mistake” by backing “ridiculous” windfarms to drive the UK’s push to a net-zero-carbon economy. The former US president said he still liked the British prime minister but claimed that he was wrong to support renewable wind energy. The UK has become a world leader in wind energy, particularly offshore, and Johnson has pushed for Britain to become to wind what Saudi Arabia is to oil in the drive to reach net zero by 2050. Investment in the technology over the past decade or more led to the world’s largest windfarm, Hornsea One, being built in the North Sea off the east Yorkshire coast. But Trump said the UK was destroying its landscape by permitting the turbines to be installed. He said: “He’s wrong, Boris is wrong if he’s going heavy into wind. He’s making a big mistake.” The interview airs at 7pm on Wednesday.UK ministers should face charges of “misconduct in public office” over their handling of the coronavirus pandemic, an unofficial inquiry has said. The People’s Covid inquiry, formed by the political campaign group Keep Our NHS Public, said there had been “serious governance failures” at Westminster that contributed to tens of thousands of avoidable deaths. The inquiry, which heard evidence from February this year until the summer, said the government had failed to protect key populations at increased risk, and recommendations from previous pandemic planning exercises had been ignored. Consideration should be given to bringing charges of misconduct in public office, given the available evidence of failures and the serious consequences for the public, it added. The government has said it has committed to holding a full public inquiry next spring as there are lessons to be learned. Accusing ministers of “serious governance failures” in a report published on Wednesday, the People’s Covid inquiry said: “These contributed to tens of thousands of avoidable deaths and suffering, and they amount to misconduct in public office.” Its chair, Michael Mansfield QC, said there had been “dismal failure in the face of manifestly obvious risks”. He said the inquiry had identified a “theme of behaviour amounting to gross negligence by the government, whether examined singularly or collectively”. He continued: “There were lives lost and lives devastated, which was foreseeable and preventable. From lack of preparation and coherent policy, unconscionable delay, through to preferred and wasteful procurement, to ministers themselves breaking the rules, the misconduct is earth-shattering.” The inquiry heard evidence from a range of witnesses and organisations, including academics, frontline workers and bereaved families. Mansfield said there had been no accountability, and this could not be offset by the success of the vaccine rollout. Jo Goodman, a co-founder of the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group, which contributed to the inquiry, said: “It’s vital that bereaved families are at the heart of the forthcoming inquiry, and listened to at every turn, and this report evidences exactly why. “The loss of our loved ones should be used to learn lessons and save lives – something the government should be entirely focused on and dedicated to.” A government spokesperson said: “Covid-19 is an unprecedented pandemic which has challenged health systems around the world. Thanks to our collective national effort, our preparedness plans, and our frontline NHS workers, we have saved lives, vaccinated tens of millions of people and prevented the NHS from being overwhelmed. “We prepared for a range of scenarios, and by deploying key elements of our flu preparedness plans we were able to develop new means to tackle the virus quickly such as by setting up our national testing programme and rolling out millions of vaccines. “Every death from this virus is a tragedy and we have always said there are still lessons to be learned from the pandemic, which is why we have committed to a full public inquiry in spring.”Writers writing about writers: the fact that there’s a lot of it about should perhaps come as no surprise. From the likes of Jack Torrance in The Shining to Paul Morris in Sabine Durrant’s Lie With Me, writers in fiction are often skewered: preening, blocked, dejected creatures who’ll receive their comeuppance – or salvation – one way or another. At the Novelry, we hothouse writers from the twinkling of an idea through to a publishing-ready novel with our online writing courses. We are blessed with saintly writers, but we do love an author horror story. In the books below you’ll find accounts of literary theft and false authorship, washed-up novelists fading to nothing on college campuses, and a fine array of supersize egos. But, you’ll also find hope: people discovering their place in the world through writing and that happiest of endings – a sparkling book deal. 1. Wonder Boys by Michael Chabon Grady Tripp is a professor at a Pittsburgh university, with a predilection for drink, drugs and extra-marital affairs. He’s also a struggling novelist, failing to finish the long-awaited – and currently just enormously long – follow-up to his last award-winning book. As Grady says, “I had the depressing thought, certainly not for the first time, that my novel might well survive me unfinished.” When Grady’s flamboyant editor Terry Crabtree comes to town for WordFest weekend, cue a caper that is as funny as it is poignant. 2. The Plot by Jean Hanff Korelitz When down-on-his-luck author Jacob Finch Bonnet takes up a new teaching role at a Vermont college he is under-prepared, uninterested, and feeling impostor syndrome to his very bones. He soon encounters his worst nightmare: an extravagantly confident student possessed of an idea for a novel that is so remarkable that even Jake despairingly admits, “the worst writer on the planet could not mess up a plot like this”. Before too long, the stars align for Jake to make his ill-advised move. The killer plot is now his, and glittering success soon follows. But will it last? Spoiler: no. 3. Bunny by Mona Awad Warren University’s MFA programme is known for its “experimental approach to narrative”. Its first all-female fiction cohort consists of Samantha, a self-professed outsider, and four “Bunnies”, a tight-knit group of sickly-sweet rich girls. When the Bunnies extend the paw of friendship to Samantha, she can’t figure out whether it’s genuine or comes with cruel intentions; after all, they’re not backwards in coming forwards with their peer review, dubbing her work “wilfully twisted” and “aggressively dark”. Soon Samantha is invited to the Bunnies’ extra-curricular “workshops”, where the boundaries between fact and fiction, nightmare and reality blur. 4. The Wife by Meg Wolitzer When creative writing tutor and decidedly average writer Joe Castleman says to his student Joan, “You have no conception of how good you are” it’s a perfect moment of foreshadowing in a novel that’s as much about sexual politics as it is about the writing life. When we meet Joan, aged 64, she’s accompanying her husband, now a celebrated writer, to pick up “the Helsinki prize” – and she’s finally had enough of him. As the novel tracks back through their past together, readers will wish that Joan had come to this realisation sooner. 5. The Truth about the Harry Quebert Affair by Joël Dicker Marcus Goldman’s first novel was a stratospheric hit and since then he’s been enjoying every minute of it, with adoring readers wherever he goes. The only problem is that there hasn’t been much time to write the follow-up, and deadline after deadline has gone whooshing by. But now his publishers are getting mad, there are threats of a lawsuit, and the only person who might be able to help him out of this sticky spot is his former college writing professor, Harry Quebert. Quebert invites Goldman to stay at his oceanside house in New Hampshire to get that novel finished. But Goldman’s wordcount plans go awry when the corpse of a teenage girl is discovered on Harry’s property, buried alongside the manuscript for Quebert’s famed novel, The Origin of Evil. It falls to Goldman to clear his prof’s name – motivated, perhaps in part, by the promise of a million-dollar advance for the resulting book. Murder and megabucks: now there’s a cure for writer’s block. 6. Little Women by Louisa May Alcott Jo, the second eldest of the March sisters – and Alcott’s alter ego – is smart, independent, and happiest when she’s at her writing desk, dressed in her ink-stained “scribbling suit”. Enduring an early setback on her road to published authordom (take one slighted sister, add a cherished manuscript and a roaring fire), Jo eventually turns pro, earning hard cash for her “sensation” stories. But when she’s shamed by a high-handed intellectual – reader, she married him; Alcott, what were you thinking? – Jo struggles to find her voice, first abandoning her gothic thrills for moralistic yarns, before toying with children’s fiction, then declaring herself temporarily out of the game until she’s accrued more life experience. “I like good strong words that mean something,” says Jo, and generations of readers have loved hers. 7. Dear Committee Members by Julie Schumacher As creative writing professor at an undistinguished liberal arts college, Jason Fitger is frequently asked to pen letters of recommendation for his students and assorted colleagues. A year’s worth of such letters makes for an epistolary novel that gives a brilliantly comic insight into the politics, frustrations and occasional joys of academia, as well as a teasing study of a man on the ropes. His sign-off to the very first letter captures the tone of a novel that manages to be uplifting, despite the disappointments that its hero faces: “In sadness but looking to the future.” 8. The Retreat by Mark Edwards Cash-strapped and lonely, grieving the loss of her husband and daughter, Julia Marsh opens her rural home as a venue for writing retreats. Enter Lucas Radcliffe, a successful horror writer with a tragic past and a severe case of writer’s block. As Lucas and Julia forge a bond, he becomes determined to solve the mystery of her missing daughter. But this corner of deepest, darkest Wales is holding its own secrets, leading Lucas to delve into local folklore, and a sequence of eerie events ratchets up the fear-factor. It will leave you thinking twice about booking your own writing retreat. 9. Jumping Monkey Hill by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie One of 12 stories in Adichie’s 2009 collection, The Thing Around Your Neck, here we meet Ujunwa, a Nigerian woman who’s won a place on a retreat for the fictional Lipton African writers’ prize. The organiser is Edward Campbell, who announces himself “an Oxford-trained Africanist”. Ujunwa’s alarm bells are already ringing as she arrives at a resort for affluent foreign tourists – all of whom are white. Over the course of the retreat she confronts not just the self-important Campbell’s lasciviousness, but also his absurd proclamations of what “authentic African” writing should – and shouldn’t – be. Ujunwa, whose writing we’re treated to throughout the story, makes for a luminous heroine. 10. The Ghost Writer by Philip Roth Twenty-three-year-old Nathan Zuckerman arrives at the home of his literary hero, the famous recluse EI Lonoff. Initially starstruck, the ambitious Nathan – an alter ego for Roth who would feature in eight further novels – wants not just to learn from the man who embodies creative integrity, “a giant of patience and fortitude and selflessness”, but become his “spiritual son”. Luck’s on Nathan’s side as a snowstorm means his visit is extended. He is enthralled and enchanted – not least by the figure of Lonoff’s assistant Amy Bellette, a Jewish immigrant whose enigmatic identity gives The Ghost Writer the propulsive energy of a mystery novel, as well as being a tender, comic story of mentor and mentee. • Louise Dean is founder of the Novelry. It provides courses and advice to writers of any moral condition, with or without novels in progress. Dean promises faithfully not to put you in her novels. Find out more here.For about an hour and a half before she finishes work and gets the bus home, Jacqui won’t eat or drink anything. Once, while waiting at the bus stop, and suddenly needing the loo, she had to head to the other end of town; the public toilets nearby had closed. She didn’t make it in time. Jacqui, who has multiple sclerosis, which can affect bladder and bowel function, says: “I go everywhere with a spare pair of knickers and a packet of wipes, but it’s not something you want to do if you can help it.” Jacqui was diagnosed with MS five years ago, and in that time she has noticed a decline in the number of public toilets. Of the ones that are left, one only takes 20p coins, “and in this increasingly cashless society, you have to make sure you always go out with a 20p”. The other block of loos are “up two flights of stairs or the lift, so it’s not the most suitable access”. If she is out for the day, she will research where the loos are, and it has meant missing out on trips with friends, such as to an outdoor festival, where the loos just weren’t accessible enough. The MS Society has given her a card, which she shows in cafes requesting access to their loos when she’s not a customer, and every person she has flashed it to “has been wonderful”. But, she adds: “You use it as a last resort because you don’t really want to burst into a cafe in front of people and say: ‘Excuse me, I need to wee.’” Public toilets are in decline, and a public campaign is needed. According to Jack Shaw, a local government researcher, who obtained freedom of information data, the number of local-authority-provided public loos fell from 3,154 to 2,556 between 2015 and 2021. Raymond Martin, the managing director of the British Toilet Association, says: “We reckon we’ve lost 50% of all [standalone public] toilets across the country in the last 10 years. It’s a crisis situation.” It isn’t just disabled people and those with chronic illness who are affected, though the impact on them is disproportionately high, but all of us – older people, those with continence issues, pregnant women, toddlers, homeless people, those of us who suddenly just really need a wee. It affects taxi drivers, delivery drivers and outdoor workers. For those who need to know where the nearest loo is, it can tether us close to home or a small area, known as the “urinary leash”. Femi Adebowale, who has Crohn’s disease, an inflammatory bowel condition, plans his days and journeys around where the nearest loo is. “If I get invited to stuff and there’s no toilets, there’ll be less likelihood of me going,” he says. But even if he meticulously researches and plans, an out-of-order toilet, or one that has closed down, either permanently or temporarily due to Covid fears, is a problem. “I’ve had a few accidents. There was one that wasn’t long ago – I was on a train and had to get off, and where I thought there was a toilet, there wasn’t one.” He eventually found access to a toilet in the third place he tried. “When you know you’ve got to go, there’s a lot of fear around it and panic,” says Adebowale. “And when you have an accident, it feels quite humiliating. It just ruins the day, and the week sometimes.” Adebowale was diagnosed 10 years ago, when he was 16, and has noticed public loos disappearing in that time. “Places where I might have known from my teen years to have a toilet, now don’t. So it’s a lot harder. I have to try to find up-to-date information for a place I haven’t been for a while to see if the toilet still exists.” He gave evidence to the London Assembly health committee, which published a report last month, recommending public toilet provision should be a statutory duty for local authorities. It also called on the London mayor to encourage large businesses, such as retail chains, to allow the public to use their toilets and advertise the fact. There should also be good-quality information on where to find the nearest public loo, including what facilities, such as a baby-change table, it offers, and reviews of toilets for disabled people to ensure they are genuinely accessible. Of its survey of more than 3,000 Londoners, more than 90% said it was difficult to find a public toilet. There has been a reluctance among politicians to address it, says Martin. “Nobody wants the portfolio, nobody wants to be known as the minister for toilets.” But he points out that public conveniences are essential infrastructure, and in other countries, sanitation departments are a source of pride. “We call them a ‘convenience’, it’s a 19th-century term, and that implies toilets are a nice extra to have,” says Rosalind Stanwell-Smith, an honorary associate professor at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine. “And yet, when you need one, it’s absolutely essential. The decline won’t stop until we legally require them, and it’s quite shocking that there is no legislation to require public toilets. They’re as vital as streetlights and pavements. We really don’t want our streets filled with people just relieving themselves because there’s no toilets.” She thought perhaps the pandemic, and its focus on public health as well as basics such as handwashing, might help push the cause for public toilets. “But of course it made it worse.” When public toilets were closed en masse during the lockdowns, people were defecating in parks and on beaches. In the Highlands in Scotland, outdoor toileting became so bad that the council put plastic trowels in laybys to encourage people to bury their waste. Even with public toilets now open, Martin says “street fouling is increasing. In London it’s abysmal and they’re having to send out teams of people with sprayers and brushes to clean it out of doorways and off pavements.” Apart from being unpleasant and giving visitors a negative view of the capital, it’s a public health issue. “This is the 21st century, we’re a developed country –people need to go to the toilet when they need to go to the toilet.” The Victorians realised this. Clara Greed, an emerita professor of inclusive urban planning at the University of the West of England and a public loo researcher, says that public toilets really took off, “in the 19th century, particularly about the 1870s, where there was this massive public health movement to improve sewage and drainage and water supply, particularly because of cholera”. They provided more toilets for men “because it was seen that men were out and about, going to work, and it was considered improper for women to be out on their own or to encourage it. So the great inequality started very early on.” Toilets became a feminist issue, and women campaigned for public loos. “Women felt very restricted in their movements because of the lack of toilets. You had department stores, and some restaurants, various places where women could go shopping and use the toilets, but it was still quite restrictive.” In the 1920s and 30s, says Greed, there was “almost a civic pride in providing toilets, but there were still fewer facilities for women”. Because you could fit more urinals into blocks than cubicles, “women got about half the level of provision as men. That’s why we still have queues, and this [comes from] the early 20th century. It was very heavily weighted against women.” Women also had to pay to use many facilities, when men did not. Public toilets are still a political issue, with the move towards gender-neutral facilities marking the latest loo revolution. While the intention is good and, if done properly, should cater for everyone, in practice it has sometimes meant little more than switching the sign on the door. Rather than starting again and building private self-contained cubicles – which would benefit everyone, including trans people, parents with children, disabled people, those who need help, men who find gents’ toilets intimidating places – often women find they are sharing their spaces with men, while men also retain access to the loos containing urinals. The postwar reconstruction of the 1950s, and the building of new towns, brought more public loos. “By about the 1980s, you began to get a decline in public funding and local authorities began to close public toilets in order to save money. And this was because the 1936 Public Health Act gave local authorities the power to provide toilets if they wish, but it wasn’t mandatory. So public toilets were one of the first things to go.” The slashing of local authority budgets during austerity made it even worse, says Martin. In the long term, he says, it makes no sense. Having good public conveniences “brings visitors and tourism to town centres – they’re things that councils want”. The loss of public toilets also means, says Jyotsna Vohra, the director of policy at the Royal Society for Public Health (RSPH), “the burden falls disproportionately on people experiencing other health inequalities. We know nearly two in five people with long-term medical conditions, such as bladder and bowel disease, are tied to their homes because of fear or knowledge of a lack of facilities nearby.” For the general public, it’s as high as one in five. “This directly hampers the UK’s wider public health efforts, such as keeping people physically active and socially engaged with their community.” The RSPH found more than half of the people it surveyed reported restricting their fluid intake occasionally or frequently in order to avoid needing the loo when they may not be able to find one. “Toilets are often seen as a taboo and trivial subject, but they require serious political and public debate,” says Vohra. “Putting the provision of public toilets on a statutory footing alongside funding for local authorities will help to address an obvious gap in public health.” There have been moves to make toilets more available for some sectors. The Department for Transport and the Health and Safety Executive recently published a letter to remind businesses of their obligation to provide access to toilet and hand-washing facilities to visiting delivery drivers (many workers reported being turned away). But the general public are still underserved. In some places, the local community has taken over the running of public loos. “I think they’re absolutely wonderful,” says Martin, of the local residents who run facilities, “but I don’t think it’s right.” It’s the same for schemes whereby businesses, such as cafes, and community organisations are paid to allow the public to use their loos – good in principle, but it can vary by area, opening hours may not be ideal and the toilets may not be accessible. Martin wants to see a statutory requirement, and funding, for public toilets. In the meantime, he says, “we’ve got to stop the closures. And get the toilets that are still available – about 2,600 that we know of – up to spec.” There are always questions of how to pay for them, says Stanwell-Smith. “Are we paying for good paving, good streetlights, sanitation? Of course we do. We pay for our water, and for drains. It should be on a par with that and legally controlled in the same way.” A penny tax on every journey could help fund them, she suggests. In previous centuries, she points out, public toilets were bequeathed by rich philanthropists. “It hasn’t become as respectable [now],” she says. “I once had an interesting conversation with a royal equerry. I said, would there be a member of the royal family who you think could support this? He said: ‘Never’. Why is it so embarrassing? How come we can talk about anything else and not toilets? Why would they think they’d be laughed at? Hopefully we wouldn’t, but being British we might.” Public toilets could be designed by the best architects and become attractions in their own right, she says. Having to plan where and when he can go to places, and knowing where the nearest public toilet is, “just makes everything longer and a lot more emotionally draining”, says Adebowale. More public toilets would obviously help, he says, and so would big chains getting involved – McDonald’s, say – and announcing that anyone with a need would be welcomed. It can be stressful having to ask to use the loo somewhere, he says – he has a card from Crohn’s and Colitis UK that he can show to cafes or restaurants when asking to use their loo, but it hasn’t always been very helpful. “A lot of people just don’t know about not just Crohn’s disease, but any chronic illness – there’s not enough awareness. A lot of people aren’t very compassionate about the fact that we have a need. It feels like a coin toss whether they will let me [use the loo] or not. I’m more likely to go in a place if I feel I can get past the staff without being noticed. It’s not nice having to ask to use the toilet, when it feels like a basic human right.”America’s equivalent of the UK’s Windrush scandal is the driving force behind this fierce heartbreaker from Korean-American star Justin Chon, who played Erik in the Twilight saga and got his directing breakthrough in 2017 with Gook, a drama set around the 1992 LA riots. Here, Chon writes, directs and stars as Antonio, who as a baby was given away for adoption by his immigrant Korean mother and brought up by negligent white parents. After a troubled past and spells in jail for stealing motorbikes, Antonio has turned his life around, working as a tattoo artist in New Orleans and married to a physical therapist, Kathy, played by Alicia Vikander – who, with no dubbing, sings a very nice karaoke version of Roy Orbison’s song about the beautiful Louisiana wetlands that give the film its title. Antonio is a loving stepdad to Kathy’s daughter Jessie (Sydney Kowalske) and together, they’ve got another baby on the way. But Jessie’s absentee dad is a cop, Ace (Mark O’Brien), who with aggressive self-pity now bitterly regrets leaving his child to be parented by another man and is demanding parental access rights; influenced by his racist cop partner Denny (Emory Cohen) it dawns on him that in the US, adopted people of immigrant descent without paperwork have no guaranteed residency. He can get Antonio deported. Meanwhile, Antonio and Kathy befriend Vietnamese-American Parker (Linh-Dan Pham), who has her own sadness. Subtlety and nuance are not exactly this film’s strong points and creating a minor character who happens to be an immigration officer, and a nice guy, is a very contrived balancing effect. And in the final scene, Chon certainly cranks up the agony dials to 11, 12 and beyond. Yet this could be exactly the kind of scene that is happening every day to people in the real world, the kind of people whose grim case histories Chon flashes up over the closing credits. Chon has a great line echoing the title, when Antonio asks Jessie about her sad comment that he won’t want to spend time with her when the baby comes: “Was that a blue thought or a true thought?” – that is, a thought born of sadness, or truth? This painful drama shows it can be both. • Blue Bayou is released on 3 December in cinemas.At first glance, the Basque cheesecake has the look of a terrible mistake. The first time I made it, in the somewhat unlikely setting of a south London shelter for those experiencing homelessness over Christmas, diners were rightly suspicious of its singed (some might even say burnt) appearance. We’d had a large donation of cream cheese nearing its use-by date, and the chef in charge had recently visited San Sebastián, which explains why he thought this was the obvious solution, because back in 2017 I’d never heard of such a thing. Now, however, this simple baked cheesecake, created in 1990 by Santiago Rivera of the Basque town’s La Viña restaurant, seems to be, if not everywhere, then ubiquitous enough for the Times to declare it the “pudding that broke the internet”, helped in part by the recipe in Nigella’s latest offering, Cook Eat Repeat. Indeed, food writer Ed Smith confesses that he was uncertain about including a version of this “food media darling” in his latest latest book Crave, yet, as he reasons, even after it stops being “A Thing”, the Basque cheesecake will still be “deliciously satisfying in its cream-cheesy, bronze-top-yet-wibbling-middle way”. Plus, as Ravneet Gill observes, it’s “so low fuss, it’s unbelievable”. What’s not to love, especially if you’re still looking for a high-impact sweet centrepiece for the Christmas table? The dairy Actually, as Nicola Lamb notes in her Kitchen Projects instalment on Basque cheesecake, this is a dessert in which the texture is as important as the flavour, which means that you can play around with the ingredients to suit your taste – or up to a point, anyway. The backbone is, of course, cream cheese; for all the snobbiness around it in certain quarters, Rivera himself sometimes uses Philadelphia, according to Gabriella Ranelli, who runs food tours that often take in La Viña, and, of course, it works just fine. The major Spanish brand, San Millan, contains slightly more salt than the Kraft version, which means if you use the latter, you might like to add a pinch to your recipe, but the fat content is very similar. (My own preference, Paysan Breton, which, unlike Philadelphia, doesn’t contain any stabiliser, is quite salty already, so it’s worth checking.) Rivera’s recipe, as translated by Daniela Galarza from a YouTube video and confirmed by Ranelli (who tells the journalist there’s no big secret – the chef gives out printed copies all the time) also uses double cream, as does chef Adam Rawson, who developed the recipe used at the Standard in London. Gill goes for double and soured cream in her new book Sugar I Love You, which Lamb says “adds essential tang”, while Lawson uses cream cheese and soured cream. Frank Camorra of Melbourne’s Movida, meanwhile, puts cheese, cream, goat’s curd and yoghurt in his cheesecake and Tomos Parry, of Brat, the east London restaurant that perhaps did more than any other to put this dessert on the map over here, uses cheese, cream and goat’s curd. While the yoghurt and curd give Camorra’s cake a lactic lightness, and those made with double cream and cheese alone are deliciously rich, the acidity of the soured cream lifts the whole dish for me. That said, I love the denseness of Rivera and Rawson’s versions, so I’m going to use creme fraiche in place of the soured and double cream. The eggs Some recipes, such as Parry’s and Sunny Lee’s for Serious Eats, use yolks as well as whole eggs, which adds richness without the textural toughness or “eggy” flavour that comes from over-egging the pudding, but my testers and I don’t find this a problem. Egg whites are always a pain to use up, unless you’re a body builder or a meringue fanatic, so I’ve stuck with whole eggs in my version. The sugar and flavourings You can include as much or as little sugar as you like; Camorra’s cake is almost savoury, with just 115g sugar to over 1kg of dairy, while Galarza’s contains nearly four times as much. As with the salt, it all comes down to personal taste. Lee adds vanilla extract, Parry orange zest, Camorra lemon zest and juice and a slug of brandy, and Smith a couple of tablespoons of honey. Again, up to you; Rivera himself tells Galarza, “If you want salt, add salt; if you want vanilla, add vanilla …”, and I must say that the freshness of the citrus zests is particularly nice against the richness of the dairy. Then again, given the strong flavour of the caramelised top, any extra ingredients might well be gilding the lily. The starch Strictly speaking, you don’t need to add any flour – Galarza’s recipe leaves it out, and Dave Beran of now-shuttered Santa Monica restaurant Dialogue explains to the Los Angeles Times that he doesn’t use it, either, “because the centre never gets hot enough for the starch to cook through and it ends up grainy”. If you’re making the cake more than a few hours ahead of eating, however, it’s a wise insurance policy – as Lamb points out, “a Basque baked without flour is quite weepy the following day, and having some flour in the mix helps hold the liquid much better”. The mixing Some recipes just call for you to mix everything together and bake. The problem with this approach is that, while you want to make sure the ingredients are well combined, introducing too much air into the batter will give the cheesecake a light, fluffy texture, as opposed to the rich silkiness we’re aiming for here. It’s better to combine them gradually, and at a low speed: some recipes even call for a food processor, as opposed to a mixer, because, according to Beran, the latter can “overmix, then break” the batter. Rawson’s recipe suggests keeping the mixer on a very low speed, and adding the ingredients very gradually, while Lamb goes so far as to whisk the flour into a small amount of the mixture before adding it to the rest, which seems a wise precaution against pockets of powder – slow and steady is the name of the game with this cake. The cooking temperature I have to be completely honest now: even when Basque cheesecake isn’t perfect, it’s still great. Every single recipe I tried for this column was utterly delicious, but the single thing that makes the biggest difference to the texture of the dish, whether you want it smooth and dense and firm, like Gill’s, or ever-so-slightly oozy, like Rawson’s (which, once cut, resembles a ripe camembert) is its time in the oven – and we’re going for Gill’s “high and fast”. For this reason, use a deep tin, and make sure the batter comes up to about 1cm below the top; if your tin is too wide and shallow, as I find when I have to substitute a cake tin for Parry’s 25cm cast-iron frying pan, you’ll lose the textural contrast between the two. Lee chills the batter before baking, in an effort to achieve the perfect balance between the deeply browned top and creamy centre, but then bakes it for such a long time at a very high heat (25 minutes at 230C, followed by 20 at 260C, which is almost self-cleaning mode in my oven) that I have to whip it out 15 minutes ahead of time when the smell of burning sugar breaks my resolve. Fortunately, the inside is pretty perfect, but I’m not sure the chilling can be credited for this. Conversely, those that are baked at more moderate temperatures, such as Parry’s 180C fan (though at Brat they cook them in a wood oven), risk overcooking in the middle before the top browns – or overcooking for my tastes, anyway. If you like your cheesecake firm enough to slice, and only lightly browned on top, this may well be your ideal. For me, however, an oven hot enough to yield a deliciously bittersweet, almost burnt crust, and a wobbly, slightly molten middle is the way to go. If your oven isn’t hot enough, you can always do as Camorra recommends, and grill or blowtorch the top (though I’m not sold on Lee’s idea of adding sugar to create a brulee effect – at such a high heat, it turns unpalatably black). If you don’t have an oven thermometer, now is a good time to invest in one. A probe thermometer is also useful, but not essential – as Beran observes, it’s preferable to err on the side of under- rather than overbaking here; a sloppy, creamy slice is much more pleasurable to eat than fluffy, overcooked curds. But, as I said, this is the cheesecake it’s impossible to mess up. To serve Lawson serves hers with a liquorice sauce, in homage to Nieves Barragán Mohacho’s version, Rawson a quince jam, Parry roast fruit; Lamb, meanwhile, makes a chocolatey version, and at least two Michelin-starred restaurants flavour their Basque cheesecake with blue cheese. This is a very adaptable dessert, but I like it just as it is. Perfect Basque cheesecake Prep 15 min Cook 45 min Makes 1 x 20cm cake 700g cream cheese, at room temperature 350g creme fraiche, at room temperature 300g caster sugar ½ tsp salt (optional) 5 eggs, beaten 2 tbsp cornflour, or plain flour Heat the oven to 230C (210C fan)/450F/gas 8 (NB I use a conventional oven). Grease and line a deep, 20cm cake tin with baking paper, so it comes up at least 2cm above the top of the rim, lay in a second sheet of paper at right angles, and weigh down the paper with a bowl, if need be. Put the cheese in a large bowl, food processor or food mixer, and beat or whizz on a low speed until soft and spreadable. Beat in the creme fraiche until evenly mixed in … … then add the sugar and salt, if using, and beat until dissolved. Finally, beat in the eggs one by one, scraping down the walls of the bowl as you go, until they’re thoroughly mixed in. Put the cornflour in a small bowl, whisk to break up any lumps, then beat in a spoonful of the batter until thoroughly mixed in. Pour the cornflour mix into the big bowl of batter and stir to combine. Pour the cake mix into the lined tin (if need be, remove the bowl weighing down the paper first), smooth the top, then pick up the tin and drop it a couple of times on a work surface to knock out any air bubbles. Bake for 30 minutes, then keep your eye on it – mine took about 45 minutes in all, but it’s ready when the top is deeply brown and, more importantly, the middle is still wobbly and liquid; you’ll think it will never set, but it will as it cools. The internal temperature should be at least 60C. Remove from the oven and leave to cool, before using the paper to help lift the cake out of its tin – I think it’s nicest served still slightly warm on the day it’s baked, but if you’d like to cut it into neat slices, you may prefer to refrigerate it for several hours first. • The Basque cheesecake – are you a fan, have you tried the original … or have you never even heard of this allegedly internet-breaking dessert? UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match The cult restaurant dessert of 2021 deserves a sweet wine from Spain at the very least: moscatel if you want a lighter wine, sherry if you’re looking for something more intense. If you’ve got a bottle of cream sherry in the house, that would work. If not, nip to Tesco and pick up a half-bottle or two of its Finest Cream Sherry (£6 a half-bottle, 18%).The parliamentary commissioner for standards has begun a formal investigation into Jacob Rees-Mogg after a complaint from Labour that he failed to declare that he received £6m in cheap loans from one of his companies. The website for the commissioner, Kathryn Stone, has been updated to show that Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, is among MPs being investigated. It says the inquiry concerns the section on rules for MPs connected to the declaration of employment and earnings. The website also shows Douglas Ross, the Moray MP and leader of the Scottish Tories, is being investigated. Ross apologised earlier this month and referred himself to the watchdog for failing to declare his pay as an MSP and as a part-time football referee. Rees-Mogg did not report to the official register that he received director’s loans from Saliston between 2018 and 2020. The North East Somerset MP owns Saliston, even though he gave up his directorship in 2019. It has a stake in Somerset Capital Management investment company. Rees-Mogg says the loans were mainly used as “temporary cashflow measures” to pay for a property purchase and refurbishment, and did not need to be declared. But Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, said it was right that the commissioner was investigating “what appears to be yet another egregious breach of the rules”. She called for a parallel inquiry into whether Rees-Mogg had breached the ministerial code, which governs conduct for ministers. “Over the last few weeks, we have seen that Conservative MPs repeatedly act as if they can put their own private business interests ahead of their constituents and the prime minister must put a stop to this,” Debbonaire said. Accounts for Saliston show the £6m in loans – £2.94m in 2018, £2.3m the following year and £701,513 in 2019-2020 – attracted interest paid at the equivalent of about 0.8%, which is below market rates. The accounts list the loans as attracting interest rates of 2.5% and 3.5% in individual years, raising the prospect that he could have borrowed the money and repaid it over short periods of time. The MPs’ code of conduct does not specifically cover director’s loans but it states: “Members shall fulfil conscientiously the requirements of the house in respect of the registration of interests in the register of members’ financial interests. They shall always be open and frank in drawing attention to any relevant interest in any proceeding of the house or its committees, and in any communications with ministers, members, public officials or public office holders.” The wider issue of MPs’ conduct and outside interests, and the way these are publicly declared, has been in the news since the furore over Owen Paterson’s punishment for breaching lobbying rules, which Downing Street initially sought to overturn. Labour has proposed a new system that would ban almost all second jobs for MPs, while the Commons standards committee, which is separate to Stone’s role, has recommended changes, including greater clarity on MPs’ and ministers’ interests. In a statement released when the Labour complaint was made, Rees-Mogg said: “Saliston is 100% owned by me and this is declared clearly in the Commons register and to the Cabinet Office. It has no activities that interact with government policy. “The loans from 2018 were primarily taken out for the purchase and refurbishment of 7 Cowley Street as temporary cashflow measures. All loans have either been repaid with interest in accordance with HMRC rules or paid as dividends and taxed accordingly. “The register asks for earnings, not loans, which is why I was declared an as a non-remunerated director until I resigned on entering government. Loans are not earnings and are not declarable in the register of interests.”Fresh from receiving an MBE for his campaigning to lift children out of poverty, Marcus Rashford is now warming up for a new challenge: the England footballer is writing a children’s novel. Rashford has already launched a book club aimed at bringing books to children who need them most, and has topped the bestseller charts with his first book, the non-fiction You Are a Champion. Now he is teaming up with author Alex Falase-Koya to write The Breakfast Club Adventures. The illustrated novel, aimed at eight to 11-year-olds, will follow the adventures of the 12-year-old Marcus and his “group of unlikely friends” from their school’s breakfast club, said publisher Macmillan Children’s Books. It will draw on Rashford’s own experiences at breakfast clubs; he has spoken of how his family relied on them and free school meals when he was growing up. Last year he backed a cross-party parliamentary bill to fund free breakfast provision in schools. “I wanted to create something that really captured the true spirit of breakfast club. Outside of making sure we got the best start to our days with cereal, toast and juice, it was where my friendships were made. Where we could just lose ourselves. A safe haven,” said Rashford. “Breakfast club was where some of my greatest memories were formed, where we talked about our dreams and where adventures were planned, and it was important for me that we captured that in my first fiction book. Alex is a great writer who is able to capture that brilliantly and I’m thrilled that he’s on this journey with me.” The novel will be published in May 2022, with an illustrator to be confirmed shortly. It will be the third title to be distributed by the Marcus Rashford Book Club, after A Dinosaur Ate My Sister by Pooja Puri, illustrated by Allen Fatimaharan, and Silas and the Marvellous Misfits by Tom Percival. Falase-Koya, winner of Spread the Word’s 2019 London’s Writers Awards and author of the forthcoming superhero series Marv, said he was “very excited” to be working with Rashford. “Books changed my life when I was a kid, making me take a closer look at the things around me and taking me to worlds far from my own. I hope that this book gets the opportunity to do the same for other people,” he said.Somebody Loves You is reminiscent at first of an old home movie shot on Super 8 film, the colours saturated but barely in focus: jump cuts from toddlers waddling in snow suits to a garden, a kitten, a blue bowl. This is the camerawork of memory in action, what childhood recollection chooses to emphasise. But from the second page, there is something bigger looming outside the frame: “The day my sister tried to drag the baby fox into our house was the same day my mother had her first mental breakdown.” The debut novel of Mona Arshi, whose Small Hands won the 2015 Forward poetry prize for best first collection, focuses on a British Indian family in suburban London. The child narrator, Ruby, has a sister, Rania. Their father is “an untidily put-together man with a mild temperament”. Their mother is prone to “accidents” with the secateurs, and “Mugdays”, which bring daily life to a stalemate: “Simple things, like getting out of bed and into some fresh clothes, eating and drinking, have to be gently negotiated, navigated and pleaded for.” The garden, and the elderly neighbour who encourages their mother to work on it, prove to be a salvation. “My mother mulched the vegetable patch”, we are told, and “withdrew from the earth her first crop of firm, silky-skinned aubergines.” But when winter descends, and gardening duties are fewer, the family have to be on standby for Mugduty. Friends are summoned to help; “Auntie Number One”, who is a troubling figure because the girls “knew she lived with a man; we caught sight of her putting up posters for the Labour Party with someone who wore a leather jacket”. Meanwhile, Ruby stumbles over the word “sister” at school one day, and abruptly stops talking altogether. This isn’t a vow of silence so much as a renunciation of speech, an attempt to opt out of a world incapable of engaging with what she has to say beyond overemphasising the ethnicity of the speaker. For Ruby, speech is an inadequate mechanism for self-presentation: “The first thing you start doing when you start talking is editing.” A neighbour’s backhanded attempts at kindness are accompanied by the phrase “even little brown girls”. Ruby’s pen pal breaks off their correspondence with the parentally dictated note: “[my dad] found out you’re a Paki”. As the sisters graduate into puberty, their racialisation and its attendant sexualisation begin to poison their forays into the wider world. The girls go to parties where all the men “have names like Russell or Dominic”, where paintings of “lean black men” in “somewhere like Kenya” hang on the walls, where the girls are looked at and the lookers lick their lips. The novel turns on a devastating act closer to home that makes the sisters into a sort of inverted version of Procne and Philomela, where the violated sister is not the silent one. It resists the at times overused feminist admonition to “use your voice”: this is a book about silence as a subversive act of care. • This review was corrected on December 10 2021 as it originally stated that the family in the novel is British Pakistani. • Somebody Loves You by Mona Arshi is published by And Other Stories (£11.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, has appeared to joke about whistleblowers on Twitter in the wake of high-profile lawsuits against the electric carmaker brought by current and former staff. The billionaire urged his 65 million Twitter followers to “Blow the whistle on Tesla!” and included a link to a branded “Cyberwhistle” for sale in the company’s online shop. Despite being priced at $50 (£38), the stainless steel whistle had apparently sold out online within minutes, with many of Musk’s Twitter followers tweeting to say they had bought the item, which is shaped like Tesla’s futuristic Cybertruck vehicle. In a follow-up tweet, the 50-year-old, who is also the owner of Space X, told his followers: “Don’t waste your money on that silly Apple Cloth, buy our whistle instead!”, referring to Apple’s recently unveiled polishing cloth, which is on sale at the firm’s UK online store for £19. Tesla has faced several lawsuits in the US in recent months from current and former employees, some of whom have complained of harassment while at work. A federal court in California ordered Tesla in October to pay almost $137m in damages to a black former employee who said he endured racial abuse while working at the firm’s main factory in Fremont. Owen Diaz, a former contracted elevator operator, had complained of racial abuse while working at the plant between 2015 and 2016. In November, a worker at Tesla’s main California factory filed a lawsuit alleging rampant sexual harassment and lack of support from supervisors when complaints were raised. Jessica Barraza said she was regularly propositioned by colleagues and had to endure inappropriate touching at the Fremont plant. She said the firm’s human resources department had not responded to complaints she filed with them in September and October. Musk, whose personal worth is estimated at about $271bn, has a track record of courting controversy through his tweets, his preferred means of communication. In recent months he has promoted bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, polled Twitter users over whether to sell some of his Tesla shares, and also mocked the US Senator Bernie Sanders over comments about taxing the wealthy. Some of his tweets have got him and his company into trouble. The US securities watchdog warned Tesla last year that Musk had twice violated a settlement requiring his tweets and material public communications to be pre-approved by company lawyers, as first reported by the Wall Street Journal. The Cyberwhistle is made from “medical-grade stainless steel”, according to the Tesla website, and described as being “inspired by” the Cybertruck, an electric pickup truck made from stainless steel used in rockets. The armoured vehicle was revealed two years ago, in November 2019, with Musk tweeting only days later that the company had received 150,000 orders. Musk has told Tesla investors that Cybertruck production will begin in 2022. However, in recent days he complained of supply chain problems in response to a tweet requesting an update on Cybertruck delivery.On 17 November, the far-right journalist and polemicist Éric Zemmour went on trial in Paris on charges of incitement to racial hatred. In September 2020, he had said on the French news broadcaster CNews that unaccompanied foreign minors were “thieves, they’re murderers, they’re rapists, that’s all they are. We must send them back”. He did not appear at the trial and was represented by his lawyers, who said the charges were unfounded. The verdict is expected to be delivered next year. Zemmour has previously been convicted of incitement to racial hatred and religious hatred and been tried and acquitted in several other cases. But the stakes are different this time: the defendant is now a candidate for president of the French republic. In early November, polls indicated that up to 17% of the electorate would choose him for next president. This placed him behind only Emmanuel Macron, suggesting that the second round of the election could be between the two men. On 30 November, he officially announced his candidacy. The rise of Zemmour, 63, born to Algerian Jewish parents and raised in the banlieues of Paris, is a media phenomenon in two ways. First, he has spent most of his professional life working for newspapers and television, where he has been able to exercise his vitriolic style and make reactionary arguments. Second, he has benefited from extraordinary media coverage of his scandalous statements. Not only was he on the cover of the conservative magazine Valeurs Actuelles five times in the first nine months of 2021, but, according to the media observatory Acrimed, he was mentioned 4,167 times in all French outlets in the month of September alone: 139 times per day. The parallels with Donald Trump are clear, but there are important distinctions. While Trump traded on vulgarity and was unconvincing when bragging about his IQ, Zemmour is an intellectual who has studied at the elite university Sciences Po, even if he failed the entrance exam to the National School of Administration twice, and has authored several books, even if they comprise somewhat repetitive essays. Zemmour’s rhetoric also seems to go beyond that of Trump, although it is not known how far he would go in practice. Indeed, he has said that parents should only be allowed to give their children “traditional” French names, approvingly referred to people comparing Nazism with Islam, propagated the so-called “great replacement” theory and argued that employers have a right to turn down black or Arab candidates. He believes that political power should belong to men and that women’s role should be to have and raise children. He has claimed to be on the side of General Bugeaud, who massacred Muslims during the colonisation of Algeria, has contended that Marshal Pétain saved Jews during the second world war, and would like the death penalty to be reinstated. His overarching narrative is reversing France’s supposed national decline, which featured again in the video announcing his candidacy. To understand the rise of someone with such extremist views, it is important to recognise the changing dynamics within the French right, as well as the way the centre of political gravity in the country has moved rightwards. Zemmour’s rise has coincided with a drop in support for Marine Le Pen of the Rassemblement National – even if the sociological makeup of the two candidates’ supporters differs, as women, young people and blue-collar workers are inclined toward Le Pen, while men, older people and the upper middle class tend to favour Zemmour. The failure of Le Pen’s party at regional elections earlier this year seems to have marked the beginning of its fall. “Everyone knows that she cannot win,” Zemmour said in the following days, adding: “Even herself”. Paradoxically, through his radically rightwing positions, Zemmour has helped to detoxify the Rassemblement National, a goal Le Pen had set out to achieve ever since she became its leader. Long considered beyond the pale in the political arena, she has now gained respectability. Commenting on the low turnout in her own constituency at the regional elections, Zemmour said that people no longer see much difference between Le Pen and the president. “Marine Le Pen speaks like Emmanuel Macron, Emmanuel Macron speaks like Marine Le Pen”, he said on CNews. This analysis may look biased, yet it holds a grain of truth: Macron’s interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, in a debate with Le Pen in February 2021, argued that she was “not tough enough” on Islam, adding that his government was more consistent in the fight against immigration and defending secularism. In response, Le Pen confirmed their ideological affinities, going as far as admitting that she could have written much of his recent book, Le Séparatisme Islamiste. Confused, the anchor who was conducting the discussion could only say: “We have the impression that what you both say and think is the same.” This mutual understanding between someone whose surname is synonymous with the far right and the most prominent figure of Macron’s “centrist” government is revealing. On one hand, as she realised that her desire to leave the eurozone and appeal to the left had destabilised her voting coalition, Le Pen has returned to traditional conservative values. On the other, recognising that the left will not get to the second round of the coming presidential elections and would always prefer him to an explicitly rightwing candidate, Macron has increasingly sought to please French conservatives. The brutal repression of the gilets jaunes (yellow vests); the hardening of borders with Italy and Spain; and the targeting of Muslims via an intolerant version of secularism were signs of this evolution. So too a series of typically neoliberal measures abolishing the solidarity tax on wealth, increasing the equivalent of national insurance, liberalising the labour market and reducing unemployment benefits. A great shift to the right is currently under way in France. Together, the voting intentions for Zemmour, Le Pen, Macron and whoever is the candidate for Les Républicains equate to between 70% and 75% of the electorate. French public discourse is increasingly characterised by Islamophobia, xenophobia and racist and sexist ideas – what some call the “Zemmourisation of minds”. Arnaud Montebourg, a former Socialist who is now a presidential candidate, even proposed to block Western Union transfers to countries that “do not help” with deportations – a policy that brought him sarcastic congratulations from Zemmour, who observed that he must have been inspired by his YouTube channel. Whether the polemicist will become a serious contender is not yet known. Various signs suggest that he may be at a turning point, with the simultaneous withdrawals from his campaign of his main political champion, the former minister Philippe de Villiers, and of his principal financial supporter, Charles Gave. But what is certain is that his political rise has revealed the deeply worrying attraction, for a significant number of voters, of an ideology whose sheer violence has no equivalent in the past half-century. Didier Fassin is a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, and director of studies at the École des Hautes Études, ParisThe independence of Pakistan’s judiciary has been called into question after the emergence of an audio recording in which a former chief justice is allegedly heard admitting that pressure was brought to bear in a case against the former prime minister Nawaz Sharif and his daughter to aid the rise of the current office holder, Imran Khan. The recording, which has not been independently verified by the Guardian, has triggered an uproar in Pakistan and once again drawn scrutiny towards the country’s courts, which have long been tainted by accusations of meddling by the military. In the audio clip, Saqib Nisar, the former chief justice, is allegedly heard saying: “Let me be blunt about it: unfortunately it is the institutions who dictate judgments.” The reference to “institutions” has been taken to mean the military, which holds a tight grip over politics in Pakistan even though the country is technically ruled by a civilian government. Nisar then allegedly goes on to say: “In this case we will have to penalise Mian Sahib,” referring to Sharif. He adds that “regardless of merit”, the judgment in the case will go against Sharif and his daughter. Sharif was sentenced to 10 years in prison for corruption and his daughter Maryam Nawaz to seven years in the 2018 case referred to on the tape. The case related to money laundering and the ownership of luxury property in London. Nisar says it is in order to “bring in Khan Sahib”, which has been interpreted as referring to the current prime minister in deferential terms. In the tape, the judge also appears to be heard acknowledging that Nawaz does not deserve to be convicted, adding: “I did talk to friends that something be done about this but they did not agree. There will be no independence of the judiciary, so let it be.” It is not clear who was being spoken to on the tape. Nisar has responded to the allegations by saying the audio recording is a fake, and he has denied any wrongdoing. “It is fabricated. I have never talked to anyone on this matter. This is a campaign against me,” he said. The clip was originally obtained by the Pakistani investigative news site Fact Focus this month, who sent it to be verified by an independent US-based forensic company, Garrett Discovery. Garrett Discovery reported that the recording it was sent had not been manipulated, tampered with or edited. However, the origins of the recording remain unknown, and Garrett could not verify whether it was an original recording or a secondary recording of audio that may or may not have been manipulated. The company said that since it had authenticated the audio, it had received threats of violence and calls to retract its verification. Three days after the recording was revealed, the former wife of Ahmad Noorani, the journalist who published the audio, was attacked in Lahore by an unknown assailant and her car was damaged. Police are investigating the matter. It is not clear if the incident is linked to the audio recording, as Noorani has alleged. Despite the judge’s denials, the appearance of the audio has set off a firestorm around Khan’s government. Khan, a former cricketer turned politician, has been known for his close ties to the military. Under his rule the military has retained significant power in what is now viewed as a hybrid civilian-military regime. Khan and the military have denied these accusations. If authenticated, the recording may confirm that the military put pressure on the judiciary to convict the former prime minister, to remove Sharif as a political obstacle to Khan, who was elected later that year. “This audio provided more substance to the accusation that Khan was installed in government by the powerful non-political forces,” said Hamid Mir, one of Pakistan’s foremost journalists and commentators. Sharif’s party, Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, demanded a thorough investigation of the audio clip, and Islamabad high court has been asked to create an independent commission to ascertain its authenticity and investigate the former prime minister’s conviction. “Unfortunately, the history of Pakistan is full of judges who have enfeebled the rule of law by collaborating with military dictators,” said Nawaz. “No single government in the entire history has been allowed to complete its tenure. This instance is no exception.” Fawad Chaudhry, Pakistan’s information minister, said the government could not investigate the issue as it was now a matter for the courts. Ali Ahmed Kurd, a senior lawyer and former president of the Supreme Court Bar Association, said Pakistan’s history was littered with politicians and prime ministers imprisoned on wrong charges by judges. “What some judges have done, from hanging [the former prime minister] Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto to convicting Sharif, is part of our bleak history but it has to change now,” he said. “The alleged audio leak should be investigated and the judiciary should remain impartial.”Experts advising the government called last week for “early and robust actions” to limit the transmission of the Omicron Covid variant, minutes reveal. Members of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) held an extraordinary meeting last Thursday and agreed they could not rule out the new variant causing a larger wave of infections that could potentially overwhelm the NHS. The scientists noted that firm data was not yet available but early analysis of the variant provided “sufficiently worrying signals” for them to recommend “early and robust actions to prevent introduction and onward transmission”. First detected in South Africa and named Omicron by the World Health Organization (WHO), the emergence of the B.1.1.529 variant has prompted the government to reintroduce mandatory mask-wearing in shops and on public transport and dramatically increase the pace of the booster programme. Ministers have also introduced more stringent self-isolation policies for those in contact with positive Omicron cases, and placed South Africa and a string of other countries on the travel red list. But the government has resisted further changes, such as advising the public to work from home, and Boris Johnson on Tuesday rejected the advice of Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), who said the public should cut down on unnecessary socialising. The prime minister said at a Downing Street press conference: “We don’t want people to cancel such events.” The minutes of the Nervtag meeting, published on Wednesday, stressed that it remained unclear how serious the health outcomes of the variant could be, but that a large wave of infections could potentially overwhelm the NHS. “Although data on disease severity associated with B.1.1.529 are not yet available, a large wave of infections will be accompanied by a wave of severe cases and the subgroup cannot rule out that this may be sufficient to overwhelm NHS capacity,” the minutes say. With the tighter mask rules due to be reviewed in three weeks, Downing Street has suggested NHS capacity will be the key determinant of whether more action will be needed. Separately, leaked minutes from a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), to which Nervtag reports, suggested experts had called on the government to introduce predeparture testing for travellers returning to the UK. The BBC reported that minutes of a meeting held on Monday reveal scientists saying such testing – which Labour has called for – could be valuable. The new shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said: “It is totally unacceptable that ministers are failing to take action at the border when even their own advisers are telling them to introduce predeparture tests. “It cannot be right that people can travel to an airport, board a busy flight, queue at busy departure gates, and travel on trains and buses in the UK, all without having taken a test.” Nervtag was not specific about which measures the government should take. It did call for the vaccine programme to be stepped up – advice the government has heeded, with Johnson announcing at a press conference on Monday that all eligible adults would be offered a third dose of vaccine by the end of January. Since the variant was detected, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has advised that all adults should receive a booster vaccination, a recommendation that the government has accepted.The footwear company Clarks has reached an agreement with about 100 workers to end a two-month strike at its distribution centre in Somerset. The deal with the Community union, which follows mediation with Acas, is understood to protect hourly pay for established workers and increase pay for new staff at the site. Staff at the warehouse have been on strike since 4 October, saying the shoemaker had been seeking to cut their wages by almost 15% to £9.50 an hour by using controversial fire and rehire tactics. The changes were implemented after Clarks was taken over by a Hong Kong-based private equity firm, LionRock Capital, and the billionaire former Chinese Olympian Li Ning in March. The deal pumped £100m in new cash into the near 200-year-old British footwear company, which is still co-owned by the descendants of its founders – Cyrus and James Clark. In a joint statement, Community and Clarks said: “We are pleased that a resolution has been reached that works in everybody’s interests, protects Community members’ livelihoods, and recognises their loyalty to Clarks. “Following an indicative ballot of Community members it is confirmed that normal working has now resumed.” The two sides said they were looking forward to “close cooperation as we move on from the dispute and commit to positive industrial relations in the future”. The deal is a positive step forward for Clarks, which is seeking a new chief executive, its seventh boss in as many years. LionRock is trying to deliver a turnaround after sales dropped 43% to £775m in the year to 30 January as the group sank £172m into the red from a £21.5m profit a year before. While many clothing and footwear firms suffered during the first part of the pandemic, Clarks’ troubles date back some time. The company’s market share has halved in six years to 4% as it has lost its position as the UK’s biggest footwear retailer to third place behind JD Sports and Sports Direct.Despite an increase in on-screen representation and hits such as It’s a Sin and RuPaul’s Drag Race UK, being LGBTQ+ and working in television can still be difficult. It has been described as a “cloak-and-dagger” industry where most people work freelance and therefore are often afraid to speak up about incidents of homophobia or transphobia. The discrimination and harassment that LGBTQ+ people experience is often horribly insidious; dressed up as “banter” or dismissed as ignorance. Here, seven anonymous LGBTQ+ people who work in television, in front of and behind the camera, share their experiences. The production coordinator When I entered the industry, I was incredibly guarded about my sexuality. There were a few gay or bisexual men, but as a cisgender woman who identifies as queer or a lesbian, there’s a different skew on it. I don’t think I always felt safe or listened to. I was working on a documentary about a brothel and the executive joked about whether they should be sending me in there to speak to these sex workers because I was a lesbian. That was really offensive, because it implied that, as a gay person, I was a predator. I found that really concerning. I have also had experiences of working with talent who have often been outwardly homophobic, transphobic or racist. The company I was working for at the time didn’t get that, as an LGBTQ+ person, I didn’t want to be around them. But you don’t want to say no to a job, so it then feels really wrong having to drive this person around or get them a cup of tea. I do think we are seeing a change in perspective at companies that are trying to be more inclusive, although they’re struggling to make headway, especially behind the camera. It’s all about optics: if they feel like the stories being told on screen are enough, they don’t put in the effort to diversify their crew or production staff. The writer Sometimes I sit in a writers’ room and think: “I’m here to tick a box.” It’s not ever explicit, but it’s a feeling I get. That said, I do feel I offer a different perspective and that I’m valued. The thing that can be tricky is that people in television don’t trust audiences enough with queer stories. That means we’re often stuck telling the same stories over and over, mainly coming-out stories – and basic coming-out stories at that. A few years ago, I pitched a story about a trans guy coming out to his brother as gay. It was quite a simple and sweet story. But the reaction from someone very high up, who was on a six-figure salary, was that she didn’t think audiences would find it believable. What I think she was saying was that she didn’t think audiences would be able to handle the idea of somebody being gay and trans. I do think things are changing, though. There are more opportunities and people are more open to telling stories that aren’t straight. But you can feel competitive with your contemporaries because there are still so few seats at that table. Also, things like the hostile and transphobic environment alleged at the BBC do make me second-guess the projects and stories I’m pitching. I don’t think that’s a good place to start from creatively. The showrunner I came out only two years ago, but I feel like once you come out there is extra pressure in writers’ rooms to make sure you are challenging representation. I remember feeling really uncomfortable once when I had to explain the “bury your gays” trope to an older writer. I come across those tropes and try to challenge them when I can. I do that with race as well, because I often feel like I am the only minority in a writer’s room. With my project now, my producers have all been really encouraging and pushed for the queer storylines. I feel like I’ve been heard. But other writers have struggled to get things off the ground. I have heard of writers trying to launch a UK version of The L Word, but only Russell T Davies ever manages to get that stuff through. I think producers see shows about queer women and lesbians as a risk. I am hopeful for the future. Look at a show like Sex Education and what it’s doing in terms of representation. I feel like commissioners are really hot on the [age] 16-25 market at the moment, and those generations are more fluid and open. The output has to match your audience, so I feel like commissioners will start not to see things as risks. The content strategist I work in the kids and family space. I have seen times where we have skirted or actively avoided LGBTQ+ issues under the umbrella of keeping our brand safe and not wanting to have that conversation in kids’ content. But the company I work for would now never cast a cisgender person in a trans role and we would never have a two-dimensionally written gay character. We also wouldn’t have a straight writer or a straight writer’s room working on a predominantly gay storyline. The only thing that makes me despair is seeing what’s going on at the BBC. That makes me nervous for the wider UK landscape. If the culture there continues to be as toxic as many feel it is for LGBTQ+ people – and trans people, or non-binary people, are just the tip of the iceberg – there are a lot of people who are going to be concerned for what comes next. My concern would be that this treatment of trans people by the BBC could bleed out into wider industry. The producer While TV is one of the more inclusive industries I’ve worked in, in my experience, it has been dominated by white, gay, cis male voices. And so it appears inclusive on the outside, but actually, when you dig deep, we’re not looking at all the intersections. We had someone non-binary on our show and a senior individual who is a white, gay cis man tried to engage me in a negative conversation about pronouns. So even with people of a certain age who belong to the LGBTQ+ community, there’s still a battle when it comes to intersectionality. I think what happens with people like me – and I can see it happening in other marginalised communities – is that we shrink and camouflage ourselves in our personal and professional lives to fit in. Over time, that’s really damaging to our mental health. People are also afraid to speak up against negative comments made by senior execs because the freelance model means that you are essentially trying to protect your career and trying to get your next job. Ultimately, what it comes down to is power and what people do with that power. I’d like to think that, if those of us going through negative experiences stick with this industry, hopefully we can turn the tide. Maybe, one day, there will be a controller of a channel who isn’t white. It’s only when we start seeing those changes at the very top that positive change will filter down. The actor-writer I am definitely on people’s lists as the queer writer, so people just expect me to write that stuff, which I obviously do anyway. I have also had some experiences where I’ll be pitching shows and companies will be like: ‘Oh, we’ve already got our gay show.’ Until recently, it’s been about hiding the queerness as much as possible for actors. I was told at drama school that I sounded too gay and I was given one-on-one training to de-gay my voice, which is basically conversion “therapy”. So, I was coming into the industry being like: “OK, I need to hide this big part of myself.” As much as people may want queer shows, they also don’t put their full weight behind them from the get-go. They ask you to do a lot more work before they will push them forward. It feels limiting, as a lot of mainstream shows just want a gay character. But, really, I’m more interested in queering the whole show – the form, structure and the characters. My intention is political, so I have to try to bring that in through the back door. The actor I had a job recently where the director wanted me and a scene partner to improvise on camera. It was a really loose brief and I was misgendered in the improvisation. In the improvisation, I ended up having an argument with the other character about my pronouns. It felt really uncomfortable. When a new actor joined in, I said: “Oh, just to let you know, my pronouns are he/him.” I thought that would make things better for when I had to work with them. And then when we improvised together, he said to the initial character about me: ‘Oh, what? So you’re seeing someone who’s a he and a she now?’ I imploded. It was awful. But I just brushed it off. It was only after I left the situation that I felt I should have said something. So I ended up contacting the director to say: ‘Just to let you know, that little exchange will really harm your film.’ I know it wasn’t meant in a cruel way. It was an off-the-cuff thing in a comedy sequence. But I felt the effects of it for a week after. I just felt really crappy. I have to be hopeful. We’re in the thick of it now and having to fight fires all the time, but I do think we’ll get there. I’m already seeing things like pronouns on call sheets. However, this particular call sheet, which I had very recently, had one person’s pronouns on, which were they/them. But why weren’t everybody’s pronouns there? I can see what they were trying to do, but they were outing that person as a special case.In September 2017, a giant, floating fish farm capable of raising 1.5 million salmon was installed in central Norway. Besides its vast size – the circular structure is roughly the equivalent of two baseball fields – what set SalMar’s Ocean Farm 1 apart was its location three miles off the coast. It was hailed as the world’s first offshore salmon farm. Four years later, there have been two production cycles with better growth and survival of salmon compared with inshore farms, according to the company, hence less food waste and a lower carbon footprint. Energy demand was also reduced compared with traditional inshore farms because seawater naturally flows through the nets, oxygenating salmon with no need for the pumps used on traditional inshore farms. But the facility now lies empty, awaiting the development of new nets after farmed salmon escaped through a tear. Tougher nets will be vital for SalMar’s next-generation Smart Fish Farm that’s slated to be four times bigger and will operate even farther from the coast. Plans to place fish cages offshore are part of a wider trend among industries that are gazing out to sea in an effort to find more space, more cold, clean water and more wind. Many are chasing an ambition of greater sustainability. These initiatives are mostly at an early proof-of-concept stage, but they offer a glimpse of what the future of the ocean could look like, as well as some of the risks. “It’s not the first time we’ve had a kind of offshoring initiative,” said Klaus Dodds, professor of geopolitics at Royal Holloway, University of London. Popular culture in the 1960s and 70s portrayed the ocean as offering a brighter, shinier future with new opportunities to advance humanity, from seabed mining to living underwater. “I have a suspicion that the ocean yet again will become either a place for technical scientific fixes or for capitalism to constantly reinvent itself with clever new solutions,” says Dodds. Part of the new wave of industrial interest in offshore waters comes from tech companies. Microsoft has tried sinking data centres to see how well the sea can cool the systems and save power. After two years underwater a mile off Orkney in Scotland, a storage device was brought up encrusted in sea life. It performed well in its time underwater, according to the company, with fewer failures than land-based systems, and its energy efficiency is being analyzed. A number of problems could arise if seabed data storage takes off. “Where does all the heat go for oceans and seas that we’re already worried about in terms of warming?” Dodds said. It’s also unclear whether operators would carefully remove units at the end of their lifespans, possibly raising equivalent problems as encountered with decommissioning oil rigs in the North Sea. “I want to see some more careful research that really reassures me that overall, given the scaling-up implications, that it really is better to be offshore as opposed to on land,” Dodds said. He has seen a lot of interest from companies in data storage in the cold climate of Arctic regions but little research into the implications for ocean biodiversity. “There’s this presumption that just because we can’t see something or just because the ocean is so enormous, we can probably crack on.” As well as new ideas for using the ocean, old ones are coming back. After a decades-long hiatus, mining companies are once again planning to exploit metallic deposits on the deep seabed. This latest rush to mine the deep is facing growing opposition. Civil society, governments, scientists and corporations are calling for a moratorium on seabed mining due to the likely impacts on biodiversity and climate. The International Seabed Authority (ISA), the global regulator, is holding an in-person meeting in December at its headquarters in Jamaica, despite requests from states and observers to postpone – pandemic-related travel restrictions mean the meeting is not likely to be well-attended. In a letter to the ISA in October, the Deep-Sea Conservation Coalition criticised the plan as “out of step with the growing calls for more inclusion in global decision-making”. Critics are concerned the ISA may take the opportunity in December to give the deep-seabed mining industry the go-ahead to commence in 2023. The race for the ocean has caused conflicts to unfold between different offshore users. While offshore aquaculture companies are keen to emphasise the sustainable credentials of their operations, they face opposition. The Don’t Cage Our Ocean Coalition, a group of environmentalists, consumer advocacy organisations and fishing organisations, liken these offshore operations to land-based industrial feedlots. Their concerns include escaped fish mingling with wild populations and adding nutrients and pollutants to waters that in many places are already struggling. “It’s all going somewhere, even if we don’t see it,” says founding member Marianne Cufone. The organisation is campaigning against US federal waters being opened to large-scale fin fish farming, such as salmon and tuna. At present, there’s no aquaculture in US federal waters but that could change if plans go ahead to streamline the permitting process. Other regions, Cufone says, are stepping away from fish farms both inshore and offshore, including a Danish moratorium on new fish farms and Canadian plans to phase out ocean fish farms in waters off British Columbia. “We should learn from what comes before us and move on to smart, progressive, thoughtful, sustainable approaches if we want to increase domestic seafood production without harming our fishing communities and others who care about and want to use the waters,” she said. The wind energy sector is also looking to move further offshore and meeting resistance from environmentalists and fishing industries. Earlier this year, the Biden administration committed to building 30 gigawatts of offshore wind capacity by 2030. Many fishers feel they are being forgotten in the race to tackle the climate crisis. They are worried about losing access to fishing grounds and that windfarm installations could disrupt ocean currents and fish populations. Offshore wind developers have held meetings with fishermen to plan windfarms more collaboratively. After talking with fishers, Empire Wind, a proposed offshore windfarm south of Long Island, changed its plans to include an area open to fishing. A lack of inclusive planning risks causing problems in UK waters, where the government has pledged to install 40 gigawatts of offshore wind by 2030. Nature conservation groups are worried the current planning regime is not fit for purpose. “At the moment, the industry is very project-led,” says Joan Edwards, director of marine conservation at The Wildlife Trusts. Windfarm developers in the UK can pick an area and approach the crown estate, which owns most of the seabed around the UK out to 12 nautical miles, for a lease. A better approach, Edwards says, would be to identify places nationally where offshore wind will not affect important parts of the marine environment, via noise pollution and digging up the seabed for cabling. “We need to work out just how best to develop this industry so that it gives us renewable energy but doesn’t create more of a problem for nature,” she says. With industries rushing offshore, the ocean is on a course to become more crowded. To avoid a messy and damaging scramble for marine real estate, a coordinated approach is needed. “We’re really going to have to be very confident these things are being regulated, monitored and evaluated holistically, and over the long term as well,” says Klaus Dodds. “There’s a real danger that we think the oceans are this kind of frontier space, that we can just do things and worry about the implications later. That’s patently not true.”Universities in England should consider making partial refunds of tuition fees if students have their courses interrupted by strikes taking place on campuses this week, the student watchdog has said. Nicola Dandridge, the head of the Office for Students, the higher education regulator in England, said universities affected by the industrial action would need to make up for any disruption. “Universities are subject to consumer protection law, and they should consider how they will make up for any disruption caused by industrial action,” Dandridge said. “This might include rescheduling any teaching which is missed, delivering course topics in a different way or considering whether partial refunds of tuition fees are appropriate. Students should not be disadvantaged academically because of any disruption.” Picket lines sprang up at 58 universities on Wednesday morning at the start of a three-day walkout by members of the University and College Union, after dual strike ballots over proposed pension cuts, and pay and working conditions. Staff at 33 institutions are taking action over both disputes, four are striking over pensions alone and 21 are striking over pay and working conditions. UCU members at six other universities backed actions short of a strike, including working to contract. The union’s members include technicians, academic administrators, librarians and researchers, alongside lecturers and teachers. UCU says employers, represented by Universities UK and the University and Colleges Employers Association, have refused to withdraw pension cuts and address falling pay and worsening working conditions such as the use of prolonged short-term contracts for teaching staff. Raj Jethwa, UCEA’s chief executive said: “We respect employees’ right to take lawful industrial action but it is unrealistic and misleading to their members for UCU to ask them to lose three days’ pay in pursuit of an unrealistic 7% pay demand at just over one-third of the higher education institutions in the collective pay arrangements.” Jo Grady, the UCU’s general secretary, said: “If university managers doubted the determination of staff to change the higher education sector for the better, the numbers of staff on strike today prove they are very sadly mistaken. “Thousands of dedicated university staff and students are on picket lines, attending demos and marching to demand fair pay, decent pensions and improved working conditions. “The level of action seen today is just the beginning and university managers now need to wake up and address the very modest demands of staff. Otherwise, the potential for more widespread and escalating industrial action in the new year becomes very real.” A group of student activists called the Red Square Movement blockaded the offices of Universities UK on Wednesday in support of the strike. The National Union of Students offered its support by advising students not to cross picket lines. The strikes are likely to affect more than a million undergraduate and postgraduate students in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and more than 100,000 enrolled with the Open University. Dandridge said she was “extremely concerned” about the potential impact of the strikes on students. “Students have endured an exceptionally difficult time. It cannot be right that they face further disruption, and we would urge the employers and trade unions to work quickly so that any industrial dispute does not materially affect students.”For thousands of residents across the UK, Wednesday marks the sixth day without power due to damage caused by Storm Arwen. Fallen trees and electricity lines have leftmany residents without power, and it is thought that power may not be restored until Friday. If you have been affected by Storm Arwen and are still without power, we would like to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Though we’d like to hear from you, your safety and security is most important. When responding and particularly if taking photographs or video please make sure you put your safety and the safety of others first. Extreme weather events can be very unpredictable and carry very real risks. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.When Hadi Karam*, a soft-spoken Syrian, decided to leave the war-stricken city of Raqqa, he knew the journey to Europe would be risky. What he had not factored in was how technology would be a stumbling block once he reached Greece. “I never thought Skype would be the problem,” says the young professional, recounting his family’s ordeal trying to contact asylum officers in the country. “You ring and ring and ring. Weeks and weeks go by, and there is never any answer.” Karam, his pregnant wife and son spent two months trying to cross the land border Syria shares with Turkey – a feat accomplished after nine attempts. Travelling to Rhodes from Turkey and on to the port of Piraeus took less than a week. But negotiating Greece’s labyrinthine bureaucracy to notify authorities of their desire to apply for asylum has taken the best part of a year. “When, finally, I did get through I was told I could go for my interview in March 2022,” Karam says. “Until then we’re stuck here with nothing to do but wait in the camp.” Yet, the family is also lucky. Last week, in keeping with its mantra of “tough but fair” migration policies, Athens’ centre-right government announced that asylum procedures for first-time applicants would only be permitted in state-run reception centres. Use of the communications app, it said, would be limited strictly to those whose applications have been rejected and want to appeal. “There are people who for years evade detection by never declaring themselves to authorities,” Marios Kaleas, the country’s top asylum-service official, says in an interview with the Guardian. “For purposes of control, of having a full picture of who is here and for national security and public order reasons, they have to be traced.” How long the registration process will take, or where the “specially designated” sites will be, has yet to be decided, he concedes. “We’re still discussing location, but what I do know is that there’ll be two centres, one in the north [of the mainland] and one in the south.” Although Greece has seen a dramatic drop in arrivals since 2015, when it was at the centre of a refugee crisis – with more than 800,000 people crossing the Aegean Sea – its proximity to Turkey still makes it a popular route for those in Africa, Asia and the Middle East fleeing war, poverty and persecution. On Monday, Athens’ migration minister, Notis Mitarachi, hailed the fall in numbers, saying new arrivals were 90% lower than in 2019. “We set ourselves a goal to change what was happening at entry points,” he told the nation’s public broadcaster, ERT. “From open structures like Moria, which shamed the country, we can now talk about closed, controlled structures, which provide decent living conditions,” he said, referring to the notoriously squalid open-air camp on Lesbos that was gutted by fires last year. On the back of such rhetoric, and with Europe hardening its stance towards refugees, aid workers worry that the abrupt policy change is aimed more at “controlling and containing” asylum seekers than making their lives easier. Corinne Linnecar, advocacy manager at Mobile Info Team, a Greece-based charity that has long assisted people with asylum requests, describes the measure as chaotic and ill-defined. “Delays in entering the asylum system were not due to people trying to evade the authorities but instead were a consequence of an inefficient system,” she says. “This policy change will only see more delays.” Under a lottery-like procedure first enforced eight years ago, those who arrive via the mainland, as well as Crete and Rhodes, have been required to use Skype to inform the Greek asylum service of their wish to apply for international protection. The pre-registration system, which does not apply to Lesbos and other frontline Aegean isles, was a necessary first step before applicants received an appointment to register their claim in person. But as Karam and thousands of others have discovered, the system, which offers 210 slots in 17 languages a week, was often a huge impediment to requests being made. A recent study by Mobile Info Team found, on average, people had still not reached an asylum officer through the app after 14 months. Without registration, asylum seekers remain invisible, unable to access healthcare and legal protections, with many attempting to move on in frustration, continuing their journeys into central Europe through the Balkans. “The Skype procedure as it stood was inhumane, forcing people to remain undocumented and destitute for many months and often years,” says Linnecar. Until the new reception centres are operational, refugees who had been unable to reach asylum officials through Skype will be “completely blocked” from entering the system, she says. “Temporarily preventing all access to the asylum procedure, limiting people’s freedoms and forcing them into prison-like structures is not the answer,” says Linnecar. “The only registration facilities ever known to Greece are akin to prisons; on the mainland, these facilities are completely closed meaning people cannot leave at all.” Officials at the United Nations refugee agency, UNHCR, also voiced concern, saying “basic questions” needed to be answered, including how people would be transferred to designated sites. “Ensuring prompt and efficient access to fair and efficient asylum procedures is key for the adequate protection of people in need of protection,” says Stella Nanou, the UNHCR spokesperson in Athens. The UNHCR has warned that as many as half a million Afghan refugees could head west after the fall of Kabul and the Taliban’s takeover. Last month, the International Monetary Fund echoed that prediction, citing the collapse of the country’s aid-reliant economy. Greece would be a main gateway to Europe. With an increase in sea patrols, amid accusations of pushbacks of asylum seekers, it is believed most would try to enter by the land border the country shares with Turkey in the northern Evros region. This year, for the first time since 2012, when a wall was erected along part of the frontier, asylum seekers using the route outnumbered those reaching Greece by boat, making the mainland the main point of entry. By 21 November, 3,568 newcomers had registered at Aegean outposts compared with 4,311 who had arrived through Evros, according to the UN agency. Kaleas, the asylum service director, accepts that it has not been easy for asylum seekers to lodge applications using Skype, saying: “They have to insist.” But he rejects reports that the policy change would involve men, women and children being transferred from the mainland to islands close to Turkey, where a further two highly fortified EU-funded reception centres were opened at the weekend. Rights groups have condemned the Aegean island camps as being tantamount to jails. “In no way are people going to be held like prisoners,” he says, insisting that if asylum seekers underwent reception and identification procedures rather than electing to become “ghosts” they would have access to welfare benefits. “As soon as they’ve undergone fingerprinting and been checked by Frontex [EU border agency] officials and the Hellenic police, they’ll be able to go. I don’t foresee the process taking long, but how long it will take, I cannot say.” * Name has been changed Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The footballer Ray Kennedy, who has died aged 70, spent eight years with Liverpool at the height of the club’s powers in the late 1970s and early 80s. Having arrived at Anfield in 1974 from Arsenal, where he had been part of the FA Cup and league double winning side of 1971, he went on to claim a hatful of further honours on Merseyside, winning three European Cups and five First Division league titles under the manager Bob Paisley, who regarded him as “one of Liverpool’s greatest players and probably the most underrated”. Revered at both clubs, Kennedy was a powerful left-sided midfielder with tremendous vision and anticipation, allied to an unusually good first touch and a knack for scoring goals. He won every domestic trophy on offer and still has one of the highest hauls of medals of any English player, although he won only 17 international caps, a circumstance best explained by the presence of West Ham’s Trevor Brooking, who proved to be more popular with England managers. Kennedy was best known in later years for his commitment to spreading awareness of Parkinson’s disease, a condition he was diagnosed with shortly after his playing career ended. As a high-profile public face of the Parkinson’s Disease Society (now Parkinson’s UK), he co-wrote a revealing autobiography, Ray of Hope (1993), with Andrew Lees, a neurologist who had helped to treat him. Born in the Northumberland pit village of Seaton Delaval, Kennedy was the eldest of the four children of Martin, a coalminer, and Veronica, a housewife. In his early teens he was spotted by Fourth Division Port Vale, whose manager, Stanley Matthews, came to the family home to persuade him to sign schoolboy forms. Once Kennedy was settled at the club, however, Matthews’ enthusiasm began to wane, and at the age of 16 he let the youngster go, believing him to be too slow. Moving back to Northumberland, Kennedy worked in a sweet factory while playing as a centre-forward for the amateur side New Hartley Juniors, where he caught the eye of Arsenal, who signed him up in 1968 and gave him his debut as a 19-year-old the following year. By 1970 he had become more of a regular in the side, and he played a valuable role in Arsenal’s run to become winners of the Inter Cities Fairs Cup (forerunner of the Uefa Cup), scoring a crucial away goal as a substitute in the first leg of the final against Anderlecht. Having collected his first winners’ medal, the following season it was his commanding header that clinched the 1970-71 First Division title in the final match of the season against Tottenham. He was also to the fore (although he missed some good chances) in that season’s FA Cup final against Liverpool, which Arsenal won 2-1 to complete the double. He was the club’s top scorer that season, as well as in 1971-72 and 1973-74, but eventually fell foul of their manager Bertie Mee’s sustained refashioning of his double winning side when Brian Kidd was brought in to replace him as a striker. Surplus to requirements, he was signed by the Liverpool manager Bill Shankly for a fee of £200,000 – then a club record – in the summer of 1974. Much to his consternation, Kennedy arrived at Anfield on the very day that Shankly resigned from his job, to be replaced by Paisley. But it was the new manager who made the inspired decision, in late 1975, to move Kennedy to a permanent berth in left midfield, and in that position he found a new lease of life, becoming more of a playmaker while continuing to provide useful goals. Kennedy’s second season at Liverpool, 1975-76, ended with a First Division title and a Uefa Cup final win against Club Brugge in which he scored the first goal in the first leg. Over the next five campaigns he missed only five league matches as his side went on to win three more league titles in 1977, 1979 and 1980. He also played in three European Cup finals as Liverpool won in 1977, 1978 and 1981, making a particularly strong impact in the run-up to the final in 1981, during which he scored a decisive away goal as his side beat Bayern Munich in the semis. All Kennedy’s international caps came at Liverpool, beginning with a debut against Wales in 1976 and ending in 1980 with appearances in two of England’s three games as they were knocked out at the group stage of the European Championship finals in Italy. His final First Division championship title came in 1981-82, when he was transferred midway through the season to John Toshack’s Swansea City, who were also in the top flight, but had played enough games for Liverpool in the first half of their campaign to qualify for a medal. By then signs of Parkinson’s were beginning to manifest themselves on the pitch, although Kennedy had no idea at the time what the problem was. After a difficult year at Swansea he moved to Fourth Division Hartlepool United, followed by a short stint as player-manager of Pezoporikos in Cyprus in 1984-85 and some non-league football in Northumberland at Ashington. When he was formally diagnosed in late 1984, Kennedy was finally able to account for some of the physical difficulties he had quietly noticed even back in his days at Arsenal, where he sometimes had trouble doing up shirt buttons and occasionally suffered from excessive post-match fatigue. After retiring as a player he became landlord of the Melton Constable pub in Seaton Sluice near his home village, and did some coaching at Sunderland. But he lost the pub licence in 1987 and his 15-year marriage to Jennifer came to an end. A long, dark period followed in which he struggled with illness and the side effects of medication, while also becoming increasingly hard-up and isolated. Helped financially on occasions by the Professional Footballers Association, he benefited from a testimonial match between Liverpool and Arsenal, staged for him in 1991. But in 1993 he was forced to sell his medals and England caps to raise further money for care. One of the brighter parts of Kennedy’s later life, however, was his involvement with the Parkinson’s Disease Society, which, among other things, allowed him to strike up a relationship with his childhood hero and fellow Parkinson’s sufferer Muhammad Ali. He had three children, Cara, Dale and Alannah. • Raymond Kennedy, footballer, born 28 July 1951; died 30 November 2021 • This article was amended on 2 December 2021. The Melton Constable pub is situated not in Whitley Bay, but a little further north up the coast, in Seaton Sluice.Another of the UK’s small energy companies has gone bust, bringing the total number of suppliers that have collapsed in the past three months after a record surge in energy market prices to 25. Zog Energy, which supplies gas to about 11,700 households, announced on its website that it had ceased to trade and that the energy regulator, Ofgem, would appoint a new supplier to take on its customers. Ofgem has been forced to find new suppliers for more than 2 million households affected by the collapse of energy suppliers since the start of September. The fate of another 1.7 million Bulb Energy customers is yet to be decided by a special administrator, which was appointed to handle the large-scale collapse. Zog Energy was founded in 2012 with a plan to offer households simple, affordable gas tariffs. It said it was “starting with gas” because this was “normally the highest proportion of domestic customers’ annual fuel bill” but did not go on to offer electricity tariffs. Bills have rocketed in recent weeks after a global gas supply crunch that has caused the wholesale market price to reach record highs in October, and remain at historic levels as temperatures have plunged. Neil Lawrence, Ofgem’s retail director, said Zog’s customers “do not need to worry” because the regulator’s safety net process would ensure they have uninterrupted energy until a new supplier is appointed, and their bills would be protected by the energy price cap. However, the total cost of managing the fallout of each supplier collapse is likely to pile an extra £120 on to energy bills across Great Britain this winter, according to analysts, which would plunge hundreds of thousands of households into fuel poverty for the first time. The extra cost burden, on top of rising energy market prices, is used to bridge the gap between the amount of cash left in the bust supply business and the cost shouldered by the new supplier to buy enough gas and electricity from the wholesale market. Ofgem has promised to put in place tougher stress tests for energy suppliers to prove they have the financial strength to weather a surge in energy market prices as part of a “new reality” for energy retail companies after the energy crisis.At least 688 people died while homeless in England and Wales in 2020, according the latest official statistics, a slight fall attributed to the introduction of emergency accommodation for thousands of homeless people during lockdown. It was the first annual decline in the number of estimated deaths of homeless people since records began in 2013, although statisticians warned difficulties in the collection of death registrations last year mean the figure may be an underestimation. While lower than the record 778 homeless deaths figure in 2019, the total remains 42% higher than when records began in 2013. The highest death rates for homeless people were in the north-east of England and in London. The biggest cause of death for homeless people in 2020 was, as in previous years, drug poisoning. There were 74 suicide deaths, down from 112 in 2019. An estimated 13 homeless people died after contracting Covid-19. About 37,000 homeless people were provided with hotel accommodation during the early months of the pandemic in 2020, and the Everyone In scheme, together with a moratorium on evictions, is thought to have decreased the size of the homeless community, potentially reducing the number of deaths. There were seven times as many homeless male deaths as female ones. The average age at which homeless men died was 45.9 years and for women it was 41.6, several decades younger than the average for non-homeless people. An estimated 256 people died while homeless in Scotland in 2020, up 40 on the previous year, according to comparable figures published by National Records of Scotland on Tuesday. In Wales, 22 homeless people died in 2020. Councillor David Renard, the Local Government Association’s housing spokesperson, said: “These are deeply distressing figures, with many of these deaths preventable. The concern is they could be just the tip of the iceberg and underestimate the true number of deaths of homeless people. “They prove just how vital it is that we build on the success of Everyone In, which saw councils act rapidly to help rough sleepers off the streets during the pandemic, and make sure it is not just a one-off emergency response.” Jon Sparkes, the chief executive of Crisis charity, said: “It’s simply devastating that hundreds of people were forced to spend their last days without the dignity of a place to call home. These deaths aren’t just numbers. Each individual was someone’s loved one whose life has been cut short and whose ambitions and dreams will now never be fulfilled.” Polly Neate, the chief executive of Shelter, said: “If it wasn’t for the government’s Covid response to help people off the streets, even more lives would have been lost. As we head into another hard winter with the virus still circulating, we cannot leave anyone out in the cold. The government must step in again to keep people safe from Covid and the ravages of homelessness this winter.” A Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities spokesperson said: “Every death on our streets is one too many which is why we remain committed to ending rough sleeping altogether. “The Everyone In scheme launched during the pandemic has helped 37,000 vulnerable people, and we are also providing more £2bn over the next three years to tackle homelessness. “This is on top of £800m committed this year which includes funding for safe and warm accommodation over winter and specialist services for those with drug or alcohol issues. We will also continue to work with partners across healthcare to make sure those sleeping on the streets can access the care they need.”After 16 years in office, Angela Merkel is stepping down on Thursday as chancellor of Germany. The former UK prime minister Tony Blair said she had “often defined modern Germany” and Romano Prodi, Italian prime minister between 2006 and 2008, said a new European strategy and the next-generation EU would be part of the “great legacy” she leaves. People across Europe share their views on her leadership in Germany and the role she has played in the European Union. ‘Merkel showed me a girl can become anything’ I’m part of generation Merkel and grew up only knowing Angela Merkel as the chancellor of Germany. Having a woman, who with a PhD, is the most influential office in Germany, showed me that a girl can become anything. In the midst of many male politicians it was a relief to see a female representative leading German politics. Her calmness and reliability always gave me a sense of security in society. Though I wouldn’t consider myself politically conservative/centre-right I admire(d) her because she led us steadily through many crises. My main criticism would be her blindness in terms of green and climate friendly policy. I approve of her stepping down to allow a change in leadership but I worry when I look at the current frontrunners for office. Xenia Cleuvers, 23, student, Cologne, Germany ‘The climate crisis is Merkel’s biggest failure’ There are only a few points where I have agreed with Angela Merkel – one being the 2015 refugee crisis, when she “opened the doors” (in my opinion the only right thing to do). Other than that, her rule is a mix of ‘let’s just continue how we have always done it’ and ‘only change something if it is absolutely necessary’. But since Germany was/is doing well economically, people kept voting for her. Merkel became the symbol of stability, and Germans love stability. The climate crisis is Merkel’s biggest failure. As a former minister for environment she warned about the dramatic effects of climate change, but when in power, did nothing meaningful to present solutions. To me she will always be the the quiet, logical, unemotional politician. Tom Stolzenberger, 24, law student, Germany ‘Good riddance’ Merkel’s politics are responsible for nearly destroying the nascent but strong renewable energies sector that the previous government had strongly supported. By destroying all her potential successors politically, Merkel left behind a power vacuum in the conservative part of German society. In an essentially conservative country, built on seeking stability and wealth rather than progress and opportunity, she thus leaves it in the worst possible political circumstances. No, her track record is hardly admirable and I remain baffled at how long she managed to cling to power despite the many problems. I say good riddance! Frithjof Stöppler, 40, academic, Stockholm, Sweden ‘Merkel puts other state leaders to shame’ Honest, brave, responsible, played for the long game and kept her principles throughout all her time in office. Genuinely cared about people. Puts other state leaders to shame! Niki, 65, photographer, France ‘Let’s hope her dream for Europe will outlive her tenure in office’ I think Angela Merkel has been a strong focal point when it comes to Europe and the world at large. She put Germany at the forefront and opened up the doors for migrants while she was in office. She’s seen by many as a saviour economically, and she has helped a lot of people and countries all over the world through commerce and trade, funding of NGOs, and international organisations. I really think Germany and Europe will miss her dynamic leadership style. Let’s hope her dreams for Europe will outlive her tenure in office. Lucky, 32, Italy ‘I think most Greek people will not miss her’ I believe Germany mishandled the eurozone crisis, and is responsible for significantly worsening the state of all the southern European countries by imposing on them unpopular and, more importantly, ineffective austerity policies. Later on, her decision to let 1 million refugees into Germany was received positively in Greece, where most people thought that rich European countries should take in more refugees. In a world where Trump was the US president, and the UK was on its way out of the EU, Merkel and Germany seemed like the last beacons of hope and stability. Overall, I think most Greek people will not miss her. Germany and Europe as a whole need a change and her departure is a golden opportunity to make this change and reform Europe before it is too late. Doros Georgiou, 35, research analyst, Athens, Greece ‘The major decisions Merkel made were a catastrophe’ Merkel’s been a disaster for Germany and Europe. After 16 years as chancellor, Germany has become more and more alike the former GDR (German Democratic Republic), where she’s from. In her early years in office I felt she hardly made any decisions, and even when she did it was only after evaluating the public opinion, just to stay popular. The major decisions she made were a catastrophe, like migrant politics and nuclear energy. Merkel has divided the German population and citizens are without a common dialogue. I’m very sad, because Germany was a great place to live in the 70s-00s. I’m afraid that none of the candidates for office will be able to bring order to the mess Merkel leaves behind her. MA, 69, retired immunologist, Portugal ‘She treats her voters as if they are adults’ I can’t agree on everything with Merkel, but I admire her. A skilful negotiator, she has established bridges between allies and opponents throughout Europe and at home. I’ve been watching from Spain about how she has curbed unemployment and public deficit in Germany with respect. We live in a time of great polarisation and it has been a relief to see a politician focused on the problems.. What I like most about her is that she treats her voters as if they are adults. I hope some of her style will prevail in Europe in the following decade. If not, I’ll miss her. Carlos Martín Carretié, 22, Seville, Spain ‘Merkel is exactly what a politician should be’ I’m not very much into politics but it doesn’t interrupt me seeing her as the most stable European political figure. She was and is a quintessence of what a politician should be – calm, consistent but determined and pragmatic, serious but a visionary. I guess I emphasise on that, because, unwillingly and with sadness in my heart, I make a comparison with our local political space. Just this year, we had our third election in November. Politicians are recklessly playing with the nerves of the people and are wasting money. The more I’m sad and disappointed from our Bulgarian political nonsense, the more I admire, in general, people who know where they are, what is expected from them to be and to do. In my eyes, Angela Merkel is exactly what a politician should be – 16 years, wow. Evgenia Sasha, 62, Sofia, Bulgaria ‘A steady hand on the tiller’ A steady hand on the tiller –consistent and reliable. I liked that Merkel allowed 1 million refugees to immigrate into the EU in 2016 and stood up to Trump. Since Germany is a leading country in Europe, we have been fortunate to have had stable leadership for such a long time. I also like that she handed over leadership of her party in plenty of time so that they could prepare for a potential new Kanzler [chancellor], and that she is stepping away, not being pushed out (how rare in politics is that?). Great to see a woman in a powerful position. Síle McNutt, 60, environmentalist and artist, Co Donegal, Ireland ‘My perception of Merkel completely changed with her refugee crisis response’ First impressions are important, and I was initially sceptical about Merkel. The Greek crisis did not help as well. Nevertheless, against all odds and just as the public perception was tilting away from her, my perception of Merkel completely changed with her refugee crisis response. I also started to appreciate much more her role as a compromise and consensus builder in the EU institutions. Now, I share some anxiety about the future of Germany and Europe after ‘Mutti’s’ retirement. Will the engine of European project hold? How are our neighbours in the western Balkans waiting room supposed to find a new ally? It seems that it’s going to be a serious challenge for any future German chancellor who aims to fill in her shoes. Mirko Savković, 28, Banovci, Croatia ‘Some of her daring decisions stand out all the more for their comparative rarity’ The hasty post-Fukushima decision to close down Germany’s nuclear power plants by 2022, while only just having negotiated a coal shutdown target of 2038, has ensured Germany had continued to be one of Europe’s greatest climate sinners, contrary to the country’s image of itself as making good progress on environmental targets. Even as a chancellor who favoured stability over reform, she did nonetheless leave her mark on the country, and those few surprising daring decisions of her time in office stand out all the more for their comparative rarity. Her greatest success as a politician may be the one she repeated from her predecessor Kohl: she so skilfully and diplomatically wields power that nobody in her party, perhaps nobody in all of Germany, seems like they can replace her. Daphne Preston-Kendal, 28, UK student, lives in Germany ‘Long reigns often leave long shadows’ The difficulty with leaders such as Merkel, is that due to their popularity and prevalence, people find it hard to see a future without them. I do not have much to comment about her policies, as we do not see eye to eye on many subjects, but as she has defined Germany through her position as chancellor throughout most of my life, I look forward to the change that her successor is sure to bring. Long reigns often leave long shadows, and so will Merkel’s as well. There is a generation that has not known a Germany without her. Due to her popularity and long time in office, it will be difficult for the next chancellor to measure up to her. Things will surely go on, but her successor not only has Germany to keep in mind, but the whole continent as well. Chris, 18, student, FinlandR&amp;B star Trey Songz is being investigated by Las Vegas police, following allegations of sexual assault being made against him. The singer, real name Tremaine Neverson, has not been arrested and is cooperating with the investigation. Neverson was in Las Vegas for his 37th birthday celebrations, and the alleged incident was reported to have taken place at a hotel in the city on Sunday night. Neverson has not commented on the allegations. The Guardian has contacted his UK representatives for comment. As Trey Songz, Neverson is a prominent R&amp;B star in the US. Five of his eight albums have reached the US Top 3, two of them reaching No 1. First emerging in 2005, the three-time Grammy nominee has collaborated with artists including Nicki Minaj, Drake, DJ Khaled and Mary J Blige. In 2018, he was accused of sexual assault by an unnamed woman in Miami, which he denied. In 2020 he said: “The movement to fight for the women who actually have suffered harassment and abuse on various levels, has been hijacked by those who find it convenient for themselves to come up as they seek to destroy someone’s life.” In January, he was arrested at an NFL match in Kansas City, Missouri, after a dispute with police. He was not charged following the incident.On Black Friday there’s a range of products you might reasonably expect to see advertised at a discount price. A TV maybe, a cashmere jumper, or perhaps a set of saucepans. But I certainly didn’t expect to find the morning-after pill nestled among the savings promoted on the Boots website as I scrolled through their offerings last week. And yet there it was, at a 50% discount. Emergency contraception is something that provides a safety net should things go wrong during sexual intercourse, though many women and people with wombs wouldn’t plan to use it as the first line of defence against pregnancy. Since its introduction to the UK in 1984, it has provided us with an effective plan B in the event that other contraceptive measures fail. Although the morning-after pill is supposed to be widely available, pharmacies up and down the country sell it at a steep premium, creating an unnecessary barrier for many people who need it. So along with the UK’s leading reproductive healthcare charity, the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS), I’m calling on Boots to make this essential medication available for the half-price cost it was willing to sell it for during Black Friday promotions. This call is supported by 27 MPs, including Stella Creasy, Dawn Butler and Diane Abbott, who have also written to the company. Boots has shown it can afford to cut its prices. It now has the opportunity to lead the way on making this medication much more accessible to those in need. If it does, it could have a huge public impact. Access to the morning-after pill used to be exclusively in the hands of the NHS. But a change in legislation in 2001 – ostensibly to try to bring down the amount of unintended pregnancies, especially among teenagers – made it available over the counter and without prescription in pharmacies for the first time. Since then, emergency contraception has been free through GPs, some A&amp;E services and sexual health clinics – but as an all-party parliamentary group on sexual health and reproductive services found in 2020, many people are facing significant challenges in accessing these services. Diana Johnson recently called it a “chronic underinvestment in sexual and reproductive healthcare”. With 800 GPs closing since 2013 and an average waiting time of over 7 days, free access can often be hard to come by. And so while making the morning-after pill available in pharmacies did improve overall access to emergency contraception – especially for people who wanted to prioritise discretion – it also moved this basic healthcare essential into the hands of the free market, making it subject to inflationary pressures and competitive pricing. Or even seeing it become part of a Black Friday sale. In 2021 at Boots you can expect to pay £28.25 for Levonelle (levonorgestrel) and £34.95 for ellaOne (ulipristal acetate), the two leading brands of emergency contraception. If you weigh over 70kg (the average weight of a UK woman), a double dose of Levonelle is recommended, meaning the cost can double too. These prices are matched by other high-street pharmacies, like Superdrug. And yet there are online-only pharmacies, such as Dr Fox and Chemist 4 U, offering non-branded equivalents for under £4. For many people, the inflated cost in places like Boots is simply out of reach. The BPAS told me that this high cost has dire consequences for some women. “We see women experiencing an unplanned pregnancy because they were unable to access emergency contraception,” says Katherine O’Brien, associate director of communications and campaigns, “including women who couldn’t afford to purchase it.” These days, according to Boots’ website, 85% of people in the UK live within 10 minutes of a branch of their store, making it by far the easiest option for women seeking an emergency solution, particularly given that the efficacy of this drug hinges on how soon after sex it is taken. In offering the drug at a 50% discount this week, the pharmacy has proved that it can afford to sell it at a much-reduced cost, so why not do so for the rest of the year? At the end of the day, many people – because of work schedules or childcare responsibilities – simply do not have the time to queue for hours in a clinic or wait to see a GP. We should be doing everything in our power to break down barriers to access and enable everyone to avoid the potential emotional and financial stress that an unplanned pregnancy can bring. The idea that pharmacies are profiting excessively from what we know can be an incredibly stressful moment in any woman’s life is simply unconscionable. In 2017, Boots resisted similar pressure to drop the price of this essential drug because they didn’t want to “incentivise improper use”. That was wrong. Now the pharmacy has another chance to do the right thing. Let’s hope they take it. Rose Stokes is a freelance writer based in London, who mainly covers women’s health, sex and relationshipsApocalyptic tragi-satire might be cinema’s new growth area. Adam McKay’s Don’t Look Up is almost upon us and now here is this arrestingly strange and forthright black comic nightmare from cinematograher turned director Camille Griffin, produced by Trudie Styler and featuring Griffin’s son Roman Griffin Davis (the child star of Jojo Rabbit). A cross-section of upper-middle-class professionals who have known each other since school descend on a handsome country house for a lavish Christmas house party, hosted by Nell (Keira Knightley) and Simon (Matthew Goode), who have three boys, including Art (Griffin Davis). Instantly, these people start speaking in Richard Curtis/Emma Freud romcom dialogue to each other. There is Nell’s sister Sandra (Annabelle Wallis) who is married to dopey-dependable Tony (Rufus Jones). Hospital consultant James (Sope Dirisu) has come with his partner Sophie (Lily-Rose Depp), and sarky Bella (Lucy Punch) with her partner Alex (Kirby Howell-Baptiste). Generally in a comedy drama of this kind, there will be an elephant-in-the-living-room trauma or sadness that everyone is collectively in denial about, but which gets resolved with laughter and tears before the closing credits. Not this movie: because the world is about to end. No weddings, one big funeral. A giant toxic cloud caused by environmental abuse is forecast to sweep in on Boxing Day killing everyone, so this is their last hurrah. The entire group have their government-issued suicide pills, which it turns out have been withheld from homeless people and illegal immigrants. You might find yourself thinking about the Covid vaccines hoarded away from the developing world. Silent Night is not exactly a satire of well-off and well-connected people as such – everyone is supposed to be basically pretty adorable. But there is something undoubtedly startling and bizarre about seeing the end of the world generically grafted on to this jolly Britcom mode. Maybe for our torpid governing classes that is exactly what the end will look like: not a bang, not a whimper, but a despairing smirk of self-deprecation before necking the poison tablet. • Silent Night is released on 3 December in cinemas.Airbnb has reportedly listed more than a dozen properties on land owned by the Xinjiang paramilitary corporation, which has been sanctioned by the US over its alleged involvement in mass human rights abuses against Uyghurs by the Chinese government. The American media outlet Axios reported on Wednesday that the short-term rental company was at risk of exposure to US regulations preventing business dealings with sanctioned entities. Airbnb, which is a major sponsor of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics, said it was not required to vet the “underlying landowner” of properties it lists. Airbnb includes hundreds of listings for accommodation in Xinjiang, including some close to sites known to house mass detention facilities. Axios said it had identified 14 properties owned by the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps (XPCC), one of several parties sanctioned by the US government in 2020 over its alleged connection to serious rights abuses against ethnic minorities. For several years Chinese authorities have run a crackdown on the minority populations in Xinjiang province, using strategies and policies found by multiple governments, human rights and legal groups to be crimes against humanity, and by some governments, including the US, to be genocide. US regulators largely rely on businesses to self-report concerns, and Airbnb has previously done so in regard to users in Cuba and Crimea. An Airbnb spokesperson, Christopher Nulty, told Axios that the company took its US Treasury obligations “incredibly seriously”. “Ofac [Office of Foreign Assets Control] rules require Airbnb to screen the parties we are transacting with, not the underlying landowners,” he said. “We screen all hosts and guests against global government watchlists, including Ofac’s specially designated nationals and blocked persons list, including the hosts associated with the listings raised by Axios.” The Guardian has contacted Airbnb in the US, Australia and New Zealand for a response. The US sanctions against the XPCC, issued during the Trump administration in July 2020, generally prohibit all transactions by Americans or people within the US which involve the property or interests of the sanctioned parties. “The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods or services from any such person,” the Treasury department said. The XPCC, a state-owned paramilitary and economic corporation, administers control over large parts of Xinjiang and is responsible for its economic development. It is known to operate some of the detention camps where as many as a million Uyghurs have been interned, and is heavily involved in the cotton trade, which the US and human rights groups say is linked to forced labour. Leaked documents published this week showed links between the crackdown and policy goals set out by senior Chinese Communist party leaders, including Xi Jinping, in speeches from 2014. Beijing has long denied the accusations of human rights abuses, and says the detention camps and labour programmes are vocational training schemes tied to its anti-terrorism and poverty alleviation efforts. With blanket government denials of abuses in Xinjiang, the province is a popular tourist destination for domestic Chinese travellers, and the government has aimed to more than double annual visitor numbers by 2025 to 400 million.Marcus Lamb, the co-founder of the leading Christian TV network Daystar who railed against Covid-19 vaccines, has died of Covid-19. He was 64 years old. Lamb, who was the chief executive of the conservative network that reaches an estimated 2 billion viewers worldwide, died on Tuesday, weeks after contracting the coronavirus. “It’s with a heavy heart we announce that Marcus Lamb, president and founder of Daystar Television Network, went home to be with the Lord this morning,” the network announced in a tweet on Tuesday. “The family asks that their privacy be respected as they grieve this difficult loss. Please continue to lift them up in prayer.” Under his leadership, Daystar aired repeated baseless anti-vaccine conspiracy theories and claims that vaccines were being used to take freedoms away from Christians. In July 2020, the network spent an hour of air time complaining about “censorship” around the pandemic and also gave an hour’s slot to Robert F Kennedy Jr, who has spread misinformation about the Covid vaccine. Covid vaccines have been repeatedly found to be safe and effective at preventing severe illness from the virus. Evangelical Christians have been getting the vaccines at lower rates than the general US population, however, and several prominent Christian broadcasters have died of the virus in recent months. Last month Lamb’s son Jonathan said that his father’s illness was due to sinister outside forces. “There’s no doubt in my mind that this is a spiritual attack from the enemy,” he said, adding that Lamb has pushed alternative therapies and that “there’s no doubt that the enemy is not happy about that. And he’s doing everything he can to take down my Dad.” Daystar was founded in 1998 and has more than 100 TV stations around the world. Lamb’s wife Joni, appearing on the daily Ministry Show on Tuesday, said that he had “got the Covid pneumonia”. “He 100% believed in everything we talk about here on Daystar, things that help so many people around the world with early protocol treatments for Covid,” she said. “We still stand by those obviously.”Spotify and Apple Music, the two biggest players in music streaming, have announced the tracks and albums that have been the most popular globally in 2021 (in the period 1 January to 27 November). For a second year in a row, the most-streamed artist on Spotify is the Puerto Rican vocalist Bad Bunny, whose songs were streamed a total of 9.1bn times, compared with 8.3bn in 2020 – a mark of how the streaming market continues to grow alongside the singer and rapper’s popularity. After releasing two studio albums and a compilation in 2020, Bad Bunny released a series of singles in 2021 including the US Top 10 hit Yonaguni. He is followed by Taylor Swift, Drake, Justin Bieber and BTS in the Top 5 most-streamed artists. The 18-year-old Californian pop star Olivia Rodrigo had the most-streamed song and album globally on Spotify, following the phenomenal success of her debut album Sour. Little known at the start of the year beyond teen fans of her acting, a series of variously angry and melancholy hits about love and teenage angst made her one of the world’s biggest pop stars – she is the only artist to be nominated in all the “big four” categories at the 2022 Grammy awards. Her breakup ballad Drivers License topped the Spotify list with 1.1bn streams, and was second to BTS’s Dynamite on Apple Music’s list of most-streamed songs. Rodrigo also appears at No 4 in Spotify’s global list with the pop-punk song Good 4 U, which was the top song in the UK on both Spotify and Apple Music. Lil Nas X’s Montero (Call Me By Your Name), The Kid Laroi &amp; Justin Bieber’s Stay, and Dua Lipa’s Levitating filled out the rest of the Top 5 on Spotify’s global list, while Ariana Grande’s Positions, Pop Smoke’s For the Night and the Weeknd’s Blinding Lights appeared on Apple’s. Lipa’s 2020 album Future Nostalgia also remained popular this year, and was the second-most streamed album on Spotify, followed by full-lengths from Justin Bieber, Ed Sheeran and Doja Cat. In the UK, where Bad Bunny’s popularity is considerably lower than elsewhere, Drake is the most-streamed artist on Spotify. Both globally and in the UK, The Joe Rogan Experience was the most popular podcast of the year.Boris Johnson has denied a report that his flagship pledge to build 40 new hospitals has been labelled as unachievable by an official watchdog, even though the health department has confirmed this is the case. Challenged about the programme during prime minister’s questions, Johnson conceded that not all the projects were completely new hospitals. A report in the Health Service Journal said the Infrastructure and Projects Authority (IPA), a government agency, had downgraded the hospitals programme to a “red” rating, meaning it “appears to be unachievable”. Asked by Keir Starmer in the Commons whether this was true, Johnson said “no” and accused Starmer of asking “frivolous questions”. However, in its response to the HSJ story, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) did not deny it. Instead, a spokesperson told the HSJ that such concerns were normal and the department was “addressing the IPA’s recommendations in detail”. Starmer noted the contradiction, saying: “Well, this is strange, because the government hasn’t been denying the reports about the red flag. And now the prime minister does. There’s obviously some confusion on these benches. If he’s so confident in his answer, why doesn’t he publish the [IPA’s] progress report in full, and let us all see it?” Johnson ignored this question, prompting Starmer to say: “There we have it. The prime minister: ‘I deny my hospital building programme has been flagged red as unachievable, but I don’t have the confidence to publish the report.’ The more we look at this promise, the murkier it gets.” Starmer challenged Johnson on the claim to be constructing 40 new hospitals, pointing to a DHSC document called the “new hospitals programme communications playbook”, giving instructions to the NHS on how to describe the scheme in the media. A section called “definitions of a new hospital” says this covers not just a whole new hospital but also “a major new clinical building on an existing site or a new wing of an existing hospital”, as long as it contains a new clinical service; and “a major refurbishment and alteration of all but building frame or main structure, delivering a significant extension to useful life which includes major or visible changes to the external structure.” Starmer said: “We can all agree that refurbishments are a very good thing, but they’re not new hospitals. So prime minister, how many of the 40 are fix-up jobs on existing hospitals, and how many are actually the new hospitals he promised?” Johnson replied: “You obviously don’t always go around building on greenfield sites.”The debut novel by Yuri Felsen, an author once regarded as the “Russian Proust” whose work has been forgotten since he died in Auschwitz in 1943, is set to be published in English for the first time. Felsen, the pseudonym of the Russian émigré author Nikolai Freudenstein, was born in St Petersburg in 1894, emigrating after the Russian revolution and settling in Paris in 1923. He was seen as one of the leading Russian writers of his time, ranked alongside Vladimir Nabokov, but when France was occupied in the second world war his escape to Switzerland failed, and he was killed in Auschwitz’s gas chambers in February 1943. His manuscripts and letters were lost – possibly destroyed – after his arrest, and his work is almost unknown today. Academic and translator Bryan Karetnyk discovered Felsen’s name while reading literary criticism from the 1930s, finding that he was widely praised, and going on to track down Felsen’s own writings. “In the so-called ‘Russia Abroad’, Felsen was unanimously held up by his contemporaries … to be one of the most original and significant writers of his generation, next to Nabokov,” said Karetnyk. “Felsen’s plunge into obscurity came about for a variety of reasons. Not content with having sent him to the gas chambers, the Nazis did everything in their power to destroy his legacy, and his archive disappeared without trace following his arrest.” Karetnyk has now translated Felsen’s first novel Deceit, which was originally published in Russian in 1930, into English, with the book due out next May from independent press Prototype Publishing. Written in the form of a diary, and set in Paris between the wars, it sees the unnamed narrator tell of his fraught relationship with his love interest and muse, Lyolya. “It really made Felsen’s reputation as one of the leading writers of the so-called ‘younger generation’, although of course it was banned in Russia,” said Karetnyk. “The fine psychological portraiture of the protagonist and his love interest, as well as the beautifully wrought philosophical meditations on love, art and human nature, bear parallels not only with Proust, but also with other greats of modernism including Nabokov, Woolf and Joyce.” Jess Chandler, who founded Prototype in 2019, said that she acquired Deceit because she saw it as “an extremely rare opportunity to introduce a highly significant, undiscovered modernist work to an English readership. “Felsen’s writing would undoubtedly have been hugely influential had his legacy not been destroyed, and Deceit will still feel contemporary and groundbreaking to readers today,” said Chandler. “As a publisher interested in freeform literary art, this novel from 1930 feels as exciting as anything I have read in recent years.” Only brief extracts of Felsen’s writings have previously been translated, although his collected works were republished in Russia in 2012. His writing, said Karetnyk, remains resonant today. “He consciously positioned himself as an anti-totalitarian writer (in that he was both anti-fascist and anti-Bolshevik), championing love, artistic freedom and individual identity, and seeking to give them heightened expression at a time of mounting political pressures that would rather deny them, at a time when writers were desperately seeking out new ways in which art could provide adequate response to political tyranny. Without exaggeration, I believe we’re living in a time when these ideas have renewed political, cultural and artistic significance,” said the translator. “On a more literary note, given today’s obsessions with autofiction, his profoundly psychological prose, which marries private experience with artistic expression, is also a timely reminder that this genre in fact has a long and distinguished European history.”Some defendants will be facing “a second Christmas behind bars without the opportunity to prove their innocence”, a legal charity has warned, as the number of remand prisoners in England and Wales detained longer than the legal custody limit continues to rise. Figures obtained by the charity, Fair Trials, show that, as of 30 June, 3,949 people had been held in prison awaiting trial or sentencing for more than the six-month pre-trial custody time limit, a 10% rise in six months, prompting calls for urgent action to address the problem. Many people who are held in pre-trial detention eventually walk free. Last year, one in 10 of all those remanded before trial were acquitted and one in four of those remanded in custody were not sent to prison following their trial. While the figures, provided by the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) in response to a freedom of information request, are not broken down into those awaiting sentencing or trial, it is exceptionally rare to be held for more than six months awaiting sentence. In September last year, the government increased the custody time limit to eight months to ease the pressure of the rising backlog of court cases but it reverted to six months on 28 June. The data shows 1,523 people had been held in prisons awaiting trial or sentencing for more than a year, amounting to one in 10 of the remand population, including 475 people who had been held for more than two years. Griff Ferris, legal and policy officer at Fair Trials, said: “Any system which holds people in prison without trial for years is a cruel, broken system. Some of these people are now facing a second Christmas behind bars without the opportunity to prove their innocence. Others have been waiting for a trial since before the start of the coronavirus pandemic last March, and even since 2019. “These unacceptable delays undermine our entire justice system, denying justice for both defendants and victims. The government needs to take urgent action to implement structural solutions to this crisis, including releasing people from remand, rather than trying to find ways to put more people into prison.” The increase in the number of people held beyond the six-month limit comes amid a backlog of cases in the crown courts, which try the most serious offences, of more than 60,000. The Law Society, the professional body for solicitors has reported trials being delayed until 2023. Last month, the justice minister James Cartlidge said the backlog was expected to be approximately 53,000 in 2025. While it has been exacerbated by Covid, it had already increased by 23% in the year leading up to the coronavirus pandemic. Those remanded in custody awaiting trial are disproportionately black, Asian or from other minority ethnic groups. People held on remand since March last year have been subjected to conditions that amount to solitary confinement under a restrictive regime, which reduced the time spent out of cells to about 30 minutes a day. Last year, the outgoing chief inspector of prisons in England and Wales said the restrictions risked causing “irreparable damage” to prisoners’ mental health. Contact with friends, families and others has been restricted to monthly video calls, with many unable to speak to their loved ones at all. Earlier this year, Fair Trials published a report containing first-hand accounts from people held on remand during the pandemic, with one describing the conditions as “inhumane” and another saying they had been treated like animals. An MoJ spokesperson said: “Courts have prioritised remand hearings during the pandemic and only those posing the greatest risk to the public or who are likely to abscond are held in prison. “Extensions to normal custody time limits must be approved by independent judges and defendants have the right to apply for bail.”Attend the tale of Ebbie Scrooge, Cardiff businesswoman and Times Rich List topper for the seventh year running. Still set in 1843 but relocated to the Welsh capital, Joe Murphy’s actor-musician staging of Gary Owen’s adaptation begins with an aptly gothic Sweeney Todd reference. Such darkness is maintained throughout, but is imbued with a smart and contemporary sensibility. It is also performed by a powerhouse ensemble that could collectively out-riff a Mariah Carey yuletide special. Setting the action to Cardiff allows for some lovely localised flourishes: Welsh songs are laced through Lucy Rivers’s score, the Ghost of Christmas Past (effervescently sung by Kizzy Crawford) is flanked by the Mari Lwyd, and the Cratchits wish each other a Nadolig Llawen. While much of the first act seems to purposely resist pantomime tropes, the stage explodes into something far more raucous with the arrival of Seiriol Davies’s glittering Ghost of Christmas Present. Stage transformations come again, with the appearance of a towering and terrifying Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, courtesy of Rachel Canning’s puppetry. The gender-swapping of Scrooge is a canny move. Theatrically playful, it nods to panto damehood while also playing it straight, and maintaining the period setting allows for a revisionist feminist imagining of Victorian womanhood. It also helps that Hannah McPake storms it as Scrooge, who, like everybody else on stage, seems to be having a great time. In presenting Scrooge’s Malthusian miserliness as the product of childhood trauma at the hands of a Georgian welfare system, Owen’s adaptation also contains candid horror. And without needing to overreach for contemporary parallels, it nevertheless feels at moments that a more pointed political critique is straining to get out. Such contrasting hues were also present in Owen’s earlier 2009 adaptation, also for the Sherman, but perhaps resonate differently after the events of the last decade. Regardless, this version brims with an irresistible festive charm, and looks absolutely gorgeous. Designed by Hayley Grindle and lit by Andy Pike, windows on snow-swept Victorian streets glimmer invitingly, big red baubles dance and turkeys are bigger than children. A Christmas Carol is at Sherman theatre, Cardiff, until 31 December.The EU must consider mandatory vaccination in response to the spread of the “highly contagious” Omicron Covid variant across Europe, the European Commission president has said. In a call to action, Ursula von der Leyen said the EU’s 27 member states should rapidly deploy booster doses and a commission communique backed countries opting to temporarily enforce pre-travel PCR tests even within the bloc’s borders. There have been a total of 59 identified cases in the EU of the Omicron variant all of which have involved mild symptoms or been asymptomatic. Asked whether she supported the Greek government in its imposition of a €100 (£85) monthly fine on those aged 60 and over who failed to get a Covid jab, Von der Leyen said the spread of the disease and lack of vaccine take-up in parts of the EU meant mandatory vaccination had to be on the table as a policy response. Speaking to reporters in Brussels, Von der Leyen, who practised as a doctor before her political career, said: “We have the vaccines, the life-saving vaccines, but they are not being used adequately everywhere. And this costs … This is an enormous health cost coming along. “One-third of the European population is not vaccinated … not each and every one can be vaccinated – children, for example, or people with special medical conditions – but the vast majority could. “How we can encourage and potentially think about mandatory vaccination within the European Union, this needs discussion. This needs a common approach, but it is a discussion that I think has to be met.” There is growing momentum behind mandatory vaccination among the EU member states. It has been reported that Germany’s chancellor-to-be, Olaf Scholz, supports the policy and neighbouring Austria is debating how to enforce obligatory jabs from February. Health policy remains a national competence. On Tuesday, Greece said it would make Covid vaccinations mandatory for people aged 60 and older in order to protect its faltering health system. About 63% of Greece’s 11 million population are fully vaccinated but there are 520,000 people over the age of 60 who have failed to get a jab. Von der Leyen said Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna were set to deliver 360m more doses by the end of March, ensuring there was sufficient supply for booster jabs. “That is good news. So go get it,” she said. In the event of the vaccines failing to offer the current level of protection in the light of the spread of the Omicron variant, researchers believe it would take about 100 days to adjust their products. But Von der Leyen said the world was in a “race against time” and the onus had to be on getting jabs into arms now. “Scientists tell us we have to do everything possible to make the best out of the time we have till we have certainty about the characteristics of transmissibility and severity of Omicron,” she said. “Prepare for the worst, hope for the best.” On Wednesday, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, an EU health agency, said the potential benefits of vaccinating children aged 5 to 11 should also now be considered, as that age group was making up an increasing proportion of both notified cases and hospitalisations in recent months. The ECDC said there was reason to believe that a vaccination programme among children would have a wider impact on community transmission. Von der Leyen said: “Over the last couple of weeks, many of us have witnessed it firsthand: Covid 19 has resurged infecting some of our close friends, co-workers, family members or loved ones. “The rapidly increasing case numbers are putting an increasingly heavy strain on our hospitals and health workers. On top the arrival of the presumably highly contiguous Omicron variant calls for our utmost attention.” Greece’s prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, defended his government’s decision to impose a monthly fine on citizens aged 60 and over who refuse to be vaccinated. In an address to the Greek parliament ahead of a vote on legislation applying the penalty from 16 January, the centre-right leader described the move as “absolutely constitutional”. “Compulsory vaccination already has the approval of the Council of State,” he told MPs, referring to the nation’s highest administrative court. Greece is the first EU member to target a specific age group, with Mitsotakis acknowledging the decision had personally “tormented” him as a “profoundly liberal politician” who struggled with the concept of obligation. But the data, he said, had proved implacable in terms of deaths and the pressure on the nation’s health system. “Nine out of 10 Greeks who die are over 60 years,” he told MPs, noting more than half a million had resisted vaccination. “More than eight out of 10 have not been inoculated.” The spectre of the fine, in addition to compulsory rapid tests twice a week, appears to have had a dramatic effect. In the first 24 hours since the drastic step was announced, about 17,500 people in the demographic had registered for a first shot compared with an average inoculation rate among the age group of 2,600 a day, according to government statistics. Last week, Sajid Javid, the British health secretary, said he did not believe the UK would ever impose mandatory vaccination among the general population.Western governments could be forced to bring in fresh emergency financial support for businesses and households if the Omicron coronavirus variant causes a severe global slowdown, a leading economic thinktank has warned. Sounding the alarm as more cases are identified, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) said a renewed wave in the pandemic threatened to add to the existing strain on the world economy from persistently high levels of inflation. Should Omicron prove more transmissible than other variants or more resistant to existing vaccines, it could exacerbate disruption to already battered supply chains and risk driving up inflation for a prolonged period, the Paris-based organisation said. If it takes a more severe turn, it could also force governments to impose tighter mobility restrictions, hurting demand for goods and services, and leading to a sharp fall in economic activity and lower inflation, similar to the earliest phase of the pandemic. Laurence Boone, the chief economist of the OECD, said there were two scenarios facing the international economy as Omicron adds to the uncertainties in the recovery from the Covid-19 crisis. “One is where it creates more supply disruptions and prolongs higher inflation for longer. And one where it is more severe and we have to use more mobility restrictions, in which case demand could decline and inflation could actually recede much faster than what we have here,” she said. If the Omicron turned out to be “more evil” than other variants, Boone said, governments could be called upon to step in to cushion the blow for businesses and households. “That could be a scenario where we need more fiscal support at this stage,” she added. Already in the UK, bosses of pubs, bars and restaurants are reporting a wave of cancellations for Christmas party bookings amid fears over the new variant, in an early sign of its harmful economic impact. Publishing its latest economic outlook report, the OECD said the world’s recovery from previous lockdowns was continuing but that momentum had eased and was becoming increasingly imbalanced. It added that the failure to ensure rapid and effective vaccination around the world was proving costly, with uncertainty remaining high and as new Covid variants are identified. The outlook projects global GDP growth at 5.6% this year and 4.5% in 2022, before settling back to 3.2% in 2023, close to rates before the pandemic. Boone said the G20 group of wealthy nations had spent about $10tn (£7.5tn) in emergency support since the start of the pandemic, but that it would take just $50bn to ensure vaccination worldwide. “The news about the Omicron variant may actually be a reminder of how shortsighted that failure has been. We’re spending to support our economies, while we’re failing to vaccinate the whole world,” she said. “As a result the world really is not looking better.” The intervention by the OECD comes as concern grows over persistently high levels of inflation across the world economy. While demand for goods and services has soared after the easing of lockdown measures earlier this year, supply constraints and freight bottlenecks caused by continuing pandemic disruption have led to shortages of materials, pushing up prices. Central banks around the world are grappling with rising inflationary pressures. The chair of the US Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, signalled on Tuesday he would support a quicker withdrawal of emergency pandemic stimulus measures in response, while the Bank of England has been tipped to raise interest rates within weeks. The OECD increased its inflation forecast for next year to 4.4%, up from the 3.9% estimated in September. It predicts largest increases in the US and the UK, with rates of 3.1% and 4.4% next year respectively. Although warning that the new variant could lead to higher and more persistent inflation, Boone said most central banks had been waiting to see whether supply tensions would diminish, “and rightly so”. “Faced with supply bottlenecks and where overall demand is not excessive, the best central banks can do is actually to signal that they will act if the pressure continues to increase. But it is for companies and governments to address the bottlenecks,” she added.Transport for London has halted an ad campaign promoting road safety that featured a driver and cyclist making up after the latter was almost hit, following a backlash accusing the ad of “victim blaming”. The TfL campaign, called See Their Side, was launched during Road Safety Week last month as part of the London mayor Sadiq Khan’s long-term goal of having no deaths and serious injuries on the capital’s roads by 2041. TfL had planned that the campaign, which includes a 60-second television ad that has already been showing on channels including ITV, would run for “a number of years”, but a backlash has prompted the mayor’s cycling and walking commissioner to pause it. In the film, a driver is seen slamming on her brakes after almost knocking a cyclist off his bike. At first the pair begin an altercation blaming each other for the incident, before the road rage subsides into a moment of reflection where both parties express concern for each other and ask if they are OK. The campaign ran with the strapline: “See their side. See safer roads.” It was created by the ad agency VCCP London, which has since taken down a webpage about its work. While VCCP’s original press release said the campaign aimed to “directly tackle the tribal culture which currently dominates London’s roads” and “targets all road users”, it seems to have instead intensified the divide between cyclists and drivers. Cyclists and road safety groups have criticised the campaign for “victim blaming” and promoting “false equivalence”, the idea that road users should share equal responsibility for incidents, arguing that the car driver is clearly in the wrong in the ad. On Wednesday, Will Norman, the mayor’s cycling and walking commissioner, tweeted that the campaign would be “paused to consider the feedback that has been received”. “I know there has been a lot of concern raised about the ‘See their side’ advert,” he said. “The campaign has been paused to consider the feedback … City Hall and TfL remain committed to improving the road culture in London and reducing road danger.” The Advertising Standards Authority, which assesses whether campaigns have broken the UK advertising code, has so far received 70 complaints about the ad. Complainants argue that it unfairly places equal blame on cyclists and drivers and shows a car making an illegally close pass on the rider. A spokesperson for the ASA said the complaints had not yet been assessed to determine if there were grounds to launch an investigation into whether the campaign broke any rules. A spokesman for TfL said the organisation recognised that those walking and cycling were much more vulnerable than drivers. “The aim of this campaign is to challenge the sometimes divergent nature of London’s road culture and to encourage all road users to be more empathetic when travelling,” said the spokesman. “We know that people walking and cycling are much more vulnerable on the roads than other groups of road users, and this campaign is not designed to suggest otherwise.”The HIV epidemic is driven by stigma and inequality. This World Aids Day, as the government publishes its roadmap to ending new HIV transmission in England by 2030, we celebrate its commitments, but wonder if it’s enough while these social barriers remain. With the right action and commitment, ending new HIV transmissions in this country is possible by 2030. Certainly, the £20m of new funding towards opt-out testing in A&amp;E departments will bring us much closer to that goal. Routinely testing for HIV alongside other blood tests is one of the most important ways of identifying people who may not realise they have been at risk of HIV, and so do not actively seek out a test. It will help prevent unnecessary illness and death and bring us closer to ending the epidemic. Other commitments, to explore the provision of the HIV prevention drug PrEP outside sexual health services, to improve NHS training to tackle HIV stigma, and to report annually on progress towards 2025 and 2030 targets, are each a further substantial step in the right direction. While these actions will make a real difference, if we fail to address structural inequality and wider health disparities head on, we will fall at the final hurdle. HIV has long been perceived as a condition that typically affects cisgender gay and bi men. The truth is more complicated. While it’s true that this is one of the communities hit hardest over the last 40 years, it is also the group that has made the most progress, with rates among gay and bisexual men at their lowest in 20 years. Since our organisation successfully challenged NHS England in court to make PrEP available for free on the NHS, the use of this HIV prevention drug has grown rapidly among gay men, particularly in London. This is important, but we will never beat this pandemic if we don’t make progress for everyone – and the story of HIV must not be one in which other groups are left behind. The Covid-19 pandemic has provided further vivid evidence of the extent to which health inequality experienced by Black and other minority ethnic groups is baked into the health system. This structural racism has always been a visible and integral part of the HIV story. Black and other minority ethnic groups comprised 74% of heterosexual people receiving HIV care in 2018 in the UK. To be successful, any interventions aimed at ending transmissions need to involve and be tailored towards these groups. For example, Black heterosexual people are less likely to access sexual health services, the only setting where PrEP is currently available. The situation is compounded for migrants living with HIV, especially those already marginalised due to their asylum status or without recourse to public funds. The practice of charging migrants for medical treatment, alongside fears of the NHS sharing data with the Home Office, deters people from engaging with the healthcare system. National Aids Trust research has shown that many migrants fear engaging with health services due to the potential impact on their immigration status or fear of being charged bills they cannot pay. Despite HIV services being free for all, these policies have been shown to lead to late diagnoses, as people avoid engaging in care. The trans community also continues to experience high levels of HIV and poor sexual health. Not only is there a dire lack of funding for trans-specific healthcare, but this situation is exacerbated by the discrimination that trans people experience. We know that across the globe, marginalisation and exclusion are drivers of HIV, even in places where rates are declining overall. And there must be the political will to tackle challenging issues around drug use and harm reduction. Instead of drawing on mounting international evidence that harm-reduction interventions, such as needle exchanges and drug consumption rooms, save lives, this government is stubbornly pursuing a failing punitive agenda. These services provide safer and supervised environments, which benefit both people who inject drugs and local communities, reducing deaths and the transmission of blood-borne viruses such as HIV. Forty years ago, the first cases of HIV were diagnosed in the UK. We have come a long way since then. In countries where treatment is available, a virus that was once a death sentence has become a manageable condition. People living with HIV, provided they have access to the medication that they require, share the same life expectancy as the general population. Overall rates have continued to decline and in the UK, for the first time, the end of the epidemic is truly in sight. A genuine commitment to “levelling up” and ending health disparities must include wider access to PrEP, increased testing and action to tackle stigma. But HIV cannot be treated in isolation. If we really want to see the end of transmission by 2030 then we need a more expansive, holistic and integrated approach. If we do not tackle inequality we will see this reflected in the experiences of people living with HIV, and the task of ending the epidemic will continue to be forestalled. Deborah Gold is chief executive of the National Aids TrustI didn’t intend to pick up a camera. I’d been practising on drums that had fallen off the back of a lorry into our house on Forthlin Road, Liverpool. But when I was 13, I broke my arm at scout camp, so Pete Best got the job in our kid’s group. That’s when I started taking photos on the family box camera. It was fortuitous, though, because if I had become the Beatles’ drummer, we’d probably have gone the Oasis route. I would go everywhere with the Beatles. I was part of the act. It’s like if Rembrandt’s kid brother was in the corner with a pad and paper, sketching his older brother. I was lucky – you couldn’t have had a better group to practise on, could you? When it comes to Paul’s extraordinary band, this is one of my favourite photos. It was taken in the dressing room at the Tower Ballroom, New Brighton, in ’61 or ’62. It had gone from holding ballroom dances into rock’n’roll, so while our kid was on the bill experimenting with his music, I was doing the same with photography. In those days, the Beatles were supporting people like Joe Brown, Jerry Lee Lewis, Little Richard. Can you imagine? Those gigs were extraordinary, absolute magic. I’d be shooting from the ballroom balcony and the bouncers would sometimes throw the drunks off on to the floor below! They’d just played the show when I took this photo backstage in the dressing room. They’ve been in their leathers and they’ve come offstage. That’s why John’s hair is all slicked back. That’s not Brylcreem – it’s sweat. I’d taken a more serious photograph before this one. It wasn’t hard to direct them. I’d say to John: “If you want to be bigger than Elvis, do what the photographer tells you.” Then I told them: “Now let’s have a daft one. Do whatever you like.” Silly things made them laugh. The dafter the better. You’ve got to remember that scousers are weird. We’re surrealists without even knowing it. The face that John, on the left, is pulling reminds me of Marcel Marceau. Have you ever seen John Lennon look like that before? I remember, just before my mum would take a photo of my dad, he would put his tongue out. It’s the same sense of humour as you’ve got in this photo. I call our kid “Rambo Paul” in this photo, because his look reminds me of Stallone. I think Pete was doing one of the silly voices from The Goon Show. Then there’s nipple-shooting George. I have no idea why he’s pointing at Paul’s nipple. And we can’t ask him now. The most important thing this photograph communicates is joy. It’s all about the fun, the camaraderie. They were totally relaxed in each other’s company and bounced off each other. All this business about the Beatles’ arguments – we all have arguments, for Christ’s sake. This photograph is a much stronger reflection of the reality. I certainly didn’t get the sense back then that I was looking at the most important band in history. Over the years, with Beatlemania, there’s been this concept of them being as famous as Beethoven and Rembrandt … not quite Jesus, we won’t go down that route again! But this picture shows what the Beatles were like as human beings, which was four working-class Liverpool lads. The idea of global fame, being billionaires … anything like that, it wasn’t just remote, it felt impossible. That period in Liverpool could be hard. It was after the war, the bottom had dropped out of the cotton business and our mum had died, so her wages as a midwife health visitor had gone. Dad was just on his own, bringing up two lads on £10 a week. Even so, it was an extraordinary time. David Puttnam once wrote in a foreword to one of my books: “What I like about Mike’s photos is that he captures a period in time. You see the back-combed hair, the winkle-pickers, the false brick wallpaper …” That’s why my new book, Early Liverpool, is important, because it tells you what life was like back then. Not just the Beatles, but all the other artistic sides of Liverpool – comedy, poetry, pop art. The whole place was bouncing. Mike McCartney’s CV Born: Liverpool, 1944. Trained: “I got on the 86 bus, went up to the library, took out all the books on photography, and learned photography in the back bedroom of Forthlin Road.” Influences: “Henri Cartier-Bresson, Bill Brandt, surrealism, Mum and Dad.” High point: “Writing The Scaffold’s Thank U Very Much and its Top 4 success – liked by prime minister Harold Wilson and the queen mum. Lily the Pink getting to No 1. The National Portrait Gallery buying 11 of my pics, and also exhibiting in the Smithsonian, Washington DC.” Low point: “Realising that selling Catholic Bibles was not the career for me. The devil got me!” Top tip: “Only do it if you love it and never, ever give up – which you can’t when you love it.” Early Liverpool is available now through Genesis Publications, with the collector copy priced at £295. Details: mikemccartneybook.comChristmas can be a stressful, combative time and the Oliver household – which Andi shares with her partner, Garfield Hackett, and regular visitor, her daughter Miquita Oliver, the TV presenter – is no different. The main source of contention is whether Andi allows help in the kitchen. “I’m going to say, ‘Yes I do,’” she says. “And when my daughter reads this she’s going to go: ‘Liar!’ But I feel that I do, I just like to keep my eye on them.” Then she thinks for a moment and admits: “Well, to be perfectly honest, I don’t really, no.” Considering what usually ends up on their Christmas table, there are unlikely to be too many complaints. For OFM, Oliver, who presents BBC Two’s The Great British Menu, has created a festive menu that fuses classic elements from her Antiguan heritage with modern preoccupations of reducing waste, eating seasonally and offering delicious vegan options. She’s particularly pleased with the slow-roasted carrot and pumpkin main course, served with parsnip crisps and coconut chickpeas. “Loads of people in my family don’t eat meat or fish,” she explains. “And in Caribbean cooking it’s not a new idea, veganism. They call it ‘ital’ and that’s how Rastafarians have eaten for decades.” With Nat King Cole and Etta James supplying the soundtrack, and a steady flow of Hix Fix cocktails, Oliver will also serve saltfish topped with salted cucumber and root-veg fritters with a no-waste broth. “It feels royal,” she says. “Everything should feel special at Christmas. Everything that goes on the table should feel like it’s got a little party hat on.” As for what the meaty main will be, there’s already a heated debate. Miquita always pushes for a traditional turkey; her mum favours a smaller bird, such as the spice-rubbed chicken featured here. Who will prevail? “Absolutely there will be a big argument,” laughs Andi. “And I will win!” Winter herb and saltfish buljol, avocado and lemon-salted cucumber Saltfish reminds me of every Christmas we ever had as kids. Mum used to make it the traditional Antiguan way, cooked up with tomato, herbs, peppers and a little heat running through. Or sometimes, on a fancier day we’d get saltfish buljol, which is another name for saltfish salad. It’s topped with citrussy salted cucumbers, it’s fresh, zingy and my absolute favourite way to have saltfish. This way of making saltfish is full of lovely woody floral herbs. There is a misconception that Caribbean food is all about heat, and ingredients people of European origin would not recognise, but this shows how much we love thyme, marjoram, oregano and a whole bunch of other stuff you can get in any shop or market in Britain. Serves 4 salt cod fillets 500g, skinless and boneless sweet green or yellow pepper 100g, grated avocado 1 whole, diced (about 150g) thyme 2 sprigs, picked oregano 2 sprigs, picked and finely chopped flat-leaf parsley 20g, finely chopped red or green chilli 1 whole, medium-sized, medium heat, finely sliced with seeds spring onions 3 or 4, thinly sliced lime juice of 1, plus another squeeze of lime to serve extra virgin British rapeseed oil 50ml For the cucumbers cucumber ½ (about 100g), peeled, deseeded and diced lemon juice of ½ good rapeseed oil 50ml Maldon sea salt a big pinch black pepper a generous pinch First, rinse the salt cod thoroughly and put it in a pot with cold water. Bring to the boil and strain off the water. Repeat this twice more, discarding the water each time, then set aside to cool. If you prefer it less salty, soak the salt cod in water overnight prior to the boiling and rinsing process. Once cooled, flake the fish gently with a fork until no large chunks remain. In a large bowl, place the grated peppers, avocado, herbs, chilli and spring onions with the lime juice and rapeseed oil, throw in the flaked fish and give everything a good mix-up. In a separate bowl combine the diced cucumber, lemon juice and rapeseed oil, and a pinch of salt and black pepper, and combine thoroughly. Leave to one side for 15-20 minutes before serving. Stack the salted cucumbers on top of the salt cod salad, give everything a good squeeze of lime and serve. Root vegetable and onion fritters, leek broth Crisp on the outside, fluffy on the inside – in Caribbean cooking we love a fritter. It’s a brilliant way for a dish with no meat to shine at the table. With this version I used parsnips because that’s what was available, but you can truly use any root vegetable you can lay your hands on – just make sure your batter doesn’t get too wet. If you’re worried, just add a little more flour. Serves 4 For the fritters parsnips 220g, or any other root vegetable (jerusalem artichoke, carrot, celeriac), peeled and grated (keep the peel for the broth) onion 1 medium (about 150g), peeled and grated (keep the skins and ends for the broth) green chilli 1, finely chopped flat-leaf parsley a big handful, finely chopped (keep the stalks for the broth) fresh oregano a big pinch, finely chopped (keep the stalks for the broth) winter savory a pinch, finely chopped (you can use thyme or marjoram or any other woody herb) lemon zest of 1 curry powder 1 generous tsp plain flour 100g eggs 2 medium, beaten salt 2 pinches ground black pepper 2 pinches baking powder ½ tsp bicarbonate of soda ½ tsp cider vinegar 1 tsp rapeseed, sunflower or vegetable oil about 1 litre, for deep frying For the broth leek 200g, roughly chopped carrot 1, roughly chopped fresh bay leaves 2 apple 40g (any kind), cored and roughly chopped white miso 1 tsp garlic 1 head, sliced in half through the middle thyme, marjoram, or other woody herb 1 sprig butter 70g, cold Start with the broth. Take your chopped leek, carrots, herbs, bay leaves, apple, miso and garlic, plus all the leftover peels and ends from the fritter vegetables, and add to a saucepan with about 1.5-2 litres of water. Bring to a boil, then simmer on a low heat very gently for about an hour to get the most flavour out of it, then leave to one side. Next, in a bowl thoroughly combine all the fritter ingredients and leave for 10 minutes to settle. In a deep fat fryer, wok or other high-sided pan heat the rapeseed oil to around 190C – you can test if it’s hot enough by dropping a small cube of white bread into it, if it becomes golden then you’re good to go. Put a plate with kitchen paper on it to one side. Once ready, gently slip spoonfuls of the fritter mixture into the oil. I use two spoons; load one up and slide it off with the other one, but be very gentle so you don’t splash yourself with the hot oil. It is important not to overcrowd the pan, leave enough room so you can gently turn them around a bit – I tend to cook about 5 or 6 at a time. Once deep golden-brown, remove from the pan and place the fritters to drain on the plate. Once the oil has drained you can keep the fritters warm in a low oven (around 100C) while you prepare the next steps. Strain the broth through a colander or sieve leaving the vegetables and peelings behind, return the broth to the pan, bubble it up and add the cold butter to it to finish it off. Plate up the fritters and serve the broth in a jug on the side. Pour the broth around the fritters on each plate at the table, just before eating – delicious! Spice-rubbed roast chicken and ackee sweetcorn cream We’ve all had a right old time of it recently, haven’t we? I just keep thinking that the idea of making a giant bird is a bit overwhelming for lots of us at this point, especially as many people will be cooking for a way smaller Christmas gathering than before. I’ve come up with a beautiful tea brine for you to try on a relatively smaller Christmas bird. It keeps the meat moist and juicy, and starts packing in the flavour early on, then the spices lift the whole thing up to the level of special that you want. It is Christmas, after all. Plus there’s creamed corn but not as you know it. Ackee is a peculiar not-sweet fruit that some will already be familiar with, often served with saltfish and fried dumplings. I recently discovered that when you cream it with sweetcorn it’s the most velvety, luxurious thing of beauty. Two of my favourite things; something simple made special and incredibly easy. A double win! Serves 4 lemon 1, cut in half organic free range chicken 1 x 2kg ackee 1 x 540g tin, drained sweetcorn 1 x 80g tin, drained oat cream 200ml (if you can’t get oat, double dairy cream will work) For the brine water 1.5 litres earl grey tea bags 3 clementines peel of 2 thyme 2 sprigs, picked sugar 1 tbsp table salt 2 tbsp For the seasoning paste ground cumin 1 tsp paprika 1 tsp cayenne pepper ½ tsp garlic 2 cloves spring onions 3 rapeseed oil 10ml salt and pepper to taste garlicky greens to serve roast potatoes to serve First make your brine. In a large pot, bring 1.5 litres of cold water to a rolling boil, add the earl grey tea bags, clementine peel, thyme, sugar and salt, then turn off the heat and refrigerate. Rub the lemon halves all over the chicken and place inside the cavity. Now put the chicken into the brine mixture making sure it is covered, and leave for a minimum of 4 hours in the fridge, or, even better, overnight. Take your seasoning paste spices, garlic, onions, oil and seasoning and blitz together in a food processor to make a thick paste. Add a little more oil if the paste is too thick. In the morning (or after 4 hours), preheat the oven to 160C fan/gas mark 4. Remove the chicken from the brine, pat dry, rub the seasoning paste all over it, season with salt and pepper and place in a roasting tin in the oven for 1 hour 30 minutes. To check if the chicken is cooked, insert a skewer into the thigh – if the juices that escape run clear, then it is done. When the chicken has been cooking for about an hour, drain the ackee and sweetcorn separately. In a non-stick frying pan gently toast your sweetcorn until it becomes slightly charred, then add your ackee for 1-2 minutes, mixing them both together. Now put your ackee and corn into a blender with the oat cream and blitz until smooth. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Remove the chicken from the oven and sit to rest for 10-15 minutes. Heat the ackee-sweetcorn cream gently over a low heat, carve the chicken and serve with some garlicky greens and roast potatoes. Slow-roast carrot and pumpkin, golden butter coconut chickpeas and parsnip crisps Slow roasting the pumpkin and carrot brings out the natural sweetness of the produce, and when you combine it with the coconut chickpea sauce it’s complex, soothing and bursting with flavour. Top with parsnip crisps for texture and it’s a plant-based dish worthy of any Christmas feast. Serves 4 carrots 200g, peeled and roughly chopped into 3-5cm pieces pumpkin 400g, peeled and roughly chopped into 3-5cm pieces garlic 1 head, cut in half through the middle Maldon sea salt flakes a good pinch cumin seeds 1 tsp thyme 2 sprigs, picked red and green chillies 2, long, mild, finely chopped lemon zest of 1 rapeseed oil 100ml fresh ginger thumb-sized piece, grated parsnip 1 oil 1 litre, for frying For the coconut butter chickpeas onion 1, thinly sliced garlic 3 cloves, finely chopped ground turmeric 2 tsp rapeseed oil 20ml coconut milk 1 x 400ml tin chickpeas 1 x 240g tin, drained In a bowl place your chopped vegetables and garlic halves, sea salt, cumin seeds, thyme, chilli and lemon zest, and drizzle over the rapeseed oil. Mix together with the grated ginger so that everything is coated. Transfer everything on to a baking sheet and roast at 160C fan/gas mark 4 for 30 minutes or until golden. While your vegetables are cooking, take your parsnip and using a vegetable peeler, shave the whole root lengthways into very thin slices and leave to one side. Add the oil to a wok or high-sided pan and heat to around 190C (or until a piece of white bread turns golden when dropped in). Put a plate with kitchen paper on it to one side. Once the oil is hot enough, carefully slip your parsnip shavings into the oil, and fry until golden and crisp. Once cooked, very carefully remove from the hot oil with a slotted spoon or spider and leave to drain on the kitchen paper. Season with a little salt. Now make your golden chickpeas. Sweat the onions and garlic with the turmeric in a little rapeseed oil until soft – the pan will start to release an enticing aroma after a few minutes. Now stir in the coconut milk and cook gently for a further 4-5 minutes. Finish by stirring in the chickpeas and heating through for a final 4 minutes or so. Spoon the chickpeas over your roasted vegetables, with the parsnips crisps scattered on top. Uncle Arnold’s rum and sultana pear cake My uncle Arnold passed away recently, a man I loved dearly. He taught me how to drink good rum and he was a gardener most magnificent. So for him I have devised a pudding that incorporates the last pears I picked from his garden and, of course, plenty of delicious honeyed golden rum. It’s a long bake but it’s worth every glorious minute. Serves 4-6 sultanas 250g gold rum 350ml mixed spice 1 good pinch vanilla extract 20ml conference pears 4, peeled butter 450g brown sugar 250g stem ginger in syrup 100g dates 400g caster sugar 230g eggs 2 self-raising flour 400g baking powder 10g gingernut biscuits 80g whipped cream or custard to serve Cover the sultanas in 250ml of the gold rum, and stir in the mixed spice and half of the vanilla extract. Leave to soak overnight or for a minimum of 3 hours. Slice the pears into quarters lengthwise and cut out the core and any pips. Line a tall 23cm cake tin with baking paper and layer the pears in the bottom in a fan shape or whichever way you fancy. In a saucepan, melt 200g of the butter, the brown sugar and the remaining 100ml of the rum on a gentle heat until the sugar has melted. Pour two-thirds of the syrup over the pears so they are covered. Preheat the oven to 150C fan/gas mark 3½. Strain the rum-soaked sultanas. In a food processor, blitz the stem ginger and dates, or chop roughly by hand, then mix with the rum-soaked sultanas. Beat the remaining butter and the caster sugar together until pale and fluffy, add the rest of the vanilla and the eggs one by one until combined. Tip in the chopped fruit and beat again. Finally beat in the flour and baking powder until thoroughly combined. Pile the cake mix into the tin on top of the pears and syrup, and give the tin a gentle shake from side to side to even out the mixture, or use a spatula or back of a spoon, and allow to settle. Crush the ginger biscuits to a crumb with a rolling pin or in a food processor, and sprinkle over the top of the settled cake mix, then cover with a sheet of tin foil. Slip it into the oven for about 2 hours and 30 minutes or until a skewer comes out clean when you stick it in the middle. Remove from the oven and leave to cool in the tin. Once cooled, run a knife around the edge of the cake, lay a plate over the top, tip it upside down and the whole thing should come out. Gently peel back the paper, pour over the remaining syrup and serve sliced with whipped cream or custard. Andi and Miquita Oliver’s Untold Caribbean will be shown on BBC Two later this year’Tis the season! For all of your Swiftie friends to find themselves in the top 5% of Taylor Swift fans worldwide, for Billie Eilish and Olivia Rodrigo to loom large on your Instagram Stories, and for the Weeknd’s Blinding Lights to be named everyone’s song of the year for the second year in a row. Yes, ’tis the season for Spotify Wrapped: the streaming service’s festive display of user data, presenting listeners with their most-played songs, artists and albums of the year in shareable graphics. It’s an effective marketing scheme, Spotify leveraging its own user base to create buzz on its behalf. The platform itself presents it as an opportunity for sombre reflection, like the Queen’s speech: a prompt “to look back on the year” on the music that “helped us get through”. Some users take it in that spirit, taking stock and finalising their pandemic playlist for posterity. Others parade their stats like a badge of honour (“hours spent listening to Post Malone”). Either way, since it began in 2016, Wrapped has become as anticipated as Black Friday; a new tradition in corporate Christmas. This time last year it led to a 21% surge in downloads of Spotify’s mobile app as users rushed to share their numbers on social media. I say: bah humbug. As someone who used to spend hours painstakingly tending to her iTunes music library, who felt a gap in her Last.fm history like an archival omission, I am exactly the sort of pedant who should be all for Spotify Wrapped – and yet I find it banal and depressing. After 10 years as a Spotify subscriber, it’s my longest-ever relationship, and I’ve never considered giving it up. Nevertheless, every year, I get the sense of my listening habits becoming increasingly tightly wound – into six daily mixes: my six modes – and increasingly like everyone else’s. I don’t know whether it’s my own failure of initiative and imagination, or one of product design and the paradox of choice, but when I open up the app each morning I mostly go with Spotify’s flow: I listen to albums I’ve recently been listening to and artists I already know I like. If I’m feeling adventurous, I might try one that the algorithm has deemed to be similar. But more often I bang on my playlist – dating back to July 2017 – of 1,107 “liked songs” and listen to the most recent additions. (Lately: a destabilising one-two punch of the new one from Mitski and Every 1’s a Winner by Hot Chocolate.) And at the end of the year, Spotify packages it up and gives it back to me, Wrapped – like a present so obvious you have to pretend you’ve not got four of them already. Ah, Hot Chocolate! You shouldn’t have! Without denying our agency, I think we can routinely underestimate the influence of platform design on our decisions and behaviours. It has never been easier to expand our musical horizons – yet many of us, conspicuously, don’t. I see the flattening effect, that feedback loop, on display every year in Spotify Wrapped posts celebrating the same handful of artists and songs. I’m not being a snob – I was a late-in-life One Directioner – but often what Wrapped claims to uncover is obvious to the individual, and unedifying for their friends and followers. Sometimes the numbers are so sweeping or skewed as to be meaningless: Call Me Maybe was in my most-played songs last year because I wrote about its 10th anniversary, and this year there will be Blinding Lights again (the most-streamed song in the world in 2020), because I sometimes listen to it on single-song repeat to motivate me to meet a deadline. Neither are musical memories to cherish – but it’s this kind of functional engagement that Spotify recognises and, with Wrapped, rewards. The platform has already cemented music as a numbers game: witness how streaming-savvy Drake can have the biggest album in the world without any ubiquitous hits, and how global fan armies strategise to drive singles up the charts. Wrapped, likewise, presents listening to music in terms of scale: top five songs, top artists, top genres, total listening time, even which percentile of an artist’s fans you’re in. Is being in the top 1% a point of pride, or a mark of monomania? What is listening time really a measure of, anyway? As a marketing blog wrote approvingly of Wrapped: the “sense of competition and achievement” motivates people to use Spotify for longer. But I believe this gamification of music comes at the cost of opportunities for actually connecting over it – one of my lifelong pleasures. Mainstream as my tastes may be, I take great pleasure in debating with friends – in highly specific and sometimes alienating detail – questions like which is the funniest Wings song, how we’d reorder our favourite albums, what makes one outro or intro or guitar solo great and another self-indulgent. The last dinner I had with my family, we named songs that had whistle solos, parentheses in the title or – the greatest challenge of all – were made after 1998 and which my dad might possibly like. My most recent friendship was cemented when we found out that we had both once cried to Fight Night by Migos. The number of plays wouldn’t have told us nearly so much. Instead of starting conversations about our favourite music, Spotify Wrapped cuts them short, framing them in terms that mean very little and that stymie further discussion – Adele’s your number two? She’s my number three! Like so much of social media, it’s a broadcast claiming to be a dialogue. It makes me wistful for an earlier internet. Last.fm, the primary site of my music discovery through the mid- to late-2000s, was as much a community for people who loved music as it was a log of what we listened to. It connected me with strangers with similar taste, who gave me recommendations and asked for them back. By contrast, Spotify is flat, functional, siloed – even my friends are reduced to a fast-moving stream of “activity” that is rarely inviting (my ex listening to Chumbawamba again, and not even Tubthumping). I would love Spotify to show me the dusty corners of their libraries, to dig out the albums they know too well to tell me about. Instead, it makes a big festive show of stating the obvious. Wrapped is little more than free advertising for a company that even the UK government has condemned for not extending a fair share of its profits and power to artists. Wrapped isn’t even the most interesting data it keeps on you. Each December, Spotify has a rummage through its drawers for something it’s willing to part with, which relates to you on the most surface level – and presents it to you with a bow. I’m going to be sitting out Wrapped this year, like the Grinch listening to Every 1’s a Winner. All I really want for Christmas is a new playlist, made by a person.Announce Pellistri. The transfer window was into added time, the clock was ticking and they were getting nervous, watching the seconds slip away and hitting f5 over and over. They were at Facundo Pellistri’s place, anyway. It was after midnight, deadline day October 2020, and Manchester United had said one more signing was coming, keeping supporters – and him – on edge. An extension had been requested but even that was running out. All because he wrote his name wrong. “I had sent off the paperwork, ‘done’,” Pellistri recalls, sitting in the canteen at Deportivo Alavés, where he is on loan, teammates eating at another table. “But they came back: ‘No, no, the signatures don’t match.’ I had signed the contract with my signature but they said it had to be the same as my national ID card – and I’d had that since I was 10. I had to re-do it: scan everything again, print it off, sign it with a kid’s signature – write my name neatly, basically – and send it back. “We thought it was all done, but we got no answer and no announcement. We’re looking at the clock. There was no response. Of course not: they were busy checking everything. My girlfriend was updating the United Instagram page but there was nothing. Eventually, on the limit, she shouted: ‘Announced!’ We threw the papers in the air, started celebrating. And then, chaos: messages, posts. I’d already signed off with Peñarol: if it hadn’t happened, I would have been an unemployed footballer.” The son of a paediatrician and an accountant, Pellistri grew up on the “wrong” side of a musical family – “the side that wasn’t as talented musically,” he says, smiling. His godfather Sebastián Teysera is the lead singer in La Vela Puerca, one of Uruguay’s biggest bands. “I would go to all the rehearsals, the concerts. In fact, they’re just about to bring out a new record and hopefully they’ll go back on tour.” Mostly, though, he went to sport: tennis, basketball and above all football. Pellistri tells stories of crossing the water to see Uruguay win the Copa América in 2011 and travelling to the 2014 World Cup. A Peñarol season-ticket holder from birth, he travelled by bus to Libertadores matches in Argentina and Brazil. Soon it was him they were watching. Joining his club at 11, he made his debut in August 2019, aged 17; a little over a year later he was gone, following the path of the man who had coached him. “I was nine during the 2010 World Cup and what Diego Forlán did was incredible: he’s an idol, so it was amazing when he came,” Pellistri says. “He’d been in Europe and was different. He did a lot of individual work, specific to positions, which really improved you. Practice, practice. He talked to us a lot, especially about spaces, positioning. He was also the one who told me about United. “He had been [Ole Gunnar] Solskjær’s teammate. Solskjær called him and said: ‘We’re interested in this lad, what’s he like? How does he train?’ Diego told me about the call and said it was an incredible club. I talked to him a lot. I’d been about to go to Lyon, in France. I don’t know why it didn’t happen but once United appeared that was it. I spoke to Solskjær: he called to welcome me, talked me through everything.” Pellistri was 18, about to cross the Atlantic, and in the midst of the pandemic too. Yet if he still looks like a kid, fresh faced, eyes as wide as his smile, he doesn’t sound like it: there’s a sharpness and intelligence about him, a maturity. There’s an awareness and patience that’s unusual too, wisdom. It almost makes sense when he describes a scenario in which he initially acted as host to Edinson Cavani rather than the other way round, as if he were the veteran and not the then 33-year-old. “I was already in the bubble because of the Sudamericana, which meant that when I got to Manchester I could train sooner than Edi. He got there before me but had to do quarantine so instead of him welcoming me, it was me welcoming him. “It was the first time I had met him. He’s incredible. Everything you heard about him is true. He trains like no one, he’s a leader, he advised me. We spent Christmas together and I talk to him all the time. My English is good: I went to a bilingual school. But there’s always a bit of embarrassment speaking English and you gravitate towards Spanish speakers. Edi, David [de Gea], [Juan] Mata. [Paul] Pogba speaks Spanish, Eric Bailly.” Loaned to Alavés in January 2021, Pellistri played 12 games, meeting and swapping shirts with Luis Suárez the day his countryman reached 500 career goals – “Luis had a shirt for each half and I got the historic one,” he grins. Then he returned to Manchester for pre-season before heading back to Alavés for this season, opportunity reduced by Cristiano Ronaldo’s and Jadon Sancho’s arrivals, except that the winger doesn’t see it like that. “I’m not thinking: ‘I have to play here tomorrow’, so you don’t worry about signings,” he insists. “In fact, you like it because you train with players who raise the level, helping you improve. “I left Manchester feeling good about pre-season: I scored at Derby, the sessions were good, I was adapting. It’s hard to change because they’re totally different leagues: in Spain the football is more closed, more defensive. In England, it’s more open, more space, more one on ones. A diagonal ball and you’re in. But a player has to look for that, learn from everything.” After one start in the opening seven games, in which Alavés won once, things are falling into place: Pellistri started wins against Cádiz, Elche and Levante as they went five unbeaten and climbed out the relegation zone. It may not be enough to keep him there. “There’s a clause where if I don’t play a certain number of minutes, they can take me back [unilaterally], and mathematically I can’t reach that even if I play every minute until January,” he says. Whenever he goes back, it will be under a different manager, Solskjær sacked last month. “I wrote to Ole,” Pellistri says. “He gave me the chance to play for United and always taught me. I thanked him and wished him the best. Sadly, in football results rule. When things aren’t going well the easiest thing is to sack the coach – that happens everywhere. Football’s like that. It can be cruel.” Pellistri says the biggest challenge is maintaining emotional balance. “Switch off, get away from football sometimes. If not, things can be very stressful. The worst thing is the hours before a game. Once you’re on the pitch, you don’t feel the pressure, not in the moment. The adrenaline means even the kicks don’t hurt sometimes. And all the bad things are nothing compared to how lovely the game is. You have to ensure that none of that gets in the way of enjoying it, of sharing those moments with fans. You have to know the bad moments will pass.” And the good moments will come. So now what? “I’m trying to get used to Europe, to improve. Then of course you’ll see what decisions you can take, where the path leads. I have a five-year contract at United but I’m trying not to look three years ahead. At the same time, you can’t ever feel like that’s a long way away. If I play for United, that’s a dream but it’s best not to focus on that yet. It’s about feeling like you’re getting a little closer all the time.”The owner of the Drax power station is expected to profit from Britain’s energy crisis until 2023 and will plough billions into doubling its production of wood pellets for burning by 2030 despite mounting opposition from environmentalists. The FTSE 250 energy company’s shares hit seven-year highs on Wednesday after it told investors it aimed to invest £3bn by 2030. Part of that investment would be directed towards doubling production and sales of biomass pellets, which Drax uses at its North Yorkshire power plant as an alternative to burning coal. Its claims that electricity produced in this way is “carbon neutral” is disputed, with green groups saying burning biomass produces emissions that contribute to the climate crisis. Drax will fund the expansion plans using its own cash as it prepares to profit from record high energy market prices in its long-term contracts over the next two years. The company’s is valued at £2.43bn after its share price rose on Wednesday morning from 564p to more than 606p, its highest since October 2014. Drax told investors its profits for the current financial year were likely to be at the upper end of market expectations. It said this was despite the company not being “a significant beneficiary” of the record gas and electricity prices that have forced factories to close and energy suppliers to almost 4m UK households to go bust. Most of Drax’s electricity generation is sold via long-term contracts, meaning its earnings this year will rely more heavily on market prices a year or two ago than recent historic highs. However, the company has managed to increase its earnings for this year by selling some electricity on a short-term basis and agreeing to fire up its last coal-burning units to help keep the lights on in September and again in November. It is expected to close both coal units by next September. Drax will also be able to hike up the price of the electricity it generates for long-term contracts for 2022 and 2023. In addition, the company will continue to benefit from subsidies worth hundreds of millions of pounds to generate biomass electricity through the government’s renewable energy scheme. The company has already received billions through the scheme, including £800m last year. This is despite growing environmental concerns over biomass electricity. Questions about the method have also been raised within financial circles. The financial services firm Jefferies told its clients in October that bioenergy was “unlikely to make a positive contribution” towards tackling the climate crisis and was “not carbon neutral, in almost all instances”. Will Gardiner, Drax’s chief executive, said criticisms of the company’s claim that it was on track to becoming “carbon neutral” were a “mischaracterisation of reality”. He added that Drax’s long-term strategy – which involves fitting its biomass burners with carbon capture technology to generate “carbon negative” electricity – was backed by the UK government, and would play “a unique piece” in energy transition efforts globally. “We’re excited about the opportunities ahead, and we have a lot of work to do,” he said.ALL ROUND TO RAFA’S It’s the 239th Merseyside derby tonight. These things are spicy affairs at the best of times but tonight’s edition is likely to be on a rolling boil from the get-go. For a start, patrons are back, and with the kick-off set for a refreshment-friendly 8.15pm, many will be fully energised with a view to telling it as they see it. Secondly, Virgil van Dijk comes up against his old nemesis Jordan Pickford who, during this fixture last season, clattered into the Dutchman like a toddler high on a cocktail of 1970s orange squash, 1960s instant coffee and 1930s monkey glands, with predictable results. Thirdly, Rafa. Oh Rafa. His name will be sung heartily from the rafters at Goodison this evening, albeit only by the folk in the away end. Benítez won Big Cup and an FA Cup during his time at Anfield, and his new club’s current run of two points from the last 21 available is proving nearly as popular an achievement with the red half of Merseyside. A Liverpool win on enemy soil for only the second time in nine years may well send the Ev into a flat spin, with Arsenal, Chelsea and Leicester to come in short order. All of a sudden, festive fixtures against Burnley and Newcastle would have the look of six-pointers, and when you’ve got to the stage of a must-win against the Toon, you know you’re in serious bother. Rafa is as Rafa does, of course, and as ever the inscrutable Spaniard is playing it cool. “It is a massive game for us,” he says. “It’s an opportunity for us to change things and improve everything for the rest of the season.” Full marks for positivity, and should the returning Richarlison put Liverpool to the sword again, as he did at Anfield in February, Benítez will be afforded a bit of slack, even if fans remain unlikely to buy into his recent “I’m a Blue” patter. However should Richarlison get himself sent off again, as he did in this fixture last year for perambulating up and down Thiago’s leg, and Liverpool subsequently do their free-scoring worst, expect the mood of the Goodison faithful to curdle quicksmart. Ah well, at least the folk serenading Agent Rafa will still love him. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Barry Glendenning for a Premier League clockwatch at 7.30pm GMT while Scott Murray will be on hand with minute-by-minute updates of Everton 0-3 Liverpool at 8.15pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I was glad that the girls gave everything until the end, did not give up. In terms of character, everything was done … it was another new and valuable experience” – Latvia boss Roman Kvacovs deserves a medal for finding some positives in the 20-0 defeat by England in Tuesday’s Women’s World Cup qualifier. RECOMMENDED LISTENING How to tackle misogyny in the game – a Football Weekly Special. FIVER LETTERS “Your farcical decision not to award the prizeless letter o’ the day to Pedro Tavares da Silva (Tuesday’s letters) is classic English journalistic failure to understand anything that isn’t English. Maybe that chip on your shoulder couldn’t let you see the beauty of his missive. Cancel my subscription, burn down the disco, hang the blessed DJ!” – Daniel Stauss. “I’m guessing Pedro Tavares da Silva is unaware of the works of the particular Fiver scribe he focuses his ire on (Monday’s Fiver), as I’m fairly certain Barry Glendenning would be equally delighted if Cristiano Ronaldo continues to keep smacking goals past England goalkeepers for Portugal too” – Jim Hearson (and many others). “May I share how distressed and surprised I was to discover when reading the piece on the Guardian virtual clean sweep of the FSA awards that Jonathan Wilson is not in fact a giant pulsating brain in a bottle and Glendenning has an ill-advised beard” – Lynda Caines. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Daniel Stauss. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Kick It Out has accused beIN Sport’s of amplifying homophobia after pundit Mohamed Aboutrika declared on-air that homosexuality is “against human nature”. Meanwhile, Adelaide United’s Josh Cavallo, who came out as gay last month, has been told he is welcome at the Human Rights World Cup in Qatar, where homosexuality is illegal and punishable with a sliding scale of penalties ranging from flogging to execution. “Nobody feels threatened here, nobody feels unsafe,” grinned tournament organiser Nasser al-Khater most reassuringly. Reverse psychology corner: Thomas Tuchel hopes his tactic of dropping Andreas Christensen from his Chelsea side will convince the Dane to stay. “We have the hope that it influences the contract situation a little bit,” winked the German. Jack Grealish has admitted to teething problems at Manchester City: “I thought I’d have more of the ball, get more assists and goals but it doesn’t work like that at all,” he sadtromboned. “I’ve had nowhere near as much of the ball as I used to get at Villa.” Important update on that Old Trafford handover: “Have I spoken to him?” said Michael Carrick of his conversations with imminent interim incomer Ralf Rangnick. “No.” Welcome home, Peters and Lee – Graeme Lee, that is, who returns to Hartlepool as manager having spent eight years as a stalwart of the club’s defence from 1995-2003. And Leeds chief suit Angus Kinnear needs to give his head a wobble after comparing calls for a transfer levy and regulator to politics that led to the Great Chinese Famine, in which up to 45 million people died. “Enforcing upon football a philosophy akin to Maoist collective agriculturalism [and] will not make the English game fairer,” he wailed. STILL WANT MORE? Lethal, humble, wise: the making of England record-breaker Ellen White, by Suzanne Wrack. ICYMI: she helped her side edge out Latvia. Manchester United winger Facundo Pellistri, who is on loan at Alavés, gets his chat on with Sid Lowe about putting the wrong signature on a contract, his debt to Ole Gunnar Solskjær and his future aims. Newcastle feel the hand of Eddie Howe before all the eye-popping spending starts, beams Barney Ronay. Here’s 10 players Ben McAleer reckons Premier League clubs should target in January. Wild two-year twists of fate in third tiers, braces scored while wearing braces and more – it’s this week’s Knowledge. Finally, Ray Kennedy, an obituary as well as his life in pictures. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! COULD HAVE BEEN WORSE. COULD HAVE BEEN HYDEHeathrow has reopened a terminal dedicated to processing passengers flying into London from countries on the UK’s Covid red list. Britain’s biggest airport has again turned Terminal 4 into a red-list facility to separate travellers from high-risk destinations amid concerns over the newly identified Omicron Covid variant. The government reactivated its red list last week with 10 countries from southern Africa now included, meaning passengers coming from those locations must go into officially managed hotel quarantine for 11 nights. The west London airport ran a separate arrivals terminal, which was initially T3 and later T4, for red-list travel between June and the start of November, before travel restrictions were briefly relaxed. T4 was then mothballed until its reopening on Wednesday to process red-list flights. The move was prompted by concerns over passengers from different destinations mixing, especially with long waits at border control as volumes of passengers rise, carrying increased documentation. Tougher travel rules have been reintroduced by the government since the discovery of the Omicron variant, including the requirement for fully vaccinated people entering the UK to self-isolate until they receive a negative result from a PCR test. The move has punctured optimism in the travel sector, with demand having been briefly rekindled when restrictions were eased to allow returning vaccinated travellers to use cheaper lateral flow tests without self-isolation until any positive test results. Heathrow‘s chief operating officer, Emma Gilthorpe, said: “We are supportive of measures that protect public health and prevent the spread of Covid. The rapid introduction of restrictions for international travel will nonetheless be a further significant blow for British exporters and those wanting to visit friends and relatives. Keeping the changes under constant review, and a government commitment to the removal of red-list countries as soon as it is safe to do so, will help.” Heathrow said it was maintaining Covid-secure measures across the airport, including mandatory face coverings, intensive robotic cleaning regimes and enhanced ventilation in immigration halls. Passenger numbers at the airport, which slumped during the pandemic, have returned markedly, boosted in particular by the restart of transatlantic travel last month. However, reports in the US suggest the Biden administration may now impose restrictions on foreign visitors again, including more tests and potentially even quarantine for the first time, as the world waits for assessments of the severity of the new variant.The former Tory health secretary Jeremy Hunt and Labour launched stinging attacks on the government on Wednesday as it unveiled long-awaited social care reform plans lacking significant new funding to resolve the current crisis. The white paper confirmed new spending including £300m over three years to help councils increase the range of supported housing options which allow people to live more independently, £150m to drive the greater adoption of technology, as well as details of £500m for workforce development, primarily through training and qualifications. There were also plans for a new national social care website and money for modifications to people’s homes to help them stay in them longer. But amid a staffing crisis in which about 60,000 workers quit between April and October and 1.5m hours of commissioned care have not been delivered in England in recent months, the plans were widely criticised. Hunt, who chairs the Commons health and social care select committee, told the care minister Gillian Keegan the plans would do nothing to stop “hospital wards continuing to be full of people who should be discharged and older people not getting the care they need because the carers don’t exist”. He described it as “three steps forward and two steps back” and said the spending plans of around £1bn it outlined were “a long way off” the £7bn a year extra the health and social care select committee called for by the end of the parliament. Labour’s Liz Kendall, the shadow care minister, said: “Ministers have utterly failed to deal with the immediate pressures facing social care as we head into one of the most difficult winters on record.” She said: “Hundreds of thousands of older or disabled people [are] being left without vital support, piling even more pressure on their families at the worst possible time, yet the minister has announced absolutely nothing to deal with any of this.” “Where was the long-term strategy to transform the pay, terms and conditions of care workers?” she said. “Can she tell me how some kind of website is going to pay a care worker’s bills or put food on the table? No wonder staff are leaving the sector in droves.” On Wednesday, the Nuffield Trust estimated that in the six months to October the number of social care staff in England fell by between 50,000 and 70,000. Low pay, exhaustion after 18 months tackling Covid and the “no jab, no job” policy are key reasons. Keegan stressed that the 103-page plan – called People at the Heart of Care – was a 10-year vision and “an important step on our journey to giving more people the dignified care that we want for our loved ones, setting out important changes that will last for generations and will stand the test of time”. She also defended the design of controversial plans to cap care costs at £86,000, which would allow wealthy people to keep a greater proportion of their assets than poorer people who still stand to lose their homes to pay long-term care bills. “No one will be worse off compared to the current system and many people will be better off,” she said. But the King’s Fund said the measures failed to “fix social care” as Boris Johnson promised he would do “once and for all” in July 2019. Sally Warren, the thinktank’s director of policy, said: “The government’s commitments do not match the ambition set out by the prime minister and urgency of change which the people who draw on care and support rightly expect to see. “There is little to tackle poor workforce pay and conditions and high vacancy levels in the sector.” The council social services group Adass welcomed it as “a foundation stone” which “paints a promising picture of a more professionalised care workforce in the future”. But Stephen Chandler, its president, said: “What we urgently need now is a bridge to that brighter future, to address the immediate crisis and ensure that everyone gets the care and support they need this winter.” The focus on the quality of care, housing and innovation using technology was welcomed by the National Care Forum, which represents providers. Its director, Vic Rayner, said it offered a “different vision for care that starts from the perspective of people who receive care”. But she said urgent action over the next four months was needed to tackle the crisis now. Caroline Abrahams, a director of the charity Age UK, said: “Millions of older and disabled people putting up with inadequate services … needed the [white] paper to turbo-charge a process of transformation, but that was never going to be possible with the meagre funding allocated by the Treasury … Rather than the Formula One vehicle that was required, the paper is an underpowered saloon car at best.”The US is the world’s biggest culprit in generating plastic waste and the country urgently needs a new strategy to curb the vast amount of plastic that ends up in the oceans, a new report submitted to the federal government has found. The advent of cheap, versatile plastics has created “a global scale deluge of plastic waste seemingly everywhere we look”, the report states, with the US a leading contributor of disposable plastics that ends up entangling and choking marine life, harming ecosystems and bringing harmful pollution up through the food chain. Plastic waste has increased sharply in the US since 1960, with the country now generating about 42m metric tons of plastic waste a year, amounting to about 130kg of waste for every person in America. This total is more than all European Union member countries combined. The overall amount of municipal waste created in the US is also two to eight times greater than comparable countries around the world, the report found. Recycling infrastructure has failed to keep pace with the huge growth in American plastic production. Littering, dumping and inefficient waste disposal in landfills has caused up to 2.2m tons of plastic – including everything from plastic bottles and straws to packaging – to “leak” into the environment each year. The total waste may be even greater than this due to data gaps in tracking it. Much of this plastic ends up, via rivers and streams, in the world’s oceans. Worldwide, at least 8.8m tons of plastic waste enters the marine environment each year, the equivalent of dumping a garbage truck filled with plastic into the ocean every single minute. If current trends continue, scientists have estimated this total could leap to 53m tons annually by 2030, which is roughly half of the weight of all fish caught from the oceans globally each year. “Plastic waste is an environmental and social crisis that the US needs to affirmatively address from source to sea,” said Margaret Spring, chief conservation and science officer at Monterey Bay Aquarium. Spring chaired a committee of experts who compiled the congressionally mandated report for the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Spring added: “Plastic waste generated by the US has so many consequences, impacting inland and coastal communities, polluting our rivers, lakes, beaches, bays, and waterways, placing social and economic burdens on vulnerable populations, endangering marine habitats and wildlife and contaminating waters upon which humans depend for food and livelihoods.” The committee’s report recommends that a new national strategy is required by the end of next year to stem the flow of plastics into the ocean. The strategy, the report states, should aim to slash plastic production, particularly for plastics not reusable or recyclable, help promote alternative materials that can be reused and set better standards for waste collection and capture. Broader international and industrial trends will influence any effort to cut plastic pollution. The US, along with many other developed countries, used to outsource its waste problem by shipping plastics to China but these imports were halted by the Chinese in 2018. This has led to an increase in plastic waste sent to other countries, such as Vietnam and Thailand, as well as “recycled” plastic being burned in domestic landfills unable to cope with the sheer volume of waste. The fossil fuel industry, meanwhile, is considering a huge expansion in plastic production as it sees its primary business squeezed due to concerns over the climate crisis. Plastic polymers can be formed from a feedstock of crude oil and the industry is pinning its hopes on a glut of new plastic to flood the market and therefore waterways, beaches and oceans, in the coming years. “There is an urgency to the issue because production is increasing, waste generation is increasing and therefore leakage impacts have the potential to increase too,” said Jenna Jambeck, a member of the scientific committee behind the report.Paolo Sorrentino’s extravagantly personal movie gives us all a sentimental education in this director’s boyhood and coming of age – or at any rate, what he now creatively remembers of it – in Naples in the 1980s, where everyone had gone collectively crazy for SSC Napoli’s new signing, footballing legend Diego Maradona. We watch as a family party explodes with joy around the TV when Maradona scores his handball goal in the 1986 World Cup. A leftwing uncle growls with pleasure at the imperialist English getting scammed. This is a tribute to Sorrentino’s late parents, who in 1987 died together of carbon monoxide poisoning at their holiday chalet outside the city, where 16-year-old Paolo might himself also have been staying had it not been that he wanted to see Napoli playing at home. So maybe Maradona saved his life, but it was a bittersweet rescue. The hand of God, after all, struck down his mum and dad and spared him. Newcomer Filippo Scotti plays 16-year-old Fabietto (that is, Sorrentino himself) at the centre of a garrulous swirl of family members. Toni Servillo plays his dad, Saverio, and Teresa Saponangelo gives a lovely performance as his mother, Maria, with a skittish love of making practical jokes. Sorrentino has clearly been waiting to make this all his life, consciously jettisoning some of the stylistic mannerisms that have made him unique in favour of something more simple and heartfelt, and whose ironies and grotesqueries are themselves more conventional. Naturally, Federico Fellini is important (Fabietto’s would-be actor brother Marchino, played by Marlon Joubert, auditions for the great man as an extra) and maybe Sorrentino wants this film to be his Amarcord. The Hand of God has been coolly received critically on the festival circuit as something rather indulgent and salacious, rather as Fellini’s own later movies were, and the men of all ages do some leching here over Fabietto’s glamorous but troubled Aunt Patrizia (Luisa Ranieri), who likes sunbathing in the nude. (Actually, there is less objectifying here than in Sorrentino’s previous film Youth, which gave us Michael Caine and Harvey Keitel perving over Miss Universe while all of them are in the hot tub.) But it would be really obtuse not to marvel at the exuberance, energy and vivid moment-by-moment immediacy of this movie: Sorrentino is a film-maker who is always on the move, on the attack. Fabietto witnesses a cigarette smuggler casually piloting a speedboat away from the police launch giving chase in the bay of Naples: this is the roguish Armando, played by Biagio Manna. Then, with dreamlike speed, Fabietto befriends him, has an adventure with him, and finally winds up visiting Armando in prison: it all happens with absolute ease. There is also Fabietto’s mother’s relationship with their haughty, ageing neighbour, the Baronessa (Betty Pedrazzi), who finally invites virginal Fabietto into her apartment to lead him to the next phase of his life. As with all autobiographical movies, part of the pleasure is in wondering what the truth actually is. What effect did Sorrentino’s parents’ death have on his film-making? Have all his angular stylisations and Jonsonian satirical contortions until now just been a flight from that terrible catastrophe? Maybe. Fabietto confesses: “I want an imaginary life, like the one I had before.” He wants to find in film-making that mythologised happiness that was wrenched away with his parents’ death, and some of the poignancy is in discovering that cinema doesn’t work like that and neither does life. His imaginary life, as a child, was carefree; as an adult, it consists of making sense of pain. • The Hand of God is in cinemas from 3 December and on Netflix from 15 December.Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel came to Anthony Fauci’s defense on Tuesday evening, condemning Republican officials and Fox News pundits who have smeared the doctor’s character amid concern over the new (and still poorly understood) Omicron variant of the virus. Kimmel tore into such rightwing figures as Fox News host Tucker Carlson, Senator Ted Cruz and Senator Rand Paul, who in recent days have labeled Fauci a self-proclaimed “deity” and dismissed his scientific advice as self-motivated grandiosity; Fox Nation host Lara Logan even compared him to the Nazi doctor Josef Mengele, drawing condemnation from the Anti-Defamation League and the Columbia School of Journalism. Kimmel was out of patience. “Let me tell you screwballs something about Dr Fauci, because I’ve had enough of this and he’s too nice to say this himself,” he said. “This man has been working on behalf of the public, that’s us, for more than 50 years,” serving under six presidents starting with Ronald Reagan. “To suggest that his politics have anything to do with his work or what he recommends? It’s ridiculous, and it’s a lie, and he doesn’t deserve it.” Kimmel continued to decry “scumbags” like Paul, Cruz, and “that vile, inflatable Macy’s parade balloon of dogshit Tucker Carlson” for attacking Fauci’s credibility and character. “The reason they do it is so they can keep terrifying old people, which is basically what they do for a living: they scare senior citizens in order to get ratings and money and votes, but to do that they need villains. To scare Grandma, they need fresh villains. So they zero in on this tiny, adorable old man who’s done nothing but good for the world. “They’d say he invented mosquitoes if people were dumb enough to believe it,” he added. “And guess what, people are dumb enough to believe it.” Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert checked in on the new Omicron variant, which, according to some scientists seems to be more transmissible, though cases appear to be mild. “So we’re grading the variants on the salsa scale now,” the host joked. “In that case, I look forward to the Atomic Ghost Pepper Extra Chunky Variant.” It will be weeks until definitive data becomes available, but preliminary reports suggest the variant could evade vaccines. “It’s a scientific phenomenon known as Aaron Rodgers,” Colbert quipped. In response to the variant, Joe Biden attempted to calm the public on Monday, calling Omicron “a cause for concern, not a cause for panic”. “What? I’m sorry, I wasn’t listening, I was ordering 700 rolls of toilet paper – out of concern, not panic,” Colbert responded. Biden also promised to unveil a new strategy this week “outlining how we’re going to fight Covid this winter, not with shutdowns or lockdowns, but with more widely spread vaccinations, boosters, testing and more”. “And more? Can you be more specific than ‘and more’?” Colbert noted. “Is this the health of our nation or the weird kitchenware and food section of TJ Maxx – ‘Don’t panic folks, we’ll treat this with vaccinations, boosters, testing, a journal that says ‘hope’ on the front, a broken egg timer and a bottle of what appears to be maple syrup that has no label on it.’” Trevor Noah And on The Daily Show, Trevor Noah tore into Republican conspiracy theories over the Omicron variant. Former White House physician and current Maga congressman from Texas Ronny Jackson, for instance, tweeted that Omicron was the “midterm election variant” concocted by Democrats to encourage mail-in voting. “Just so I’ve got this straight: according to this conspiracy, the Democrats’ big plan is to intentionally never solve the one problem that is ruining everyone’s life?” Noah wondered. “That is such a dumbass strategy to win an election. “You realize for this to be true, the Democrats would’ve had to coordinate on this lie with the World Health Organization AND South African scientists AND governments across Europe,” he continued. “Are you serious, people? You know the Democrats can’t coordinate shit. The only thing Democrats can coordinate is their Kente cloths.” Noah also took former Trump adviser Stephen Miller to task for arguing on Sean Hannity’s Fox News show that the US would “already have modified vaccines” for new variants if Trump were still in office. “The idea that Donald Trump would’ve quickly handled a Covid variant is by far the least believable shit I have ever heard,” he said. “You’re going to act like we all don’t know this man? There’s no way he would’ve handled it. “First of all, he would’ve spent four months denying there was even a new variant, then he would’ve wasted six more months saying that the vaccines were on their way, but also don’t worry about it because it’s not going to hurt anybody, but also the vaccines are coming. Then he would’ve gotten Omicron himself, and then he would’ve been like ‘Omicron is real, folks! And I made it, I karate chopped it so hard.’”A doctor who was one of the first people in the world to become infected with the Omicron variant says he believes he caught the virus when he was in London for a major medical conference attended by more than 1,200 health professionals. The disclosure from Elad Maor will raise fears that the variant may have been in the UK much earlier than previously realised – and that other medics could have been exposed to it too. In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Maor, a cardiologist at Sheba Medical Centre near Tel Aviv, described how he returned to Israel on 23 November after the three-day meeting at ExCeL London, a large convention centre in Newham, east London. He began experiencing symptoms within days, and tested positive on 27 November. The time from exposure to symptom onset (known as the incubation period) is thought to be up to 14 days, though symptoms typically appear within five days of exposure. The 45-year-old, a father of three and an associate professor of cardiology at Tel Aviv University, arrived in London on 19 November and stayed four nights at a hotel in Islington, north London. Maor has so far shown mild Covid-19 symptoms, including a fever, muscle ache and a sore throat. Speaking to the Guardian from his home in Israel, where he is self-isolating, Maor also said he had probably infected a 69-year-old colleague with the virus after flying back from London. The colleague has since tested positive for the Omicron variant. While he cannot be certain how or when he became infected, Maor, who had received three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, is convinced it occurred in the UK. “I got the Omicron in London, for sure,” he said. “That is interesting because that was 10 days ago in London – really, really early.” The revelation will raise fresh questions about how early the new variant may have been present in the UK and Europe. Governments around the world are urgently scouring databases for recent cases of Covid infections, screening travellers and decoding the viral genomes of the new variant as they try to measure how far it has spread and where it originated. Data shows it was circulating before it was officially identified in southern Africa last week and it has since been detected in more than a dozen countries. Work to establish if it is more infectious, more deadly or can evade vaccines will take weeks. Maor said he had nothing but praise for the organisers of the PCR London Valves 2021 conference, who asked for proof of vaccination before allowing entry to ExCeL London. However, pictures of the meeting taken by Maor and reviewed by the Guardian show not everyone was wearing masks. The conference was attended by 1,250 people in person and a further 2,400 watched online. The doctor, who travelled to the conference in east London using the tube and Docklands Light Railway each day, noticed similar behaviour on public transport. “Many of the people on the tube were not wearing masks,” he said. “I was actually surprised by that.” He undertook a PCR test on 20 November – his second day in the UK – and again on 21 November – the first day of the medical conference – as per UK and Israeli travel rules. After attending the final day on 23 November, he flew from London via Heathrow airport at 9pm. Upon arrival at Tel Aviv in the early hours of 24 November, he had a third PCR test – which also came back negative. “The only reasonable explanation is that I got infected on the last day of the meeting – maybe at the airport, maybe at the meeting,” he said. “That’s why the [third] PCR was too early to detect the infection. So either the second day of the meeting or the last day of the meeting because there is a lag between the time you get infected, and when the PCR turns positive.” Having initially tested negative for Covid-19 when returning to Israel, he returned to work at the Sheba Medical Centre before developing symptoms, and a fourth PCR test said he was positive. Maor has since been told he is the third confirmed Omicron case in Israel, and the first in the country with no travel links to southern Africa. Maor said it “feels weird” to be one of the first people in the world to become infected with the Omicron variant. “As a physician I am not used to being under the spotlight.” Although his wife accompanied him to London, neither she nor any of his children have experienced symptoms or tested positive for Covid-19. “That’s reassuring, I think,” he said. “I think the transmissibility of this [variant] is not completely different or extremely different to what I know about Delta.” Maor urged people to get vaccinated and to have a booster jab if eligible. “I can’t emphasise the importance of that enough,” he said. “Things could have ended much worse for my family and friends – I am sure that my disease could have been worse if not for the vaccine.” The Europa Group, which is based in Toulouse and organised the PCR London Valves 2021 conference at ExCeL London, posted a message on its official conference website confirming it had learned on 30 November that a delegate had tested positive for Covid after returning to their home country. Speaking from France, a spokesperson for the Europa Group said: “As you may imagine, the health, safety and wellbeing of everyone who visited PCR London Valves was our number one priority. “All protocols mandated by the UK government were put in place. Anyone entering the congress centre had to present a valid health pass and were requested to wear a mask. Hydro-alcoholic gel and masks were made readily available for all participants and disposal bins for used protective equipment were provided.” Israel shut its borders to foreigners from all countries for 14 days on Saturday to try to contain the spread of Omicron and has reintroduced counter-terrorism phone-tracking technology to trace contacts of a handful of people who have likely been infected. The UK has added 10 countries to its travel “red list”.Michael Vaughan has been dropped from BT Sport’s Ashes coverage because of his involvement in the ongoing investigation into racism at Yorkshire cricket. But on a day of mixed fortunes for the former England captain, he was also told by the BBC that it expected to work with him again – before, hours later, revealing that he had tested positive for Covid-19. Vaughan, 47, had already been removed from BBC Radio’s Test Match Special team for the Ashes. However, it had been expected that he would be heard on BT Sport as part of its feed from the Australian host broadcaster Fox Sports. But on Wednesday BT confirmed it was considering a “hybrid approach” to ensure that Vaughan does not appear due to Azeem Rafiq’s allegations during their time playing for Yorkshire. “The recent report presented to the UK parliament uncovering institutional racism within cricket and specifically Yorkshire county cricket club is extremely disappointing and a concern for all,” BT Sport said in a statement. “Given these recent events and the controversy with the situation, we have taken the decision that including Michael Vaughan within our Ashes coverage would not be editorially appropriate or fit with BT Sport’s values. “We are still finalising plans but we are assessing the option of taking a hybrid approach, using Fox commentary where possible with the aim of putting our own commentary team in place if necessary.” Vaughan’s future as a pundit has been in considerable doubt ever since Rafiq claimed that Vaughan said “there’s too many of you lot, we need to do something about that” to four Asian players before a T20 game between Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire at Trent Bridge. In recent weeks the BBC has postponed the Five Live show Tuffers and Vaughan several times, and pulled the England captain from their Ashes coverage, amid an investigation into those remarks in 2009. However, on Wednesday the BBC released a fresh statement saying it expected Vaughan to be back working for the corporation after recent talks. “We’re in regular contact with Michael and have had positive conversations with him in recent days,” the BBC said. “Our contributors are required to talk about relevant issues, so Michael’s involvement in a story of such significance means it’s not possible for him to be part of our Ashes coverage or wider cricket coverage at the moment. We’re pleased with how our conversations are going and expect to work with Michael again in the future. He remains on contract to the BBC.” The BBC’s decision follows an apology from Vaughan to Rafiq last week for the hurt he went through at Yorkshire. However, Vaughan reiterated that he had not used the words attributed to him by Rafiq. “It was [one of] my last few games and I just remember clearly I was proud as punch that we had four Asian players representing Yorkshire,” Vaughan told BBC Breakfast. “Nothing but a proud senior old pro just about to retire, absolutely delighted that Yorkshire had come so far.” Vaughan also apologised for a series of historical tweets, including one that suggested that England player Moeen Ali should go around asking Muslims if they were terrorists. “I can apologise if I was involved in any way, shape or form in a dressing room that had a culture that wasn’t inclusive for everyone,” added Vaughan. “My recollections of all the dressing rooms that I played in were inclusive to everyone, but I’m more than happy for people to come forward and say you know what, that wasn’t the case.” On Wednesday afternoon Vaughan also revealed that he had tested positive for Covid, which means he is likely to miss the first Ashes Test in Brisbane next Wednesday. “I’ve had to delay my flight to Australia until next week because of a positive Covid test, which is frustrating,” he tweeted. “But at least I’ll avoid the rain in Brisbane for a few days!”A man has been detained by armed police after breaching security to enter the grounds of the Houses of Parliament. The man is believed to have entered over the walls and was stopped in New Palace Yard. It is not being treated as a terrorist incident. A Metropolitan police spokesperson said: “A man was detained and arrested at Carriage Gates inside the Palace of Westminster on suspicion of trespassing on a protected site. Enquiries into the circumstances continue.” Witnesses said the man was spoken to by police for some time after being handcuffed. He was then transferred to a police van, which was driven out through the gates of the Palace of Westminster. Eliot Keck, a parliamentary staffer, tweeted: “Just saw someone climb into parliament. Quickly tasered and guns immediately drawn. Impressive performance from the police.” New Palace Yard was the site of a terrorist attack in 2018 by Khalid Masood, who fatally stabbed PC Keith Palmer after mowing down and killing four pedestrians on Westminster Bridge. The attack led to a significant review of how the area was policed.An Italian archaeologist has compared the impact of the AD79 eruption of Mount Vesuvius on Herculaneum – the ancient Roman beach town close to Pompeii – to the dropping of an atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima during the second world war. Such was the heat of the pyroclastic surge produced by Vesuvius – believed to have been between 400C and 500C – that the brains and blood of the Herculaneum’s victims instantly boiled. “The remains of victims here have been found in a similar condition to those of Hiroshima,” said Domenico Camardo, an archaeologist at the Herculaneum conservation project. “You really get a sense of the horror and tragedy.” Camardo was speaking as the partially mutilated remains of a Vesuvius victim, found on what would have been the beach of the ancient town in October, were shown to the press on Wednesday. Archaeologists believe the man, thought to have been aged between 40 and 45, was killed only steps away from the sea as he tried to flee the eruption. The man appeared to have been clutching what experts said was a small leather bag containing a wooden box, from which a ring, perhaps iron or bronze, is protruding. “He was possibly escaping with his treasures,” said Nunzia Laino, a conservator who will be among the team analysing the remains once they are moved to a laboratory. “The objects found with the human remains are of a particular complexity. There are also fabric scraps, so they will have to be carefully extracted before studies can be done.” The victim’s bones were also a reddish colour, which Francesco Sirano, director of Herculaneum archaeological park, said was the mark of the stains left by the man’s blood. The discovery was made during the first archaeological dig at Herculaneum, a much smaller and less well-known site than neighbouring Pompeii, in almost three decades. Excavations in the 1980s and 90s unearthed the well-preserved skeletons of more than 300 victims piled up in boat sheds, where they are believed to have been sheltering while they waited to be rescued by sea. The remains of a soldier, who was believed to have been among the army of Pliny the Elder, the Roman naval commander who attempted to save the inhabitants of Pompeii and Herculaneum, were found in the 1980s, close to the most recent discovery. Camardo said the eruption of Vesuvius hit Herculaneum in a different way to Pompeii. “This is the crucial difference between the two,” he added. “Pompeii was destroyed by a rain of ash and lapillus, which buried it by three or four metres. Instead, Herculaneum was first destroyed by the pyroclastic cloud of a temperature of over 400 degrees. It burned trees, inhabitants and other forms of life.” The city was subsequently hit “by six waves of volcanic mud that arrived like a flood and froze it under almost 20 metres of material”, Camardo added. “But this flood of mud, which then hardened, allowed the conservation of all the organic relics, as oxygen was not able to filter through … so today we find things like items of food, which haven’t been found in Pompeii.” Herculaneum, which was rediscovered during the digging of a well in the early 18th century, is said to have been wealthier than Pompeii, and lavish villas decorated with frescoes and mosaic floors – including the House of the Bicentenary, which was found in 1938 – have been excavated. Excavations have been particularly challenging as the site lies beneath the modern town of the same name. Other discoveries have included organic matter of fruit and bread as well as wooden furniture and ancient scrolls that were carbonised by the heat and ash. Items of wooden furniture from homes and shops, as well as an inscription that belonged to a temple dedicated to the goddess of Venus, have also been discovered during the latest beach excavations. Sirano expects to find the remains of further victims as excavations continue. Part of the beach area being excavated is expected to be opened to the public in 2024.We would like to hear from people whose relatives have not had the Covid-19 vaccine, and how this is affecting your Christmas plans. As cases of the Covid Omicron continue to rise, perhaps their decision has caused conflict within your family. Are you still planning to meet up or will you avoid each other? How will Christmas be different this year if you do meet up? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.People should not assume that Covid will evolve to become a milder disease, a senior scientist has warned, adding that the threat posed by the Omicron coronavirus variant will not be clear until the end of December. Prof Neil Ferguson, head of the disease outbreak analysis and modelling group at Imperial College London, told MPs on Wednesday that while evolution would drive Covid to spread more easily the virus might not become less dangerous. “Most of the transmission has already happened by the time people get hospitalised,” Ferguson told the Commons science and technology committee. “The virus cares about replicating very fast within the respiratory tract and getting out into the environment. If that happens to kill somebody 10 days later the virus really doesn’t care.” His comments came as minutes from the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) revealed that the experts urged UK ministers last week to take “early and robust actions” to limit the transmission of the Omicron variant. The scientists noted that firm data was not yet available but early analysis of the variant provided “sufficiently worrying signals” for them to recommend “early and robust actions to prevent introduction and onward transmission”. First detected in South Africa and named Omicron by the World Health Organization (WHO), the B.1.1.529 variant has prompted the government to reintroduce mandatory mask-wearing in shops and on public transport and to dramatically increase the pace of the booster vaccine programme. Ministers have also introduced more stringent self-isolation policies for those in contact with positive Omicron cases, and placed South Africa and a string of other countries on the travel red list. The minutes of the Nervtag meeting, published on Wednesday, stressed that it remained unclear how serious the health outcomes of the variant could be but said a large wave of infections could potentially overwhelm the NHS. The group said preparations should be made to update vaccines and antibody treatments. “Although data on disease severity associated with B.1.1.529 are not yet available, a large wave of infections will be accompanied by a wave of severe cases and the subgroup cannot rule out that this may be sufficient to overwhelm NHS capacity,” the minutes said. Separately, leaked minutes from a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), to which Nervtag reports, suggested experts had called on the government to introduce pre-departure testing for travellers returning to the UK. The BBC reported that minutes of a meeting held on Monday revealed scientists saying such testing – which Labour has called for – could be valuable. Ferguson told MPs that while some viruses did become less dangerous over time this was not always the case. Two of the most prominent variants of Covid-19, the Alpha and Delta variants, had each caused more severe disease than their predecessors, he said. He said: “It’s too early to say whether Omicron is going to be more or less severe than previous variants, but what we have seen so far is, Alpha has been more severe than the previous strain, a little in terms of severe outcomes counterbalanced by the fact that we have treatments, and Delta was more severe again. “The trend we have seen so far is toward greater severity, not lesser severity, thankfully countered by better treatments … that mean people have a much better chance of surviving severe Covid today than they did at the outset of the pandemic.” Viruses mutate all the time as they replicate in infected bodies. Most of the mutations have a detrimental or neutral impact on the virus, but some can improve its ability to spread. This might happen if a variant binds better to human cells, or multiplies faster inside cells, or causes people to be infectious for longer. In a highly immune population such as the UK, a variant can gain the upper hand if its mutations make it harder for the immune system to attack. Mutations in the Omicron variant are expected to make it both more transmissible and harder for antibodies to recognise. The concerns have sparked an urgent global effort to understand how well vaccines and immunity after infection protect against the variant. The first results are expected in the next week or two, but Ferguson said it would take longer to gain a fuller understanding of the threat posed by Omicron. When the Alpha and Delta variants emerged it took several weeks for epidemiologists to gather enough data to work out how much more transmissible they were, and the extent of any immune evasion. Ferguson said it would probably take “three to four weeks” to get an indication of the transmission and real-world vaccine effectiveness. “We have to be patient. It is likely to be towards the end of this month, when we have a clearer picture.”The coronavirus pandemic had a radical effect on migration, limiting movement despite increasing levels of internal displacement from conflict and climate disasters, the UN’s International Organization for Migration said in a report on Wednesday. Though the number of people who migrated internationally increased to 281 million in 2020 – 9 million more than before Covid-19 – the number was 2 million lower than expected without a pandemic, according to the report. “We are witnessing a paradox not seen before in human history,” said IOM director general, António Vitorino. “While billions of people have been effectively grounded by Covid-19, tens of millions of others have been displaced within their own countries.” Internal displacement caused by violence, conflict and disasters increased to 40.5 million from 31.5 million. Globally, the IOM said governments implemented a total of 108,000 restrictions on international travel, alongside internal restrictions on movement, disrupting migration during the pandemic. Prior to the report’s release, Vitorino told IOM member states on Monday that international cooperation was needed to ensure people were not stripped of the option of migrating when they needed to. He also pointed out that people from countries with low levels of vaccination could be excluded from emigrating. “We must acknowledge the deep impacts the Covid-19 pandemic has had for people on the move: people stranded in transit, families separated across borders, migrants left unemployed but unable to afford the return home,” said Vitorino. “The resulting complex patchwork of measures, frequently changing in scope and application, has placed a chilling effect on cross-border mobility, particularly for those unvaccinated.” The report said conditions were particularly harsh for people from developing countries working in the Middle East and south-east Asia, with the pandemic affecting their incomes and housing, while they were also often excluded from access to healthcare and welfare. However, the feared 20% drop in remittances – which can be a key lifeline to poor families during crises – that was predicted by the World Bank in April 2020 did not materialise and had been much lower, at 2.4%. This might be partly related to people being forced to send money to their families through formal routes, the report suggested, because options such as carrying cash were blocked off, as well as many working in jobs on the frontline of the pandemic that continued despite lockdowns.Amid the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, the Biden administration intends to toughen testing requirements for international travelers coming to the US, including both vaccinated and unvaccinated people. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announced in a statement on Tuesday that officials are working on a plan that would require international travelers to be tested for Covid-19 within a day before their flight to the US. Currently, fully vaccinated travelers can test for Covid-19 up to three days before their trip. “CDC is working to modify the current Global Testing Order for travel as we learn more about the Omicron variant; a revised order would shorten the timeline for required testing for all international air travelers to one day before departure to the United States,” said the agency. Details for the updated testing requirement are still in the works. The new testing protocols will be finalized before Thursday, when Joe Biden will give a speech about the US’s plan to control the Covid-19 spread during the winter months, according to a senior official who added that current details could still change. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the shifting scenario, said additional options that were being considered included testing post-travel and even a possible self-quarantine requirement. The CDC director, Rochelle Walensky, had said on Tuesday: “CDC is evaluating how to make international travel as safe as possible, including pre-departure testing closer to the time of flight and considerations around additional post-arrival testing and self-quarantines.” Currently, the CDC recommends post-arrival testing three to five days after landing in the US from overseas and for unvaccinated travelers to self-quarantine, but both actions are voluntary with participation believed to be low. The changes in international travel requirements come just weeks after the US reopened its borders to more international travelers on non-essential journeys, on 8 November, notably for neighbors Canada and Mexico. With Omicron cases now confirmed in North America, the US president has been working to temper concern, saying in his Thursday remarks: “I’ll be putting forward a detailed strategy outlining how we’re going to fight Covid this winter – not with shutdowns or lockdowns but with more widespread vaccinations, boosters, testing and more.” When reporters asked if he would consult with other world leaders before making changes in travel requirements, which his predecessor had not done, Biden said: “Unlike Trump I don’t shock our allies.”Sajid Javid has said delivering booster jabs is “our new national mission” for the NHS, as he hinted that demands for GPs to return to face-to-face appointments could be dropped to let them do more vaccinating. The health secretary said on Wednesday the NHS was capable of the logistical challenge of offering up to 25m booster jabs by the end of January, amid doubts about its operational capability. Within weeks, all adults will be eligible for booster jabs from three months after their last Covid jab as ministers respond to the threat of the Omicron variant. But the number of vaccination centres has dropped by a third since the peak of the national vaccinating effort this year and some people are reporting difficulty booking their booster jabs, despite being over 40 and eligible. Javid said the huge national effort to recruit a further 10,000 vaccinators, pay GPs to deliver jabs and involve the army in logistics would make a positive difference. He also said the government was in discussions with GP leaders about reducing their workload to allow them to concentrate on vaccinations, suggesting he was willing to drop demands on them to see patients face to face. Asked on Radio 4’s Today programme if he was prepared to make choices to free up GPs’ time, such as withdrawing a demand for more face to face appointments, Javid said: “Yes. This our new national mission. In terms of the public health of this country, there is nothing more important than this booster programme. “We are working at pace with GP representatives about how we can free up more of their time … GPs are working very constructively with us on that.” A few hours after Javid’s comments, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said a further nine cases of the Omicron variant had been identified in England. It brings the total number of confirmed cases in England to 22, the agency said. Another case has also been identified in Scotland, bringing the total across Scotland to 10. Questioned about whether the NHS could cope with the requirements to massively expand the booster programme during winter while there were huge pressures, Javid said: “We are asking a lot more of [the NHS] now as we need to hugely step up our vaccination effort and I do believe they up are to the task.” NHS leaders have insisted the health service will be able to expand the booster programme. But Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents health service trusts, acknowledged on Sky News that the backlog of care was “immensely challenging”. “It is true to say that the health service is under immense pressure at the moment,” she said. “The last thing anyone wanted to hear was that we have a new variant of Covid to also grapple with because trying to deal with that backlog of care is immensely challenging. “We’ve got huge staff vacancies and we are also looking at the huge pressure on urgent and emergency care and other services, including mental health and community services.” She added: “I think it’s fair to say the NHS is kind of on standby to expand its capacity, should it need to do that. It does come at a cost that … will be potentially cancelling routine operations, longer waits for people who come in to A&amp;E, for example, so we know those challenges are there.” Cordery said NHS organisations had asked staff not to mix in big groups in the run-up to Christmas, even though the prime minister said people should not need to cancel parties or school nativity plays. Javid struck a slightly more cautious note than the prime minister, saying people should consider lateral flow tests before meeting in large groups. He said people should follow the guidance but also should “be sensible” if they were going to be in crowded spaces. Boris Johnson’s official spokesman later said the government was not recommending that people take a test, but the public could do so if they wanted, “reassurance”. “We have significant testing capacity and if people wanted further reassurance they could use that,” he said.Two years ago this month Boris Johnson successfully wooed voters in the north of England with a promise to “level up” the UK economy. The Conservative victory was based on a simple message: we get why you voted for Brexit and we’ll do something about it. Progress has been slow, for obvious reasons. Within a few months of the election, the UK was gripped by a global pandemic. Lockdowns and other restrictions deemed necessary to limit the spread of the Covid-19 virus have provided the government with a cast-iron excuse for its failure to back rhetoric with action. But Johnson knows holding on to the “red wall” seats won in 2019 requires more than warm words, and the government says its long-awaited white paper on levelling up should be out before Christmas. This will show whether Johnson really is serious, or whether levelling up will join the long list of failed attempts to reshape Britain’s economic geography. So far there is little evidence that anything truly transformative is in the offing, primarily because the scale of proposed government investment is inadequate to meet that of the task ahead. Rishi Sunak has allocated £4.8bn to be spent on a levelling-up fund over the rest of this parliament, and the government has committed to matching former EU funding for struggling regions with a new shared prosperity fund worth £1.5bn a year. Contrast these relatively modest sums with what the German government has spent in the years since reunification to level up the eastern regions. When the Berlin Wall came down, living standards in East Germany were 60% of those in West Germany. The gap has been closed considerably – living standards in the east are now 85% of those in the old West Germany (and higher than many parts of northern England and Wales) – but this took €2tn over 25 years. To be sure, East Germany’s economic problems were a lot more severe than those of Britain’s former industrial heartlands, and some of that spending went on welfare payments. But the message is clear: if you are serious about levelling up, you have to spend serious amounts of money. There will be much in the white paper about devolving power to a local level and the experience of Manchester, where a combined local authority and elected mayor shows that getting the governance structure right makes a difference. Yet power without money is no real power at all. This is a challenge for Labour, as well as the Tories. It was a smart move by Keir Starmer to give the Wigan MP Lisa Nandy the levelling-up brief in this week’s shadow cabinet reshuffle, but winning back red wall seats is going to take more than criticising Johnson’s proposals as flawed. The opposition will need to show it has some better ideas. A good starting point would be the Plan for the North, a paper from Steve Fothergill and Tony Gore, of Sheffield Hallam University, earlier this year. This proposal comprises four basic elements: have a clear idea of what you are trying to achieve and a yardstick for measuring success; devolve power as well as money; make a commitment to long-term, reliable funding that genuinely makes a difference; and take action on a broad front, including infrastructure, business support and skills. That’s not to say levelling up is going to be easy. Governments of both left and right have been experimenting with different forms of regional policy since the 1930s. There was a time when the north was the cradle of the first Industrial Revolution, and it was the rural south that needed levelling up, but that was more than a century ago. Manufacturing clusters have withered away and not been replaced. Talented young people leave for university and never come back, because the jobs they want are elsewhere. The row over scrapping the eastern branch of HS2 largely misses the point, which is the much greater need for investment to upgrade local rail services. With both main parties competing for red wall seats, rarely has so much attention been paid to the older industrial regions. Decarbonising the economy represents an opportunity to rebuild manufacturing. Levelling up is possible, as the Germans have shown. The question for both Johnson and Starmer is whether they really want to address the problem or just tinker with it. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editorWhen Fran Kelly signs off on Thursday after 17 years hosting Radio National Breakfast, the veteran ABC broadcaster will finally be able to breathe. “Sometimes I feel like every hour of my day is mapped out by what I need to achieve in that hour in order to be able to deliver the show the next morning, so it will be nice to breathe out a little,” Kelly told Guardian Australia ahead of her final show. Kelly, 63, says she is giving up a job that still “thrills” her because she wants a little less adrenaline in her day, a bit more balance and more time to spend with her family, which now includes grandchildren. As well as getting up at 3.30am for a gruelling two hours of presenting live radio, Kelly has spent most evenings studying briefs. There is nowhere to hide when you conduct high-stakes, live interviews on a national program. “I was just watching the news last night and something came up and I went to make dinner or something and stopped. I thought ‘I had better watch that because at some point you’re going to have to learn about the story’.” But giving up what she loves is “bittersweet” for a journalist who came to her craft relatively late – she was 29 when she got her first job on triple J’s The Drum – but has set the standard for passionate professionalism and integrity. “One of my favourite things about live radio is a breaking story; getting on to a story as it’s breaking,” Kelly says. “And being on the crest of a big story is really like riding a wave. It’s very compelling and it drives you along. That’s where I think one of my strengths is. I can write a story really well. And I can get across the story very quickly. Because I’ve had, you know, 30 years of journalism now.” Since 2005 Kelly has been keeping her audience entertained and informed with all the “stored facts and memories I can bring to bear”. Kelly has been at the Breakfast mic calmly but firmly questioning no fewer than six prime ministers – John Howard, Kevin Rudd, Julia Gillard, Tony Abbott, Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison. She admits to being a political animal – “it’s my bailiwick” – who loves leadership challenges. On occasion, she hasn’t even had to decamp quickly to Canberra to cover the event because her “instinct” told her it would happen and she was there already. “Every day I’ve worked in that building – 10 years solid in Canberra – I never lost that thrill of walking around those corridors,” she says. What she won’t miss is the frequent accusation from right-wing commentators Gerard Henderson and Chris Kenny that she is an “activist”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning This week Kenny referred to Kelly as “a left-of-centre activist who has hosted RN” and someone who is “really Green-left”. He’s borrowed the phrase from Henderson who has repeatedly claimed over the years that Kelly “once proudly boasted that she is an ‘activist’”. But Kelly says her comment has been misconstrued, and while she was active in the social justice and feminist movements at university in the 1970s, she is diligent about her craft and its need to be balanced and fair. “What I said was in my youth, I was an activist,” Kelly says. “From my family upbringing, because my parents were active around some issues in terms of Catholic education, state aid and all that. And I just learned growing up to get involved. “When I decided, I was almost 30, to go into journalism, I knew the rules were different. You have to bring balance and represent balance in your work. I have never gone to a protest march since.” Kelly says she worked with Kenny, now an associate editor at the Australian and a Sky News presenter, in the press gallery when he was a Liberal staffer and he “is familiar with my journalism” and is being “mischievous ”. She’s aware of the feedback from listeners via the text line and also of the accusations that she favours one side or the other on Twitter. But she rarely engages. “It’s not that I don’t accept criticism,” she says. “And I do get it every morning live as I’m going through. And I take note of it and sometimes I take some of the criticism on because my audience is really well informed and know a lot more about certain issues than I do. So I’m happy to wear that. But I really don’t care to be diverted by the personal sledges that are stupid, you know, ‘She’s a right-wing stooge’, ‘She’s a member of shadow cabinet’. It’s nonsense.” Kelly will take a long break over summer and return to the ABC in a yet to be announced role and RN Drive presenter Patricia Karvelas will take over in January. You can see her chatting to Barrie Cassidy on ABC TVs One Plus One on Thursday at 8pm. “I have listened to Fran the entire time she has been on it,” Karvelas told Guardian Australia. “It set my day as a political reporter and then political correspondent for the Australian. So it’s been a part of my daily diet of news and current affairs for years. And, and as everyone has pointed out, and I’m no different, I too found her personable and I found that show relatable, and I always was attracted to its national focus, because national affairs is what I’m most passionate about.” Kelly and Karvelas are close and have presented a political podcast the Party Room together for five years. “It’s been thrilling,” Kelly says. “It’s still thrilling. Every morning this week is thrilling. I sometimes think what am I doing? I love this. But it’s best to go before the job takes you.”Adelaide United Coach: Adrian Stenta 2020-21 finish: 5th Major ins: Grace Toranto, Shadeene Evans, Nanako Sasaki Major outs: Charlotte Grant, Dylan Holmes, Mallory Weber Player to watch: Chelsie Dawber, 21, will be the Reds’ first-choice striker and appears well-placed to bolster her rapidly rising career trajectory Predicted finish: 8th Fun fact: New signing Reona Omiya keeps an active blog of her experiences as a Japanese footballer in Australia It was a case of so near and yet so far for Adelaide in 2020-21: missing out on a first-ever finals appearance in their 13-year history on goal difference to Canberra United. Nonetheless, there were positives: a record standalone ALW crowd of 5,159 achieved against Western Sydney and a bevy of young talent emerging onto the scene. These were enough to earn coach Adrian Stenta a two-year extension. The problem when you give your local, unheralded talent a chance to shine, though, is that others begin to sit up and take notice when they perform and, football being football, pinch them off you. Dylan Holmes was lost to Swedish side BK Häcken three games out from last year’s finals and Olympian Charlotte Grant left for another Swedish side in FC Rosengård during the offseason. Maruschka Waldus, Mallory Weber, and María José Rojas are also gone. Young and local talent remains and will be given scope – and this being ALW, don’t be surprised if we see late pre-season or even mid-season additions or returns – but the movement in the departure lounge means ending the finals drought this coming campaign is looking like a tall task. Brisbane Roar Coach: Garrath McPherson 2020-21 finish: 2nd, semi-finals Major ins: Hollie Palmer, Shea Connors, Ayesha Norrie Major outs: Leticia McKenna, Tameka Yallop, Olivia Chance Player to watch: Katrina Gorry returns to ALW after becoming a mother and, no pressure, but her building to the form that made her the 2014 AFC women’s player of the year would be huge for Roar and the Matildas Predicted finish: 5th Fun fact: Born in Brazil, Mariel Hecher started every game for the club in 2020-21 after a dearth of international signings due to Covid finally gave her the chance to step up from the NPLW After the club was initially able to hold onto their core group of Matildas while the rest of the league lost theirs, Clare Polkinghorne and Emily Gielnik departed the Roar just before the finals and have since been joined by Tameka Yallop through the exit door. Standouts with international experience in Gorry and Larissa Crummer remain, but it means the Roar will inevitably be an even younger and more heavily NPLW Queensland-focused outfit this coming campaign. Recruited to the club after his work at the head of the Sunshine’s state National Training Centre program and coach of the Queensland Academy of Sport side in NPLW QLD, new coach McPherson is highly suited to fostering this approach and, as a former underling to now-Matildas assistant coach Mel Andreatta during the club’s premiership-winning 2017-18 campaign, he knows both the club’s culture and what it takes to win. Canberra United Coach: Vicki Linton 2020-21 finish: 4th, semi-finals Major ins: Ally Haran, Chelsee Washington, Ash Sykes Major outs: Bianca Galic, Paige Satchell, Jessika Nash Player to watch: Midfielder Grace Maher, 22, instantly slotted into United’s midfield on her return to Canberra last season and will be an important figure for the club once again Predicted finish: 4th Fun fact: New signing Mikayla Vidmar is the daughter of Socceroo and Adelaide City legend Tony Vidmar If nothing else, Canberra should be fun to watch on the offensive side of the ball – even with Nikki Flannery’s ACL injury. Stung by the absence of Michelle Heyman in their 3-0 semi-final defeat to Sydney FC, Linton’s side has signed Allira Toby from the Harboursiders and lured 19-time Matilda Sykes back to football to give themselves a fine collection of attacking options. Heyman also returns to get the band back together with Sykes and back up a season in which she scored 10 times to seize the record for most career ALW goals off a little-heralded striker named Sam Kerr. Changes on the defensive end, however, could spell some trouble for the side; newly arrived American defender Harran will need to step up for a group that has lost recent Matildas debutant Jessika Nash to Sydney FC. Melbourne City Coach: Rado Vidošić 2020-21 finish: 3rd Major ins: Hannah Wilkinson, Winonah Heatley, Sally James Major outs: Noor Hoelsbrekken Eckhoff, Alex Chidiac, Chinatsu Kira Player to watch: This shapes as the most important season of Emma Checker’s career, as the defender attempts to give Tony Gustavsson no choice but to select her for the 2023 World Cup Predicted finish: 3rd Fun fact: Vidošić’s son, Dario, will be joining him this year as an assistant After losing 10 members of the starting XI which won the 2019-20 grand final, experiencing a series of near-misses in recruitment and having the players they could sign heavily affected by hotel quarantine, City thudded back down to earth last season and missed finals for just the second time. While its Galactico (Matildaco?) sides loaded with international talent from head to toe are likely a thing of the past in women’s football’s new era, the club has recruited shrewdly this off-season to assemble a side that, although perhaps just a step behind Sydney and Victory, should reach finals. The addition of Kiwi attacker Hannah Wilkinson, in particular, addresses the club’s most pressing need and the return of Rebekkah Stott from Hodgkin’s Lymphoma adds not just a top-class defender, but also a world-class presence to the dressing room. One small niggle, though, is that the club’s reliance on recruiting young interstate talent risks leaving them as the third option for standout Victorian youngsters when Western United enters ALW next year. Sally James’s broken thumb on the eve of the season means 41-year-old Melissa Barbieri will start the season as the incumbent No 1. Melbourne Victory Coach: Jeff Hopkins 2020-21 finish: 3rd, champions Major ins: Courtney Nevin, Alana Murphy, Casey Dumont Major outs: Gaby Garton, Lisa De Vanna, Angie Beard Player to watch: If central defender Kayla Morrison was Australian she would already be a Matilda, and if she becomes eligible beforehand will be in green and gold in 2023. Predicted finish: 1st, champions Fun fact: Striker Melina Ayres may be a contender for the golden boot but she is also handy with a bat, having once been a junior Victorian representative in cricket. Keeping around the young, predominantly Victorian core of the side that lifted the club’s second-ever championship in 2020-21, Hopkins looks primed to pad out his resume as the most successful coach in club history in the coming months. Nevin should slot in next to the returning Kayla Morrison, Claudia Bunge, and rising star Polly Doran in defence. Kyra Cooney-Cross should excel in what will almost be her last season in Australia before she moves to Europe. And American import Catherine Zimmerman, in her second year, should continue to shame us all with the sheer depth of her stamina and determination in attack. The loss of De Vanna is a big one, but her absence could potentially open the door for 22-year-old Ayres to continue to develop as a first-choice striking option and throw her into Matildas’ contention. They are the definitive favourites, especially if they can pull off multiple planned moves for high-profile reinforcements on the eve of the season. Newcastle Jets Coach: Ash Wilson 2020-21 finish: 8th Major ins: Elizabeth Eddy, Marie Markussen, Sunny Franco, Major outs: Tessa Tamplin, Rhianna Pollicina Player to watch: Kirtsy Fenton started playing for the Jets at an under-13 level, and now the former Junior and Young Matilda has the chance to start this coming campaign Predicted finish: 9th Fun fact: Norwegian signing Markussen is the first international to join the Jets since 2018-19 ALW Possessing a strong junior set-up and a heavy emphasis on recruiting and retaining local talent, the Jets – be it down to necessity, a deliberate strategy or a combination of both – have deep, deep ties to the region. This sense of familiarity extends to this season’s squad. Wilson is back in the dugout for her second season and the likes of Tara Andrews, Claire Coelho, Hannah Brewer, Cass Davis, Lauren Allan, and 11-time Matilda Gema Simon will all run out for another go-around in the Hunter. With another year in Wilson’s system, and the addition of internationals Markussen and Eddy, the Jets should better last season’s two wins, but finals football will still be a challenge. Perth Glory Coach: Alex Epakis 2020-21 finish: 9th Major ins: Kim Carroll, Lisa De Vanna, Mie Leth Jans v Lily Alfeld, Malia Steinmetz Player to watch: Highly rated attacker Alana Jancevski was one of Perth’s first signings of the off-season and the 18-year-old has the tools to make Victory and City regret letting her slip away Predicted finish: 7th Fun fact: New signings Sofia Sakalis and Jancevski were part of the ABC documentary series ‘Kick’ A cursory glance at the record books would tell you Glory’s 2020-21 campaign was a disaster: no wins and a draw against 11 defeats and seven goals scored compared to 32 conceded. That fleeting analysis, however, would fail to communicate the extent Epakis was on a hiding to nothing. His late appointment, challenges in recruiting and Western Australia’s border situation made his task, effectively, a Sisyphean one. Now, what the Omicron variant may mean for his side’s ability to travel or host games remains a vexing question, but it cannot be said that this Glory side does not have the former NPLW New South Wales coach’s fingerprints all over it. More than a dozen new players have signed with the club for this season, including some of the most promising and overlooked youngsters on the east coast, and Matildas great De Vanna will provide much-needed leadership and grunt. The play-offs are a big ask but they should be good for a few surprises. Sydney FC Coach: Ante Juric 2020-21 finish: 1st, grand finalists Major ins: María José Rojas, Jessika Nash, Sarah Hunter Major outs: Teresa Polias, Clare Wheeler, Liz Ralston Player to watch: Jessika Nash, 17, had a baptism of fire in her international debut against the USA last week but should continue to grow under Juric – a former defender himself Predicted finish: 2nd Fun fact: Sydney have made the finals every year since the competition’s inception As good as Sydney were last season – they won a first premiership in a decade – it was, to paraphrase Dragon Ball Z villain Frieza, not even the group’s final form. Already aware of the sea change occurring in women’s football as he watched his side be vanquished by Melbourne City in the 2019-20 grand final – the last before a score of Matildas left for Europe and taking place just days before Covid slammed international borders shut – Juric embarked on a multi-year project in assembling his side in the subsequent weeks and months, locking in a host of young and talented locals who would be around not just in the short term but also the years ahead. Now, with a season under their belts, Sydney should once again be there or thereabouts, with the dynamic front three of Remy Siemsen, Princess Ibini and, in particular, Cortnee Vine ones to watch. Nonetheless, the loss of Polias and Ellie Brush, for family reasons and an ACL injury respectively, is a blow. Wellington Phoenix Coach: Gemma Lewis 2020-21 finish: None, expansion side Major ins: Annabelle Martin, Grace Jale, Grace Wisnewski Major outs: None, expansion side Player to watch: Forward Grace Wisnewski was one of New Zealand’s standout players at the 2018 U17 World Cup and now gets the chance to make history with the Phoenix’s women Predicted finish: 10th Fun fact: Defender Martin is the daughter of former Richmond AFL player Geoff Martin and once turned down an offer to play for the Melbourne Renegades in the WBBL After coming agonisingly close to fielding an ALW side in 2020-21 only to be denied at the last by Football Australia, the Phoenix will make history as the 10th side in the competition – Western United and Central Coast Mariners will enter next year – and the first-ever professional women’s team in New Zealand. Inevitably, the ‘Nix’s introduction will prove a boon for the development of the women’s game in Aotearoa but, at least in the short term, things will be pretty tough going for Lewis’s side. To start with, NZ’s border situation means the team face the prospect of playing some, if not all games in Wollongong this season and, as hinted by Lewis’s status as NZ’s U20 boss, this is going to be a very, very young group – Martin is the “veteran” at 23 with 40 league appearances. Seeing genuine improvements from the young squad and avoiding a season like the one Perth endured in 2020-21 would be a positive. Western Sydney Wanderers Coach: Catherine Cannuli 2020-21 finish: 6th Major ins: Liz Ralston, Clare Hunt, Bianca Galic Major outs: Courtney Nevin, Leena Khamis, Georgia Yeoman-Dale Player to watch: Midfielder Galic, 21, made her ALW breakthrough with Canberra last season and shapes as a key contributor Predicted finish: 6th Fun fact: When plying their trade in the ‘Dub, Caitlin Cooper and Erica Halloway work at Fire and Rescue NSW After a breakthrough 2019-20 campaign which propelled the team, on the back of strong play from their international contingent, to a maiden finals appearance, a more locally flavoured red-and-black outfit slipped to sixth last season. Now, under the guidance of Western Sydney-born Cannuli, who has stepped into the head coaching role after a long apprenticeship as an assistant, the club have what it takes to return to finals football if things click into place. If they do not, they could struggle. The defence has lost Matilda Nevin to Melbourne Victory but retained burgeoning Wanderers great and 10-time Matilda Cooper at its heart, alongside new signings Ralston, Hunt, and Allen. The new trio all have what it takes to reinforce the backline into a strong unit but also arrive after injury-hit periods at Sydney, Canberra, and Melbourne City. A young midfield featuring Rosie Galea, Galic, Malia Steinmetz could surprise, especially with some targeted veteran reinforcement on the eve of the season, as too could an attack led by recently capped Matilda Bryleeh Henry and talisman Erica Halloway.The growth of temporary migration visas since the 1990s has turned Australia into a “guest worker state” creating an underclass of young, vulnerable and often exploited employees, a new report suggests. The Migrant Workers Centre’s Lives in Limbo report found 65% of temporary visa holders had experienced wage theft. Based on interviews with 700 temporary visa holders in Australia, the report – released this week – found a clear link between workplace exploitation and temporary visa status, with 91% of workers who experienced wage theft arriving on a visa with no pathway to permanent residency. On top of wage theft, one in every four migrant workers had been pressured to work without enough breaks, perform overtime work, and work on public holidays. The report found it was becoming increasingly difficult to settle in Australia, with only 13.5% of respondents managing to secure permanent residency after their arrival, a process that takes 5.1 years on average. Indian migrant worker Paramjit, who did not want her last name used, has been in Australia for 13 years and says she has spent between $50,00 and $60,000 on fees related to her visa. “We are not treated properly compared to other countries,” Paramjit said. “We were never given any benefits and we pay tax. It’s discrimination. We don’t get anything back. I told my brother not to come to Australia.” Paramjit came to Australia on a student visa, training as a hairdresser in Victoria and working for free for six months, before moving to Tasmania. She is now working in aged care in regional NSW. After being on five different visas she is waiting to hear if her sixth will be approved – an 887 visa, which skilled workers in regional areas can get as part of a pathway to permanent residency. She applied 20 months ago. Her son, who was born in 2012, will be an Australian citizen in a month. “They don’t think about migrants, we are just here to give money.” The report revealed many migrants were encouraged to sign up for educational courses, with some choosing to enrol in classes because they have run out of options. “Migration agents and the government give migrant workers the impression that acquiring Australian education will give them a better chance to progress toward permanent residency,” it states. “In reality, the so-called ‘PR occupations’ do not guarantee permanent residency.” Overwhelmingly, migrant workers say they are out of pocket thousands of dollars due to visa fees, have to navigate complex and fast-changing requirements and are forced to do medical tests, including pregnancy checks, when they apply for permanent residency. Columbian migrant Vanessa, 25, is on her third visa and says she had to take a medical test each time she applied for a new visa. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They ask if you are pregnant, and you do a wee test,” she said. “To check if you’re pregnant or if you have tuberculosis. They take an X-ray. You have to pay $500 for it.” Vanessa came to Melbourne five years ago with her boyfriend and the pair have found jobs as chefs and in early childcare. They’ve spent more than $20,000 in visa fees and, to stay in the country, they need to move to regional South Australia for two years, before they can apply for permanent residency. “We are part of Melbourne, even if the government doesn’t see us like that,” Vanessa said. “It has been very stressful because we have tried to do everything right with this process.” The chief executive of the Migrant Workers Centre, Matt Kunkel, says the system needs more permanent visas, maximum processing times, and protections for whistleblowers. “The government expects migrants – often highly educated and highly dedicated to creating a life in Australia – to give up the prime working years of their life to this country, all the while shifting the goalposts to keep permanent residency just out of reach,” he said. “Workers on temporary visas experience workplace exploitation because the system creates barriers to reporting industrial wrongdoing.” Kunkel said these workers were giving years of their lives to help the Australian economy, building friendships and families in their communities and for that, they should be rewarded. “We need an overhaul of the visa system so workers’ lives don’t rest solely in the hands of a single employer, and all long-term migrants have an opportunity for permanent residency.”BHP, Fortescue and other major Australian iron ore miners could be left behind in a global switch to hydrogen-based steelmaking because of the country’s relatively low-quality ores, according to a report by Bloomberg New Energy Finance. The conclusion is contained in the consultancy’s Decarbonising Steel: A Net-Zero Pathway report released on Tuesday. It identified different ways one of the biggest greenhouse-gas emitting industries could wean itself off fossil fuels. The report estimated the transition to net zero emissions would need as much as $US278bn ($A388bn) in extra investment, a shift to greater use of recycled steel and also a range of carbon prices. The report noted the move to electric arc furnaces, preferably powered by renewable energy, would typically require high-grade iron ore pellets as feedstock. “There is a limited amount of high-grade ore currently being produced, mostly in the Americas, Europe and the Middle East, though there are good quality reserves in South Africa, India, Russia and Brazil,” the report said. “Lower-quality ore producers in Australia will need to further refine their product in order to make it suitable for hydrogen [electric arc furnaces], potentially raising production costs,” it said. “This issue could impede the uptake of hydrogen direct reduction technology, or conversely it could result in iron ore production and possibly green steelmaking capacity moving closer to higher-grade ore producers.” Iron ore is Australia’s largest single export, worth about $150bn in the year to June. With falling ore prices, the commodity is forecast to bring in about $113bn by 2022-23, the government said earlier this year. Accounting for about 7% of global emissions, the steel industry will be at the forefront of efforts to cut carbon pollution if dangerous climate change is to be averted. Hydrogen, particularly made from renewable energy, offers a potential substitute for the metallurgical coal burned in the steel-making process if production of the fuel can be scaled up and prices fall. Academics such as associate professor at Australian National University John Pye have also identified the threat to Australia’s predicted mineral wealth if green steel developments end up favouring ores other than those found in Western Australia’s Pilbara region. “It’s so important to Australia’s balance sheet,” Pye said, adding: “The jury’s out as to how competitive we can be in a decarbonised steel sector.” Pye said a process known as beneficiation – which removes impurities in the ore –would be needed to raise the quality of Australia’s minerals to that of Brazil’s or other rivals’, but that would add to costs and cut miners’ profits. Similarly, green hydrogen processes may favour magnetite ores over the hematite ores that dominate in the Pilbara, Pye said. The region, though, is not without magnetite. Fortescue is building a magnetite operation in the Pilbara called Iron Bridge, with first production scheduled for the end of 2022. It would be the only one of the big three with a magnetite operation when it comes online. Elizabeth Gaines, Fortescue’s chief executive, said the company, along with Fortescue Future Industries, was evaluating a range of pathways to produce green iron which could eliminate the need for coal. These ranged from electrochemically converting iron ore to green iron at low temperatures without coal and using green hydrogen for direct reduction of iron ore. “As part of our early-stage test work, we have successfully produced high purity green iron from Fortescue ores at low temperature without coal, and we are now focused on scaling up the process,” Gaines said. “In line with our strategy to invest in the future of our core iron ore business and diversify to commodities that support decarbonisation, we are taking a broad value chain approach,” she said, adding the Iron Bridge Magnetite Project represented one of the few such ventures globally, and will deliver 22m tonnes a year of high grade 67% Fe magnetite concentrate. Global head of industry decarbonisation at BloombergNEF, Kobad Bhavnagri, said the shift to green steel “could cause both great disruption, and great opportunity, for Australia’s iron ore miners”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Numerous studies show that green hydrogen is emerging as both the cheapest and most practical way to make green steel,” Bhavnagri said. “But this technology change poses a challenge for Australia. Not only will it virtually wipe out metallurgical coal exports, but iron ore exports could take a hit too, if miners don’t adapt.” He said miners and investors betting on a slow transition to hydrogen could be left behind as has happened to power companies that were slow to adjust to plunging prices for new solar and windfarms. Bhagnagri said it wasn’t inevitable Australian iron ore producers would lose out since the country’s abundance of low-cost renewable energy gives the country an opening to upgrade iron-ore production onshore and also lure more of the steelmaking to Australia. “Australian companies will need to take the lead to shape the future of the industry in their favour, or risk it evolving in a way that deals them out,” he said. Guardian Australia approached several iron ore producers and steelmakers for comment.None of the people who bombard virologist Prof Dominic Dwyer with emails calling him a “traitor”, or who urge him to recommend unproven Covid-19 treatments, have his four decades of medical experience. Nor have they spoken to those most affected by the devastation of Covid. In January, he visited Wuhan, China, with other experts, to investigate the origins of the pandemic and report back to the World Health Organization. Dwyer spoke to many people forever changed by the virus at a time before vaccinations were available. “I had an experience in China talking to a doctor whose wife was also doctor,” Dwyer says. “She died of Covid herself after looking after Covid patients, and he was left behind with their two-year-old baby. To see the hurt in his eyes makes you think, ‘This is not just numbers and cases’. It’s about people.” Dwyer’s desire to help people has led to him working long hours with his colleagues at NSW Health’s Pathology West to sequence the virus and understand its mutations – and how those mutations might impact vaccines and treatments. He finds it baffling that some of the people who email him think he is hiding the “truth” about Covid and its treatments. A study published in the journal BMJ Open on Thursday, led by the University of Sydney, documented the experiences of Australian health researchers, such as Dwyer, and science communicators, during the pandemic. It found a shared concern among these professionals that the spread of misinformation had become more intense. “I’ve had heaps of them [misinformation emails], hundreds, particularly because of the work that I did in China,” Dwyer says. “I’ve never struck misinformation like this before. I’ve had unbelievable things said to me by all sorts of people writing to me often with criticisms, or with references to conspiracy theories, or to dangerous drug treatments, all sorts of stuff. It’s nonstop. It’s extraordinary. There was some of this sort of stuff around during the early Aids days, but because of social media now there is much more of it. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Going to Wuhan led to me getting emails saying that I’m a traitor to my country. You think; ‘why would people write that?’. Is it racism? Are they phobic about something? I’m trying to do the right thing for my country and other people, I’m trying to do good. People are at you, and criticise you and so on, when all you’re trying to do is do your best. “I try hard not to let it get me down.” Lead author of the BMJ Open study, Dr Lisa Parker from the University of Sydney’s school of pharmacy, said she conducted interviews with Australian researchers and science communicators and asked for their views about flawed research and misinformation in the context of the pandemic, and more generally. They shared concerns about long neglected issues in academia and media that led to misinformation, including the production of fraudulent or biased science research, pressures in research culture to constantly publish research papers, inadequate training in research misconduct, problems in the academic publishing system, and lack of public access to high quality research. They also said the loss of specialist journalists to explain and critically evaluable scientific studies, and lack of skilled science communicators, had played a part in the spread of misinformation. Parker said a possible solution was to make academic publishing more transparent by removing paywalls for access to research, something long called for. Academic journals also needed to make comments from peer-reviewers – who scrutinise papers before they are published – public. Researchers should be mandated to register their studies including the study protocols, and should make any datasets that inform their findings public, Parker added. “I think we as a science community also need to be willing to look at our own back yard as well, and acknowledge when we make a mistake,” she said. “We can’t expect people just to take what we do as face value. And you can only hope that by standing up and exposing the junk, we are showing that we are here to promote high quality, trustworthy information. I would also encourage the public to really be careful about where they’re getting their news from and to try to seek out reputable sources.” The chair of epidemiology at Deakin University, Prof Catherine Bennett, has dedicated much of the past two years to helping the media and public analyse much of the data that has emerged from the pandemic. Her public profile has led to her receiving hundreds of comments on her social media pages, linking her to questionable websites and videos that promote unproven treatments and conspiracy theories. Her approach is to respond where possible, not because she thinks she will change the minds of those who peddle misinformation, but because she wants anyone who reads their comments to also see her considered and evidence-based replies. “They often don’t understand the data, and if you ask them more questions, it actually draws out the faults in their thinking,” Bennett said. “Often, they actually don’t know how vaccines work. So you disarm them in a way, but you arm other readers by helping them to understand the flawed logic in some of this, which hopefully prevents innocent people from spreading it.”Former parliamentary staffers have urged the Morrison government and other political parties to quickly implement the recommendations of the landmark Jenkins review or face a fierce backlash from women at the ballot box. Chelsey Potter, a former Liberal party adviser, told Guardian Australia she would be contacting parliamentarians – not just coalition MPs – to push for immediate action because “there is no other workplace in our country where these findings would be tolerated”. “I’ve spoken to women in the building who say that, throughout this process, perpetrators and bullies still believe they’re untouchable – that it is all business as usual,” Potter said. “This is why we must implement these recommendations in full and to deadline. After a year in which this prime minister’s words have rarely married up with his actions, he has an opportunity to honour Brittany Higgins’ incredible advocacy. “Alongside others, I’ll be contacting MPs to push for immediate action. Any hesitation to act on women’s safety by the Morrison government, or any other party, will be noted at the ballot box. Women in our community are tired of excuses.” Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, on Tuesday recommended a significant overhaul of federal parliament’s toxic workplace culture after handing down her landmark report that found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The report calls for a new code of conduct for parliamentarians and their staff as part of normalising employment conventions. It says that code should address current legal requirements that prohibit bullying, sexual harassment, sexual assault and workplace discrimination. As part of structural reforms, Jenkins recommended the establishment of a new Office of Parliamentarian Staffing and Culture to provide centralised human resources support, including policy development, training, advice, support and education. It also recommended the creation of an Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission “to ensure that there are independent and consistent responses to reports and complaints of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault” in parliamentary workplaces. The Jenkins inquiry into parliament’s workplace culture was triggered after Higgins, a former Liberal staffer, alleged she was raped by another staffer after hours in a ministerial office in March 2019. Higgins’ allegations are the subject of separate criminal proceedings. The man accused of raping her has pleaded not guilty and denies any form of sexual activity took place. Potter has alleged she was sexually assaulted by another colleague in Canberra while working for the Liberal frontbencher Simon Birmingham in 2015. She was a key advocate ahead of the Jenkins inquiry to ensure the review maintained a workable balance between confidentiality for submitters, and the preservation of staff rights to access key records held by their former employers. Higgins echoed the call for prompt implementation on Wednesday. She said the recommendations had been informed by “the accounts of people who have had the privilege of working in the heart of Australia’s democracy and this was the abysmal treatment they were subjected to”. “They aren’t radical recommendations,” Higgins said. “It’s simply about bringing parliament house in-line with every other workplace in the country. We should expect more of our leaders. It’s time they step up and set the standard.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Jenkins review found more than half the people (51%) currently working in parliament had experienced at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault, while 77% had experienced, witnessed or heard about such behaviour. Only 11% of people who experienced sexual harassment in parliamentary workplaces reported it. Jenkins made it clear in the report she believed the first set of changes – including a statement of acknowledgment that people had endured terrible experiences in some parliamentary workplaces – could be implemented within six months. She said a realistic timetable for implementation of all the recommendations would be 12 to 18 months. Scott Morrison told parliament he looked forward to responding to the review through a multiparty process. He said Labor had responded to the report by saying it would carefully consider the recommendations, and consult with parliamentary staff as it prepared a response. Morrison said that approach was “appropriate”. He said the toxic culture identified by the report manifested in all political parties, and he said Jenkins had “done an outstanding job in identifying many of the drivers that have led to this behaviour”.Some regional Australian publishers that won multimillion-dollar government grants designed to protect local journalism jobs sacked staff and closed newsrooms before the ink was dry on their grant agreements. Guardian Australia can also reveal that the government conducted a federal seat analysis of the Public Interest News Gathering (Ping) grants to determine which seats would benefit from the $50m program. The communications minister, Paul Fletcher, did not respond to questions about the analysis. Documents obtained under freedom of information suggest the government’s rhetoric about the importance of the Ping grants to regional media companies to maintain or increase employment was not matched by reality. The grants were announced in June 2020 in response to the crisis in regional media brought on by the pandemic. Hundreds of small regional newspapers had been suspended and regional television was warning of mass job losses in their newsrooms. At the time Fletcher described local papers as the “lifeblood” of many towns and said the government was providing support because Covid-19 had triggered “catastrophic drops in advertising revenue leading to many newspapers suspending operations and threatening the sustainability of regional broadcasters”. But the FOI documents reveal a number of recipients had their grants reduced before the first payments were made, and two of the three regional networks announced plans to dramatically reduce bureaus and services within months of receiving the funds. The documents show Australian Community Media, whose parent company is Rural Press, was awarded $10m but shaved back the frequency of publication of many of its mastheads, making some digital only and folding others, despite Fletcher’s claim that the grants were designed to return suspended rural publications to print. News Corp decided not to take any grants and pursued a strategy to take many of its regional newspapers digital. The government has not explained why a federal seat analysis was relevant when determining which businesses got part of the $50m handout, but the Ping grants overwhelmingly benefited National and Liberal seats. Because of the limited nature of the FOI request, it is not possible to say whether outlets in Labor seats missed out. Money comes in, staff kicked out The Ping grants used funds from a previously unspent program designed to support regional media and were designed to get publishers to either restart newspapers or keep producing local news bulletins for TV and radio. The scheme focused on maintaining capacity for “public interest news-gathering” which was defined as news directly relevant to the local communities served by the regional outlet. “Public interest journalism is critical to keeping communities informed,” Fletcher said. “Ping will provide direct support for the continued provision of local and regional journalism, which has never been more important than in recent times when communities across Australia need access to trusted sources of news and information. “Through this program the government is providing $20m for television, $18m for publishing and $12m for radio, with funds to flow from July.” The FOI documents show that many of the key conditions for eligibility were not developed until after the grants were announced. One email, soon after Fletcher announced the program on 29 June, shows the department’s bureaucrats pondering the definition of “a journalist” under the grants program. There was no requirement to maintain the quality of the service. Another internal department note shows the conditions were so flexible that recipients only had to account for the number of journalists employed, not their seniority, so employers “could drop high profile journo and replace with a cadet”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning There were also overlapping tests for compliance, such as maintaining headcount and maintaining outlets. These soon became a problem as grant recipients continued to cut staff and services. The documents show that in some cases the government paid out 90% of the grants upfront and withheld only 10% to ensure performance, with the result that there were few consequences for recipients that continued to shed staff. Neither the media companies nor the government responded to questions about the penalties, if any, for shedding staff and cutting services. But the documents reveal there were no restrictions on shedding staff immediately after the grant period ended. ‘Exceptional circumstances’ invoked Although many small independent media companies received assistance, the lion’s share by value – more than $40m – went to major television, radio and print outlets. Those who received $500,000 or more included Nine Entertainment ($4.2m), Win ($4m), Southern Cross Austereo ($10m), Prime ($4m), Seven Queensland, ($1.8m). There were also some large recipients in print, notably Australian Community Newspapers, which received $10m, and Seven West Media, publisher of the West Australian. Nine Entertainment and Southern Cross Austereo (SCA) each applied for Ping grants to help fund their jointly operated regional television network. Nine owns a TV network which operates stations in Newcastle and the New South Wales Northern Rivers region and at that time also operated several newsrooms under its affiliation agreement with SCA, during which it provided an hour-long regional news bulletin in Queensland, southern NSW and Victoria, with Nine taking a share of the revenue in return for running the newsrooms. The documents show that almost immediately after applying for Ping funds, Nine had to revise its application when it cut the regional news bulletins to 30 minutes and reduced staff. This decision, announced in July 2020, led to a dozen job losses. The documents show that the department reduced Nine’s grant, but do not say by how much. Nine eventually received $4.03m in September 2020. This was on top of the $15m it received in JobKeeper during 2019-20 and 2020-21. Its disclosure to the ASX shows it has since chosen to return $8.8m of JobKeeper voluntarily. By March 2021, there was more bad news for journalists in the Nine/SCA regional newsrooms. Nine announced on 1 July 2021 it was moving back to an affiliation with Win, and as a consequence was axing the three SCA statewide television news bulletins in regional Queensland, Victoria and NSW. The change in affiliation meant that 15 new regional newsrooms it created with SCA closed. More than 60 staff in regional newsrooms lost their jobs. On 6 May the department wrote: “Just wondering if you were able to provide any further clarification on the affiliation agreement and impacts on the Ping agreement?” Nine confirmed it would not be providing news bulletins in southern NSW, regional Queensland and regional Victoria, as Win had its own news service in those areas. It said it was looking to redeploy staff or transfer them to Win. “Nine can ensure that compliance with the conditions under the grant agreement will continue as it has until July 1 2021.” Nine then invoked the “exceptional circumstances” clause in its grant deed. “Given Win’s own significant commitment to regional news and employment of local journalists, it does not require Nine to provide a regional news service, comparable to that provided to Southern Cross. This combination of events is an exceptional circumstance which justifies the change in our journalist numbers from 1 July 2021.” “Nine’s stipulated use of the funding was to support its owned operations in Northern NSW and Darwin, and it has used the funding for those purposes, to continue providing news services in those locations and to expand the number of staff employed in Darwin. Nine intends to maintain that increased level of employment after expiry of the Ping funding in September. This demonstrates that the purpose of the Ping program has been satisfied, where it is within Nine’s control to do so.” The department accepted Nine’s argument and has not sought return of any funds. A spokesperson for Nine said the grant in relation to the SCA newsrooms was provided to SCA, not Nine, and that its Ping grant was used to support its operations in the NSW Northern Rivers and Darwin, which is counted as regional newsroom. SCA received $10.2m in Ping grants. The freedom of information documents revealed no correspondence with SCA about the announcement in March 2021 and it appears no one was penalised for the job shedding. SCA also announced a restructuring of its radio network in August 2020, resulting in the loss of 38 jobs. The FOI request did not include information on radio operations. SCA told Guardian Australia it received $10.27m, which was evenly split among its 78 regional radio stations and its regional television network. “Since applying for the Ping grant in July 2020, SCA has increased its full time regional journalism workforce from 47 to 58 and our total regional journalism workforce from 62 to 69,” SCA chief executive, Grant Blackley, said. The money was spent on paying journalists and sales staff, buying equipment, and technology licensing and support costs. “The grant funds enabled ongoing local delivery of audio news services across SCA’s regional footprint despite local area lockdowns, and team member absences due to Covid test/case exposure isolation periods,” Blackley said. “The funds also enabled regional journalists to up-skill in digital audio ranging from best practice podcast creation to education on digital audio analytics. As a result, SCA has launched Local News daily podcasts in 17 regions … five Local Sport News weekly podcasts and 33 Local’s Guides podcasts offering weekly local event and community information.” SCA said it replaced the bulletins produced by Nine with 130 news updates each weekday. “These updates provide relevant local content into 16 regional markets across the country including NSW, Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania, and Northern Territory. A team of 12 people produce the material which equates to 175 minutes of content Monday to Friday. This material is generated by SCA team members across the country and collated in SCA’s Hobart-based news hub.” A windfall for Win Regional journalists at Win, Nine’s new affiliate, have also faced job losses. In May 2021 Win announced cuts to its regional television services, despite receiving $4.46m in Ping grants. In July Win dropped nine local TV bulletins, the biggest drop the television sector has seen since the beginning of the Australian Newsroom Mapping Project in January 2019. The Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance estimates up to 20 journalists and camera operators lost their jobs that month. But Win and the department say there was no breach during the grant period. The department withheld from Guardian Australia all documents relating to its discussions with Win, saying: “There has been no confirmation that they reduced staff, bulletins or mastheads at the commencement or during the PING grant period.” Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young called on Win at the time to hand the money back because the funds were granted to keep journalists in jobs and newsrooms operating. “The Morrison government should be making sure recipients uphold the intent of the program and do the right thing with taxpayer money,” Hanson-Young said. “Minister Fletcher needs to be asking Win to return the millions it has received.” The department told Guardian Australia discussions with Win had indicated there were no changes to services and staff which would affect the grant period. “The department accepted Win’s six-monthly and final acquittal reports, which showed Win had met the requirements under their funding agreement,” officials said. “Any changes made by WIN following the completion of their PING Grant is a commercial decision for WIN.” Prime, the Seven network’s regional affiliate, has not publicly indicated any job losses that would affect its grant of $4.7m. However, the documents show Seven Network Queensland faced questions about staff reductions between the announcement of Ping and when it signed the agreement in September 2020 which resulted in its grant being pruned to $1.87m. The documents reveal several email exchanges with the then-general manager for regional Queensland, Ben Roberts-Smith, about whether there had been further job losses. But the documents do not reveal how many jobs were ultimately lost. Seven Queensland explained the discrepancies by saying it was hard to keep staff in Queensland because they often left for the city for career advancement. Fletcher has defended the operation of the Ping scheme. A spokesperson for the minister said: “Among the conditions attached to the grants was the maintenance of the activity for which they were awarded. If any of those activities were withdrawn, then the grant was adjusted. “The $50m PING program provided vital support for media outlets in regional and remote areas of Australia at a time of unprecedented challenges. This well-targeted program made an important contribution to sustaining public interest journalism through the pandemic.” The chief executive of the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance, Paul Murphy, said the union was uncertain how many jobs were lost. “Any support for public interest journalism is welcome,” he said. “The problem is the design of the support and the government doesn’t listen to our or the communities’ concerns. At the moment the government money doesn’t guarantee outcomes for the community, it only seems to deliver to private companies.”We live in strange economic times. In the three months to September, Australia’s economy shrank 1.9% – the third-biggest quarterly fall ever – and yet it felt rather underwhelming, and if anything a bit of good news. In the run up to the release of the gross domestic product figures, economists were predicting a fall as large as 3.1% in the September quarter, so when the bureau of statistics revealed it was “just” a 1.9% fall, it didn’t seem all too bad: If the graph does not display please click here Compared to 12 months ago, the economy is about 3.9% bigger, which is well above the long-term average and also an indicator of how weird things are at the moment – on one measure things are horrific, and on another they’re booming. It’s a reminder that how we measure the economy is not just reliant on what we count but the period over which it is counted. If we only care about three-month chunks, then these latest figures show the economy has collapsed and is now some 4% below where we should be given the long-term trend: If the graph does not display please click here But if we count GDP as how much Australia produces in a 12-month period, then in the past three months our economy actually grew – albeit just 1% - and it continues to slowly recover to the long-term trend level: If the graph does not display please click here This shows that when times are crazy, it’s best to look at things from a number of angles and make use of as much perceptive as you can. For example, on Wednesday in parliament’s question time the debate between Labor and the Coalition was over how Australia was performing compared to the rest of the OECD countries. Labor was quite rightly pointing out that Australia had the worst growth in the September quarter across the OECD. But the treasurer countered that compared to pre-pandemic levels, Australia was doing better than most G7 nations (if only about the middle of the OECD on this measure): If the graph does not display please click here So what was the cause of the fall in GDP? Well, you don’t need to be much of an economist to know – the lockdowns in New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT: If the graph does not display please click here So massive was the impact of the lockdowns that the collapse of household consumption in NSW, Victoria and the ACT alone reduced national GDP by 2.7 percentage points, while the same spending in all other states increased it by 0.2 percentage points: If the graph does not display please click here As it turned out, the drop in household spending also helped GDP because the biggest contributor to GDP growth in the September quarter was the fall in imports – down 4%. Because imports are in effect money leaving the economy, when imports fall, our GDP grows. The collapse in household spending also caused the second-biggest rise in our savings ratio – up from 11.8% in Jun to now 19.8%. When you can’t go to the shops, or go on holidays, you save more: If the graph does not display please click here The other big driver was government spending. Were it not for government spending and investment, GDP would have fallen 2.8% in the quarter rather than 1.9%. Similarly almost half of all the economic growth over the past year has come from the public sector: If the graph does not display please click here This is also the case for household incomes. In the September quarter, real household disposable income per capita rose 4.2%, and 60% of that came via the rise in social benefits amid the lockdowns: If the graph does not display please click here One area of government support that does appear to be easing is that for the residential construction sector. Certainly the lockdowns have had an impact, but over the past six months dwelling construction, and alterations and additions to houses, have declined from the peak of the homebuilder period: If the graph does not display please click here And so we now look ahead. The December quarter will likely experience a surge of household spending in the south-eastern states, but also a drop in government support. It means in three months’ time in March (perhaps just before an election) we will likely see another near-record GDP growth figure, and no doubt the government will be upbeat. But we will again have to wait to see the true health of the economy, when we finally get to a point when for an ongoing period lockdowns and virus restrictions are not creating weird and somewhat unreal figures.I’ve been with my boyfriend for almost seven years, and our relationship has gotten stale. We both feel that we are not very happy, but we don’t want to break up, as we love and care for each other. We’ve both been working from home throughout the pandemic, and work long hours. No doubt this has impacted our relationship, and our sex life is poor. I just feel like relationships should be more than this, that they should add something to your life. Right now we are more like flatmates. Although I have considered splitting up with him, money is an issue. I don’t know if I could afford living alone and my parents live far away, so I couldn’t live with them. Is this something that happens to every long-term relationship, or has ours just run its course? You asked whether it’s every relationship’s fate to turn moth-eaten, and while my strong belief is “no”, I think that isn’t actually the question. This isn’t about what everyone else’s relationships are like – it’s about what you want yours to be like. Every relationship on earth could look “like flatmates” and it would still be legitimate to decide “I don’t want that”. So don’t look too much through the lens of what’s normal. Look through the lens of what’s worth wanting. Do you want a better relationship with this person, or a different relationship altogether? From where you’re standing, it can be hard to answer that question. We get tangled in loops of expectations and counter-examples, every thought trailing clouds of analysis. Is this normal? What’s a good decision? How do I know? But I think when love’s in town, you know. Do you root for each other in the real way? Are you on each other’s side? Does your dynamic feel like a high five or a wink, or something else joyful between equals? Can you imagine years of conversation with him? Do you make each other laugh? If the answer is “yes”, and you do you want this relationship – just better – it may be helpful to think about how you can get from love back to desire. They’re almost photonegative emotions: love is a ribcage-expanding gratitude for what we have, whereas desire is a longing for what we don’t have. Love responds to reality; desire, to imagination. They’re right on the edge of being contradictory, so it’s famously easy for one to extinguish the other: many beautiful young women know that the people who most desire them are the least equipped to love them; and conversely, many in your position find that the person they adore most is the least able to ignite their desire. But the fun of a long-term relationship lives precisely in this almost-contradiction. You get to be at once familiar and unknown to each other; you get to play in that space, mutually changing aspects. You can be kaleidoscopic, multitudinous, contradictory. To do that, you have to help each other shift. While many would suggest spending more time together, I think sometimes the reverse can help: try to rediscover the other in “significant other”. Lean into what makes you separate, so you have something of yourselves to bring to each other, besides the space between you. If you want your sex life to change, too, it’s worth talking about it directly. Do not expect it will improve when everything else does; it can be the exact other way around. Sex should make you feel free, happy, celebrated. If it doesn’t, it’s worth finding out why, with specific words. From there, ask what kinds of touch do make you feel good, and try to play together in those. Trust, intimacy and the electricity of touch don’t have to aim at – or be exhausted by – sex. Indeed they’re better when they don’t. If, after all that, it turns out you just want a different relationship, don’t feel bad. I once Googled “how to know if you should break up with your boyfriend” and the first result was “because you Googled this”. Relationships take work, but that doesn’t mean they have to be hard. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereIf left unchecked, I can have a pretty obsessive personality. Right now I’m obsessed with different types of sugar-free chewing gum; before it was claw machines at arcades; tomorrow it’s probably going to be collecting washi tape. So when I find something on the internet that makes me feel some kind of strong emotion (right now it’s TLC’s Curvy Brides Boutique clips; before it was video compilations of soldiers returning home to surprise their loved ones; tomorrow it’s probably going to be Pat McGrath makeup videos) I tend to go down a deep rabbit hole unearthing more content that gives me a similar emotional rush. I guess it’s better than having an addiction to hard drugs? Maybe not? Who can say! Either way – enjoy! 1. Debbie Downer at Disney World This, alongside the sketch of Liza Minnelli trying to turn off a lamp and the Surprise Party sketches, is my all-time favourite Saturday Night Live sketch. I love watching comedic actors corpse – especially during high-stakes, live TV – and seeing Amy Poehler cut her teeth before her career took off is a real treat. 2. Man eating apples while juggling You’ll need the volume on high with this one. It’s the sheer talent matched with the laboured grunting, for me. Also just knowing that this man likely consumed hundreds of apples while practising this trick – chef’s kiss. 3. Spinning helicopter woman I know this video is contentious but there is something very funny about human beings who are genuinely trying to help, and that help making the situation infinitely worse. (And the woman ends up being totally fine!) 4. Not all heroes wear capes Elsa Majimbo’s TikToks of her wearing sunglasses and eating chips while spouting truths are unrivalled. 5. Cat vacuum This is just so silly. 6. Dissatisfied teacher Every teacher you’ve ever had. 7. Don’t run from the Lord I am the pig. The audio is anyone who has ever rung my doorbell. 8. Simpsons v Liberals I’m sure there’s probably Simpsons versus Labor/Greens/various independents Instagram accounts out there but this one does a really funny job of skewering the Coalition in ways that diehard Simpsons aficionados will appreciate. 9. Keira Knightley goes to the park Luke Millington-Drake does hilarious impressions and does bear an uncanny resemblance to Keira Knightley. Also check out his impressions of a midwest mum and Hugh Grant. 10. WAP in Cantonese Anyone who understands or speaks Cantonese knows that it’s quite a literal language and how do I put this … not a very sexy-sounding language, either? So hearing a rendition of WAP in Cantonese sent my family and I into hysterics. Michelle Law is a writer and actor based in the Eora nation. Her book Asian Girls are Going Places is out in January. You can follow her on Twitter and Instagram.Storm Arwen was “an event the likes of which we haven’t seen for 60 years” and the UK needs to be prepared for more extreme weather due to the climate crisis, according to the business secretary, as more than 30,000 homes remain without power. Kwasi Kwarteng said the majority of those people will have power restored “in the next day or two”, although he conceded some in remote locations may have to wait much longer. Paying tribute to the three people who died in the storm, the business secretary said the exceptionally strong winds of almost 100mph had damaged power lines and required an enormous restoration effort by engineers. The most severely affected areas are the Wear valley, surrounding Eastgate and north Northumberland, the north Peak District and the south Lakes in northern England, and Aberdeen and Perth in Scotland. Urging those still without electricity to call 105, the minister conceded that the emergency power cut phone number did face initial pressure with unacceptable delays in the wake of Storm Arwen over the weekend, with reports of people having to wait up to two hours to get through. “Clearly Storm Arwen was an event the likes of which we haven’t seen for certainly 60 years since the record starts. We have to be prepared for similarly extreme, difficult weather conditions in the future. We have to make sure that our system is resilient in that eventuality,” the business secretary told the House of Commons. He was responding to questions from the shadow climate change secretary, Ed Miliband, who said: “Faced with the climate crisis, extreme weather events will sadly become all the more common in the future. We cannot be this vulnerable in the future. There is real concern that some lessons haven’t been learned and on this occasion we must face up to those lessons and learn them.” It will be at least the end of the week – seven days after the devastating storm first hit – before electricity is restored to some people, the Energy Networks Association (ENA) has said. Engineers have reconnected 97% of homes affected by the power cuts, with the majority of those still affected living in remote locations where access for crews is difficult, according to the ENA. Welfare centres and hot food have been provided, with the energy network companies working in partnership with local resilience forums, emergency services, local authorities and the British Red Cross. Chris Burchell, the managing director of Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks, apologised to customers. He said the impact of the storm had caused “catastrophic damage to the electricity network across the north-east of Scotland and is the most significant event we have ever had to deal with in the area in a generation”. The storm’s gale force winds also brought down thousands of trees, including irreplaceable specimens, according to the National Trust. The conservation charity said the full extent of the damage was still being assessed but was likely to cost at least £3m to repair. More than 50 trees were uprooted at the trust’s Bodnant Garden in north Wales, including a 51-metre tall coast redwood, as well as many hybrid rhododendrons that are unique to the property. Storm Arwen is also thought to have blown a rare sea turtle 5,000 miles off course, after it was discovered on a beach in north Wales. A couple from Holywell were walking their dog on Talacre beach in Flintshire on Sunday when they discovered the motionless creature. Marine experts identified the turtle as an Atlantic ridley, one of the most endangered species of sea turtle, which generally live off the Gulf of Mexico. The couple revived the turtle, which was suffering from cold-water shock, and transferred it to Anglesey Sea Zoo where it will spend the next few months recuperating before being released back into its natural habitat.Bosses of pubs, restaurants and hotels across the UK are warning they are already receiving cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties and events amid fears about the Omicron variant, just as hospitality businesses were hoping to welcome many customers during the crucial festive season. Surinder Arora, the chair of the Arora group, said customers had already cancelled events due to take place at the 16 hotels it owns in and around London. “It is definitely having an impact on our bookings, not just on bedroom bookings but also meetings and events,” he said. “A lot of them are being postponed.” Arora said businesses had been delaying meetings and events planned to take place at the group’s newly opened hotel in Surrey. He added that travellers who were booked to stay at the group’s hotels next to Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted airports were cancelling their December trips because of concerns about quarantine regulations. News of the Covid-19 variant had come at a difficult time for the hotel industry, Arora said. “We were trying to rebuild our business, us and the airlines, after the 8th of November when the US opened up, we all thought that was a step in the right direction.” Large and small venues across the UK have reported cancellations. Colin Wilde, the managing director of Castle Rock brewery in Nottingham, said he had had “a handful” of cancellations of Christmas parties and wedding celebrations booked for December at the 20 pubs the company operates across the east Midlands. “It’s too early to say if it’s all of them, it’s certainly a handful,” Wilde said. “I think there is a bit of nervousness and employers are wary about getting people all together.” Christmas trading is vital for hospitality venues, many of whom rely on making enough money in the festive period to get them through the leaner months at the start of the new year. The loss of a second Christmas season in a row would be extremely damaging for many businesses. “It’s the last thing we needed at this time of year. I’m hoping Christmas won’t go the exact same way as last year,” Wilde said. “When we have debts to pay, loans and VAT, what we need to do is generate income”. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of the trade body UK Hospitality, said its members were starting to see bookings cancelled, which would have a serious financial impact on their businesses. She said there was no doubt that fears about the Omicron variant would “have a dampening effect just as we were about to head into our busiest trading period, and any drop in revenue pushes businesses back to loss-making as government support like grants and furlough has fallen away”. Hugh Osmond, the founder of Punch Taverns, said: “We are seeing that some of the people in large organisations who organise bigger events are taking the cautious view because I guess they feel some overriding responsibility. We are not seeing that in young people.” “Social interaction is, after food and water, the most important thing for a human being’s mental health,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. The prime minister said on Tuesday that people should not cancel upcoming parties and gatherings, only hours after one of the UK’s most senior health officials urged people to reduce their social contact. Sacha Lord, the night-time economy adviser for Greater Manchester, said he had been informed by operators of several hospitality businesses across the city that they had received cancellations on Monday for Christmas parties. “They needed a good December behind them,” Lord said. “Now this has thrown a grenade in.” Lord and Osmond unsuccessfully brought legal action against the UK government in the spring, when they tried to bring forward the date for pubs and restaurants to be allowed to serve customers indoors.The EU’s plan to invest €300bn (£255bn) in global infrastructure will be better than China’s belt and road initiative, the European Commission president has said, as she announced a strategy to boost technology and public services in developing countries. Ursula von der Leyen said the EU’s global gateway strategy was a positive offer for infrastructure development around the world and based on democratic values and transparency. China’s belt and road initiative, often described as a 21st-century silk road, has enabled Beijing to extend its international influence by investing in more than 70 countries, accounting for half the world’s population and a quarter of GDP. Forecast to cost up to $1.3tn, it has helped countries in Asia, Africa and eastern Europe to get railways and ports connecting them to China, while often becoming heavily indebted to Beijing. Von der Leyen, who came to office pledging to lead “a geopolitical commission”, said countries did not have enough options on finding investment for big infrastructure projects. “When it comes to investment choices, they are currently relatively limited. And the few options that exist too often come with a lot of small print, which includes big consequences, be it financially, politically, but also often socially.” China launched the belt and road initiative in 2013, but Von der Leyen was bullish that the EU could close the gap, although European spending was forecast to remain lower than the Chinese equivalent. “Yes definitely we are able to do that,” she said when asked. “Countries [had] their experience with the Chinese investments and they need better and different offers,” she said, adding that the EU plan was “a true alternative”. She pledged the EU would take a different tack. “We want to show that a democratic, value-driven approach can deliver on the most pressing challenges,” she said, citing the EU’s priorities of a green economy and digital technology. Under the plans, the European Commission, the EU’s 27 member states and its lending arm, the European Investment Bank, would aim to generate €300bn in public and private funds by 2027, about €60bn a year. Possible projects the EU could support include green hydrogen, underwater data cables and spending in schools. Analysts at Morgan Stanley have forecast the belt and road initiative could cost between $1.2tn and $1.3tn by 2027, although estimates vary. The EU’s plans were aligned with Joe Biden’s build back better initiative, Von der Leyen said. She promised countries receiving EU-backed loans would define their priorities, while also reiterating the the bloc’s green and digital policy goals. Reinhard Bütikofer, a German Green MEP who has long argued that the EU needs to take a more hard-headed approach to China, described the launch of the strategy as a breakthrough and an important step for the EU. “Many partners around the world are ready to work with us to realise the global gateway strategy, in Asia, Africa and the Americas,” he said. “Now it’s a matter of effectively setting up the management of the strategy. Let’s walk the talk.” But some cast doubt on whether the plans could succeed. Jonathan Holslag, a professor at the Free University of Brussels, argued that the commission was starting from “a rather naive view of the geo-economy”. Writing for the EU Observer website, he argued: “The Chinese Silk Road is and will remain primarily the result of Beijing earning hundreds of billions of euros from trade with the west and investing them abroad. “As long as China runs a trade surplus of €540bn a year with the west, the global gateway’s €60bn [a year] will remain a bit like mopping up.”Exeter’s Rob Baxter says he wants his players to use any lingering bitterness over the Saracens salary cap saga as extra motivational fuel when the two fierce Premiership rivals meet at Sandy Park for the first time in almost two years this Saturday. The Chiefs’ director of rugby, who is hoping to welcome back a trio of fit-again international forwards in Luke Cowan-Dickie, Jonny Hill and Scotland’s Jonny Gray, was among those upset by Saracens’ behaviour before their demotion to the Championship and suggested that, in certain cases, resentment might still be smouldering. “In sport you use anything you can,” said Baxter, whose squad won the Premiership and European double in 2020 after Saracens were fined and given a points deduction for breaking salary cap regulations. “If some players are still feeling that’s an issue that’s great. They should use that as motivation. It might still feel a personal thing and that’s fine. Everyone’s got to find their own reasons. That’s what you’ve got to do. It’ll be exactly the same for Saracens.” When the sides last met at full strength in December 2019, there was a mass pitchside scuffle that resulted in the substituted and previously sin-binned Exeter prop Harry Williams receiving a red card. Allegations of sledging were subsequently made against some Saracens players but Exeter won the game 14-7 and Sarries, who had to spend last season playing in the second tier, have not visited Devon since. If the mutual antipathy is not quite on a par with Manchester United versus Liverpool, Baxter is not averse to such comparisons being made. “If people think it’s that big, that’s great for both of us. You want to be involved in big fixtures that attract a lot of support and a lot of coverage. I’m delighted if that’s how people see it and we’ve got to make sure that brings the best out of us. “Everyone’s aware of the salary cap stuff and there are obviously international-quality head-to-heads on the pitch as well. For all kinds of reasons it’s a really big and exciting game. Saracens are above us in the league and we want to be further up the league than we are. There are lots of motivations for us and we should use every one of them.” His Saracens counterpart, Mark McCall, however, has made clear he does not want his players to get too carried away. “We try not to hype things up too much,” he said. “Our motivation is very inward in lots of ways and that’s served us well down the years. We want to be a really consistent team who don’t pick and choose when we get more motivated or when we don’t. But there are obviously going to be games that certain individuals are going to really enjoy getting up for, and for some people that might be Exeter.” Cardiff say they will fulfil their European Cup fixtures this month despite the looming unavailability of players marooned in South Africa this week by Covid-related issues. While the bulk of the party, which includes 15 Wales internationals, are due to return to the UK on a morning charter flight, they will be required to quarantine in a hotel in England for 10 days while six squad members must remain in Cape Town after returning positive Covid tests. Fourteen members of Munster’s travelling party are also being required to complete a 10-day quarantine period in South Africa. Wasps have signed the Argentina loosehead prop Rodrigo Martínez. The 23-year-old made his Test debut in September and featured against France last month.Has Boris Johnson delivered his 2019 promise to “fix the crisis in social care once and for all” with Wednesday’s white paper? The PM had already capped care costs at £86,000, ending most of the “catastrophic” impact on inheritances – albeit still leaving the poorest families vulnerable. He announced a new tax to raise £5.4bn for social care over the next three years. And now the government has sketched out a 10-year vision of more independent, flexible care with a new generation of “extra care” housing schemes and improved technology to help people stay at home. Jotted on a spin doctor’s notepad, that might seem enough to declare victory. But the frontline looks very different. Alice Ushamba, who runs a home care agency in Portsmouth, this week described how she has only three home-carers on her books when she would normally have 20. An attempt to fly in reinforcements from Zimbabwe has been scotched by Omicron. Councils reckon 1.5m hours of commissioned care couldn’t be delivered between August and October owing to staff shortages. In North Yorkshire, Mike Padgham, who runs the St Cecilia’s care home in Scarborough, has 20 vacancies and is “giving the statutory minimum [of care] when you want to be giving in excess of that”. Sixteen per cent of social care settings in England are ranked as needing improvement or inadequate by regulators. The flashing red lights don’t end there: 400,000 people are waiting for care assessments or services and some relatives still face the anguish of being locked out of seeing loved ones in their care homes. If things are tough now, wait for 2040, when there are forecast to be a million more people aged over 85 than in 2018. Crossing the gulf between the government’s version of a successful policy and the one demanded by the reality above may boil down to one question: does society believe that providing the best care when our loved ones are at their most vulnerable is a priority? When it comes to medical care in the NHS, the answer has long been yes. Cross the border to social care and the answer, when it comes to funding, has repeatedly been no. This may seem strange given 10 million adults in England are involved in social care as recipients or paid and unpaid carers. Yet of the £12.4bn the new health and social care tax will raise annually, only £1.8bn will go to social care, and most of that to capping costs to protect the value of estates. It is widely estimated that somewhere between £7bn and £10bn a year extra is needed just to maintain current standards of care, which are far from world-beating. The most urgent need is carer pay, which averages £9.01 an hour and unless addressed will have “a ripple effect across the wider health and care system that risks becoming a tsunami of unmet need”, the Care Quality Commission regulator has warned. But does the public have the stomach to pay more for staff and better care centres that deliver the independent lives people want? By focusing on capping care costs, governments have repeatedly framed the social care problem as a matter of personal finances. They may have judged voters correctly. People approve more of the new tax when it is described as helping pass on an inheritance than when it is cast as guaranteeing new money for the NHS and social care, according to research by Engage Britain. Maintaining wealth is understandably more appealing than contemplating the hard reality of a parent’s end of life care needs. But when people receiving care are suffering as a result of the current crisis, increased resources may be considered non-negotiable. It may be that the only way a government can create the political room to deliver them is to be honest and admit to the public how bad things have got.That’s all for today. Thanks for following along with us and be sure to check back shortly for a full report from Game 5. “Today is basically not about him defending well but me not using all the opportunities I had,” Nepomniachtchi says. “In general I believe these games are pretty much tense and despite it’s all draws, we are trying to play reasonable chess.” Carlsen is asked whether the fifth straight draw matters within the context of the match. “I think there is some magical cutoff point where draws instead of just being normal they become a problem,” he says. “But I don’t think we’ve crossed the Rubicon yet.” Once again Carlsen was first to deviate with 8. ... Rb8, a rare move at the top level. Asked why he chose to do so, he says: “I thought it’s always good to spring the first surprise. Unfortunately it didn’t work out very well for me. I think he chose a very good line. Actually, I kind of knew it’s hard to completely equalize in this line. I thought there’s limited material and it’s fairly symmetrical so I’ll figure it out if it comes to that. It was a little bit more unpleasant than I hoped.” Asked whether he’s disappointed with the outcome, Carlsen says: “It’s OK. Obviously I’m not thrilled with a game where I’m ... unless you count Ra2 and Ra1 at the end, I didn’t make a single active move. That’s not ideal. Doesn’t win you many games. But the result obviously is fine.” Remarkably, the players combined for one inaccuracy in today’s game: when Nepomniachtchi played 20. Red1 instead of c4. Asked whether he considered c4 in first question of the post-game press conference, the challenger says: “Of course I considered c4 as one of my options. The position was so pleasant it was hard to choose the type of advantage I wanted to see on the board.” Asked whether he was relived when his opponent played 20. Red1, Carlsen comes clean: “Yep!” He elaborates: “I definitely considered [c4] the main option. I thought everything else was kind of manageable. Obviously it’s always a bit worse but it feels like my position is not going to get worse, it’s going to probably gradually improve seeing as I have very few real weaknesses. [c4] was definitely what was worrying me the most there. Seeing Rd1, I kind of thought that the worst was over.” Immediately after stepping out of the studio, Carlsen is asked why he spent 20 minutes on 19. ... Qe8. “There were some different things to consider,” he says. “Mainly I was choosing between Qe8 and Re8, since I thought I needed to get Be6. But, yeah, there were some subtle differences I thought. But at the end of the day I couldn’t find a way to refute Qe8, so I went for that. I thought his best chance was to go c4 after that move and try to get c5, because I thought after what he did then I should gradually be fine.” He continues: “I do think I somewhat underestimated the ending. I realized that it was worse of course, but it was probably a little sadder than I had hoped. But fortunately I managed to move out my pieces in a decent way and I think when I managed to trade one knight it was all over. There was nothing left for him. And possibly there was nothing he could do to avoid that.” Asked whether there were any especially uncomfortable moments in the endgame, Carlsen says: “I think that’s always a question. I think in many situations the computer will say lots of moves are fine while sitting at the board you feel like you have to be precise. That’s really hard to say. I don’t know. I think overall it was fairly holdable and if there were some difficult moments then neither of us saw them.” Carlsen is then asked about the shape and tenor of the match so far, which is in a 2½-2½ deadlock with nine contests remaining. “Obviously the tension is rising and it’s becoming clearer and clearer that it’s going to be hard for either of us to break through,” he says. “But I do get a rest day now and a chance to prepare for two white games in the next bunch of games. That’s good but it’s not easy.” The players are looking at their scoresheets. The draw appears imminent. And after 41. Rd1 Ra2+ 42. Rd2 Ra1 43. Rd1 it’s finished: the contestants shake hands and a fifth straight draw is in the books. Nepomniachtchi plays 37. Ra5 after nearly 10 minutes. Carlsen plays 37. Ke8. We may be looking at a draw by repetition. The Nepomniachtchi plays 38. Rd5 and Carlsen responds with 38. ... Ra8. Matters looking ever more drawish after 39. Rd1 Ra2+. The challenger offers the rook trade (40. Rd2) and Carlsen declines it (40. ... Ra1). An extra hour is added to the clock for both players after the 40th move but this one appears bound for a peaceful result. The knights have been traded off the board (35. Ncxd6+ Bxd6). Nepomniachtchi follows by repairing the structure on the kingside (36. h5 Bf8). A quite unpleasant position for Carlsen but it’s not immediately clear how Nepomniachtchi will penetrate the fortress. Nepomniachtchi plays the ambitious 32. g4 after six minutes. A knight trade is imminent following the flurry of moves that follows (32. ... Kf7 33. h4 Bf8 34. Ke2 Nd6). Carlsen with nearly 26 minutes on his clock, Nepomniachtchi with just over 40. Both are due to receive an extra hour following their 40th moves under the format. Nepomniachtchi plays 31. f3 after more than 11 minutes. Very passive. Carlsen thinks for two minutes before maintaining the symmetry with 31. ... f6. Carlsen opts for the predicted 30. ... Rd8. The moment of truth for Nepomniachtchi. Will the challenger make a statement of winning intent with the g4 pawn push or will he be content to sit on this position ahead of tomorrow’s rest day? Carlsen plays 28. ... Nf8 after five minutes. Nepomniachtchi counters with 29. Nf5 after less than three minutes. Carlsen takes about a minute before continuing his plan with the solid 29. ... Ne6. Another swift reponse by the challenger (30. Nc4) adding to the pressure on black’s dark-squared bishop on c4. That leaves essentially a forced reply as any other response by Rd8 to defend the bishop will create problems for Carlsen. Carlsen goes with 27. ... Ne8 after exactly 11 minutes. He’s under 39 minutes with 13 moves to until the time control. A highly technical position, this. Nepomniachtchi thinks for four minutes before opting to improve his king (28. Kf1). Into the endgame we go. Nepomniachtchi plays 27. Ra6 after five and a half minutes, ostensibly targeting black’s dark-squared bishop on d6. ... and Nepomniachtchi opts for 22. ... Nd2 after more than 18 minutes of deep thought. Carlsen then initiates a bishop trade and the challenger follows with a queen exchange (22. ... Bxa4 23. Qxa4 Qxa4 24. Rxa4). Also gone are a pair of rooks amid the ensuing burst of activity (24. ... Ra8 25. Rda1 Rxa4 26. Rxa4 Rb8). White still holds a microscopic advantage but this is an easier position to hold for black. Carlsen defends the queen with 21. ... Bd7 after three minutes of thought. Nepomniachtchi, still more than a half-hour ahead on time, has spent the last 12 minutes (and counting) contemplating his response ... Nepomniachtchi takes more than 10 minutes before playing the calm 20. Red1, but he’s still comfortably ahead on time. Looks like he’s out of his prep. Carlsen answers with 20. ... Be6 before the challenger attacks the black queen with 21. Ba4. The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse evaluates the position as dead even. After nearly 20 minutes, Carlsen goes with 19. ... Qe8. That leaves him with less than 58 minutes to make his next 21 moves until the time control. Nepomniachtchi is more than 45 minutes ahead on the clock. From here, the engines like the c4 pawn push best. Meanwhile, both contestants have stepped away from the board. Carlsen has been looking at this position for more than 13 minutes (and counting). He appears to be in search of a plan having fallen 32 minutes behind Nepomniachtchi, who by all indications is still in his opening prep. Nepomniachtchi plays 18. Ng3 after three minutes. Carlsen answers with 18. ... Ng6. The challenger takes two more minutes before getting his dark-squared bishop into the mix with 19. Be3. White enjoys a slight positional edge with black’s light-squared bishop in the weeds. Carlsen spends nine more minutes before deciding on the logical 17. ... Ne7. The champion is down more than a half hour on the clock. Nepomniachtchi, who’s stepped away from the board, will return to this position. Carlsen plays 15. ... Bd6 and Nepomniachtchi spends nearly six minutes before responding with 16. Qc2. The Russian challenger’s longest think of the game so far by some distance after blitzing out his opening moves. Carlsen then spends eight minutes before the prophylactic 16. ... h6. Nepomniachtchi, who appears to still be in his prep, immediately answers with 17. Nf1. Carlsen continues to take a lot more time with somewhat uneasy body language. Carlsen plays 13. ... d5, which appears to be the first new move of the game. Nepomniachtchi responds quickly with 14. Nbd2 followed by an exchange of e-pawns (14. ... dxe4 15. dxe4). The challenger, who’s yet to spend more than a half-minute on any of his moves, is already more than 20 minutes ahead on the clock. Carlsen releases the tension after (11. ... b4 12. d3 bxc3 13. bxc3). Nepomniachtchi has spent less than a half-minute on each of his moves so far. Carlsen has spent more than three minutes on each of his last two and has been inspecting this position for more than five minutes. Carlsen plays 8. ... Rb8, a rare move at the top level but one he played against Duda at the World Cup. Then a pawn exchange (9. axb5 axb5) followed by more familiar Ruy Lopez theory (10. h3 d6 11. c3). That’s followed by some curious body language from the world champion. Nepomniachtchi, playing with the white pieces, opens with 1. e4. Another Ruy Lopez follows (1. ... e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6). And the moves that follow mirror the openings from the first and third games (5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 O-O 8. a4). Both players addressed the elephant in the room after Tuesday’s contest. Specifically, the active streak of 16 consecutive draws in classical world championship games. Carlsen drew the final two games with Sergey Karjakin in 2016, all 12 against Fabiano Caruana in 2018, then four straight to open this year’s tie with Nepomniachtchi. Carlsen, who’s spoken on multiple occasions about altering the format, was diplomatic when the question was put to him yesterday. “There’s a saying that if you don’t have anything nice to say, you shouldn’t say anything at all,” he said. “So I’m going to invoke that particular saying right here.” Nepomniachtchi, for his part, was less keen on change. “It’s hard to say because I believe the importance of traditions in chess is really big,” he said. “I guess whatever works you shouldn’t try to make it work better in order not to break it. I believe this system with the matches is more or less fair.” Carlsen, who turned 31 yesterday, was asked whether playing on his birthday affected his approach or mindset. “I would have of course loved to have had a rest day on the eve of my birthday so I could have had at least a token celebration. Apart from that, I would say it’s pretty good. I think I won at least one game in the World Cup against (Farrukh) Amonatov in 2005. And obviously the match in 2016 was decided on my birthday in the tiebreak. It’s going to take a lot for me to have bad reflections of me playing on my birthday, even though I lost to (Wesley) So last year.” As far as I can tell, the only player to compete in a world championship game that started on his birthday (until Carlsen yesterday and in 2018) was the great William Steinitz in Game 16 of his doomed title defense against Emanuel Lasker on 17 May 1894. It wasn’t his best day. A quick refresher on the format. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. (Both Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi are on two points apiece after Friday’s Game 1, Saturday’s Game 2, Sunday’s Game 3 and Tuesday’s Game 4) The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. Players cannot agree to a draw before black’s 40th move. A draw claim before then is only permitted through the arbiter, if threefold repetition occurs (as occurred in Game 4). If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day (16 December) in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Notably, Carlsen’s second and third title defenses both came down to tiebreakers. But many believe the increased length of this year’s match (from 12 to 14 games) and the stylistic matchup at hand promises a decisive result in regulation. Hello and welcome back for the fifth game of the World Chess Championship. The overall score in the showdown between Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi in Dubai remains level at 2-all following draws in Game 1, Game 2, Game 3 and Game 4 with 10 scheduled contests remaining. The first three games were fighting encounters notable for Carlsen making early material sacrifices in exchange for long-term initiative, demanding extraordinary accuracy from the Russian challenger for him to emerge with a result. Yesterday? Not so much. Carlsen failed to get his teeth into Nepomniachtchi’s Petrov with the rare 18. Nh4!? and the affair fizzled out to a draw after 33 moves and 2hr 37min. Carlsen, who failed to strike with the favored white pieces, was asked whether he felt like the peaceful result felt like a setback. “It’s OK,” he said. “I’ve started with a lot more draws than this [in the 2016 and 2018 world title matches]. When you play a forced line as today, you don’t expect to hit very often. But the idea is to hit once in a while, take your opponent by surprise, and the other times you’ve usually got to be very safe. “Obviously I would have loved to win, would have loved to find more chances than I did, but I think overall it’s a normal result against a world-prepared opponent.” For those of you just coming aboard, Carlsen, who turned 31 on Tuesday, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Vishy Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, also 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April. The best-of-14-games match is taking place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games, as happened in Carlsen’s second and third title defenses). We’re a little more than 40 minutes from today’s first move, so not much longer now. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s his report from Tuesday’s fourth game from Dubai.At next week’s People’s Choice Awards, Kim Kardashian will receive the fashion icon award for “single-handedly transforming the fashion industry through her innovative designs and trend-setting style over the past decade”. Her critics might argue that she has achieved this through high-level media manipulation, but there is no denying that she deserves recognition for making fashion a conversation topic again. Kardashian has captured the viral nature of the internet “moment” and bottled it. Like her body and the tabloid engine that follows her and her sisters, fashion has become another prop to ensnare eyeballs on multiple devices. Her ability to do this began in 2014 when she appeared on the cover of Paper magazine, the same year she wed Kanye West (who would go on to play a sort of stylistic Henry Higgins figure to her Eliza Doolittle). The cover with Grace Jones collaborator Jean Paul Goude was a masterclass in “internet breaking”. It showed her in a black couture dress, balancing a champagne glass bubbling over with fizz on her bottom (which has become her USP). Going forward, these photo-ops became mini mission statements. Here she was using fashion to titillate the tabloid mentality, spark controversy and let us know she was in on the joke (the coverline of the magazine was literally: ‘Break The Internet’. And it did). It is a tactic she has gone on to use repeatedly, picking clothes fresh off the runway (or even pre-season) to conjure up this magic. This year at the Met Gala, her Balenciaga full-body covering outfit had multiple interpretations: a nod to the fetish fashion revival, a reference to West’s Donda album and a moment dripping with comedic potential that was made to be memed. Kardashian has been expertly schooled in the world of virality, thanks to her mother Kris and close friend Paris Hilton, who know how to find opportunity in even the most inopportune moments. There is, however, a darker side to this attention-grabbing. Called out many times for blackfishing, whether for over-tanning, cultural appropriation of hairstyles or words, she doesn’t seem to have learned from these missteps. Hopefully, at some point, she will. In July this year, I wrote about how memes have become essential to the conversations around fashion – and in the case of Balenciaga and Moschino, literally woven into the fabric of it. All too often on the red carpet, or at a “private” moment captured by the paparazzi, Kardashian is at the centre of these conversations, disrupting style norms, one unexpected fabric or weird accessory at a time.An 11th hour attempt has been launched to try to halt plans by Shell to explore for oil in vital whale breeding grounds along the Wild Coast of eastern South Africa. Campaigners filed an urgent legal challenge against the seismic survey, which was scheduled to begin on Wednesday, in an effort to prevent it harming whales, dolphins and seals in the relatively untouched marine environment. The challenge brought by four environmental and human rights organisations was heard in court on Wednesday afternoon, and the judgment on whether to allow the exploration to move ahead is expected to be delivered on Friday. The intervention is expected to delay Shell’s plans to explore for oil in the sensitive marine environment, which will include firing extremely loud shockwave emissions down through 1.8 miles of water and almost 35 miles into the seabed to create a seismic survey of the area. Opposition to the plans has grown steadily in South Africa over recent weeks due to fears that the work could damage the ecologically diverse and sensitive environment of the Wild Coast, which runs along the Eastern Cape province. The law firm behind the last-minute legal challenge, Cullinan &amp; Associates, said the decision to allow Shell to move ahead with plans to explore for oil in the area amounts to “unjust administrative action” because it was taken using an approval process that has since been replaced by stronger environmental protections. The plans were approved in 2014 by South Africa’s then minister of mineral resources, Ngoako Ramatlhodi, before the country’s one environmental system legislation was put in place to align its mining and environmental regulation at the end of that year. Cullinan &amp; Associates has argued on behalf of Border Deep Sea Angling Association, Kei Mouth ski boat club, Natural Justice and Greenpeace Africa that Shell’s plans would have “direct and dire impacts” on the local environment as well as the social, economic and cultural rights of local communities. These communities depend heavily on eco-tourism and fishing for livelihoods and subsistence, and “safeguard this land as sacred and deeply connected to their identity and heritage”, the firm said. “The needs and rights of these communities, the stewards of our seas, land and biodiversity, far outweigh the selfish interests of companies like Shell.” Happy Khambule, a senior climate campaigner for Greenpeace Africa, said: “Shell’s activities threaten to destroy the Wild Coast and the lives of the people living there. We know that Shell is a climate criminal, destroying people’s lives and the planet for profit. “South Africa’s problems do not require violent extraction nor destruction of the environment and community livelihoods. The best and most immediate solution is a just transition to renewable energy, ensuring safe and decent jobs, and energy access for all,” he said. Shell plans to pursue exploration in an environmentally sensitive ecosystem months after the International Energy Agency said no new fossil fuel development would be compatible with the world’s climate targets. The company also plans to use a planning “loophole” to produce oil from the Cambo field in the UK’s North Sea – which is operated by the private-equity backed oil firm Siccar Point – without submitting to a new climate compatibility test put forward by the government in March. A spokesperson for Shell said the company had long experience in collecting offshore seismic data and would apply stringent controls to protect the environment and minimise the impacts on fish, marine mammals and other wildlife. “South Africa has already had many similar surveys safely completed off our coastline by Shell and other operators,” they added. South Africa’s Department of Mineral Resources did not respond to a request for comment.The US says it has evidence Russia has made plans for a “large scale” attack on Ukraine and that Nato allies are “prepared to impose severe costs” on Moscow if it attempts an invasion. Speaking at a Nato ministers meeting in Latvia, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said it was unclear whether Vladimir Putin had made a decision to invade but added: “He’s putting in place the capacity to do so in short order, should he so decide. “So despite uncertainty about intention and timing, we must prepare for all contingencies while working to see to it that Russia reverses course.” He said he had found solidarity among his fellow Nato ministers in the Latvian capital, Riga, saying the alliance was “prepared to impose severe costs for further Russian aggression in Ukraine” and would “reinforce its defences on the eastern flank”. While repeating the US position that Washington is “unwavering in our support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and committed to our security partnership with Ukraine”, the secretary of state stopped well short of saying the US or the alliance would intervene militarily. “Should Russia follow the path of confrontation, when it comes to Ukraine, we’ve made clear that we will respond resolutely, including with a range of high impact economic measures that we have refrained from pursuing in the past,” Blinken said. He did not specify the nature of those measures, but most observers believe that the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project, intended to bring Russian gas to Europe, could be cancelled if there is another invasion. The new German coalition government is already sceptical about the scheme. Blinken said the US would spell out the consequences to Russia’s leaders “at the appropriate time”. His remarks represent the strongest warning from the Biden administration so far, and were delivered a day before Blinken is due to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Stockholm under increasingly tense circumstances. Blinken pointed to “evidence that Russia has made plans for significant aggressive moves against Ukraine”, adding those moves included “efforts to destabilise Ukraine from within, as well as large-scale military operations”. Ukrainian government estimates of the number of troops near its borders range from 90,000 to 100,000. Russian forces staged two major military exercises in the region, in April and September, and each time left a significant number of troops and substantial supplies of equipment. Commercial satellites have shown concentrations of military vehicles. Blinken pointed to other possible indicators of Russian intentions. “In recent weeks, we’ve also observed a massive spike – more than tenfold – in social media activity pushing anti-Ukrainian propaganda, approaching levels last seen in the leadup to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2014,” he said. He urged a return to diplomacy on the basis of the Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015, involving a Russian withdrawal and greater autonomy for the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine. The Kremlin has said Putin will shortly hold a summit with Joe Biden. The White House has signalled it is open to the idea but no date has been agreed. On Wednesday, Putin proposed holding negotiations to ensure Nato would not accept new members along Russia’s borders. “In dialogue with the United States and its allies, we will insist on developing concrete agreements that exclude any further Nato advances to the east and the deployment of weapons systems threatening us in close proximity to Russian territory,” he said during a ceremony at the Kremlin. “We propose to start substantive negotiations on this matter.” The suggestion that Russia and the US in effect hammer out spheres of influence was direct even for Putin, who has denied that Russia’s recent buildup near Ukraine is anything but defensive in nature. The Biden administration is seeking to avoid being drawn into a situation where the US is negotiating Ukraine’s future over the heads of the government in Kyiv and its European neighbours. The policy emphasis has been on shoring up EU and Nato solidarity in the hope of deterring the Russian threat. Blinken said that before meeting Lavrov on Thursday, he will have consulted his Nato counterparts and the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba. “I think I’ll be able to reflect not just the view of the United States, but the view of all of the Nato allies, both in terms of the concern that we have, and as well the conviction that if Russia were to engage in further aggression against Ukraine, there would be serious consequences,” he told a Latvian television journalist. The focus on the placement of weapons systems in eastern Europe also appeared to evoke earlier crises from his time in power, specifically the placement of air defence systems in Poland and Romania that Russia claimed could be a staging area for missile strikes on Moscow. Putin warned on Tuesday that Moscow could be forced to target Europe with missiles if air defence systems were sent to Ukraine. The accession of former Soviet and communist countries into Nato has long been a bugbear of Putin’s, who has argued that the alliance violated assurances given to the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev that it would not expand eastward. Putin gave a seminal address at the Munich Security Conference in 2007 where he accused Nato powers of “a serious provocation that reduces the level of mutual trust”.The Duke of Sussex has warned of “corporate greed and political failure” prolonging the Covid pandemic, comparing a “spectacular failure” of global vaccine equity to the struggle by millions to access HIV medicines. In a letter read out at a World Health Organization (WHO) and UNAIDS event on World Aids Day, Prince Harry said lessons must be learned from the HIV/Aids pandemic. Vaccinating the world was a “test of our moral character”, he wrote. “It’s time to draw from the lessons we learned throughout the HIV/Aids pandemic, where millions died unnecessarily due to deep inequities in access to treatment. “Are we really comfortable repeating the failures of the past? Everything I’ve learned from the youth of Sentebale [his charity in Lesotho and Botswana] tells me not. They see how repeating these mistakes is destructive and self-defeating, it is a betrayal of the next generation.” He said his late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, who helped to highlight the work of Aids charities, would be “deeply grateful” to the scientific community for their work in combating the disease. Harry and his wife, Meghan, have been vocal campaigners for Covid vaccine equity. In a video for the People’s Vaccine, co-narrated by Harry and the UNAIDS executive director, Winnie Byanyima, he said: “There are striking parallels between Covid-19 and another deadly pandemic, one that emerged 40 years ago – HIV. This is a story about how corporate greed and political failure have prolonged both pandemics and what we can do to stop it.” The video featured clips of Diana meeting Aids patients, and of Harry and Meghan at the Global Citizen Live event in September, which called for world leaders to adopt vaccine equity policy. Harry said: “By ending vaccine monopolies and sharing technology, companies in the developing world can start producing Covid vaccines too … Break the monopolies … Deliver a people’s vaccine.” In the letter, addressed to the WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Harry wrote: “Vaccinating the world is a test of our moral character and we are experiencing a spectacular failure when it comes to global vaccine equity. Similar to the Aids crisis, we’ve yet again revealed over the past year that the value of life depends on whether you were born and/or live in a rich nation or a developing country.” He described the emergence of the new Omicron variant of Covid-19 as of “deep concern”. “Now more than ever, the voiceless majority of the world needs to be heard, and the onus is on our leaders to end this pandemic. Anything less is self-defeating,” he wrote. “That means breaking pharma monopolies that prevent vaccines from getting to communities around the world in need; that means governments honouring their promises and delivering the doses that they committed; that means pursuing international pandemic agreements with strict timelines and holding each other accountable to them; that means treating all human lives as equal lives.”The actor Bernard Holley, who has died aged 81, was a well-known face on British screens for 50 years, notably a four-year stint in the popular BBC police drama Z Cars, highly regarded since the 1960s for its ground-breaking social realism. Originally cast as an unnamed PC, he was quickly taken on as a regular. Over 250 episodes between 1967 and 1971 he became familiar to the viewing public. PC Newcombe was a dependable, genial copper, and Holley’s unshowy, authentic performance was a central asset to the series, which was hugely popular at the time. “It came as a wake-up call to television,” he said about the show. “Gritty, northern, tough – people just loved it.” And BBC staff crammed into the galleries just to see this new way of making television, he said. A subtle actor with a natural twinkle and a warm, reassuring presence, he rose through the TV cop ranks, later playing a detective-inspector – and the love interest of series star Jill Gascoine – in another mould-breaking police series, The Gentle Touch (1982-84). He ultimately made chief constable in A Touch of Frost (1999, 2003) – the lead actor, David Jason, personally requesting him for the role. Bernard was born in Eastcote, Middlesex (now in the London borough of Hillingdon), the middle son of Doris (nee Martin) and Fred, a heating engineer. Fred died when Bernard was two years old, and Doris later married Henry Wilton. They had a further six children, which resulted in a happy, close-knit family. He was educated at Kilburn grammar school but left aged 16 to work as an office boy. The class clown, he always felt that he was performing to an imaginary camera and hankered to act – and so he enrolled at the Rose Bruford drama college, Sidcup, in 1961. Upon graduation he made his professional debut in Arnold Wesker’s Chips with Everything (Lincoln, 1963) followed by repertory theatre in Manchester, Derby and Hornchurch before his London debut at Regent’s Park open air theatre in 1966. That year he made his first television appearance in a BBC schools programme, Men in History, and after episodes of The Newcomers soap (1966) and Softly, Softly (1967), he joined Z Cars. When he decided to leave the show he first defied typecasting with a strong turn as the double-agent Gilbert Gifford, opposite Glenda Jackson in the acclaimed Elizabeth R (1971) and then in Doctor Who as the titular nemesis in The Claws of Axos (1971) with Jon Pertwee. This involved a spandex costume, ping-pong balls for eyes and the application of gold spray paint to his face and hair. He had already played a friendly scientist opposite Patrick Troughton in 1967’s The Tomb of the Cybermen, and in 2011 and 2015 revived both parts – with Doctors Tom and Colin Baker – for the audio company Big Finish, for which he also played memorable villains in Dorian Gray (2014) and Survivors (2015). Other TV roles – of many, he was rarely out of work – included Mr Hurst in Please Sir! (1972); the lead in both series of John Esmonde and Bob Larbey’s superior nostalgic comedy Now and Then (1983-84); Richard, Lesley Joseph’s love interest, in Birds of a Feather (1998); the Rev Green in Hollyoaks (2000-01); and four different parts in the daytime soap Doctors (2001-14). A successful working relationship with the producer Clive Doig also made him a regular face on children’s television, displaying his versatility as part of the resident ensemble in both The Deceivers (1981) and Eureka (1982-86). He was a familiar storyteller on Jackanory (1974-91), his renditions of Joan Eadington’s Jonny Briggs stories being especially well loved. With his modulated tones and clear diction – sturdy, reassuring, or cushion-soft as needed – Holley was always in demand for documentary narrations, video games and adverts. He even spoofed his voice-over man persona in the 2013 short film A Voice to Die For. On stage he took leading roles in Sleuth (Bromley, 1977), The Norman Conquests (a favourite, playing the title role at Leatherhead in 1978), Bedroom Farce (Leatherhead, 1979), Wife Begins at Forty (national tour, 1982), Noises Off (Savoy, 1983), and joined a number of productions at the Orange Tree, Richmond: most recently Mary Broome in 2011. In 1972 he appeared in the West End in My Fat Friend (Globe, Shaftesbury Avenue – now the Gielgud) with Kenneth Williams. Holley, a great listener and kindly man, is one of the few to escape a wrathful comment in Williams’s famously waspish diaries. He met Jean Brockie, a model, in the 60s when he gatecrashed her farewell party – she was due to emigrate to Canada the following week but after meeting him she decided to stay. They married in 1964. She survives him, as do their son, Michael, grandchildren, Marly and Isla, and seven of his siblings. • Bernard John Holley, actor, born 9 August 1940; died 22 November 2021For months, CNN’s primetime anchor, Chris Cuomo, refused to cover the multiple scandals surrounding his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo. Chris Cuomo said it would be a conflict of interest for him to report on the sexual harassment, corruption and misuse of public funds his brother had been accused of. But many wondered how CNN could justify what amounted to a blackout of one of the nation’s top news stories during the news network’s most-watched time slot. Finally, last night, CNN announced that Chris Cuomo would be “suspended indefinitely” from the network, not because of his inability to cover his brother’s scandals but because he’s become a part of them. According to evidence made public from the New York attorney general’s investigation into Andrew Cuomo’s workplace misconduct, Chris Cuomo used his position as a journalist to ferret out information to help his brother, such as how far along Ronan Farrow was with his first story about the governor. Top gubernatorial aide Melissa de Rosa told the investigation that Chris Cuomo frequently initiated contact with her, and text messages show him pleading “please let me help with the prep” on 3 March and offering “I have a lead on the wedding girl being put up to it” the following day. The evidence suggests that Chris Cuomo was dishonest in August when he said during his show, “I never made calls to the press about my brother’s situation.” It was already known that Chis Cuomo had taken a role advising his brother during his scandals and in May, he apologised on air for doing so and was not further reprimanded by CNN. But after this new evidence was released, CNN announced that Cuomo would be suspended from the network indefinitely. In a statement a CNN spokesperson said: “When Chris admitted to us that he had offered advice to his brother’s staff, he broke our rules and we acknowledged that publicly. But we also appreciated the unique position he was in and understood his need to put family first and job second. However, these documents point to a greater level of involvement in his brother’s efforts than we previously knew. As a result, we have suspended Chris indefinitely, pending further evaluation.” It’s unclear whether the suspension is paid or unpaid. Both CNN and Chris Cuomo have wider questions to answer about how they enforced impartiality in their coverage of Governor Cuomo. During the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic, the network allowed Chris not just to cover his brother, but air buddy-comedy style entertainment segments which bolstered his public image. In one, the pair jostled about who was the better looking or had the biggest nose (with Chris at one point bringing out a giant prop cotton swab suggesting his brother would need it). The segments might have raised more eyebrows at the time if the nation hasn’t been in a state of emergency. When criticism did arise, the network argued that they made an exception to a rule banning Chris Cuomo from reporting on his brother that had been in place since 2013 because “Chris speaking with his brother about the challenges of what millions of American families were struggling with was of significant human interest.” The decision to suspend their own rule benefited CNN: the ratings for Chris Cuomo’s show climbed during the months of the brothers’ stunt shows. Cuomo did robust reporting on other elements of the Covid-19 outbreak but he could have been interviewing any American about the challenges their families were facing, instead of bantering with his brother about who was “the meatball” as he did on 31 March 2020, less than a month after the first Covid case in New York was detected, and less than two weeks after his brother and Bill de Blasio, New York City’s mayor, delayed closing schools with petty political squabbles. The dozen or so episodes with his brother served as free press for the governor’s million-dollar book deal about how he handled the crisis. Still, Chris Cuomo argued that he was simply acting as a concerned and loving brother, as anyone might, and many seemed sympathetic to that argument. When messages indicating Chris Cuomo’s involvement in his brother’s defense first came to light in August, CNN employees anonymously expressed frustration at the network’s refusal to censure him. “The fact that Chris Cuomo wasn’t fired over his inappropriate conflict of interest in actively affecting a news story is not only irresponsible of CNN, but also a disgrace to journalism,” one employee told BuzzFeed News at the time. Another griped that it was typical of the network, a place where “the more prominent you are, the less the rules and discipline apply to you.” Marissa Hoechstetter, a high-profile victims’ rights advocate and survivor of sexual abuse, cautioned against trusting CNN with sensitive stories if Chris Cuomo continues to face no consequences. “As a survivor who has trusted CNN with my story, it is deeply disturbing that Chris Cuomo remains employed. His unethical behavior – plus that of anyone giving him any info in the first place – should be disqualifying for a journalist. If they keep him on, they can’t be trusted,” Hoechstetter tweeted on Tuesday. And Charlotte Bennett, one of the young women who reported experiencing sexual harassment in the governor’s employ, issued a statement condemning the network’s inaction. “Just like his older brother, Chris Cuomo used his time, network and resources to help smear victims, dig up opposition research, and belittle our credible allegations,” Bennett said Tuesday. “Anything short of firing Chris Cuomo reflects a network lacking both morals and backbone. Does CNN stand by journalistic integrity, or will it simply excuse his actions because Chris Cuomo drives ratings?” For his part, Chris Cuomo didn’t address his role in his brother’s debacle, but on his radio show Tuesday complained that his brother was denied “due process”. But how else would the investigation that turned up the messages and transcripts be described? Andrew Cuomo was afforded, to date, at least two thorough investigations into the complaints about his conduct. He had access to legal counsel and an apparently robust team of people working in his defense. By allowing the Cuomos their buddy routine during the pandemic, CNN was implicitly endorsing a politician they considered to be one of the good guys (it’s difficult to imagine Andrew Cuomo would have been offered the same leeway were he a Republican governor). That suspension of ethical guidelines has made things very uncomfortable for the channel, and its star host, now that normal politics has resumed and both brothers appear mired in scandal.It was once the launchpad for a national department store chain, now the former Binns site in Sunderland’s High Street West will be fostering the musical and catering talents of young people. Futureheads, Field Music, and Frankie &amp; the Heart Strings, will kick off the first main gig at the former department store, which is being reincarnated as Pop Recs, a music and arts venue and community hub. The Grade II-listed building opened as Binns haberdashery store in 1811, trading there for about 80 years. It later spent time as an ironmongers, and provided bedsits and a squat. Now, after a £1m renovation which has taken three years to complete, the site houses a music venue, record shop, cafe, gallery and kitchen where young people can gain catering skills. It also accommodates a youth mental health charity and market where teenagers can sell products. A neighbouring store is set to house the first high-street outlet for Sunshine Co-operative, a local online grocer. The project is one of dozens around the country where communities, local authorities, social entrepreneurs and charities, are raising funds to bring former department stores, left vacant by the collapse of chains such as BHS and Debenhams, back into use. While Sunderland’s scheme is based around music, in Southend, Essex, the former Havens department store, an art deco masterpiece that resembles a mini version of London’s Selfridges, is now home to a thriving community centre focused on supporting older people. In Great Yarmouth the abandoned Debenhams site has been transformed into the Primeyarc gallery under the auspices of a local charity, while in Ryde, on the Isle of Wight, the former Elizabeth Packs department store, which closed five years ago, is now an arts space which has plans also for a cafe and permanent homefor the Shademakers carnival group. Martin Hulse, trust manager of Tyne &amp; Wear Building Preservation Trust, said the trust had worked in partnership with Sunderland city council, and the funders, the Architectural Heritage fund and Historic England, to revive the former Binns building. Pop Recs, a local social enterprise, came up with the creative ideas to bring the space alive. “The social outcomes that Pop Recs can deliver really makes it special. I worked with them to create the vision. Without their dynamism I wouldn’t have been able to do my bit,” Hulse said. “The returns on social outcomes of community engagement, improving security of the area and bringing footfall and making it a nicer place to live, are really difficult things to monetise but that is what we are delivering – huge change for the area. You now see people on the streets at night.” Matthew Mckeague, chief executive of the Architectural Heritage Fund, said that social enterprises, springing up around Britain, were often able to use their local knowledge and connections to find solutions for old buildings where the commercial world could not. “They have become a bigger part of the economy, particularly in places suffering from economic deprivation,” said Mckeague. The heritage fund, a charity which promotes reuse of historic buildings, has £15m to invest in 100 similar projects around the UK, about eight of which have already begun. Mckeague added: “In a lot of places the cost of doing up a building is more than the value of the building itself. No bank is going to put money behind that and the landlord will say it is not worth it. There has been a cycle of doing nothing. A not-for-profit can raise money through grants and different types of social investment that a private owner can’t do.” Community projects, sometimes backed by crowdfunding or council cash, also have the advantage of being able to work quickly to bring spaces back to life, in a semi or undeveloped state, helping to keep people visiting town centres. There are questions about the long-term potential for such projects, particularly given the hefty costs of redeveloping a large department store buildings, which could be beset with structural problems or riddled with asbestos. But Mark Robinson, chair of the High Streets Task Force, a government-backed body which aims to support the revival of town centres, said community projects were one of a range of tactics that would be needed to provide new anchors for high streets and town centres where departments stores were less likely to be a draw now. “About 160 Debenhams stores have closed and there will probably be over 100 different solutions for those buildings. That takes us away from clone towns which we have fallen out of love with, putting back in place what communities want and need,” he said.The occupants of a boat that sank last week in the Channel causing the deaths of at least 27 people may have tried to contact the UK authorities, the Home Office has acknowledged. Dan O’Mahoney – the clandestine channel threat commander – said he could not say with any certainty if those onboard had rung the UK for help. Speaking to parliament’s human rights committee, O’Mahoney said HM Coastguard was now investigating. The two survivors from the incident last Wednesday claim those onboard made repeated calls to the British and French authorities as their flimsy dinghy began to sink. According to one of the survivors, the British responded by telling them to get in touch with the French. Relatives of one of those who died, Twana Mamand Muhammad, told the Guardian he was aware of the dangers of the Channel crossing and had taken emergency numbers with him before he set off, including 999. It was his seventh attempt to reach the UK, they added. The Guardian contacted HM Coastguard on Tuesday and asked about the claims in the survivors’ account. A spokesperson said it had received more than 90 alerts from the Channel last Wednesday, including emergency calls. They added: “We responded to all of them.” But HM Coastguard has repeatedly refused to clarify whether it received a distress call or calls from the sinking boat in the early hours of Wednesday morning. The group set off from the French coast near Dunkirk at about 10pm on Tuesday evening. Their dinghy ran into difficulties about three-and-a-half hours later, when its right side began to deflate. The motor then stopped working. They said that two people on the boat who speak fluent English made at least two calls to the UK, begging to be rescued. The home secretary, Priti Patel, appointed O’Mahoney last year as “small boat commander”. According to the Home Office, his brief is to make the Channel route of entry to the UK “unviable” for the growing numbers of migrants setting off from Calais and Dunkirk. Asked by Harriet Harman MP on Wednesday about the survivors’ claim, O’Mahoney said: “At this stage I can’t tell you with any certainty whether we definitely received a call from that boat or not. It is a question for the coastguard and they are working through it.” He said HM Coastguard responded as soon as the French launched a search and rescue operation, after French fishers spotted bodies floating in the water. This was at 12.58pm on Wednesday – about 11 hours after the survivors claim they first raised the alarm. Speaking to the Kurdish station Rudaw, Muhammad – a survivor from Somalia – said one person in the boat who spoke fluent English rang the UK authorities and the person on the other line requested their location. “Before we could give it we fell into the water,” he said. The Home Office denies claims that British authorities failed to respond and said there was “no evidence” to the contrary. The French launched a huge search and rescue operation, which the British authorities joined, sources said. The UK Coastguard sent a helicopter to assist once a distress signal was sent out, they added. According to the second survivor, Muhammad Ibrahim, those onboard made several frantic attempts to raise the alarm. The boat began to sink three-and-a-half hours into the crossing, he told Rudaw, with the occupants debating whether to press on or turn back. “The right side of the boat was losing air. Some people were pumping air into it and others were bailing the water from the boat,” Ibrahim, 21, told Rudaw, speaking from hospital in Calais, where he was recovering from hypothermia. “Then after a bit, we called the French police and said: ‘Help us, our pump stopped working.’” “Then [we] sent [our] location to the French police and they said: ‘You’re in British waters.’ So we called Britain. They said call the French police,” Ibrahim claimed. “Two people were calling – one was calling France and the other was calling Britain.” The calls were made in English, he confirmed. Ibrahim claimed the boat had reached the UK zone by the time it started sinking. “The British police didn’t help us. Then, as we were slowly drowning, the people lost hope and let go. Then the waves took us to back to France.” He added: “Britain should have come onboard and rescued us. They didn’t help us or do anything for us.” O’Mahoney told the committee that it might be impossible to show whether the boat was ever in UK waters before eventually being located in French waters. “To manage your expectations though, chair, it may never be possible to say with absolute accuracy whether that boat was in UK waters or French waters prior to that,” he said. One of those who is said to have rung the UK for help was Mubin Hussein, 16, from the Iraqi Kurdistan town of Darbandikhan, Ibrahim said. Mubin was on the boat together with his mother, Khazel, 45, and sisters Hadia, 22, and Hasti, seven. Khazal’s husband, Rezgar, said his last contact with his family was at about 10pm on Tuesday, adding: “After that I didn’t hear from them again.” Relatives of the dead are now making a formal complaint accusing the UK government of negligence. Zana – whose brother Twana perished – has compiled a letter signed by 11 relatives. They claim they were tracking the boat’s progress via Facebook Messenger in real time and believe it had reached the UK maritime zone. The French authorities have formally denied receiving distress calls. No details have been given pending a criminal investigation. The families say some of those onboard had British sim cards in their phones. The network connection that night was good and clear, they add. As the boat drifted after its motor broke and lost more air, the passengers, including children, slipped into the water, Ibrahim said. They clung to the deflated dinghy and each other and cried out: “Please God, rescue us!” By dawn, as the half-sunk dinghy floated back towards France, most were dead. “Everyone could take it until sunrise, then when the light shone, no one could take it any more and they gave up on life,” Ibrahim said. “One by one, they let go of each other and the boat.” Additional reporting by Jon Henley in Paris and Martin ChulovIn the past three months 29 European Women’s World Cup qualifying games have concluded with a winning margin of seven goals or more. England’s 20-0 hammering of Latvia broke a record set by Belgium’s 19-0 defeat of Armenia last Thursday to become the highest-scoring Women’s World Cup qualifier ever. These results are not the exception that they are in the men’s game; when the haves and have-nots meet they are increasingly the rule. The gap is getting bigger and it is not a result of some countries investing and some not (although that is a factor in a minority of countries) but of the rapid but uneven development of international women’s football – of some countries investing at a much faster rate and to a greater extent than others are willing or able to. The recent run of mind-boggling scorelines has prompted many to question the format that has allowed these potentially morale-crushing results to happen all too frequently. Scoring 20 goals in a game to take your goal difference to +53 across six matches, having not conceded, should be cause for celebration but England’s head coach, Sarina Wiegman, was among the dissenting voices on Tuesday night, calling for a rethink on a set-up that enables disparities to be so brutally exposed. “You want competitive games and these are not competitive games,” Wiegman said. “You want to develop the well-developed countries and the countries that are not that far along. In every country, you want to develop the women’s game, but I don’t think it’s good that the scores now are so high. “I know that has the attention of the federations and Uefa and Fifa, and I think that’s good because I don’t think a 20-0 is good for the development of anyone.” The idea of pre-qualifiers for major international competitions is not new or unique to the women’s game. After England men’s 5-0 defeat of San Marino in March, Gary Lineker prompted a backlash when he tweeted: “Surely we’ve reached the stage where the lowest ranked nations should play amongst themselves to qualify for the right to play at this level. It’s become absurd.” Many were unhappy at the implication that England’s men were above playing lower-ranked nations. That England had drawn Andorra, the lowest-ranked nation in pot five, and San Marino, the lowest-ranked team in pot six, was also a statistically unlikely and unlucky occurrence. The difference between lower-ranked women’s and men’s nations, though, is vast. Yes, lower-ranked men’s teams can include part-time players but the resources available, size of the talent pool and quality of coaching on offer to small and under-funded men’s nations are hugely superior to what is on offer to equivalent level teams in women’s international football. One Guardian reader commenting below the line after Tuesday’s game, who said their daughter received a first cap for Latvia, reported: “There are lots of terrific people in Latvian football doing their best (I am thinking of one coach who would collect players who lived in the sticks to get them to training – used to take him nearly 3 hours: wonderful gent). But, at the end of the day, there are only about 200 women playing – and this team were missing their best players too.” The desire to let lower-ranked sides, in this context, compete against the best has to be balanced both against the effects of humiliating defeats and to what extent these games actually help develop the weakest and strongest nations. In the current format nobody wins. England do not benefit from 64 shots without reply as the team prepare for much sterner tests and do not deserve to be criticised for celebrating goals, particular record-breakers and first senior international goals. Latvia do not benefit from being pummelled and barely touching the ball (14% possession). There can be a legitimate argument to say that the result might not have been as large had the game not been played on a weekday evening when a number of Latvia players were unable to get out of work or school to travel. Taking these types of limitations into account should be the minimum reply. But pre-qualifiers and increased centralised funding and coaching support for lower-ranked nations have to be discussed. Uefa has said it is something it is looking at, with its head of women’s football, Nadine Kessler, telling the Associated Press in October: “The qualification systems for the World Cup and Euro, which Uefa organises and not Fifa, are already going to be examined very closely and we will see an improvement in the future. “I think we need to really take a look closely to have more evenly matched matches, but also to have some opportunities to still see where’s the bar and to compete against the very best.” The sooner something is done, though, the better.Boris Johnson has not denied that parties were held in Downing Street last winter despite the lockdown at the time, saying only that no Covid rules were broken. But Johnson has denied a report that his flagship pledge to build 40 new hospitals has been labelled as unachievable by an official watchdog - even though the health department has confirmed this is the case. Experts advising the government called last week for “early and robust actions” to limit the transmission of the Omicron Covid variant, minutes reveal. Jeremy Hunt, the former Tory health secretary, and Labour launched stinging attacks on the government as it unveiled long-awaited social care reform plans lacking significant new funding to resolve the current crisis. UK ministers should face charges of “misconduct in public office” over their handling of the coronavirus pandemic, an unofficial inquiry has said. Bosses of pubs, restaurants and hotels across the UK are warning they are already receiving cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties and events amid fears about the Omicron variant, just as hospitality businesses were hoping to welcome many customers during the crucial festive season. A doctor who was one of the first people in the world to become infected with the Omicron variant says he believes he caught the virus when he was in London for a major medical conference attended by more than 1,200 health professionals. People should not assume that Covid will evolve to become a milder disease, the senior epidemioligist Prof Neil Ferguson has warned, adding that the threat posed by the Omicron coronavirus variant will not be clear until the end of December. Heathrow has reopened a terminal dedicated to processing passengers flying into London from countries on the UK’s Covid red list. The parliamentary commissioner for standards has begun a formal investigation into Jacob Rees-Mogg after a complaint from Labour that he failed to declare that he received £6m in cheap loans from one of his companies. A man has been detained by armed police after breaching security to enter the grounds of the Houses of Parliament. David Lammy, the new shadow foreign secretary, has criticised Liz Truss for posing for a photograph on a tank while on a visit to Estonia yesterday. In an interview with Radio 4’s PM programme, he said: As I come into this brief, real concerns with Ukraine, Belarus, issues with China, Iran, I’ve got to say the photo ops are not where this is. So I was surprised to see Liz Truss attempting her best impression of Margaret Thatcher. I just think these are very serious times and one’s got to approach the job very seriously. That got the comment it did for very obvious reasons; that she took her time out, frankly, to evoke an image that seemed more to do with appealing to a small section of the Conservative party and not really the country. Lammy was referring to Truss’s ill-disguised leadership ambitions. According to the latest ConservativeHome survey of party members, Truss is rated more highly than any of her cabinet colleagues by Tory members, and she has held the top slot in this regular survey now for a year. Here is the Truss image from yesterday. And here is the iconic Thatcher picture that Truss seemed to be referencing. The BBC has spoken to someone who attended the party at Downing Street on 18 December reported by the Daily Mirror this morning. (See 9.30am.) According to the BBC, the source said “several dozen” people were there, food and drink were laid on, people played party games and the event went on until past midnight. Maroš Šefčovič, one of the European Commission vice-presidents, has told members of Northern Ireland’s legislative assembly (MLAs) that the UK should “reciprocate” the efforts made by the EU to compromise in the talks on the Northern Ireland protocol. Giving evidence to the assembly’s executive committee, Šefčovič said: Our proposal will deliver significant changes, they amount to a new model for the implementation of the protocol and can deliver a real difference for all people and businesses in Northern Ireland. We made an important move towards the UK with far-reaching proposals for solutions, we need the UK government to reciprocate this now, we have no time to lose, and what is most pressing is the need to ensure continued supply of medicines from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. Commenting on the latest Omicron variant figures (see 3.38pm), Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has said he expects cases to go up. As I’ve said recently, we do expect cases to go up .... Our strategy is all about buying time, buying time so that we can assess it, but also [so] that we can build our defences and we’ve been really clear in the last few days, I think, that the best way to continue to defend ourselves is through our fantastic vaccine programme. These are from Andrew Harrop, general secretary of the Fabian Society, the Labour thinktank, on the social care white paper. The latest edition of the Guardian’s Politics Weekly podcast is out. As the PM contradicts his own scientists, Jessica Elgot and Gaby Hinsliff discuss the government’s response to the new Covid-19 Omicron variant. Plus: is Keir Starmer’s new shadow cabinet an election-winning Labour team? Starmer’s former director of communications Ben Nunn gives us his take in an exclusive first interview since he resigned last summer. The government wants schools in England to remain open right up until the end of term and has rejected union proposals for early closure before Christmas to act as a Covid circuit-breaker. Will Quince, minister for children and families, told MPs on the Commons education committee that individual schools and directors of public health would be monitoring the situation locally, but said the government plan was for schools to remain open. The NASUWT teachers’ union in Northern Ireland has suggested that schools close early in the run-up to the Christmas holidays because of a spiralling teacher shortage due to sickness and Covid-related absence. The committee heard that some schools in England have also been forced to send children home to study online because of staff absence. Quince insisted however: “The position of the government is we want all education settings open.” He also defended the introduction of masks in communal areas in schools as a precaution, after MPs questioned the efficacy of face coverings in school settings, their impact on education, and the fact that children were being asked to wear masks when office workers were not. Quince was also asked about school nativity plays which appear to have become central to backbench concerns about children enjoying a full school experience, and said any cancellations were “deeply regrettable”. He said: Unfortunately as MPs we very rarely get to go to our children’s but often get to see them online, but they are wonderful, wonderful things. But there will be some areas where there is a higher prevalence of transmission. The directors of public health guidance will say, ‘Look, actually, big gatherings probably isn’t the right thing to do.’ Or, ‘If you’ve got parents coming into school to watch a play, wearing a mask might be a sensible precautionary measure.’ So I think, ultimately, on balance, it comes down to trusting schools and headteachers and directors of public health. Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative chair of the Commons health committee, has described the white paper on adult social care published today (see 1.33pm) as a “disappointment”. In a statement issued on behalf of the committee, which is cross-party, but with a government majority, he says: This is a disappointment given the extent of the crisis in social care and the predicament of people whose quality of life is dependent on a solution being found. Providing an additional £1.7bn in funding over three years falls far short of the annual £7bn sum that our evidence found would be necessary to fix social care. The white paper states that it provides an ‘ambitious 10-year vision’, but it doesn’t acknowledge the scale of extra resource needed to realise that vision, based on the crisis the sector faces right now. The government deserves credit for grasping the nettle of social care reform, and no one can argue with the laudable aims of providing choice, quality and fair access. However, these plans represent three steps forward and two steps back. Though there is progress with a cap on care costs, it could have gone further. Failures in social care will continue to put pressure on our overstretched hospitals with patients who cannot be safely discharged exacerbating the winter crisis and thousands of people will not get the care they need because the carers do not exist. Organisations linked to employers, workers and users in the care sector have welcomed particular aspects of the white paper, and there is praise for the government for at least addressing the issue. But overall many of the comments released about the white paper echo what Hunt said about the contents being disappointing overall. Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary, said the white paper did not address the key problems. She said: Britain needs high-quality care and high-quality employment for those providing it. But the biggest problem for both care users and the burnt-out workforce is the staffing crisis caused by a generation of underfunding, fragmentation and privatisation. A credible plan for social care must transform the pay and conditions of the workforce. But the white paper fails to do that. And it has no answers for care workers who want to know when they will get a secure contract and a living wage. Helen Walker, the chief executive of Carers UK, said: We welcome the announcements of £25m to work with the sector to improve services to support unpaid carers, the £30m to help local areas innovate services, and £150m to drive adoption of technology across the sector. These all have potential to improve the experiences of unpaid carers. The proposals to encourage digital technology, improve data collection and sharing of data could all make carers’ lives easier. However, many unpaid carers tell us they are at breaking point, exhausted and on their knees after more than 18 months caring with little or no outside support right now. Seventy-two percent have not had a break at all from caring since the start of the pandemic. We are concerned that there is no substantial funding to enable carers to take the breaks they desperately need. Sally Warren, the director of policy at the King’s Fund, a health thinktank, said: The overall vision in the white paper is the right one and if delivered could significantly improve the experience of people receiving care and those who work in the sector. However, the steps outlined don’t go fast or far enough to achieve this vision and the funding allocated to deliver it is insufficient. In particular, although there are some welcome commitments on training and skills for staff, there is little to tackle poor workforce pay and conditions and high vacancy levels in the sector. Martin Tett, adult social care spokesperson for the County Councils Network, said: Proposals to digitalise social care, a greater emphasis on supported housing, policies on workforce recruitment, and a person-centred care service are what the County Councils Network has called for. However, while CCN supports many of today’s proposals, we remain concerned that the amount of funding committed so far falls short of the ambitions laid out. And Rachel Harrison, national officer at the GMB union, said: This is like groundhog day. Care workers have been waiting for the government’s plan for years – since before the last election. Now they’re being told they have to wait even longer for any substantial reforms. You don’t have to be Einstein to realise addressing pay for carers is the absolute number one priority to tackle the catastrophic understaffing crisis – a crisis which will only get worse. The Metropolitan police have issued this statement about the intruder at the Palace of Westminster earlier. (See 3.08pm.) The UK Health Security Agency says a further nine cases of the Omicron variant have been confirmed in England. That takes the total to 22. And in Scotland one further case has been confirmed, taking the Scottish total to 10. UKHSA says: The individuals that have tested positive and their contacts are all isolating. Work is under way to identify any links to travel to southern Africa. We have now identified cases in the east Midlands, east of England, London, south-east and north-west. UKHSA is carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to be infectious. Here is the list of local authority areas in England where the cases have been identified Barnet – 2 Bexley – 1 Brentwood – 1 Buckinghamshire – 1 Camden – 2 Haringey – 1 Lancaster – 1 Lewisham – 2 Liverpool – 1 Newham - 1 North Norfolk – 1 Nottingham – 1 South Cambridgeshire – 1 Sutton – 1 Three Rivers – 1 Wandsworth – 1 Westminster - 3 As reported earlier, at the post-PMQs lobby briefing the PM’s press secretary failed to deny that parties were held in Downing Street last Christmas. (See 2.35pm.) Adam Bienkov from Byline Times has the exchanges in their glory, for anyone interested in how these briefings actually function. Armed police have apprehended someone trying to get into the parliamentary estate without permission, the Times’ Matt Dathan reports. The journalist Alex Taylor has more on Le Canard enchaîné’s article about the Johnson/Macron relationship (see 2.40pm), with a helpful tip for anyone looking to improve their mastery of French vernacular insults. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, has promised to do everything possible to restore power to homes affected by Storm Arwen before Christmas, PA Media reports. PA says: Five days after what Kwarteng said was a storm unlike any other in 60 years, 30,000 homes are still without electricity. Speaking in the Commons he said weather events like Arwen could become more frequent due to climate change. On Friday night, winds reached almost 100mph in parts of northern England and Scotland, power lines were ripped down, tens of thousands of trees were uprooted and roads were blocked by debris. On Wednesday, thousands of people in County Durham remained without power and Conservative MP Richard Holden said a rural surgery in his North West Durham constituency had lost 10,000 worth of flu vaccines when its fridges cut out. Holden said some living in remote communities have been warned it could be a “very long time” before their electricity supply is fully restored. Kwarteng replied: “Being without power until Christmas is simply unacceptable, I’ll say that publicly, and I’ll do everything I can to make sure that that doesn’t happen. Clearly, Storm Arwen was an event the likes of which we haven’t seen for certainly 60 years since the record starts. “We have to be prepared for similarly extreme, difficult weather conditions in the future. We have to make sure that our system is resilient in that eventuality.” He said it was “unacceptable” that people were left waiting up to two hours to get through to a power cut emergency phone number over the weekend. Covid-related deaths in Scotland have risen slightly after a recent fall as National Records of Scotland registered 97 deaths over the week ending on Sunday 28 November, one more than the previous week. NRS, a government statistics agency, said that brought the total number of deaths in Scotland where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate to 12,127 since the pandemic began, including cases where Covid was suspected or probable. The latest increase in deaths, attributed to the more infectious Delta variant, saw weekly death data peak at 164 in late September before it plateaued at around 140 deaths per week during October. There are no known deaths in Scotland associated with the Omicron variant detected last month in South Africa. According to Le Canard enchaîné, which is often described as the French equivalent of Private Eye, Emmanuel Macron, the French president, has described Boris Johnson in private as a clown. These are from the French journalist Pierre Briançon. Here are the main lines from the post-PMQs Downing Street lobby briefing. Downing Street defended its decision not to introduce pre-flight tests for UK arrivals, as proposed by Sage. (See 9.48am and 11.47am.) Asked if the government had ignored a recommendation from Sage, the PM’s spokesman said: At all times we take account of any clinical advice we receive, and then we need to make a balanced judgement on what is right. He said the government had “acted swiftly” to put new measures in place to protect against the Omicron variant of coronavirus “on a precautionary basis”. He added: “We’re confident this is the right approach. The PM’s press secretary said she did not “recognise” the account giving in the Daily Mirror of parties in Downing Street last winter. (See 9.30am.) “We don’t recognise this account, as we’ve said Covid rules have been followed at all times,” she said. But she would not say which parts of the report were inaccurate. “I’m not going to get into individual aspects of speculation,” she said. The spokesman said Boris Johnson and President Macron have a close working relationship. Asked about a comment from the former French ambassador, Sylvie Bermann, on Times Radio that relations have not been as bad since Waterloo, the spokesman said: The prime minister’s been asked about this on a number of occasions and has talked about his close relationship ... working relationship with President Macron. The spokesman said there was “nothing to suggest” children are worse affected by the Omicron variant. Asked about reports that reports from Tshwane in South Africa that children under the age of two accounted for about 10% of total hospital admissions with the variant, the spokesman said: We have seen those reports, but we have seen nothing to suggest ... there’s no hard evidence to suggest it disproportionately affects children in the way you suggest. Clearly, we will [be] monitoring all evidence very carefully. It’s important to stress that there is nothing to suggest it’s impacting on different age groups in a different way to (what) we see with other variants, and it’s also worth noting the different age profile characteristics of South Africa as well. Support for Scottish independence has hit a recent high of 55%, according to an Ipsos Mori poll for STV that contradicts a recent downturn in the yes vote. Ipsos Mori found that, counting only those certain to vote and excluding don’t know, the yes vote had a 10-point lead over no, at 45%. Most recent polls by other companies have put the no vote ahead, by between two to six points. Rather than the panels of voters polled over the internet used by most pollsters, Ipsos Mori uses telephone polling of random voters – a technique it regards as superior. It recorded a record yes vote of 58% last year (a figure not directly comparable with figures from other pollsters, because its methodology is different). Ipsos also registered the lowest satisfaction for Boris Johnson it has recorded for Scotland, putting it at 16%. With don’t knows at 4%, it found 80% of Scottish voters were dissatisfied with the prime minister’s performance. In April this year, with the Covid vaccination programme under way, Johnson had his best Ipsos rating in Scotland: 27% positive against 64% negative. The SNP vote rose by two points to 52%, but satisfaction with Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister fell, by four points to 58% (giving a net positive rating of 20 points), along with a 4.5-point fall for the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. With his positive rate of 31%, Starmer had a negative net satisfaction rate of -16. Unlike a YouGov poll for the Times last week, which found only 13% of voters felt independence was a priority, eighth in its list, the Ipsos Mori survey found Scottish independence was the second most important topic, after healthcare and the NHS. Even so, its importance rating fell 13 points, to 27%, compared with April. Here is the PA Media report of the Johnson/Starmer exchanges at PMQs. Boris Johnson has denied his key hospital building programme is unachievable, as Labour revealed a “playbook” has been issued to ensure refurbishments are described as new hospitals. Keir Starmer accused Johnson at PMQs of breaking “yet another promise” on his hospital rebuilding programme. The Health Service Journal last month reported a government infrastructure watchdog has raised concerns about the lack of progress made to build 40 new hospitals by 2030. Starmer said: “The Cabinet Office and the Treasury have checked on the progress and it’s reported that they have reached a damning conclusion. They have concluded that the project needs a red flag because it is unachievable. Prime minister, is that true?” Johnson replied: “No. He plays politics and asks frivolous questions, we are getting on with the people’s priorities. We are helping to build another 40 new hospitals with an injection of £36bn of investments which that party voted against.” Starmer countered: “This is strange because the government hasn’t been denying the reports about the red flag and they haven’t done since, but now the prime minister does. There was obviously some confusion on these benches over whether the Cabinet Office and the Treasury think he is on course to break yet another promise, this time on new building of hospitals. If he is so confident in his answer, why doesn’t he publish the progress report in full and let us all see it?” Johnson maintained 40 hospitals are being built but Starmer said the PM lacked the confidence to publish the report, adding: “The more we look at this promise, the murkier it gets. I’ve got a document here sent by the Department of Health to the NHS. It’s called the ‘new hospital programme communications playbook’ - I kid you not. It offers advice to make it easier to talk about the programme. This guide instructs everybody to describe refurbishments and alterations on existing hospitals as new hospitals. We can all agree that refurbishments are a very good thing, but they’re not new hospitals. How many of the 40 are fix-up jobs on existing hospitals and how many are actually the new hospitals he promised?” Johnson replied: “You obviously don’t always go around building on greenfield sites, you rebuild hospitals and that’s what we’ve said for the last two-and-a-half years; it’s the biggest programme of hospital building this country ever undertaken.” Starmer joked: “No wonder so many Tory donors paid so much for that wallpaper last year, he probably told them he was building a new flat.” Concluding, Starmer highlighted “broken promises” from Johnson before adding: “He promised 40 new hospitals and even if you count the paint jobs, his own watchdog says he can’t deliver it. Isn’t this the truth, Mr Speaker, that any promises from this prime minister aren’t worth the manifesto paper they’re written on?” Johnson said Starmer “dribbles on irrelevantly about wallpaper and parties, playing politics”, adding: “They’re getting on with factional infighting, we are delivering for the people of this country.” Liz Kendall, the shadow care minister, responded for Labour. “Is that it?”, she asked. She said the plan did not explain how the government would cut waiting lists for care, and she said it would not deliver extra care workers. Another 500,000 will be needed by the end of the decade, she said. A new website (one of the plans) would not do it, she said. She said Labour wanted a proper plan that would integrate health and social care. UPDATE: Kendall said: There are two central flaws in this government’s approach. Ministers have utterly failed to deal with the immediate pressures facing social care as we head into one of the most difficult winters on record and they have failed to set out the long-term vision and more fundamental reforms we need to deliver a care system fit for the future. Last week we learnt that a staggering 400,000 older and disabled people are now on council waiting lists for care, with 40,000 waiting more than a year. There are over 100,000 staff vacancies and turnover rates are soaring and, because of these shortages, 1.5 million hours of home care couldn’t be delivered between August and October alone, and half of all councils report care homes going bust or home care providers handing back contracts. Where was the long-term strategy to transform the pay, training, terms and conditions of care workers to deliver at least half a million additional care workers by 2030 just to meet growing demand? Gillian Keegan, the health minister, is making a statement on adult social care. She says a white paper is being published today. It is the product of years of work, she says. Social care workers deserve a system that works for them. But that has not always been the case, she says. Carers are not just underpaid, but under-appreciated. She says the government has published its plans for the health and social care levy. But there is more to do, and that is why the white paper sets out plan for the next three years. Here is an excerpt from the document summarising some of its main proposals. At least £300m to integrate housing into local health and care strategies, with a focus on increasing the range of new supported housing options available. This will provide choice of alternative housing and support options. At least £150m of additional funding to drive greater adoption of technology and achieve widespread digitisation across social care. Digital tools and technology can support independent living and improve the quality of care. At least £500m so the social care workforce have the right training and qualifications, and feel recognised and valued for their skills and commitment. We want the workforce to also have their wellbeing prioritised. A new practical support service to make minor repairs and changes in people’s homes to help people remain independent and safe in their home, alongside increasing the upper limit of the Disabilities Facilities Grant for home adaptations such as stairlifts, wet rooms and home technologies. Keir Starmer is starting to sound like an opposition leader who has finally found his target, and is concentrating his fire in the right place. Or, to adapt another violent metaphor, he has decided to keep punching the same bruise. For the third week in a row he has majored on broken promises. Two weeks ago it was broken promises to the north of England over rail. Last week it was broken promises over social care reform, and people no longer being at risk of having to sell their homes. And this week Starmer focused on the 40 new hospitals that are not new hospitals, but refurbishments that may not even happen anyway. (About time too, some might say. In a crowded field, “40 new hospitals” must be the most dishonest government boast yet.) It set Starmer up for a final question that was ideally crafted for the TV news. It’s the same old story from this prime minister, week in, week out defending the indefensible and broken promises. His mates were found to be corrupt, he tried to get them off the hook. Downing Street throws parties during lockdown, he says ‘not a problem’. He promised there’d be no tax rises, then he put up tax. He promised a rail revolution in the north, then he cancelled the trains. He promised no one would have to sell their home for care, then along came his working-class dementia tax. He promised 40 new hospitals and even if you count the paint jobs, his own watchdog says he can’t deliver it. Isn’t this the truth, Mr Speaker, that any promises from this prime minister aren’t worth the manifesto paper they’re written on? Boris Johnson has had a reputation for not delivering from the moment he entered Downing Street, but in the past the ‘broken promises’ line of attack against him by Labour has tended to bounce off. Perhaps that was because voters think all politicians break their promises. Perhaps it was because getting Brexit done inoculated him against this charge for a while. Or perhaps because people were just prepared to give him a bit more time. But now the charge is starting to stick, and it sounds like a line of argument with traction. Presumably Labour has tested it too with focus groups, and it is hard to believe Starmer would keep using it if he did not know it was having some effect. It is certainly the case that voters are starting to take a more sceptical view of Johnson than in the past. This is from the latest Ipsos MORI political pulse (pdf) out two days ago. The other interesting thing about Starmer’s strategy today was his decision to go heavily on the Daily Mirror splash. (See 9.30am.) The broadcasters seemed wary of touching this story this morning, but Starmer’s decision to pile in heavily, and - even more importantly - Johnson’s failure to deny that there was a party last December ought to give the story a leg up onto the news agenda. The government sources briefing the BBC this morning made a better effort at trying to argue that the story was untrue than Johnson did. But quite how damaging it will turn out to be remains to be seen. An on-the-record witness would be useful. Perhaps Dominic Cummings will be firing up his Substack service? Johnson managed to keep sounding confident, and Tory MPs cheered loudly, but he did not engage properly with Starmer’s questions and it was mostly bluster. His Captain Hindsight peroration is sounding ever more feeble (does even the most diehard Tory really think we would “still be in lockdown” under Labour?). And at one point Johnson said, according to PM, that Starmer “dribbles on irrelevantly about wallpaper and parties”. I heard it as “drivels on”, which it might just as well have been. But whether it was dribbles or drivels, it was quite a charge from the man who gets invited to the CBI and bangs on about Peppa Pig. Ian Byrne (Lab) asks about Hillsborough. Will the PM agree to ensure the tragedy is included in the national curriculum? Johnson says Byrne makes a powerful point. The government is committed to continuing engagement with the bereaved, he says. And he wants to ensure the lessons are not forgotten. He will ensure Byrne has a meeting with ministers so this is taken forward. Imran Hussain (Lab) says all people from BAME backgrounds are concerned that the government is coming for them, because the borders bill will make deportations easier. Johnson says that is shameful. He says Hussain should look at the make-up of the government front bench. He says the bill does not do what Hussain claims. Labour should support border controls, he says. Tom Randall (Con) asks if the government will help places like Gedling apply for money from the levelling up fund. Johnson says there will be another round of bidding next year. The government wants to help places like Gedling. Jessica Morden (Lab) says Wales has been left out for rail investment. Why should people trust the government to deliver on its promises? Johnson says Morden has failed to look at the plans in the union connectivity review. Christine Jardine (Lib Dem) asks the PM to support her clean air proposals. Johnson says the government is promoting electric cars, and he says its clean air strategy has been praised worldwide. David Jones (Con) asks if the PM is committed to ensuring Gibraltar stays British, and to keeping the European court of justice out of it. Johnson says he is committed to keeping it British, and he sees no role for the ECJ there. Colleen Fletcher (Lab) says cuts have left West Midlands police with real problems. They say they do not have the officers to investigate every crime. Johnson says the government is increasing the number of police officers. He promised an extra 20,000, and an extra 11,000 have already been recruited. He says they are more diverse too. Emma Hardy (Lab) asks why mesh-damaged women are not getting proper compensation. It is impossible to know the pain they are going through. Johnson says the Cumberlege report has been published. If there is more to do, he will look at it. Damian Collins (Con) asks if the PM agrees it is wrong that Facebook allows people smugglers to use its site. Johnson agrees. The online harms bill will allow that material to be taken down. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, says farmers are on the brink. They are about to see payments cut by 5% at least. The PM promised a new support system for farmers. But in the meantime farmers will go bankrupt. Will the PM stop cutting the old payments until the new system is in place? Johnson says he met representatives of the food and farming industry last night. He says every embassy now has an official backing food exports. Ian Blackford (SNP) says it is regrettable that MPs are having to talk again about the PM’s misconduct. Last Christmas the PM hosted a party that broke lockdown rules. He says he spoke to the Mirror newspaper, they are confirming their report [er - they would, they would not have published it otherwise], and they have legal advice saying the law may have been broken. It is one rule for him, one rule for everyone else. Johnson says Blackford should have mentioned Storm Arwen. Blackford says he did. He says Sage advice to PM called for tougher travel rules. That is what Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, advised too. Will the PM take this advice? Johnson says Blackford is “simply wrong” in what he has said about the steps taken by the government. He says this government was the first internationally to respond to Omicron. He says it put countries on the red list. He says the measures being taken are balanced and proporotionate. Andrew Rosindell (Con) says the government cannot deal with illegal migrants while still constrained by the Human Rights Act and the European convention on human rights. Johnson says the government is reviewing the human rights system. He says Labour should back the nationality and borders bill. Starmer says the new hospitals are just the latest example of Johnson not keeping a promise. Johnson accuses Starmer of drivelling on about parties and wallpaper. He says Labour are obsessed with factional infighting. He is getting on with governing. He says the government is cutting tax for low-paid families. He ends with the usual dig at Captain Hindsight. That is not true. The lowering of the universal credit taper will lead to poorer workers having higher take-home pay, but it is not a tax cut. Starmer quotes from government advice saying refurbishments should be called new hospitals. Refurbishments are a good thing, but they are not new hospitals. How many are genuinely new? Starmer seems to be referrring to this report. Johnson says you do not build on greenfield sites. Starmer challenges the PM to publish the report saying the building programme has been flagged as red. Johnson says there is record investment going into the NHS. Starmer points out that Johnson has not denied that there was a party. But he says no rules were broken. Both of those things cannot be true. Both of those things cannot be true. He says Tory MPs are not obeying the rules. As usual, it is one rule for them, one rule for us. He says a Treasury analysis says the PM’s plan for 40 new hospitals is unachievable. Is that right? No, claims Johnson. He claims he is helping to build another 40 hospitals, with investment worth £36bn. Starmer says the rules were clear. They say you could not have a work Christmas lunch or party. Why does the PM think it was OK to hold a boozy party? Johnson says he has commented on what happened 12 months ago. He says he wants to focus on this year. He summarises the latest guidance. He says he hopes Starmer has had his booster. Keir Starmer says he also wants to mark world Aids day. He says it is within our hands to end new transmissions of Aids within a decade. Was a Christmas party held in Downing Street on 18 December last year? Johnson says all guidance was followed. He says Starmer is holding his own party on 15 December, and has not invited Angela Rayner. Boris Johnson starts by saying he is wearing a purple tie because it is people with disabilities day on Friday. He says MPs’s thoughts are still with those affected by Storm Arwen. There will be a statement after PMQs, he says. PMQs is about to start. Here is the list of MPs down to ask a question. Here is the BBC report with more details of its story about Sage, the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, saying pre-departure Covid tests for people arriving in the UK would be “valuable”. It is based on leaked minutes of a meeting held this Monday. Yvette Cooper, the new shadow home secretary, says that in ignoring this advice the government is being “totally irresponsible”. Last week a subgroup of Nervtag, the government’s new and emerging respiratory virus threats advisory group, met to consider the threat posed by the Omicron variant. As Sky News reports, Nervtag concluded that this could lead to a new wave of coronavirus hitting the UK that could overwhelm the NHS. A minute of the meeting says: If introduced into the UK, B.1.1.529 [Omicron[ would likely be capable of initiating a new wave of infections. We cannot exclude that this wave would be of a magnitude similar, or even larger, than previous waves. Although data on disease severity associated with B.1.1.529 are not yet available, a large wave of infections will be accompanied by a wave of severe cases and the subgroup cannot rule out that this may be sufficient to overwhelm NHS capacity. This is a marginally starker expression of the risk that ministers and government advisers have been talking about in public since the Omicron threat emerged at the end of last week. According to the minute, which is available on the Nervtag website here, the subgroup said the government should improve early detection of Omicron and intensify the vaccine booster campaign. Both of these things are happening. Nervtag also called for “early and robust actions to prevent introduction and onward transmission”. The government has re-introduced PCR tests at day 2 for arrivals into the UK, mandated mask wearing in shops and on public transport in England, and ordered close contacts of Omicron cases to isolate for up to 10 days, but whether these responses are “robust” enough for the Nervtag advisers is not clear from the minute. There will be two statements in the Commons after PMQs, the parliamentary authorities have announced. At 12.30pm Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, will make a statement on Storm Arwen. And at around 1.30pm Gillian Keegan, the care minister, will make a statement giving further details of the government’s plans for social care. The People’s Covid Inquiry, which was set up by the campaigning group Keep Our NHS Public and which took evidence in a series of public evidence sessions earlier this year, has this morning published its final report (pdf). It is called “Misconduct in Public Office”, and one of its conclusions is that the pandemic involved “serious governance failures” by the UK government that “contributed to tens of thousands of avoidable deaths and suffering” and that this amounts to misconduct in public office. The inquiry was chaired by Michael Mansfield QC. In his introduction to the report, Mansfield says that the government has a legal duty to protect public health and that, because a pandemic was anticipated, and because Whitehall had even planned for one, the government should have been prepared. He says: The government should, therefore, have been well prepared for the eventuality that presented itself at the end of 2019. The NHS and social care infrastructure should not have been neglected and run down; effective in-date personal protective equipment should have been readily stored and accessible; track and trace provision should have been anticipated as vital to basic public health measures; extra NHS hospital space carefully planned; an adequate NHS trained staffing complement at the ready; quarantine conditions and support sorted; strict border controls and isolation facilities programmed in advance. None of this is hindsight, as we make clear. This People’s Covid Inquiry report is unequivocal – dismal failure in the face of manifestly obvious risks. And he says that, once Covid arrived in the UK, Boris Johnson and the government failed to respond properly. There was no consistent, comprehensive and coordinated plan of public health strategy. What leapt off the press conference page was the dilatory initial response; the absence of any effective track and trace system; the sheer waste of taxpayers’ money ploughed into the pockets of private cronies; the contradictory messaging; the abject failure to provide PPE; the albatross of Nightingale hospitals; the lack of trained staff; the failure to utilise NHS primary care facilities; the misrepresentations about care home ringed protection; the parlous state of the NHS in the first place. Above all is the utter distrust of the public and the disrespect for the frontline workers, who, once the claps and saucepan fanfares had abated, were offered a 1%, below-inflation, pay rise for their life-endangered troubles. As my colleague Rowena Mason reports, in his morning interviews Sajid Javid, the health secretary, also hinted that demands for GPs to return to face-to-face appointments could be dropped to let them do more vaccinating. In his interviews Javid also suggested that people might want to take lateral flow tests before attending Christmas celebrations. Asked on Sky News if people should take a Covid test before going to a Christmas party, he replied: “I would.” Later he told the Today programme: If you are invited to a Christmas party, there’s quite a few people there, maybe you want to take an LFT [lateral flow test] before you go. Go to the party, but just be cautious. Asked if he would wear a mask if he was at a party, Javid said: It depends if I am walking around or sitting down. It depends if I’m eating. People just need to make a decision based on the guidance. This is what the government guidance for England says about taking lateral flow tests ahead of going to crowded events. You are at higher risk of catching or passing on Covid-19 in crowded and enclosed spaces, where there are more people who might be infectious and where there is limited fresh air. You may wish to take a rapid lateral flow test if it is expected that there will be a period of high risk that day. This includes spending time in crowded and enclosed spaces, or before visiting people who are at higher risk of severe illness if they get Covid-19. In Scotland government advice is tougher. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, has advised Scots to take a lateral flow test every time they leave home to meet up with friends. According to the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg, there has been a leak of a document from the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) saying that its members think pre-departure tests for people coming to the UK would be valuable and that PCR tests for arrivals would be more use at day 5 or day 8, instead of at day 2 (where they are now required, under a rule announced at the weekend). This is almost certain to come up at PMQs. The new shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, and the new shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, have been loudly calling for pre-departure testing since they took up their new roles on Monday night. And the SNP government in Scotland and the Labour government in Wales have both said the PCR testing at day 2 for arrivals is not enough, and the arrivals should have to isolate until they have done a PCR test at day 8. Good morning. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was doing the morning interview round this morning and, although mostly he was asked about the expansion of the booster programme announced last night, he also faced questions over new reports about Downing Street breaking Covid rules last year. We’ve had a steady stream of such stories during the pandemic, some more consequential than others, and the latest is by Pippa Crerar in the Daily Mirror, who says Boris Johnson and his Downing Street staff “have been accused of breaking Covid rules by attending parties at No 10 in the run-up to last Christmas”. Crerar reports: The prime minister gave a speech at a packed leaving do for a top aide last November when the country was in the grip of its second lockdown. Then just days before Christmas, with London in tier 3 restrictions, members of his top team held their own festive bash in Downing Street. Officials knocked back glasses of wine during a Christmas quiz and a Secret Santa while the rest of the country was forced to stay at home. Around “40 or 50” people were said to have been crammed “cheek by jowl” into a medium-sized room in No 10 for each of the two events. “It was a Covid nightmare,” one source claimed. The Mirror quotes from the lawyer Adam Wagner, who says that if there was an unofficial Christmas party on 18 December, it probably broke the rules. The paper also says that, when it put the story to No 10, Downing Street did not dispute that the gatherings took place, but claimed no rules were broken. Asked about the story on the Today programme, Javid – who only became health secretary because Matt Hancock resigned after breaking Covid restrictions – replied: Whatever would have happened at No 10 throughout the pandemic, I’m absolutely certain all the rules around the pandemic would have been followed. Obviously I can’t tell you what’s going on on a daily basis in any building. But what I can tell, if it’s government, and especially No 10, is that all the rules would have been followed at all times. Javid also told the interviewer, Mishal Husain, not to assume that the news report was accurate. But when asked if the report was definitely inaccurate, he just said: “I can tell you all rules would have been followed at all times.” Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: The ONS publishes a report on the characteristics of people getting Covid. 10am: Leading lawyers give evidence to the Commons home affairs committee about rape prosecution rates. 10am: The People’s Covid Inquiry publishes a report based on the hearings it held earlier this year. 12pm: Boris Johnson faces Keir Starmer at PMQs. 2.15pm: Sir Tom Scholar, permanent secretary at the Treasury, gives evidence to the Commons Treasury committee. 3pm: Tom Pursglove, a Home Office minister, gives evidence to the joint committee on human rights about the nationality and borders bill. 4pm: Simon Coveney, the Irish foreign minister, discusses the Northern Ireland protocol at a Public Policy Projects event. 4.30pm: Maroš Šefčovič , vice-president of the European Commission, gives evidence to MLAs about the Northern Ireland protocol. I will be covering UK Covid developments here, as well as non-Covid politics, but for global Covid developments, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comDescribing the Church of England’s Christmas single, In the Bleak Midwinter (Christmas No 1: LadBaby and Adele face competition from the church, 30 November), you mention the composer, Rebecca Dale, but give no credit to the poet, Christina Rossetti. She is one of the great English poets of the 19th century. For me she remains top of the pops. Michèle Roberts London • Sunday lunch is over. Various topics are discussed, including the digital revolution. Our 30-year-old son pulls his smartphone. “Cool new app, folks… Now I can get oat milk and other stuff delivered every morning before 7am. By hand. To my flat. By a real person in a van.” Granny looks up: “Yes, darling. We used to call it ‘the milkman’.” Neil Canetti Etchingham, East Sussex • Many years ago, my wife and I brought back a kitchen ornament from Pennsylvania that had the words “Kissing don’t last – cooking do” on it (Letters, 29 November). We never liked it, and in 66 years of marriage proved that it is not true. Rev Peter B Godfrey King’s Stanley, Gloucestershire • Barbecue, patio, gazebo, umbrella (Wordsearch, G2, 29 November). Oh, that kind of garden! Silly me – I was searching for words like digging, tomatoes, composting and dung. Derek Knight Chilton Polden, Somerset • How many people manage to fit a stable into their garden? That’s if you are lucky enough to have a garden. They don’t seem to feature much in today’s new estates. Diane Woodley Westgate-on-Sea, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Marina Hyde’s comments were spot-on (Let’s not pretend the anti-mask babies would have lasted a minute in the blitz, 30 November). I was born in north London in December 1944, a time when Hitler’s V2 “vengeance weapons” were raining down on the city. Arrangements had been made to evacuate me and my mum out to Essex, but dreadful winter weather – sub-zero temperatures and snow – prevented that happening. Instead, she kept me indoors at home. Because the V2s gave no warning of their arrival, she placed an old shove ha’penny board over my cot as protection, “just in case”. On 8 January 1945 – when I was 12 days old – a V2 landed in Sydney Road, Hornsey, just a few streets over from where we were living. It shook the house and brought down the ceilings, but I was saved because of that shove ha’penny board. I am now nearly 77 years old and lucky enough to have been given my full quota of vaccines and booster. When I do go out, I always wear a face mask in the same spirit as my mum putting that shove ha’penny board over my cot. That saved my life then. The mask may save my life now. Martyn Day Twickenham, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I shall not be taking the advice of Jill Lepore and returning my copy of Robert Nisbet’s The Quest for Community to the public library, though they should all have a copy, as it contains views that she did not emphasise in her important article (Is society coming apart?, 25 November). Lepore uses the word “voluntary” only once, and there is no reference to the voluntary sector at all. Nor is Nisbet’s emphasis on “association” mentioned – he wrote that “spontaneous associations of men [and women] are the primary sources of freedom and order”. Nisbet ends, in my copy of his book, with the three conditions in which liberal democracy will thrive: “diversity of culture, plurality of association and division of authority”. Nisbet also believed the example of the Tennessee Valley Authority demonstrated that “central planning is not inconsistent with local and associative autonomies”. That is also our experience in Milton Keynes, where after only a decade of development, a paper to the government-appointed board stated that “the voluntary sector is an integral element in the creation of a varied and strong social fabric”. The Milton Keynes master plan included a section on social development which stated that support, buildings, grants and advice were vital to encourage people to meet not only each other but also their own personal, social and recreational needs and ideals. The danger of the state using the voluntary sector only for its own objectives should be recognised. It must also be listened to and its independence guaranteed, as it has been in Milton Keynes by the creation of a community foundation. Since Nisbet we have the benefit of the “social choice theory” – as expounded by Amartya Sen and others – that decisions should always take account of their effect on people and society as a whole. Sen also believes that in every place and time we have to continue to work to oppose the individualism in rampant capitalism and collectivism in political, ethnic, cultural and religious dogmas. Lepore is right to warn of the dangers we face and to list in her final paragraph those amenities for social life that we must support. I would add our “associations”. Peter Waterman Milton Keynes • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I am one of the Hastings volunteers who has welcomed refugees on the beach with hot tea and dry clothes (Tensions run high in Hastings over small boat arrivals, 30 November). I was shocked but not surprised to hear that an RNLI lifeboat was blocked from going out to sea by a small group of people protesting against them rescuing refugees. The government has been pumping out a relentless stream of racist propaganda demonising refugees and migrants; predictably, people act on the racism they are spoonfed from above. The Tories would like us to believe that our jobs, pay, homes and public services are being threatened by a wave of people invading our shores. This is classic scapegoating: when a tiny minority enrich themselves at the expense of the rest of us, they have to use racism to divide and rule. Many of the 27 refugees who drowned in the Channel were fleeing from regions destabilised by British wars, occupation and colonisation. They died as a consequence of the racist policies of our government, who deliberately created and maintain a hostile environment. We should recognise that it is in the interests of ordinary people in the UK to stand together and demand safe passage for refugees and migrants – they are welcome here. Jenny Sutton Hastings, East Sussex • Nesrine Malik writes: “Your entire life is an accident, a random luck of the draw” (Migrants are told they must earn a place in Britain. But no one should have to, 29 November). It is worth pointing out that every newborn child has already experienced two major lotteries over which they have no control, but that will have huge influence on their later lives. First, the moment of conception: are you blessed with “good” genes or cursed with “bad” ones? Second, the circumstances of your birth. Malik discusses place of birth, where a country providing a hostile environment – be it from poverty, conflict, repression or climate – creates refugees. But even in a wealthy country you can be born into a financially-secure family or into a poor or dysfunctional one. Surely, in any decent code of morals, those who have been lucky in life’s lotteries should feel obliged to help those who, for whatever reason and through no fault of their own, have not had such luck. One of the most depressing statements that one hears from time to time is, “if I can do it, anyone can”. As Malik implies, this claim, carrying the accusation that it is always your own fault if you struggle and suffer where others succeed, is blatantly untrue. Peter Pusey Malvern, Worcestershire • Thank you, Nesrine Malik, for such a brilliant piece, so clearly explaining and criticising current attitudes towards asylum seekers. I feel very strongly about this, and I have to ask: who do we think we are? Who were our ancestors? How did they get here? What right have we to deny anyone entry? Rowena Dawson Kegworth, Leicestershire • Nesrine Malik’s humane commentary on the deaths of migrants in the English Channel reminded me of another recent Guardian article (Inquiry into foundation linked to Prince of Wales launched, 18 November), where we learned that the son of one of Saudi Arabia’s richest men had been advised that securing honorary roles and awards would aid his attempt to secure British citizenship or residency. Ah, so that’s the way to do it. Jennifer Basannavar Twickenham, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Rights groups have criticised the European Commission after it proposed that three countries sharing a border with Belarus should be allowed to hold people in special asylum processing centres for up to 16 weeks, up from the current maximum of four. Top officials at the EU executive said the emergency measures would give Poland, Lithuania and Latvia the flexibility to deal with an unprecedented situation caused by what the EU calls a hybrid attack from Alexander Lukashenko’s Belarusian regime. Under existing EU rules, member states have three to six days to register an asylum claim, or 10 in exceptional circumstances; the whole process, including appeals, is supposed to be completed in four weeks. Eve Geddie, Amnesty International’s Europe director, said the EU was allowing a minority of member states “to throw out the rulebook due to the presence of a few thousand people at its border”, and in doing so was also throwing out “any authority it has on human rights and the rule of law”. Erin McKay, of Oxfam, said: “Stopping, detaining and criminalising people trying to find safety in Europe breaks international and European asylum law. Supporting the detention of migrants at EU borders puts politics over people’s lives.” The EU has accused Belarus’s authoritarian leader of luring desperate people from the Middle East to Belarus and then bussing them to the EU border in the hope of destabilising the bloc. Poland, Lithuania and Latvia have experienced a surge in people arriving from the Middle East via Belarus to claim asylum. About 10,000 people are thought to have reached Germany via Belarus, while some have tried to cross the Channel to the UK. Juan Fernando López Aguilar, a Spanish Socialist MEP who chairs the European parliament’s justice and home affairs committee, described the measures as excessive and disproportionate and accused the commission of being influenced by Poland’s nationalist government, led by the Law and Justice (PiS) party. “The decreasing number of people seeking asylum at the EU’s border with Belarus in no way justifies allowing governments to abandon their obligations under international law to give access to asylum,” Aguilar said. “Nor is there any reason to turn a blind eye to the illegal practice of pushbacks. “It is very worrying that the commission is willing to dance to the tune of the PiS government’s demands to suspend the EU’s asylum rules and even more so following yesterday’s vote in the Polish parliament to ban media and NGOs from accessing the border area.” The EU home affairs commissioner, Ylva Johansson, has repeatedly called on Poland’s government to allow media and NGOs access to the border region, a point she repeated on Wednesday. “Transparency is of the essence: that is why it is so important media can have access and we are not the victims of rumours that can’t be clarified.” On Tuesday, Polish MPs rejected a proposal from the senate to allow media access to the zone, voting for a long-term ban to replace emergency measures. Poland’s interior ministry has said the ban on independent observers would facilitate the imminent construction of a 5.5-metre-high wall on the border with Belarus. The European commissioner did not respond directly to questions about the EU compatibility of a Polish law from October that NGOs say allows Polish border guards to push back people seeking asylum, in contravention of international law. Johansson said: “We all realise that the situation is unprecedented at the borders … and it has been difficult of course for the member states most concerned at the borders to deal with it. And that is why they have asked us for legal clarifications on what is possible to do and what is not possible to do, and we are coming with these legal clarifications with our proposal today and I expect them to comply with it.” She has previously said the EU does not allow pushbacks, but member states have a duty to prevent unauthorised entries. Speaking to reporters on Wednesday, she said the latest proposal protected fundamental rights, including the right to a fair process and non-refoulement, the right not to be returned to face war or persecution. The emergency rule change, which has to be approved by all EU member states, would apply only in Lithuania, Latvia and Poland for six months. EU officials believe the crisis is easing, as arrivals of migrants into Belarus have ceased, while 1,872 Iraqi citizens have been flown home, with more flights expected. Yet 10,000 people are believed to be stranded in Belarus, while Latvia, Lithuania and Poland are facing numerous asylum clams. According to the commission, 7,831 people have entered Latvia, Lithuania and Poland this year, compared with 257 for the whole of 2020. Poland has received 6,730 requests for asylum, Lithuania 2,676 and Latvia 579.Call it the Quantity Theory of Inanity. It would be wrong to say that Boris Johnson doesn’t still enjoy prime minister’s questions. Like any sociopathic narcissist he cannot resist being the centre of attention. The noise, the lights, the cameras. It’s one of the few ways Boris can tell he’s still alive. It’s just that the cracks are beginning to show. Even a few months ago, the cheers from the Tory backbenchers that greeted Johnson’s appearances in the Commons sounded almost sincere. Now they seem forced. Pavlovian responses from a bygone era. The Fool is now the fool, a fading music hall act reduced to babbling nonsense. A hollow man, bereft of redeeming qualities. As Boris shrinks, so Keir Starmer grows. There was a time when the Labour leader looked awkward at PMQs. He had all the right lines, but the delivery kept falling flat. His arrows mere paper darts that left Boris unharmed. He knew it, his MPs knew it, and the pretence that he was in his element was killing them both. Now, though, Keir has found his range. There is a confidence, a swagger to him. He is beginning to look and sound like a leader. He’s finally got the shadow cabinet he wanted and he’s not afraid to assert himself. Most of all he is comfortable in the job, because he knows he’s got Johnson’s measure. Boris no longer holds any terrors or mysteries for him. He’s just a third-rate chancer who always lets you down in the end. And, more often than not, in the beginning. Someone who can be picked off at will. For the last three PMQs, Starmer has effortlessly come off best by attacking Boris on matters of trust. Something that has never been the prime minister’s strong point. And this week the Labour leader was at it again. He started with the story the Daily Mirror had broken overnight about Boris breaking his government’s own lockdown rules by holding parties at No 10 last year. Didn’t this just show the prime minister was incapable of being taken seriously as someone who kept his word? Johnson did his best to look astonished. Though not so much that he denied the party had taken place. Rather he tried to make out that the party had never really been a party. It had just been a normal day’s work that had morphed into someone opening a few cases of champagne. Boris could make his own bubbles as he saw fit. A Westminster bubble. And Boris knew, it really had not been a Christmas party because, as far as he knew, no one had had sex with him. Which is his definition of a proper party. Keir was unimpressed. It had definitely been a party – there had been booze and games – yet Johnson was insisting it had taken place within the guidelines in force at the time. Both things could not be true. “It’s one rule for the prime minister and another for everyone else,” Starmer observed. Much like mask-wearing. Johnson had just about managed to strong-arm Jacob Rees-Mogg and Nadine Dorries, long-term mask refuseniks into reluctantly wearing face coverings, by telling them it would hide their lack of shame; but there were still at least 20 backbenchers boldly challenging the Omicron variant to do its worst. Though in their minds, they were the untouchables. Covid was something only the little people got. Having made plain there was little reason for the rest of the country to pay any attention to what the government said, as there was little chance it was listening to itself, Starmer moved on to a leaked report that not only showed most of the promised 40 new hospitals would amount to little more than a paint job in A&amp;E but that the Treasury thought there was little chance of them ever happening. Outrageous, Boris exclaimed. In his own world every time a new lock is fixed to a toilet door a new hospital is built. It won’t be long before we find that the 40 hospitals are just the same hospital being built 40 times. “He drivels on irrelevantly,” Johnson said of Starmer, bouncing up and down nervously and waving his arms sporadically. Only it was Boris who was drivelling on irrelevantly. He had nothing to say. No defence. His MPs may have been willing to give him a bit of leeway but two years on they expected some delivery. Two Tory backbenchers dared to ask when their constituencies might receive some levelling up funds. Johnson laughed and all but admitted they wouldn’t be getting a penny as long as there were Labour councils in charge of the local authorities. The Tory benches went noticeably quiet. They can sense their leader is becoming a liability. The joke is no longer funny. Johnson has nothing left to offer but broken promises. The master of the profane, the maestro of the inane. A man incapable of leading by example. When the shit hits the fan he’s off partying with his mates. Someone who treats the country as mugs. And sooner or later the country will wise up and decide it’s had enough. John Crace and Zoe Williams will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 13 December. Join the conversation online by booking tickets here. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Britain’s prolonged house price boom, described on Wednesday by market analysts as “gravity-defying”, shows little sign of letting up. According to data released from Nationwide, average property values rose by 0.9% in November alone. Since the first lockdown in March 2020, they have risen by almost 15%, driven by booming demand, limited supply and pandemic-related lifestyle changes. Shelter has estimated that the average first-time buyer in England will require a dauntingly high household income to raise a deposit. Adding fuel to the fire, successive Conservative governments have sought to make the housing ladder more accessible through help-to-buy schemes, which have contributed to the surge in prices. But for the millions of Britons who will never come close to earning enough money to own a home, insecure rented accommodation has become a way of life. As the supply of social housing has steadily dwindled, their interests have been grievously neglected. Yet, as Labour’s former shadow housing minister Lucy Powell has pointed out, promoting home ownership should be compatible with looking after the interests and welfare of renters. This week, perhaps more surprisingly, that argument was echoed by the former prime minister Theresa May. In a foreword to a report by the Centre for Social Justice (CSJ), a centre-right thinktank, Mrs May acknowledged that the historic Tory focus on home ownership “has at times distracted from what should be our overwhelming priority as Conservatives: ensuring that everyone has a decent, affordable and secure home”. The CSJ report, entitled The hidden housing crisis, exposes the dark underside of Britain’s buoyant property market. The dearth of available social housing, which began with the 1980s sell-off of council stock, has led to a boom in the private rented sector. Low-income families – who once would have lived in council accommodation or a housing association home – are struggling to get by as a result. One in five households now rent privately, compared to one in 10 in the 1980s; of those, almost half find it “fairly or very difficult” to pay their housing costs. A large proportion spend more than 30% of their disposable income on rent, making it a key driver of in-work poverty. The decline in cheap social housing stock, the report concludes, has culminated in a collapse in the supply of decent affordable homes for people living on modest to low incomes. Soaring levels of rough sleeping and sofa surfing are a byproduct of a dysfunctional sector. As a member of Conservative governments that contributed to this dismal state of affairs, Mrs May bears her own share of responsibility. But the belated recognition of the extent of this crisis is welcome. It is also a sign of the times, as the Tory party reflects on the changed social composition of its support. Having polled extensively among first-time Tory voters in “red wall” areas, the CSJ recommends that an emphasis on building affordable rented housing should be a central part of the government’s levelling-up programme. Over two-thirds of “new Conservative” voters surveyed said that expanding affordable rented accommodation should be the top housing priority. They would be wise not to hold their breath. Since the 1950s, Conservative governments have seen expanding home ownership as a means of maximising the Tory vote at general elections. The nation’s stressed-out renters continue to pay the price.Norway’s Magnus Carlsen and the Russian Ian Nepomniachtchi are no closer to a verdict in their €2m world championship match after playing to a fifth successive draw on Wednesday at the Dubai Exhibition Centre. Supercomputers evaluating the moves from the opening four games had indicated it was the most accurate world title match in the event’s history and this fifth contest maintained that standard as the players remarkably combined for one inaccuracy between them. Regrettably for the 31-year-old challenger, the lapse was the opportunity Carlsen needed to escape from a highly uncomfortable position as black and negotiate a draw after 43 moves. The contestants blitzed out their first moves after the same anti‑Marshall variation of the Ruy Lopez from Nepomniachtchi’s two previous games with the white pieces (1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 O-O Be7 6 Re1 b5 7 Bb3 O-O). After 8 a4, Carlsen continued his strategy of being first to divert from the familiar, initially with the rare (8 … Rb8) and soon after with the new (13 … d5), but Nepomniachtchi’s pace and accuracy in response suggested he was prepared for both. The champion began exhausting more and more time on his moves, falling behind more than three‑quarters of an hour on the clock after spending nearly 20min deciding on 19 … Qe8. But Nepomniachtchi’s decision to play 20 Red1 instead of c4 was, Carlsen confessed, an enormous relief. “I definitely considered [c4] the main option,” said Carlsen, who turned 31 on Tuesday. “I thought everything else was kind of manageable. Obviously it’s always a bit worse, but it feels like my position is not going to get worse, it’s going to probably gradually improve seeing as I have very few real weaknesses. [c4] was definitely what was worrying me the most there. Seeing Rd1, I kind of thought that the worst was over.” From there Carlsen was able to rely on his tactical acumen and instinct to simplify the position and come away with a half-point after 3hr 50min, leaving Nepomniachtchi to rue his missed chance to take the match by the scruff. “Of course I’m disappointed,” the world No 5 said. “Today is basically not about him defending well but me not using all the opportunities I had.” The bloodless result, which left the best-of-14 match in a 2½-2½ deadlock with nine contests remaining, extended a run of 19 consecutive draws in classical world championship games. Carlsen drew the final two games with Sergey Karjakin in 2016, all 12 against Fabiano Caruana in 2018, then five straight to open this year’s tie with Nepomniachtchi. “I think there is some magical cutoff point where draws instead of just being normal, they become a problem,” said Carlsen, who will marshal the white pieces when play resumes on Friday afternoon after a rest day on Thursday. “But I don’t think we’ve crossed the Rubicon yet.”That’s all for today - here’s our main stories so far: Goodnight. GW Cyber-security firm Darktrace and science and chemicals company Johnson Matthey are being relegated out of the FTSE 100 index of leading shares. The latest reshuffle of Britain’s blue-chip stock index, just announced, shows that they’ll be replaced by Dechra Pharmaceuticals, which has seen strong demand for its veterinary products in the pet pandemic boom, and industrial and electronics products maker Electrocomponents. Darktrace and Johnson Matthey are being shuffled into the FTSE 250 index of smaller companies, in a rebalancing based on last night’s closing share prices. Darktrace, which floated earlier this year, has seen its shares halve since hitting record highs in September, as a lock-in period preventing insiders selling shares ended, and some analysts questioned its prospects. Johnson Matthey’s value tumbled after it announced last month it was pulling out of the electric vehicle battery business. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, explained that Darktace could yet return to the FTSE 100. Darktrace is not alone in being a former IPO darling, now experiencing the pain of a rapid deceleration in its share price. Its successful launch in the spring was seen as a coup for the London market, and if it exits the top-flight it will leave a big tech gap in the FTSE 100. However, given ongoing growth reported by the company and some pretty upbeat trading updates, it may not stay outside the top-flight for long. There is growing demand for sophisticated technology to counter the growing armies of cyber criminals and Darktrace uses AI to scan regular business operations and detect tiny irregularities, providing an early warning system of cyber-attacks. The ongoing shift to digital is likely to keep opening up new opportunities and markets for Darktrace as firms scale up their operations to meet demand, whilst trying to ensure their systems stay secure.’’ While for Johnson Matthey, investors are clearly worried about its strategy for the future, she explained. The engineering company’s decision to abandon plans to become a battery supplier by selling off its eLNO business saw shares slide, because this appeared to be JMAT’s answer to the shift towards electric vehicles and away from combustion engines, for which it makes catalytic converters. Management says it will focus on other potential growth avenues, but ultimately the group will be starting from scratch as it looks for new opportunities alongside the new greener auto industry. Although catalytic converters won’t be rendered obsolete immediately, the clock is ticking and as the transition to electric vehicles speeds up, Johnson Matthey will need to quickly find a new sense of direction.’’ Among smaller companies, online electricals retailer AO World and Wagamama’s owner Restaurant Group are dropping out of the FTSE 250. With risk appetite returning to the City, the FTSE 100 index has closed 109 points higher at 7169 points. That’s a surge of 1.5% today, its biggest one-day rise since 21st July as worries about the Omicron variant recede. Gains in banks, oil and mining stocks led the index higher, along with travel companies such as IAG (+3.4%). The smaller FTSE 250 index jumped by 1.75%, with travel and hospitality stocks such as Wizz Air (+7%), easyJet (+4.3%), and Restaurant Group (+7.7%) higher. Energy company Drax jumped 9%, after outlining plans to invest billions more in biomass. A strong start to December, but it still leaves the FTSE 100 index around 140 points, or 2%, below its levels last Thursday - ahead of Friday’s heavy selloff. Other European stock markets also had a strong day, with the pan-European Stoxx 600 rising 1.7%, and Germany and France up around 2.4% each. Danni Hewson AJ Bell financial analyst, explains that investors are hopeful that the Omicron variant won’t undermine the recovery. “The volatility that’s marked the last few days hasn’t gone away but today’s action has at least been positive pretty much across the board. Investors have likely grabbed onto the comments from a WHO official that Omicron is in most cases mild and that there’s no evidence that vaccine efficacy should be reduced. If this twist in the Covid saga follows the same path as Delta did then global recovery shouldn’t be undermined. London’s indices have bubbled over with optimism rather like an over eager sommelier with a good champagne. Across all sectors there’s been positive momentum and notable gains for companies that bore the brunt of Friday’s battering with IAG, Wizz Air and The Restaurant Group most in fashion. “By contrast Ocado has fallen out of favour as people breath a huge sigh of relief that queues around supermarket car parks are not expected to make a return appearance any time soon. Today Christmas is back on, whether tomorrow will bring a new twist to chill the glow is frankly anybody’s guess. Craig Erlam of OANDA points out that there is still significant uncertainty about Omicron, and the risk that America’s central bank ends its stimulus measures sooner. Today’s rebound really doesn’t feel particularly warranted given what little we know about Omicron at this point and what Jerome Powell said yesterday. A hawkish central bank and clearly concerned governments around the world is hardly the recipe for a new surge in the stock market. But then, buying dips has often appeared to defy logic and yet been very effective so you can’t blame investors for giving it a try. And let’s face it, we’re a good headline on vaccine effectiveness away from a potentially tasty Santa rally. Maybe that’s the play for those jumping back in despite the worrying signs around the new variant. Travel and hospitality stocks are rallying strongly this afternoon, as fears over the latest variant of Covid-19 recede. In London, British Airways parent company IAG is up 3% in late afternoon trading, with budget airlines easyJet up 5.4% and Wizz Air gaining nearly 7%. Cruise operator Carnival are 4% higher, while hotel operator Whitbread have gained nearly 3%. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares is ending the day strongly, up 91 points or 1.3% at 7151 points. Industrial metals, such as copper, are also rebounding. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says investors are hoping that Omicron will be more benign than initially feared: This expectation of a more benign outcome, as a WHO official says early data shows existing vaccines should be effective, has seen a wholesale rebound in the likes of travel and leisure stocks, with British Airways owner IAG, and Premier Inn owner Whitbread leading the way, along with the likes of BP and Shell as oil prices rebound ahead of this week’s OPEC meetings. The lack of appetite for co-ordinated travel restrictions amongst EU leaders may well also be helping on the margins with easyJet and Wizz Air also showing strong gains. The economic impact from COVID-19 has faded since the start of the pandemic but still remains strong, Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey said today. Asked how to assess news of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, Bailey explained: “Direct economic effects of COVID have attenuated a lot since the fall in GDP in the second quarter of last year, when we went off a cliff. “However, there are still impacts that we are feeling from COVID quite strongly,” He was speaking at a question and answer session hosted by Britain’s Institute and Faculty of Actuaries which focused mostly on insurance regulation, Reuters reports. The owner of the Drax power station is expected to profit from Britain’s energy crisis until 2023 and will plough billions into doubling its production of wood pellets for burning by 2030 despite mounting opposition from environmentalists. The FTSE 250 energy company’s shares hit seven-year highs on Wednesday after it told investors it aimed to invest £3bn by 2030. Part that investment would be directed towards doubling production and sales of biomass pellets, which Drax uses at its North Yorkshire power plant as an alternative to burning coal. Its claims that electricity produced in this way is “carbon neutral” is disputed, with green groups saying burning biomass produces emissions that contribute to the climate crisis. Drax will fund the expansion plans using its own cash as it prepares to profit from record high energy market prices in its long-term contracts over the next two years. More here: The Institute of Supply Management’s survey of US factories is also out, and it shows that the sector grew at a faster rate last month. It also found that supply chain problems are constraining growth, as Markit’s PMI report a few minutes ago also showed. The ISM reports that economic activity in the manufacturing sector grew in November, with the overall economy achieving an 18th consecutive month of growth. Its manufacturing PMI rose to 61.1%, from 60.8% in October, with: New Orders, Production and Employment Growing Supplier Deliveries Slowing at a Slower Rate; Backlog Growing Manufacturing Inventories Growing; Customers’ Inventories Too Low Prices Increasing; Exports and Imports Growing The ISM’s Timothy R. Fiore says: The U.S. manufacturing sector remains in a demand-driven, supply chain-constrained environment, with some indications of slight labor and supplier delivery improvement. All segments of the manufacturing economy are impacted by record-long raw materials and capital equipment lead times, continued shortages of critical lowest-tier materials, high commodity prices and difficulties in transporting products All of the six biggest manufacturing industries — Computer &amp; Electronic Products; Food, Beverage &amp; Tobacco Products; Chemical Products; Petroleum &amp; Coal Products; Fabricated Metal Products; and Transportation Equipment, in that order — registered moderate to strong growth in November, says ISM. It also found that almost all commodities became pricier last month.... Less encouragingly, growth across America’s factories has slowed to its lowest level this year, according to data firm IHS Markit. It’s US manufacturing PMI has dropped to an 11-month low for November, with firms reporting that: Output growth was subdued amid softer rise in new sales and supply shortages Job creation slowed due to reports of labor shortages Input costs rose att he fastest pace on record Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, said supply chain problems are hurting US factories, who are also seeing a slowdown in new orders. “Broad swathes of US manufacturing remain hamstrung by supply chain bottlenecks and difficulties filling staff vacancies. Although November brought some signs of supply chain problems easing slightly to the lowest recorded for six months, widespread shortages of inputs meant production growth was again severely constrained to the extent that the survey is so far consistent with manufacturing acting as a drag on the economy during the fourth quarter. While demand remains firm, November brought signs of new orders growth cooling to the lowest so far this year, linked to shortages limiting scope to boost sales and signs of push-back from customers as prices continued to rise sharply during the month. While average selling price inflation eased as firms sought to win customers, the rate of input cost inflation hit a new high, hinting at a squeeze on margins Reassuring words about vaccine efficacy, and a decent US jobs report, have lifted the market today, explains Fiona Cincotta, senior financial markets analyst at City Index. US stocks are rebounding on Wednesday after another steep selloff in the previous session. Omicron concerns and a surprisingly hawkish turn from the Fed sent stocks tumbling with the S&amp;P 500 closing 1.9% lower. Fed Powell told the Senate Banking Committee that the risk of inflation has increased and the word transitory should be retired. He also said that the pace of tightening could be accelerated, which means interest rate rises could also come sooner. The hawkish turn came from the Fed at a time when uncertainty surrounding the Covid outlook rose abruptly. Even so, the Fed don’t consider that the new variant will cause the same economic chaos that COVID initially caused. Today, the mood in the market has improved amid encouraging comments from the Israeli health minister and BioNTech who see the Pfizer vaccine offering protection against Omicron. US ADP payrolls were also encouraging, showing the continued recovery in the labour market. ADP private payrolls rose 534k, ahead of the 520k forecast but below October’s 571k. Stocks in New York have opened higher, a day after worries about Omicron contributed to a sharp selloff. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US companies has jumped by 240 points, or 0.7%, at the open to 34,725 points. The broader S&amp;P 500 index has risen by 1.1%, or 50 points, to 4,617, while the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite index is nearly 1.2% higher. Every sector is green, led by energy, materials, financials and consumer discretionary stocks. Entertainment group Walt Disney (+2.2%) is leading the Dow risers, along with healthcare insurance firm UnitedHealth (+2%), American Express (+1.9%), construction equipment maker Caterpillar (+1.7%) and investment bank Goldman Sachs (+1.7%). Turkey’s central bank staged an intervention to prop up the ailing lira today, after a series of controversial interest rate cuts sent the currency reeling to record lows. However the move hasn’t brought much relief, with Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan defending his “risky but correct” economic policy of low interest rates again. Reuters has the details: The Turkish lira fluctuated sharply near a new record low on Wednesday as the central bank said it had intervened due to “unhealthy” market prices, while President Tayyip Erdogan again doubled down on his pre-election strategy of sharp rate cuts. The volatile trade in low liquidity came after the emerging market currency logged its second-worst month ever in November, hammered by Erdogan’s endorsement of sharp monetary easing despite soaring inflation and widespread criticism. The central bank - which Erdogan has overhauled and pressured this year - said in a statement it “directly” intervened in the market “via selling transactions due to unhealthy price formations in exchange rates”. The lira , which had earlier weakened as far as 13.87 to the U.S. currency, rebounded as far as 12.42 - a rally of more than 8% on the day. However, by 1256 GMT, it was just 0.5% firmer at 13.35. “We have no doubt that [central bank] intervention will fail if the intention is to stabilize the currency, though it could provide some more two-way risk in the near term. In fact, the move worries us even more,” said Brown Brothers Harriman. “Spending precious FX reserves suggests that the government is still holding the line in its economic policies, making the adjustment even more painful,” it said. Turkey expert Paul McNamara, of asset manager GAM, shows how the lira initially rallied against the dollar, before dropping back: Back in the UK, footwear company Clarks has reached an agreement with about 100 workers to end a two-month strike at its distribution centre in Somerset. The deal with the Community union, which follows mediation with Acas, is understood to protect hourly pay for established workers and increase pay for new staff at the site. Staff at the warehouse have been on strike since 4 October, saying the shoemaker had been seeking to cut their wages by almost 15% to £9.50 an hour by using controversial fire and rehire tactics. The changes were implemented after Clarks was taken over by a Hong Kong-based private equity firm, LionRock Capital, and the billionaire former Chinese Olympian Li Ning in March. The deal pumped £100m in new cash into the near 200-year-old British footwear company, which is still co-owned by the descendants of its founders – Cyrus and James Clark. In a joint statement, Community and Clarks said: “We are pleased that a resolution has been reached that works in everybody’s interests, protects Community members’ livelihoods, and recognises their loyalty to Clarks. “Following an indicative ballot of Community members it is confirmed that normal working has now resumed.” The 536,000 increase in US private payrolls last month supports Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell’s comment yesterday that the Fed might wrap up its QE scheme earlier than planned, says Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics. But, he predicts jobs growth will ease back soon, as rising Delta infection rates in the Northeast and Midwest begin to weigh on demand a little. American companies added over half a million more employees to their payrolls last month, as the labor market continued to recover. Payroll operator ADP reports that private payrolls increased by 534,000 for November, ahead of estimates, but down on the 570,000 added in October. Services firms added 424,000 jobs, including 136,000 at leisure and hospitality companies, 110,000 at professional/business services firms and 78,000 across trade, transportation and utilities. Goods-producing sectors hired 110,000 staff, including 52,000 in construction and 50,000 in manufacturing. It suggests the US jobs market was solid last month, in the face of rising inflation, supply problems, and fears that the pandemic could slow growth into the winter months if infections rise. The official US government measure of employment, the Non-Farm Payroll report, is due on Friday, and expected to show around 550,000 jobs were created last month. In the US, applications for a new mortgage fell sharply last week, as a jump in borrowing costs deterred people from refinancing. Mortgage applications fell 7.2% week-on-week, driven by a 15% tumble in refinancing requests following a pick-up in mortgage rates. Joel Kan, Mortgage Bankers Association’s associate vice president of economic and industry forecasting, says: “Mortgage rates rose for the third week in a row, reducing the refinance incentive for many borrowers. Over the past three weeks, rates are up 15 basis points and refinance activity has declined over 18%.” Applications for a mortgage to buy a new property rose around 5%, though: House prices in the UK continued their upwards climb in November, reaching double-digit growth again as demand remained strong after the end of the stamp duty holiday and the furlough job support scheme. The average UK house price rose by 0.9% last month, according to data from the building society Nationwide, after an increase of 0.7% in October, taking the average UK property value to £252,687. Average house prices are 10% higher than a year earlier. House prices have risen to almost 15% above levels seen in March 2020 when the coronavirus pandemic first struck the UK, Nationwide said. The continuing rising prices appear to be in part down to a reduction in the supply of houses available to buyers. The October property market was the quietest for almost a decade, according to data from HM Revenue and Customs, as house sales were 28% lower in October than a year earlier after a record surge in activity earlier in 2021. More here: Bosses of pubs, bars and restaurants across the UK are warning they are already receiving cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties amid fears about the Omicron variant and following mixed guidance over socialising during the festive season. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of the trade body UK Hospitality, said its members were starting to see bookings cancelled, which would have a serious financial impact on their businesses. She said there was no doubt that fears about the Omicron variant would “have a dampening effect just as we were about to head into our busiest trading period, and any drop in revenue pushes businesses back to loss-making as government support like grants and furlough has fallen away”. Hugh Osmond, the founder of Punch Taverns, said: “We are seeing that some of the people in large organisations who organise bigger events are taking the cautious view because I guess they feel some overriding responsibility. We are not seeing that in young people.” “Social interaction is, after food and water, the most important thing for a human being’s mental health,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. The OECD has predicted that the UK will recover to its pre-crisis levels at the beginning of 2022, as the progress in rolling out vaccines supports the recovery. Output is projected to rise by 6.9% in 2021, faster than the wider G20 (+5.9%), the US (+5.6%) and the eurozone (5.2%) UK growth is then seen moderating to 4.7% in 2022 and 2.1% in 2023, with Brexit frictions weighing on trade. The OECD says: Consumption is the main driver of growth during the projection period. Business investment will improve but continues to be held back by uncertainty. Increased border costs following the exit from the EU Single Market are weighing on imports and exports. Unemployment will continue to decline. Inflation will keep increasing due to higher energy and commodity prices and continuing supply shortages. It is expected to peak at 4.9% in the first half of 2022 and then fall back towards the 2% target by the end of 2023. The OECD also flags that the government should ‘closely monitor’ the impact of tax increases on the recovery: Monetary policy should tighten gradually to bring inflation back to target over the medium term, as price pressures show signs of becoming persistent. Fiscal policy should continue to support the economy and become more targeted to aid economic restructuring. Boosting training and career counselling programmes can facilitate economic reallocation and ease job transitions. Government programmes should focus on providing certainty on long-term issues such as the transition to net zero in order to support investment. The effects from phasing out fiscal support measures on businesses and households should be closely monitored, in the context of planned tax increases, to avoid derailing the recovery. Small British energy supplier Zog Energy has collapsed, becoming the latest casualty of soaring wholesale energy costs. Regulator Ofgem says that Zog, which has 11,700 domestic customers, has ceased to trade. Customers will now be moved to a new supplier. A message on Zog’s website says: Ofgem’s advice is not to switch, but to wait until they appoint a new supplier for you. This will help make sure that the process of handing customers over to a new supplier, and honouring domestic customers’ credit balances, is as hassle free as possible for customers. Ipswich-based Zog is the 25th energy company to collapse since the start of September, as the surge in wholesale gas and electricity prices has disrupted the sector. Bulb, the UK’s seventh biggest energy firm with 1.7m customers, collapsed last week, followed days later by Orbit Energy and Entice Energy, affecting over 70,000 customers. The OECD have tweeted the key points from their latest Economic Outlook report: The OECD is also concerned that the Omicron variant may intensify supply shortages and price pressures building in the global economy. Laurence Boone, chief economist of the OECD, has told the Financial Times that the latest Covid-19 variant is: “adding to the already high level of uncertainty and that could be a threat to the recovery, delaying a return to normality or something even worse”. The OECD has warned that rising inflationary pressures could threaten the global recovery. In its latest economic outlook, the Paris-based group warned that the rebound from last year’s pandemic slump is losing some momentum as the surge in demand for goods has led to bottlenecks in production chains. This could worsen, if central banks are forced to act to fight inflation. Inflation pressures have emerged in all economies, it says, with rising food and energy prices hitting low-income households in particular. It points out that: disruptions in energy, food and commodity markets have pushed up prices high energy prices and fuel shortages are limiting manufacturing of key materials and intermediate goods bottlenecks in production chains are spreading to more generalised shortages of goods. Inflation is already at a 13-year high in the UK, and at 30-year highs in the US and Germany. The OECD predicts price pressures will peak earlier next year, but warns that: The main risk, however, is that inflation continues to surprise on the upside, forcing the major central banks to tighten monetary policy earlier and to a greater extent than projected. Such an outcome could stem from a number of possible factors, including prolonged supply disruptions, an upward shift in inflation expectations, labour market pressures, or if prices for a wider range of goods and services start to rise substantially. The report also warns that “new, more transmissible COVID-19 variants of concern” could also hit the recovery. There’s also a risk of a slowdown in China, hitting other economies, if the problems in its property sector, and in power supplies, intensify. The OECD also flags that the global recovery has lost momentum and is becoming increasingly imbalanced. Parts of the global economy are rebounding quickly but others are at risk of being left behind, particularly lower-income countries where vaccination rates are low, and firms and employees in contact-intensive sectors where demand has yet to recover fully. The recovery is expected to remain uneven, it adds: Most advanced economies are projected to return to their pre-pandemic output path by 2023, but with greater debt and still-subdued underlying growth potential. Inflation is also projected to be higher than it was prior to the pandemic in many countries, although generally remaining in line with central bank objectives. The OECD predicts global growth is set to hit 5.6% this year, before dipping to 4.5% in 2022 and 3.2% in 2023. UK factories faced the sharpest rise in price pressures in at least 30 years last month, as supply chain problems and the energy crisis drove up costs. The latest survey of UK purchasing managers found that factory costs rose to the highest level since records began in 1992. Firms reported ongoing shortages of components, commodities and labour, forcing them to run down stocks to satisfy customer orders. Although orders rose, firms also reported a drop in new export orders, for the third month in a row. There were reports of weaker demand from China, disruption to trade with the EU (in part due to ongoing Brexit complications) and the cancellation of some orders due to extended lead times, says Markit. Overall, the IHS Markit CIPS UK Manufacturing PMI rose in November to 58.1 from 57.8 in October, showing slightly faster growth. Duncan Brock, group director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply, fears the UK economy could over inflate unless supply chain problems ease: “Sluggish global supply chains remained uppermost in the minds of manufacturers this month. Disruption led to a new three-decade high in terms of mounting prices and supplier delivery times increased for the 29th consecutive month holding back further output. “New orders flows exacerbated the problem in manufacturing capacity with the fastest intake for three months, and it was the domestic market that made up the majority of the new work. Export orders dropped back again as long lead times, port and shipping difficulties caused some clients to lose patience and opt to source elsewhere. “This didn’t detract from the optimism in the sector as 63% of manufacturers that conditions would continue to improve – if only in fits and starts. With more success in finding skilled labour they are preparing for supply chain issues to even out and for price rises to subside. 74% of supply chain managers paid more for their goods in November, as prices charged also accelerated at a rapid pace raising fears that the UK economy could over inflate if supply chain disruption doesn’t subside in the first quarter of 2022.” Eurozone factories continued to be hindered by severe supply-related constraints last month. Growth slowed at intermediate and investment goods makers in November, although consumer goods producers grew faster, Data firm IHS Markit’s survey of purchasing managers shows. Firms continued to suffer from material shortages, poor transport availability and staffing issues at vendors, the survey shows. Costs kept rising too, leading factories to hike prices at the fastest rate since the survey began in 2002. After slowing for four months, activity in the sector accelerated slightly, with the IHS Markit Eurozone Manufacturing PMI increasing from 58.3 in October to 58.4 in November [showing faster growth]. Italy posted the fastest growth, while France lagged (anything over 50 shows growth). Takeover news: UK software group Blue Prism has agreed to be taken over by US fintech company SS&amp;C Technologies in a £1.24bn deal. Warrington-based Blue Prism, which sells Robotic process automation software, has withdrawn its backing for a bid from private equity firm Vista, in the latest takeover battle for a UK company. SS&amp;C’s all-cash offer of 1,275 pence per Blue Prism share is higher than its earlier possible bid of 1,200 pence, and is above private equity firm Vista’s final offer of 1,250 pence which Blue Prism accepted last week. Jason Kingdon, chairman and CEO of Blue Prism, said: “Blue Prism was an early pioneer in building the RPA sector and today is a market leader, working with over 2,000 organisations worldwide. While as a standalone enterprise we have built an impressive business, the opportunity presented to combine Blue Prism with SS&amp;C will bring us access to significant capital resources and investment in R&amp;D alongside access to SS&amp;C’s extensive 18,000 customers. Robotic process automation software lets companies use technology to automate routine back-office tasks, using software ‘robots’. German consumer spending was subdued in October, in another sign that Europe’s largest economy is stumbling towards the end of 2021. Geman retail sales fell by 0.3% in October, and were 2.9% lower than a year earlier, data body Destatis reports. That’s weaker than expected, suggesting that the recent jump in inflation and ongoing supply bottlenecks are hitting demand. UK house prices were lifted by a shortage of homes on the market, and the rush to fix mortgages before interest rates rise. So says Lucy Pendleton, property expert at independent estate agents James Pendleton, who predicts December could be ‘unusually intense’: “This market is still barreling along, even at a time of year that traditionally sees a little energy taken out of it. “Fewer people choose to move home at Christmas and that normally means you see buyers drop the pace, with many holding off their search until after the New Year. “That’s happening to a lesser degree this year but more so for buyers than sellers. This is worsening the supply crunch temporarily and that’s undoubtedly why we’re back in double digits. “One obvious reason for this is the threat of inflation. With interest rate rises stealing plenty of headlines, everybody has become an armchair economist. It’s common knowledge that rates are historically low and are going to climb soon. The rush to beat rate rises is fuelling an unusually busy market. The oil price is rallying this morning too, after tumbling yesterday on fears that omicron would hurt the global recovery. Brent crude has surged by 4% this morning, back to around $72 per barrel. On Tuesday, crude oil prices hit their lowest level in three months amid concerns about the efficacy of Covid-19 vaccines against the latest variant, and after Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell said the central bank might end asset purchases sooner than planned. The Opec+ cartel meets tomorrow to decide its monthly production targets from January. It has been adding an extra 400,000 barrels per day to output each month recently, but some analysts think it could freeze output, or even cut it slightly, following the recent drop in prices. Stocks have opened sharply higher in London, as the markets try to shake off yesterday’s worries over the Omicron variant. The FTSE 100 index has jumped by 74 points, or 1%, to 7133 points, led by travel companies, hospitality firms, miners and oil companies. Hotel operator Whitbread (+3.7%), airline group IAG (+3.5%), and energy group BP (+3%) are leading the risers, with mining giants Anglo American (+2.6%) and Rio Tinto (+2.6%) also in demand. This means the blue-chip index has recovered yesterday’s losses, but is still around 2.5% below last weeks levels, before Friday’s tumble. Investors will be cheered by the head of BioNTech, who predicted yesterday that its vaccine (produced by Pfizer) is likely to offer strong protection against any severe disease from the new Omicron Covid variant. BioNTech’s founder Ugur Sahin said: “To my mind there’s no reason to be particularly worried. “The only thing that worries me at the moment is the fact that there are people that have not been vaccinated at all.” Yesterday, stocks were rattled after the CEO of drugsmaker Moderna suggested Covid-19 vaccines would struggle to cope with Omicron. Richard Hunter, head of markets at interactive investor, says: UK markets continue to blow hot and cold in the face of Omicron uncertainty, in terms of both the medical and economic impact. Taking the lead from a more positive overnight session in Asia, shares were marked higher in opening exchanges in something of a relief rally. Even though there is insufficient information on the latest variant fully to assess the impact, there is an increasing feeling that any fallout would be less severe than that seen in the initial pandemic. In any event, and as seen in previous waves, companies are better prepared to deal with any future restrictions having experienced them before. Less positively, of course, there are already immediate impacts such as the restriction on overseas travel, which has stopped the tentative recovery of sectors such as the airlines in their tracks. The markets are also pondering whether future variants and mutations will be dealt with in a similar fashion by governments and policymakers, Hunter adds: If so, a full economic recovery will become more difficult as these interruptions interfere with the progress which companies had been making. Even so, some consider the initial market reaction to the news to have been overdone which has led to some bargain hunting as is the case in the UK today, with some rotation out of defensive shares. Iain McKenzie, CEO of The Guild of Property Professionals, also cautions that there is uncertainty in the market, after a busy year driven by people seeking more space in the pandemic: “Britain’s year on the move continues, with more properties sold already this year than were sold in the whole of 2020. “Prices are still climbing due to a shortage of stock available to prospective buyers, with many of those working from home still desperately hunting for a larger property and more space. “There is still some uncertainty in the market, with the new Omicron variant warning people that it’s not business as usual. “As long as the labour market remains buoyant and mortgage approvals continue at their current levels, it is likely that the demand for property will remain steady as we move into 2022.” UK house prices reached another new record on Nationwide’s index in November, rising to £252,687 from £250,311 in October. [Land Registry figures, though, show the average UK house price hit a record high of £270,000 in September 2021] Martin Beck, senior economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, predicts house price growth will slow next year -- which might help first time buyers onto the housing ladder. Stamp duty back at its normal level is not the only headwind facing the housing market: household income growth faces pressures from higher inflation and tax rises, while uncertainty stemming from the new Omicron variant could hold back potential buyers until the situation is clearer. Prices are unlikely to fall, though, Beck says, due to the demand for houses from people seeking more outdoor space and room to work from home. The excess savings build up by some households, and the strong jobs market, could also support prices. “Moreover, despite the Bank of England’s MPC adopting a more hawkish tone on the prospect of interest rate rises, mortgage rates fell to a record low in October. And uncertainty stemming from the new Omicron variant reinforces the EY ITEM Club’s expectation that the MPC will hold off raising rates until next year. So, while house price growth is likely to slow during 2022, an outright fall seems unlikely.” Despite the jump in house prices in November, Nationwide cautions that the outlook for the sector remains uncertain. There are several factors suggesting the pace of activity may slow -- including the latest Covid-19 variant, the cost of living squeeze, and the possibility that the Bank of England raises interest rates in the coming months. Nationwide chief economist Robert Gardner explains: It is unclear what impact the new ‘Omicron’ variant will have on the wider economy. While consumer confidence stabilised in November, sentiment remains well below the levels seen during the summer, partly as a result of a sharp increase in the cost of living. Moreover, inflation is set to rise further, probably towards 5% in the coming quarters. A rise in interest rates could also dampen demand: Even if economic conditions continue to improve, rising interest rates may exert a cooling influence on the market. Indeed, house price growth has been outpacing income growth by a significant margin and, as a result, housing affordability is already less favourable than was the case before the pandemic struck. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK house price growth accelerated again last month, as demand holds up despite the end of the furlough job protection scheme and the stamp duty tax break this autumn. The average UK house price rose by 0.9% in November, data released by Nationwide shows, following a 0.7% increase in October. This pushed the average house price 10% higher than a year ago. House prices are now almost 15% above their level in March 2020 when the pandemic struck the UK, Nationwide says, as the move to homeworking drove people to seek larger homes in more rural areas. Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s Chief Economist, says annual house price growth remained strong last month, despite a sharp drop in transactions in October after stamp duty rates returned to normal. “There have been some signs of cooling in housing market activity in recent months. For example, the number of housing transactions were down almost 30% year-on-year in October. But this was almost inevitable, given the expiry of the Stamp Duty holiday at the end of September, which gave buyers a strong incentive to bring forward their purchase to avoid additional tax. “Indeed, activity has been extremely buoyant in 2021. The number of housing transactions so far this year has already exceeded the number recorded in 2020 with two months still to go and is actually tracking close to the number seen at the same stage in 2007, before the global financial crisis struck. The cut in stamp duty on house purchases in England and Northern Ireland finished at the end of September, having wrapped up earlier in Wales and Scotland. UK mortgage approvals dropped to their lowest level since mid-2020 in October, but Gardner argues that underlying activity appears to be holding up well, with approvals running above the 2019 monthly average. Early indications also suggest that labour market conditions remain robust, despite the furlough scheme finishing at the end of September, he adds: If this is maintained, housing market conditions may remain fairly buoyant in the coming months, especially since the market has momentum and there is scope for ongoing shifts in housing preferences, as a result of the pandemic, to continue to support activity. More to follow... Also coming up today Healthchecks on factories in the UK, eurozone and the US will show how manufacturers fared last month, in the face of ongoing supply chain problems and the rise in Covid-19 cases in some countries. Already today, manufacturing surveys from across Asia have shown activity stabilized last month amid easing lockdown and border restrictions. The financial markets remain volatile, with shares expected to rise this morning after being hit by worries over the Omicron variant yesterday. Stocks were also hit yesterday by Jerome Powell, after the Fed chair suggested America’s central bank could wind down its bond-buying stimulus package faster than anticipated, to combat inflation. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote, explains: Inflation is ‘not transitory’ said the Federal Reserve (Fed) Chair Jerome Powell at his testimony before the Senate yesterday, and the stock markets took the ‘no transitory’ phrase as a slap in the face. Most equities dived yesterday, as many didn’t expect to hear a hawkish Powell at a time the new omicron wave threatens the economic recovery. We now know that Jerome Powell thinks ‘it’s appropriate to discuss whether it will be appropriate to wrap up the QE purchases a few months earlier’, at the next FOMC meeting which is a couple of weeks from now, and an earlier end of the QE program would also mean an earlier hike of interest rates, even though Powell wants investors to dissociate the link between the timing of the QE taper and the first rate hike. The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone manufacturing PMI report for November 9.30am GMT: UK manufacturing PMI report for November 10am GMT: OECD to release its latest Economic Outlook 1.15pm GMT: ADP survey of US private sector payroll changes in November 3pm GMT: Fed chair Jerome Powell testifies to the House Financial Services CommitteeWhen government policy collides with human rights legislation, the Conservative party instinctively finds fault with the law. For that reason, Priti Patel, the home secretary, is unlikely to be moved by a parliamentary report published on Wednesday calling for humanitarian amendments to the nationalities and borders bill. The joint committee on human rights has various concerns about the bill, of which the most pressing are the intent to criminalise the very act of “irregular” arrival in the UK and the plan to “push back” migrants attempting to cross the Channel. In the former case, the committee identifies a breach of a UN convention, which states that refugees must not be penalised for the fact of entering a safe country illegally. As for driving boats back towards France, the core principle at stake is the fundamental right to life as enshrined in the European convention on human rights (ECHR) and incorporated in UK law via the Human Rights Act. As the recent drowning of 27 people tragically demonstrated, the water is treacherous enough without the increased hazard of aggressive intervention by border guards. The very idea mandates cruelty to those on the vessels being repelled. It is also unfair on enforcement officers, who might be ordered to imperil the lives of vulnerable people. The deterrent effect is likely to be negligible. The criminals who run the trafficking networks stay safe on dry land. Ms Patel is aware that her policy risks putting border guards on the wrong side of the law. One remedy reported to be under consideration is to declare them immune from prosecution. To assert such impunity in a matter of life and death would be an egregious challenge to one of the most fundamental principles on which legitimate state power rests. Bad laws are often born of political frustration, and this is no exception. Sovereign control over the nation’s frontiers was the central to the promise of Brexit. Anything that makes the border look porous is thus intolerable to Boris Johnson. When driven by fear of losing the support of his core vote, the prime minister is unpersuaded that human rights law, or moral obligation to desperate people, makes a compelling case for a different approach. In that respect, he is going with the grain of Conservative policy for decades. The party has long discussed repealing the Human Rights Act and withdrawing from the European convention. Some hoped Brexit would make that happen, but it does not. The ECHR is not an EU institution, but it does set standards that are embedded in EU treaties – including the trade and cooperation agreement that Mr Johnson signed last year. It takes a combination of arrogance and nationalism to presume that assertions of British sovereignty take precedence over international principles that were established as mitigation against humanitarian disaster and insurance against political atrocity. There is an authoritarian thread woven through the parts of the bill that pertain to Channel crossings. There is also a more banal calculation at work when the government subordinates ethical considerations to the politics of talking tough on immigration. That approach takes Britain further down the path of treating human rights as a disposable impediment to effective government. It is a road that leads, sooner or later, to acts of official cruelty that bring shame on the politicians who permit them.