It’s something. The chancellor’s Omicron support package for the hospitality sector is worth £1bn, enough for Rishi Sunak to claim he listened to the cries of distress from pubs, restaurants and leisure businesses and acted. And, to be fair to him, there was applause from the main industry lobby groups. Kate Nicholls, chief executive of UKHospitality, called it a “generous package”. It is hard, though, to escape the sense that the measures could quickly be overtaken by events. This is a limited package designed merely to catch up with the current “stealth lockdown” environment, meaning consumers’ sensible decision to tone down their partying. It would not be sufficient to cope with a ramping up of restrictions beyond plan B. One hopes the Treasury knows as much. The focus was on parcels of grants – up to £6,000 for each premise – plus reimbursement of statutory sick pay of up to two weeks a worker for small and medium-sized employers. That’s a limited bailout from the point of view of businesses, but it does nothing for employees who would be at risk of losing their jobs in a proper lockdown. Nor, as the Resolution Foundation thinktank pointed out, does it offer support for workers on zero-hours contracts who will see their hours reduced. They have been the biggest losers during the toned-down season of socialising. The open question is what happens if heavier restrictions are introduced after Christmas. Some version of a sector-specific furlough scheme would still seem essential. Sunak has provided a holding position; it cannot be the last word on the matter. Schroders knows which way the wind is blowing Call it a windfall from windfarms. Greencoat Capital, a fund manager that was early into renewables investment in 2009, including windfarms in the Irish Sea, is being bought by the industry giant Schroders. Or, at least, a 75% stake is changing hands in cash at an enterprise value of £358m. Greencoat’s four founders, plus a few staff, currently own the business, so that’s a very large payday for them. To keep the sellers keen, Schroders is also offering a potential three-year earn-out worth up to £120m. Not bad. For the buyer, it’s a very on-strategy transaction. Schroders’ chief executive, Peter Harrison, has been pushing hard into responsible and green investing in recent years and Greencoat is one of the fastest-growing names in the specialist sector (one of its investment trusts is a member of the FTSE 250 index). The target’s £6.7bn under management barely registers against Schroders’ £700bn, but the direction of travel is clear. One cannot say Schroders is getting an out-and-out bargain, however. Greencoat generated revenues of £38.2m last year and made pre-tax profits of £20m. Even if one assumes a one-quarter uplift this year, Schroders will be paying about 20 times earnings. That’s steep for a fund management business by traditional yardsticks. A “full, but not excessive” price, said Barclays’ analysts, and, yes, two factors probably support that generous verdict. First, with a shove from Schroders’ marketing muscle, Greencoat should be able to accelerate its push into the US; at the moment, the business is primarily a UK and continental European backer of windfarms and solar, biomass and heat projects. Second, money is shifting like never before into renewables and energy transition. Low wind speeds in Europe have been an operational problem this year but haven’t affected investment appetites one jot. Schroders is an old and canny outfit: it has probably called this one right. ASA scores a clever goal against Arsenal Well played, the Advertising Standards Authority, which seems to have opened a war against the irresponsible promotion of cryptocurrencies and cryptoassets. Last week, it ruled against a couple of big names, Coinbase and eToro. This week’s crop includes Arsenal football club, which was found to have unfairly punted a “fan token” to supporters. Arsenal’s charge-sheet from the ASA is long: exploiting consumers’ “inexperience or credulity”; trivialising investment in crypto assets; misleading consumers over investment risks; and not making it clear the “token” was a crypto asset. The club will seek an independent review, but the ASA’s attempt to bring some order to the crypto market is to be applauded. The watchdog has few teeth, but nobody else seems shocked by the rapid normalisation of high-risk speculative instruments. Keep pressing.Sexual harassment is “endemic” in universities and colleges, with one in 10 staff members saying they have experienced sexual violence in the past five years, according to a report. Women were nearly two-and-a-half times as likely to experience sexual violence as men, while staff on insecure contracts, those with disabilities, LGBTQ+, or black, Asian or minority ethnic were also at greater risk, according to a survey of nearly 4,000 staff members by the University and College Union. Jo Grady, UCU general secretary, said there were “cultural problems” within universities stemming from a reluctance to discipline perpetrators for fear of damaging institutional reputation, especially where these are star academics who bring in large amounts of research funding. This is compounded by the prevalence of insecure contracts which make staff hesitant to report unwelcome behaviours due to anxieties about jeopardising their careers, she said. Although she acknowledged that sexual violence in the workplace wasn’t unique to the education sector, Grady said there had been particular “failures to acknowledge the prevalence of it and the scale of the problem”. “Survivors say managers are often dismissive towards those reporting sexual violence, complaints processes are hardwired to frustrate claims and non-disclosure agreements are used to silence them, forcing many to leave their employment without justice. With practices like this, it is little wonder over half don’t report their abuse at all,” she said. Of the staff members surveyed, 52% said they hadn’t disclosed their experience of sexual violence, which was defined in the report as any unwanted sexual advance, ranging from uncomfortable comments and harassment to assault and rape. This is despite 70% saying it was a pattern of behaviour rather than a one-off incident. The report warned that this is concerning because “over time, a pattern of seemingly small and innocuous acts can set the scene for physical forms of sexual violence such as sexual assault to be carried out”. The report said that survivors do not trust the complaints process, with some worrying about the implications for their careers, since 28% of those surveyed experienced sexual violence from their managers. Others simply do not believe that anything will be done, or are not aware of the reporting procedures. Some staff said they had been pressured into resolving complaints informally or asked to sign non-disclosure agreements to safeguard the institution’s reputation. One survivor interviewed for the report said that when they had attempted to raise a complaint they were told the perpetrator’s behaviour was “just the way he was”, while another said senior managers laughed about inappropriate behaviour being “just the boys”. Some respondents said uncomfortable behaviours had become normalised. One said “everyone knew that these men were ‘creepy’ and ‘sleazy’ but no one did anything”. Another added: “If they are a prof with a large grant record, you may as well forget about it.” Staff members were also unhappy with the drawn-out and complicated nature of the formal investigations process and the traumatic experience of being asked to re-tell their story on multiple occasions. They were also frustrated by universities’ reluctance to disclose the outcomes of investigations to complainants on GDPR [data protection] grounds. The chair who led the report, Prof Lesley McMillan, said it showed promising signs that “the sector is waking up to the problem” but warned that “progress is variable, and in some cases, slow or yet to begin”. A spokesperson for Universities UK said the report made for “difficult but important reading” and that it would use it to step up work with universities and the UCU. They said: “University senior management take these matters extremely seriously and universities are committed to becoming safer places to live, work and study so that no student or member of staff is subject to any form of sexual violence or misconduct. “However while progress has been made, including in encouraging survivors to come forward and report, we know – and this report further emphasises – that there is much more to do to end all forms of harassment in higher education.” A Department for Education spokesperson said the universities minister, Michelle Donelan, had written to vice-chancellors in July to stress that they must take a zero-tolerance approach to sexual violence and implement “robust procedures” to tackle it. She also set out plans to tackle the misuse of non-disclosure agreements, on which the government will provide further detail “in due course”.The UK’s advertising regulator has banned two promotions for “fan tokens” from Arsenal Football Club, saying they were misleading supporters over the risks of investing in cryptocurrencies. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) said that the north London club was “taking advantage of consumers’ inexperience or credulity, trivialising investment in crypto assets, misleading consumers over the risk of investment and not making it clear the ‘token’ was a crypto asset”. Arsenal said it would seek an independent review of the ruling “to seek greater clarity on the ASA’s current position”. The Arsenal ad ban was one of a number published by the regulator on Wednesday, including bans on advertisements by BT, the cider brand Kopparberg, and the online retailer THG. An increasing number of football clubs are becoming involved with cryptoassets, including Watford through shirt sponsorships from cryptocurrency trading platforms and Barcelona and Juventus which offered their own “fan tokens” or non-fungible tokens (NFTs) that serve as digital memorabilia – while proving potentially very lucrative for the clubs. However, some have faced issues given the lack of regulation of the space. Manchester City last month suspended a partnership with a cryptocurrency startup that appeared to have a minimal corporate presence. The head of the Arsenal Supporters Trust, Tim Payton, last month told the Times newspaper that football clubs should have a “greater duty-of-care responsibility toward their fans” and suggested there should be more regulation of cryptocurrencies. An Arsenal spokesperson said: “We take our responsibilities with regard to marketing to our fans very seriously. We carefully considered the communications to fans regarding our promotions and provided information regarding financial risks.” The latest ASA rulings – 25 in total – also included a ban on another crypto advert. Skrill, described as an “online wallet and money transfer service”, took advantage of consumers’ inexperience, the regulator said. BT was rapped for an advert for broadband internet which claimed to guarantee speeds of 60MB/s, after a complaint. THG, the online retailer of consumer products like makeup and protein shakes, made “misleading claims over potential discounts for hair products” on its Lookfantastic website. The regulator said that a Kopparberg radio ad broke rules because it implied that alcohol could contribute to an individual’s popularityand featured people who appeared to be under the age of 25. The ASA also named and shamed four influencers who published ads on their Instagram feeds, including for not properly disclosing they were paid for the posts – a growing problem for the regulator. They were reality TV personalities Charlotte Dawson and Chloe Ferry, the beauty blogger Jamie Genevieve and video blogger Anastasia Kingsnorth. It was the second time that Ferry has been censured within six months, after she was criticised in June for posting an ad for a company that claimed it could help customers write off up to 85% of their debts. In Marc,h the ASA warned it would crack down on influencers who broke the rules. Under the UK advertising code, paid-for endorsements must be clearly marked, typically using a hashtag such as #ad or #spon, short for advertising or sponsored. Complaints against two adverts – by the clothing retailer Jigsaw and construction machinery retailer JMAC – were upheld for objectifying women. Regulators also upheld 26 complaints that a Halloween billboard poster for Blackpool Pleasure Beach was “inappropriate and disturbing for young children” – although Norfolk Dinosaur Park avoided censure for its poster following complaints that it was too scary.The Covid self-isolation period has been cut to seven days in a move that could save Christmas for thousands of people and ease mounting staff shortages. From Wednesday, new guidance will enable the 10-day self-isolation period for vaccinated and unvaccinated people in England who have tested positive for coronavirus to be reduced by three days if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests. People who receive negative results from tests taken 24 hours apart on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period will no longer have to self-isolate for the full 10 days, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. However, those who are not fully vaccinated will still have to isolate for the full 10 days if they are a close contact of someone who has tested positive. Those who leave self-isolation on or after day seven are “strongly advised” to limit close contact with other people in crowded or poorly ventilated spaces, work from home and minimise contact with anyone who is at higher risk of severe illness if infected with Covid-19, the agency added. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said: “We are reducing the self-isolation period from 10 days to seven if you test negative on a lateral flow test for two days running. It’s vital people keep playing their part by testing regularly and isolating if they test positive. And I urge you to get boosted now to protect yourself and those around you.” Some businesses had feared that if the rules were not relaxed then they could be crippled by mass staff absences. However, scientists and others have raised concerns, arguing that shortening the self-isolation regime could increase the likelihood of Covid spread, given lateral flow tests are not entirely reliable indicators of whether someone is infected. Analysis by the UKHSA suggests that a seven-day isolation period alongside two negative lateral flow test results has nearly the same protective effect as a 10-day isolation period without lateral flow testing. The new approach reflects the latest evidence on how long infected people transmit the virus for and will support essential public services and supply chains over the winter, while still limiting the spread of the virus, UKHSA said. The UKHSA chief executive, Dr Jenny Harries, said: “Covid-19 is spreading quickly among the population and the pace at which Omicron is transmitting may pose a risk to running our critical public services during winter. “This new guidance will help break chains of transmission and minimise the impact on lives and livelihoods. It is crucial that people carry out their lateral flow tests as the new guidance states and continue to follow public health advice.” • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. After publication the UKHSA clarified that the seven-day period also applied to unvaccinated people who tested negative on days six and seven, but that the 10-day period would still apply to those who were not fully vaccinated if they were a close contact of someone who had tested positive.Almost 5 million families in social housing in England are facing the biggest rent hike for a decade from April amid a mounting cost of living squeeze, according to a report. The Resolution Foundation thinktank said 4.75 million families would see rent on their local authority or housing association home rise by up to 4.1%, adding to the pressure on living costs by an average £202 extra a year. It warned the increase would coincide with significant tax rises planned by the government to come in from April and a further jump in household utility bills when Ofgem’s consumer energy price cap is raised. The Bank of England also forecasts inflation will peak at about 6% the same month, the highest level since 1992. “Rising social rents on top of these increases will be very damaging for living standards indeed,” it added. Social housing providers set rents each year within a cap calculated on the consumer price index measure of inflation for September plus 1%. While this is a cap rather than a requirement, most providers are expected to raise rents by the full amount. It comes after CPI reached 3.1% in September. The latest rise follows a decade of housing costs rising faster than incomes for those living in social accommodation, with families renting from local authorities and other providers suffering a faster increase than for those in private rented homes or owning their property. According to the report, social renters now spend 19% of their income on housing costs after housing benefit is taken into consideration, up from 15% a decade ago – equivalent to an extra £768 per year for the average family. In contrast, the share of income for private renters has remained flat over the same period, at an elevated level of 31%. Housing costs for homeowners have fallen from about 10% to 9% thanks to a drop in interest rates over the past decade. Housing benefit paid by the government will help cushion the blow for some social renters, although the thinktank warned the proportion of people receiving support from the state had dropped in recent years amid rising employment levels. Almost half of social renters do not receive housing benefit, meaning they will need to cover the biggest increase in social rent costs for a decade by themselves from April. Lindsay Judge, research director at the Resolution Foundation, said the rise would put particular pressure on the 2 million social renters who don’t receive housing benefit, but who are likely to face falling real wages, rising taxes and soaring energy bills. “While government support has helped to limit rent arrears from building up among social renters so far, raising rents to the maximum uprating would be unwise given the cost of living crunch hitting families hard this spring,” she said.Christmas will go ahead without any curbs on socialising, Boris Johnson has confirmed, prompting warnings this could lead to tougher measures later despite tentative signs that cases have begun to plateau. The prime minister said he understood that families across England needed certainty to press ahead with Christmas plans but warned curbs could still be imposed after 25 December because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. From today, the Covid self-isolation period in England will be cut from 10 days to seven for vaccinated and unvaccinated people in a move that could also help save Christmas for tens of thousands of people if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests on days six and seven, the government announced. However, those who are not fully vaccinated will still have to isolate for the full 10 days if they are a close contact of someone who has tested positive. The Christmas decision, which follows deep splits within the cabinet, was in contrast to moves by the Scottish and Welsh governments on Tuesday. Scotland cancelled Hogmanay street parties for tens of thousands of people, Wales announced £60 fines for employees who refuse to work from home, and both countries said sporting events would be held behind closed doors. Nicola Sturgeon had previously urged indoor mixing to be limited to three households either side of Christmas Day. Labour said that while the news about Christmas in England would be a relief to many, Johnson now appeared to be “too weak” to push any new restrictions through his cabinet if they were needed. The number of reported Covid cases across the UK fell for the third time in five days on Tuesday, raising hopes the recent surge may be starting to plateau – albeit at record high levels. There were 90,629 confirmed cases on Tuesday compared with a high of 93,045 on Friday. Paul Hunter, professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said that the recent rapid increase had slowed and numbers may now have “plateaued”. “I was pretty fed up last Thursday, but I am more optimistic tonight,” he said. “Even with all the caveats and sources of bias that might be influencing … it does give me hope.” Hunter said factors such as fewer people wishing to be tested in case it rules out Christmas gatherings with family could be at play – but none could sufficiently explain the trend of the last five days. “Looking at the rate of growth from two weeks ago, if that had continued we would have been expecting to report today something in excess of 200,000 [confirmed cases], rather than the 90,000,” he said. While he didn’t believe infections were falling, they could be stabilising, he said. “At the moment, the data looks as if it has plateaued. But there are caveats to that, that mean we still have to be somewhat cautious.” Hospitalisations are rising slightly but “the jury is still out” on whether the NHS could be overwhelmed next month, he added. In a brief video clip, Johnson said the situation with Omicron – which is highly transmissible and less responsive to vaccines – “remains extremely difficult but I also recognise that people have been waiting to hear whether their Christmas plans are going to be affected”. “So what I can say tonight is that naturally we can’t rule out any further measures after Christmas – and we’re going to keep a constant eye on the data, and we’ll do whatever it takes to protect public health. “But in view of the continuing uncertainty about several things – the severity of Omicron, uncertainty about the hospitalisation rate or the impact of the vaccine rollout or the boosters, we don’t think today that there is enough evidence to justify any tougher measures before Christmas.” He did not rule out post-Christmas curbs being announced this week but unless the data moves quickly that now seems unlikely. It is understood that any post-Christmas measures would involve regulations, requiring a vote in parliament, rather than just a change to advice. While Johnson reiterated warnings that people should be careful about Christmas plans, particularly with vulnerable relatives, some scientists said the lack of new rules carried significant risk. “This is a very risky approach and is very likely to result in the need for more stringent restrictions in the near future,” said Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist and professor of molecular oncology at the University of Warwick. “Waiting for case numbers and hospitalisations to increase is likely to be too late to suppress the spread of the Omicron variant and will subject the NHS to unprecedented pressure. A short circuit break now would have prevented more people from getting infected and from having to isolate which is now impacting many essential services.” Johnson’s announcement came after a long and divisive meeting of his top team on Monday during which the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, are understood to have warned against new measures. All have been linked with potential bids to become the next Conservative party leader, in particular following a rebellion by 100 Tory MPs over Covid curbs and a historic byelection defeat last week. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said: “Boris Johnson is too weak to get any measures to keep the country safe through his cabinet. The prime minister is focused on clinging on to his job, half his cabinet are preparing their leadership campaigns, and the country is left with no plan to deal with the imminent threat of Omicron. The government must stop arguing amongst itself, come forward with a plan, and give people and businesses clarity.” • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. After publication the UKHSA clarified that the seven-day period also applied to unvaccinated people who tested negative on days six and seven, although the 10-day period would still apply to those who were not fully vaccinated if they were a close contact of someone who had tested positive.A gingerbread White House is coated in pristine icing and decorated with tiny wreaths, surrounded by miniature fire, gas and police stations, a grocery store, post office, warehouse and school, complete with yellow bus. This twee vision of a virus-free world, produced by White House pastry chefs, formed an incongruous backdrop on Tuesday as Joe Biden strode into the state dining room to deliver something akin to a wartime address. Gloom, fear and fatigue stalk the land again. The Omicron variant has sent coronavirus cases spiralling across the US, forcing a new round of business closures. A long queue of people snakes around a testing site a couple of blocks from the White House. It’s a deja vu of death and despair. It also spells trouble for a president who ran on compassion and competence and promised to beat the virus, along with Donald Trump. At year’s end, Covid-19 is surging again while Biden’s legislative agenda is sagging and his approval rating is in the doldrums. It was not meant to be like this. The president, who in his January inaugural address spoke of “a winter of peril and possibility”, finds himself in another winter where peril appears to have the upper hand. He is also aware that rightwing critics are eager to portray him as a pro-lockdown, pro-mandate, joy-killing Ebenezer Scrooge. But the last thing Biden wanted to conjure on Tuesday was the grim ghost of Christmas past. Behind him were two cheerful Christmas trees adorned with photos of family and snowmen. A red ribbon was draped over the fireplace. To his left was that idyllic gingerbread display and a wreath hanging over a mirror. Biden began with his signature empathy card. “I want to start by acknowledging how tired, worried and frustrated I know you are. I know how you’re feeling. For many of you, this will be the first or even the second Christmas where you look – across the table will be an empty kitchen chair there.” But then came the Churchillian appeal for stiff upper lips: “While Covid has been a tough adversary, we’ve shown that we’re tougher – tougher because we have the power of science and vaccines that prevent illness and save lives, and tougher because of our resolve.” The unvaccinated have good reason to be concerned, he warned, but the vaccinated should celebrate Christmas as planned. Yes, they could get Covid “in large numbers” but they are protected from severe illness and death, he said. Biden announced that half a billion at-home tests will soon be available for Americans to order online for free, a development that is embarrassing for press secretary Jen Psaki, who earlier this month appeared to pooh-pooh the idea. Psaki had to eat some humble pie at Tuesday’s press briefing. But the pandemic has always been political and Omicron threatens to pour yet more fuel on those flames. David Leonhardt, a senior writer at the New York Times, observed that partisanship is the biggest factor determining vaccination rates. “If Democratic voters made up their own country, it would be one of the world’s most vaccinated, with more than 91 percent of adults having received at least one shot,” Leonhardt wrote. “Only about 60 percent of Republican adults have done so. This vaccination gap has created a huge gap in death rates, one that has grown sharply during the second half of the year.” It is a chilling omen for a president who, back in that inaugural address, vowed to heal wounds and unite the nation. On Tuesday he said: “The unvaccinated are responsible for their own choices. But those choices have been fuelled by dangerous misinformation on cable TV and social media. “You know, these companies and personalities are making money by peddling lies and allowing misinformation that can kill their own customers and their own supporters. It’s wrong, it’s immoral. I call on the purveyors of these lies and misinformation to stop it. Stop it now.” In addition, Biden gave a rare shout out to “the prior administration” for the speedy development of vaccines with the scientific community. Biden finished with another rallying cry: “I know you’re tired and I know you’re frustrated. We all want this to be over. But we’re still in it, and this is a critical moment … We’re ready. We’ll get through this’.” Unlike Barack Obama, Biden does not seem likely to hold an end-of-year press conference, but he did take a few questions from reporters. Several naturally focused on Joe Manchin, the senator from West Virginia who has rudely announced that he will not support Biden’s Build Back Better legislation after all. It was a devastating blow to a Senate veteran who campaigned on his ability to cut deals. But Biden, who has Irish ancestry, quipped: “Some people think maybe I’m not Irish because I don’t hold a grudge. Look, I want to get things done. I still think there’s a possibility of getting Build Back Better done. He added: “Senator Manchin and I are going to get something done.” In the world of romantic comedies and festive movies, it would have been the cue for Trump and Manchin to rattle down the chimney, agree to let bygones be bygones and say in chorus with Biden: “A Merry Christmas to us all. God bless us, everyone!” It is, after all, a time for miracles, and Biden may need one or two.The holiday season at the ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles, America’s busiest shipping complex, has always been hectic. But 2021 is a year unlike any other. A pandemic-induced buying boom and supply chain crisis led to an unprecedented backlog of ships lingering offshore and towering stacks of colorful containers clogging the entirety of the dockyard. Inside the port, thousands of workers are laboring around the clock to unload these containers one by one, sending the televisions, bicycles, medical supplies and more that they contain out to trains and waiting truckers, whose rigs stretch into nearby residential neighborhoods. The goods eventually make their way to warehouses and stores and into the arms of eager consumers. “It’s like being on a freeway in traffic”, Danny Miranda, the president of ILWU Local 94, the union that represents dockworkers, said of the port complex. “There’s nowhere to go. Every space is being utilized.” The frantic holiday season caps an unprecedented year for the port. Climbing consumer sales, worker shortages and the slowdown of major transportation hubs during the pandemic created a crisis in the global supply chain, leading to increasing costs and shortages of goods and containers. In June, the Los Angeles port became the first in the western hemisphere to process 10m container units in a 12‑month period. Month after month, the complex has regularly seen record-breaking numbers of cargo ships stuck waiting in nearby waters. The backlog, which left some ships idling in the waters outside the ports for weeks, churning out pollutants, is creating challenges for consumers and retailers alike, particularly amid the holiday season. “The last quarter of the year is always busy. You get out of the summer, bathing suits and lawn chairs and you get into the normal Christmas flow of cargo,” said Miranda, who started working at the port in 1978. “Never before have we had this much cargo come to our port in my experience.” Local officials and the Biden administration are working to reduce the backlog, including moving to 24/7 operations. But with a shortage of truck drivers to transport the goods and warehouse space to hold them, a return to normal levels of traffic is still far. As the pandemic took hold in the US, it brought lockdowns and restricted access to services, which sent consumer spending on goods surging. Americans are continuing to spend significantly more on goods than ever before and the supply chain is struggling to keep up. “Americans are buying 20-25% more containers from China. If you have a system that is designed to grow between 2-4% and you ask it to grow overnight by 25% … It’s not feasible,” Edward Renwick, vice-president of the Los Angeles board of harbor commissioners, said at a recent board meeting. The increased consumer demand, along with supply chain issues and a steady backlog of ships outside the ports which together move 40% of container imports in the US – are certain to affect holiday shopping this year. Experts expect to see shortages of items such as bicycles, toys and personal electronics and long delays for home appliances. “I think there’s gonna be quite a few things that are not going to be available for Christmas,” said Bill Michels, vice-president of operations, Americas at Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply. “I don’t think people will be able to get the kinds of gifts they were intending to get. There’s gonna be less choices.” Retailers have encouraged consumers to buy early this holiday season. Meanwhile, the port complex has been working for months to address the backlog, teaming up with the Biden administration to find solutions, expanding working hours, pushing companies to clear out empty containers more quickly and securing additional storage space. In the early days of the pandemic, the ports were almost at a standstill, Miranda recalled, as imports slowed dramatically with Covid-19, creating supply chain issues around the world. Infections, too, slowed things; at one point earlier this year, before the widespread availability of vaccines, just over 5% of the 15,000 dockworkers at the two ports were infected with the coronavirus. Twenty-two workers have died of Covid over the course of the pandemic. “The pandemic created a lot of different things. People want their next day delivery. Amazon created that model and now we’re all stuck with it,” Miranda said. “People stayed home bunkered down during the pandemic and started utilizing online shopping. That’s where I think it started.” Port employees are moving more cargo than the complex has seen in more than a century of operation. Marine terminals are operating above 100% capacity to handle the surge, Gene Seroka, the LA port executive director, said at a recent meeting of the Los Angeles board of harbor commissioners. “There is no one lever that we’re gonna pull that simply gets all this cargo moving out of anchor as quickly as anyone would like,” Seroka said. “It’s all of these succinct efforts in unison that will continue to free up our docks to move more cargo.” Reducing the backlog at the port complex will ultimately require more truck drivers, experts warn, and a decrease in consumer demand. America needs about 80,000 more drivers than it currently has, according to the industry’s main trade body – a shortage fueled by low pay, long hours and challenging work conditions. California has increased the weight of loads truck drivers are allowed to carry on state highways and expanded the department of motor vehicles’ capacity to hand out commercial licenses. But without significantly more drivers to transport goods, the backlog will remain, said Katheryn Russ, an economics professor at UC Davis. “The only thing that will solve this, is having more truckers,” Russ said. “The most effective thing [would be] a boost in trucking wages and that lies with the trucking companies.” Supply chain issues can also serve as a wakeup call for consumers to consider their buying behavior, Russ said. “It gives me a reminder of the excess in my daily life,” she said. “That’s not the case for everybody but for a lot of us, we have too much stuff, so it’s a great reminder of how we can be gentler to the environment.” Miranda and port officials are hopeful that the $1.2bn infrastructure bill recently signed by Joe Biden will help alleviate long-term issues, with $17bn set to go to ports. Investments in the rail industry will also expand capacity, which will allow goods to move out more quickly. But in the meantime, the best approach to eliminate supply chain shortages, Russ said, is mitigating the spread of Covid-19, increasing the availability of rapid testing and resolving the pandemic. “Everyone who is complaining about supply chain shortages, whether it’s top of the government or people on the street doing the shopping, we should all be thinking what can we do to stop the pandemic,” she said. “There are things we can all do: masks, we can wash our hands, we can get vaccinated. “Those are all things we, as individuals, can do and should do as a patriotic duty to help the world to mitigate the virus and that will help our economy and prevent these supply chain related shortages.”We will be closing down this Covid blog but opening up a new live feed for all coronavirus developments here. If you’ve been following along, thanks for joining us and catch up with anything you might have missed by viewing all our coronavirus coverage here. The Covid self-isolation period has been cut to seven days in a move that could save Christmas for thousands of people and ease mounting staff shortages. From Tuesday, new guidance will enable the 10-day self-isolation period for vaccinated people in England who have tested positive for coronavirus to be reduced by three days if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests. People who receive negative results from tests taken 24 hours apart on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period will no longer have to self-isolate for the full 10 days, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. Those who leave self-isolation on or after day seven are “strongly advised” to limit close contact with other people in crowded or poorly ventilated spaces, work from home and minimise contact with anyone who is at higher risk of severe illness if infected with Covid-19, the agency added. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog. First up, some numbers out of Australia where I will reporting to you from. The state of NSW has recorded 3,763 new cases and two deaths. It is rise of more than 700 on yesterday’s number, a previous record day. Victoria reported 1,503 cases and six deaths. Meanwhile, Australia could have 200,000 new Covid cases a day by late January or early February under a “worst-case scenario” included in Doherty Institute modelling to be discussed at national cabinet. Boris Johnson has confirmed no further Covid restrictions will be put in place in England before Christmas. The UK prime minister said there was currently not enough evidence to justify tougher measures before Christmas but curbs could be imposed after 25 December. Edinburgh’s annual Hogmanay street party has been cancelled, while in Wales employees face £60 fines for failing to work from home as governments tightened rules to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. The Scottish and Welsh governments also imposed limits on sporting events from Boxing Day. People over the age of 60 in Israel will be eligible for a fourth Covid vaccination, the country’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, announced. His remarks came the country recorded its first death from the Omicron variant. The World Health Organization’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. Dr Hans Kluge said Omicron is now the dominant variant in a number of European countries, including the UK, Denmark and Portugal. The next mayor of New York City, Eric Adams, said on Tuesday he would postpone his inauguration ceremony, which was set for 1 January, due to the rise in cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. He did so shortly after the current mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced that residents who get a Covid-19 booster shot by the end of the year will receive $100. Germany has announced a string of new measures that are to take effect from 28 December “at the latest”, in a bid to get a rampant surge in new infections under control. Chancellor Olaf Scholz said the fourth wave of infections was now under control, but warned that the fifth wave was just around the corner. Portugal’s government ordered nightclubs and bars to shut doors and told people to work from home from 26 December to at least 9 January to control the spread of Covid-19 over the holiday period. A negative coronavirus test will also be required to stay at Portuguese hotels and outdoor gatherings will be limited to 10 people per group on New Year’s Eve. The archbishop of Canterbury has said that people will have felt “sorrow and sadness” seeing the photograph of Downing Street staff drinking together last May because it will have reminded them of what they sacrificed. In an interview, Justin Welby hinted at his disapproval over the gathering, saying that leadership involved setting an example. A bailout package worth about £1bn for businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge was announced by the UK’s chancellor, Rishi Sunak. The funding will primarily help firms in the leisure and hospitality sectors, and follows concerns that they have faced cancelled bookings. Israelis over the age of 60 and medical teams will be eligible for a fourth Covid vaccination to protect against the fast-spreading Omicron variant, the country’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, has announced. “The citizens of Israel were the first in the world to receive the third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine and we are continuing to pioneer with the fourth dose as well,” he said on Tuesday, calling on those who meet the criteria to “go and get vaccinated”. Bennett’s remarks came after a meeting of the country’s ministerial coronavirus cabinet which convened amid growing concern over the spread of the Omicron variant. The premier called the pandemic expert committee’s decision to go ahead with a fourth dose “wonderful news that will assist us in getting through the Omicron wave that is engulfing the world”. A statement from the health ministry noted that immunodeficient people will also be eligible for the fourth shot, which can be administered to them, elderly people and the medical teams at least four months after the third shot. Read the full article here: The UK’s National Health Service has increased the daily rate of booster vaccinations by three-quarters in a week – but remains short of the roughly 1.5m jabs a day needed to match Boris Johnson’s promise of a booster jab for all those eligible by the end of the year. One group of health service bosses said the NHS “should not be blamed” if the target is not met, reflecting concern there could be political recriminations if the goal set by the prime minister just over a week ago is not reached. On Monday, 897,979 boosters were administered around the UK, compared with 513,722 a week ago, the day after the prime minister brought forward the vaccination target in a televised address. There remain 15.1 million people across the UK who had a second jab before the end of September and have not yet had a booster – and there are 10 days, excluding Christmas Day, to complete the programme in line with the prime minister’s pledge. Read the full article by my colleagues Dan Sabbagh and Libby Brooks here: The Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby has said he thought about “the sorrow and sadness” many will have felt at seeing the picture of Boris Johnson and Downing Street staff drinking wine during lockdown. Speaking to ITV, he said he “felt a whole lot of emotions” after seeing the photograph, adding: I thought about the many people who’ll look at that and remember what they were doing on that day – and the sorrow and sadness they felt because of not being able to see someone or a bereavement of the last time they saw someone they loved. Although he said he was “not quick to judge people”, he said it “costs lives” not to have the “moral authority to lead”. There needs to be truth and integrity and the cost of leadership is that you set an example. You lead from the front which means you obey the rules. The next mayor of New York City, Eric Adams, said on Tuesday he would postpone his inauguration ceremony, which was set for 1 January, due to the rise in cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. He did so shortly after the current mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced that residents who get a Covid-19 booster shot by the end of the year will receive $100. “Today we’re announcing a $100 incentive for anyone who gets a Covid-19 booster at a city-run site or with our partner Somos Care,” De Blasio said. “This is a limited time opportunity – through 12/31. “This is the moment. Get your booster and protect your family and city,” he said. In his own statement, Adams, a Democrat like De Blasio, said: “It is clear that our city is facing a formidable opponent in the Omicron variant. After consulting public health experts, we have decided that [the] inauguration ceremony will be postponed to a later date.” The Omicron variant is spreading rapidly. According to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Omicron is now the dominant version of the coronavirus in the US, making up 73% of new infections last week. CDC data revealed a nearly six-fold increase in Omicron’s share of infections in just one week. New York state reported that nearly 22,000 people tested positive on Friday, the highest single-day total for new cases since testing became widely available. More than half of the positive results came from New York City. Read the full article here: One of Britain’s most senior scientific figures has warned “uncontrolled, high transmission” could have a “profound” impact across all sectors in the country. Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust, said it is “impossible to have a functional economy” if high rates lead to illness, time off work and hospitalisations. As we await more data to confirm trends, he has recommended the public get boosted, wear masks in all indoor spaces as well as to reduce contacts as much as possible. Early human testing of an experimental Covid-19 antiviral pill developed by Pardes Biosciences shows it works as a standalone treatment, the company said. If the drug, PBI-0451, proves effective in later-stage testing, it could have an advantage over similar pills that need to be taken with a second booster medication, such as Pfizer’s two-drug antiviral regimen, Paxlovid. Pardes said it expects to complete its current phase I study in healthy volunteers early next year and plans to go public by merging with a special purpose acquisition company, Reuters reports. “We’re hoping to be able to move as quickly as possible and generate significant data in 2022,” said the company’s chief development officer Brian Kearney. The Pardes pill is a protease inhibitor, designed to prevent the coronavirus from replicating in human cells. Company officials said it plans to discuss with regulators the design of a larger, global trial of PBI-0451, including the number of participants and geographic locations. Hospital bosses in England are bracing themselves for “a dangerous situation” because of the fast-growing Omicron-driven surge in Covid cases, an NHS leader has said. Responding to Boris Johnson ruling out any new rules limiting social mixing in England before Christmas, NHS Confederation chief executive Matthew Taylor said: “It remains a question of when rather than if further restrictions will be brought in to curb the rapid spread of Omicron. “While it is for the government to decide national policy on Covid restrictions, many NHS leaders are preparing for a dangerous situation in which rising patient numbers coincide with rising numbers of NHS staff off sick. That is why we must monitor the situation daily and stand ready to respond to changing evidence,” said Taylor. He did not comment directly on the prime minister’s decision. But it is likely that hospital chiefs, many of whom are busy finalising plans for yet another wave of seriously ill patients who need to be admitted, will be concerned at Johnson’s reluctance to change tack because his action could help the virus to spread – which could result in a spike of hospitalisations. Taylor urged the public to behave responsibly over the festive season. “The best thing the public can do is continue to behave in ways that will keep themselves and others safe, including taking up the offer of a vaccine or booster if they are eligible,” he added. Hello, it is Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over from my colleague Jedidajah Otte. The World Health Organization’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. Speaking at a press conference in Vienna, Dr Hans Kluge said Omicron is now the dominant variant in a number of European countries, including the UK, Denmark and Portugal. He said: We can see another storm coming. Within weeks, omicron will dominate in more countries of the region, pushing already stretched health systems further to the brink. Last week, 27,000 people died from Covid in the region and an additional 2.6m cases were reported, he said. Although these cases include all variants, he noted this figure is 40% higher than during the same period last year. He added: The sheer volume of new Covid-19 infections could lead to more hospitalisations and widespread disruption to health systems and other critical services. Governments and authorities need to prepare our response systems for a significant surge. The Welsh parliament will be recalled on Wednesday “to consider a matter of urgent public importance”, government officials have confirmed. First minister Mark Drakeford will make a virtual statement addressing the Senedd on the Covid-19 pandemic from 1.30pm and ministers will then have the opportunity to ask questions. It will follow a government media briefing which will be held just after midday to update the country on the Omicron crisis after Cabinet talks were held on Tuesday. The Senedd has been on winter recess since Monday. It is planned to sit again in Plenary on Tuesday, 11 January 2022. Germany has announced a string of new measures that are to take effect from 28 December “at the latest”, in a bid to get a rampant surge in new infections under control. Chancellor Olaf Scholz, North Rhine-Westphalia’s prime minister Hendrik Wüst and Berlin’s governing mayor Franziska Giffey gave a press conference about new coronavirus measures. Scholz said the Omicron variant would soon cause infections to skyrocket. “Covid-19 won’t take a Christmas break,” he said. The chancellor said the fourth wave of infections was now under control, but warned that the fifth wave was just around the corner. Private gatherings will be limited to 10 people even for those who have recovered from the virus or who have been vaccinated. Children under the age of 14 are not included in this number. Clubs and discos will remain closed. The “2G rule” – which stipulates that people must either be vaccinated or recovered from Covid-19 – will apply in cinemas and theatres. In addition, the sale of fireworks will be prohibited on New Year’s Eve, and there will be a ban on assemblies on 31 December. Tough restrictions for unvaccinated people will remain in place – with the 3G rule [having to be either vaccinated, recovered or able to produce a negative test] applying at work and on public transport, and tight contact restrictions also applying over Christmas. All measures decided on Tuesday should not start until after Christmas, Scholz said, adding that the past few years had shown that Easter and Christmas aren’t major drivers of infection. The government is aiming to administer a further 30m booster vaccinations by the end of January, Scholz said. As an interim goal, the overall vaccination rate in the population is hoped to increase to at least 80%. The different heads of Germany’s individual states will meet again on 7 January to discuss further steps, which is also when further financial aid for companies will be discussed again. France will pass a law that will transform its health pass – currently needed to exercise some professions and to go to cinemas and bars – into a “vaccination” pass in the first half of January, government spokesman Gabriel Attal told journalists on Tuesday. Reuters reports: “The wave awaiting us will be high,” Attal said, adding that the Omicron variant accounts for 20% of new Covid-19 infections in France and is spreading rapidly, particularly in the Paris region. The main aim of a vaccination pass will be to do away with the option of obtaining a valid certificate by testing negative instead of having the jabs. In contrast to other European governments, Attal on Tuesday ruled out further restrictions, saying that the country had the means to battle the next wave of cases with its vaccination campaign and mass testing. France logged 72,832 fresh infections on Tuesday, compared with 63,405 a week ago. Israel on Tuesday recorded its first death from the Omicron coronavirus variant, according to Israeli news media which on Tuesday reported that a man in his seventies with pre-existing conditions died in Beersheva on Monday after having received two vaccination doses, Reuters reports. The country confirmed 170 new cases of the Omicron variant, the health ministry said on Tuesday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases of the highly infectious variant to 341. The health ministry said it was looking into 807 confirmed Covid cases that may be Omicron, but have yet to be confirmed, Haaretz reports. The government’s coronavirus cabinet is set to meet later on Tuesday to discuss ways to handle the spread of the Omicron variant in Israel, in what will be the cabinet’s first meeting since the end of November. Fresh infections continue to soar, with Tuesday’s 1,306 new coronavirus cases marking a two-month peak, but the number of patients in serious condition remains stable, according to official figures. The country’s R number – representing the average number of people each coronavirus carrier goes on to infect – continues to climb, but the country has been able to observe a slight downward trend in serious cases over the past month. Currently, there are 81 patients in serious condition, out of whom 48 are in critical condition and 41 are on ventilators. Portugal’s government on Tuesday ordered nightclubs and bars to shut doors and told people to work from home from 26 December to at least 9 January to control the spread of Covid-19 over the holiday period. Prime minister Antonio Costa also announced that a negative coronavirus test would be required to stay at Portuguese hotels and said authorities would limit outdoor gatherings to 10 people per group on New Year’s Eve. Portugal’s recorded infections are still below the EU average, with 433 new Covid cases per day per million inhabitants. But in the previous week, this number stood at 386. A total of 7,801 people were in hospital in the UK with Covid-19 as of 20 December, government figures show. This is the highest number since November 23 and is up 1% from a week earlier, PA reports. During the second wave of coronavirus, hospital numbers peaked at 39,254 on 18 January. Separate figures from NHS England show that 1,904 people were in hospital in London with Covid-19 as of 21 December, the highest number since 2 March and up 41% from a week earlier. The peak of the second wave had stood at 7,917 on 18 January. Across England, 6,902 patients were in hospital with Covid-19 on 21 December – the highest number since 10 November and up 7% week-on-week. The second-wave peak for England was 34,336 on 18 January. Italy reported 153 coronavirus-related deaths on Tuesday versus 137 the day before and 120 a week prior, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections rose to 30,798 from 16,213, the first time above 30,000 since November last year. Italy has registered 135,931 deaths linked to Covid-19 since February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 5.4 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 8,381 on Tuesday, up from 8,101 a day earlier. There were 96 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 73 on Monday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,012 from a previous 987. 851,865 tests for Covid-19 were carried out over the past 24 hours, compared with a previous 337,222, the health ministry said. British prime minister Boris Johnson said on Tuesday that he would not be introducing new Covid-19 restrictions in England before Christmas, but stressed the situation remained extremely difficult and the government might need to act afterwards. In a video posted on social media, Johnson said: We don’t think today that there is enough evidence to justify any tougher measures before Christmas. We can’t rule out any further measures after Christmas. We continue to monitor Omicron very closely and if the situation deteriorates we will be ready to take action if needed. Johnson said that while people could go ahead with their Christmas plans, he would urge them to be cautious and follow advice such as keeping windows open and taking a Covid test before visiting elderly or vulnerable relatives, and get a booster jab if possible. The Philippines’ health ministry on Tuesday halved the waiting time for a Covid-19 vaccine booster to three months after a second vaccination to help prevent the spread of the more infectious Omicron variant. A growing list of countries, including South Korea, the UK, Thailand and Germany are shortening the interval for boosters to try to stave off a new surge in infections, Reuters reports. Adults in the Philippines can receive a booster dose at least three months after the second shot of a two-dose vaccine, cutting the six-month gap. Recipients of a single-dose vaccine can get a booster shot after two months, the health ministry said. “We are exploring all possible options to safely mitigate the effects of more transmissible variants of Covid-19,” health secretary Francisco Duque said in a statement. The Southeast Asian nation has detected three imported cases of the Omicron variant. The Philippines has received more than 192m doses of Covid-19 vaccines, and fully inoculated roughly 44.2 million of its 110 million population, government data show. In November, the government started the rollout of booster doses for healthcare workers and the elderly. Covid-19 cases have fallen to an average of 378 a day in December from the peak of 18,579 daily in September. A further 90,629 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases have been recorded in the UK as of 9am on Tuesday, the government said. A further 172 people were reported to have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been over 173,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. On Monday, the UK reported 91,734 new daily infections, and 59,077 a week ago. The UK Health Security Agency said there had been 15,363 additional confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 reported across the UK. This brings the total confirmed cases of the variant in the UK to 60,508. A total of 897,979 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported in the UK on Monday, new figures show. It is the second-highest figure on record, behind 940,606 doses on Saturday 18 December. More than 29.8 million booster and third doses have now been delivered in the UK, with 5.8 million in the past seven days. The figures have been published by the UK’s four health agencies. Vaccine sceptics in Sicily paid a nurse to give them fake Covid-19 jabs in order to obtain a health certificate that is mandatory for some professions, police said on Tuesday. Reuters reports: Three people, including the nurse and a local leader of the movement known in Italy as ‘No-Vax,’ have been arrested and face charges of corruption and forgery. Police used a hidden camera to film the nurse at a major inoculation centre emptying the vaccine syringe into a tissue before briefly putting the needle into the arm of the recipient. About a dozen health passes were obtained in this fashion, including by a policeman. Local media reported that people paid up to €400 each for the service. “We have uncovered the dark and fraudulent plots of these die-hard, No-Vax people who do not hesitate to break the law,” Palermo police commissioner Leopoldo Laricchia said in a statement. In an effort to curb Covid-19 infections, the government has made vaccinations mandatory for health care workers, teachers, law enforcement officers and the military. Italy further tightened curbs on people who are still not vaccinated on 6 December, limiting their access to an array of places and services, including indoor seating at bars and restaurants, museums, cinemas, clubs and sporting events. Some 81% of all Italians have received either one or two jabs – one of the highest rates in Europe – while 26% of the population has had a booster jab. As pressure has mounted to get vaccinated, so have reports of people trying to dupe the system. Earlier this month, a dentist turned up at a vaccination centre in northern Italy wearing a fake silicone arm, hoping to fool a nurse into giving him a jab in order to obtain a Covid-19 health certificate. Omicron is now firmly established as the dominant strain of coronavirus in Scotland, first minister Nicola Sturgeon has said, as she announced new restrictions on public events. Large-scale Hogmanay celebrations in Scotland are to be cancelled and live sports will be “effectively spectator-free” for three weeks from Boxing Day. More restrictions in hospitality venues will be introduced after Christmas. People in Scotland should also minimise their socialising at New Year, with Sturgeon urging people to keep their contacts with other households to a minimum. Updating MSPs, the first minister said 62.9% of cases showed the S-gene dropout, and that more restrictions were needed to slow the spread of the virus. She said: It is currently spreading rapidly across Scotland, and so the steep increase in infections that was predicted last week has now started to materialise. She added: Difficult though it is, please follow this advice over New Year – minimise Hogmanay socialising as much as you can. If we all follow the advice to minimise the contact we have outside our own households, we will help limit the spread of infections. This is the bedrock of our plan for the immediate period ahead. On restrictions for hospitality, Sturgeon told MSPs: From 27 December, again for a three-week period – we intend to introduce some further protections in hospitality settings and other indoor public places to reduce transmission risk in what are, through no fault of those who run such venues, higher-risk environments. I can confirm that a requirement for table service-only will be reintroduced for venues serving alcohol for consumption on the premises. And we will also ask indoor hospitality and leisure venues to ensure one-metre distance, not within, but between groups of people who are attending together. Recent funding from the Treasury will give Scotland an extra £175m to spend now, Sturgeon said. She told MSPs the entirety of this sum would go towards supporting businesses, bringing the total package for business support over the next three weeks to £375m. Discussing the new restrictions for hospitality, which include a rule for table service-only in venues serving alcohol, she said: I know how unwelcome this will be for everyone - but we believe these precautionary steps will help us navigate a difficult period more safely. I am also acutely aware that these decisions - and the advice we are giving the public – have significant financial implications for many businesses. More than two-thirds of people aged 18 and over and who are eligible in England have received a booster jab against Covid-19, NHS England said on Tuesday. In total, over 25 million people who are at least three months on from their second dose have already been boosted in England, with the online service opening to eligible adults last Wednesday. The latest numbers follow a week of “blockbooster” records for vaccinations, including a weekend with over 830,000 booster jabs delivered on Saturday – the highest number ever – and more than 1.5m boosters reported over Saturday and Sunday. More than 5.3m boosters were reported between 13 and 20 December. More than four in five of people aged 50 and over have now been boosted. The NHS is urging everyone who is eligible – three months on from their second jab and able to book after two months – to get their booster as soon as possible. However, people cannot get vaccinated within 28 days of having had the virus. Recent data from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) showed that two doses of the vaccine are not enough to stop people becoming unwell from Omicron, but a booster significantly increases protection against the variant. On Monday, the NHS opened the national booking service for 12- to 15-year-olds to get their second Covid-19 vaccine with more than 1.3 million young people already having taken up the offer of a first dose. Despite high vaccination rates, Spain could be forced to reintroduce measures as the Omicron variant is running rampant. Prime minister Pedro Sánchez will meet via video with the heads of Spain’s 17 regions on Wednesday to discuss new health measures, while medical groups and experts are clamouring for more action to be taken. The country had hoped to rely on the willingness of 80% of its entire population of 47 million (90% of those over age 12) to line up for vaccine shots with little-to-no prodding and the widespread use of face masks to have a Christmas that looked much more like 2019 than like last year, AP reports. But the incredibly fast spread of the Omicron variant is starting to put pressure on hospitals, prompting authorities in Catalonia to prepare to become the first Spanish region to reinstate serious limitations (see 10:35). The region accounts for one in four people hospitalised in Spain with Covid-19. “We had all hoped to spend these Christmas holidays with our family and loved ones, but unfortunately we are not in that situation,” Catalan regional president Pere Aragones said Tuesday. “You don’t have to look at the numbers. All of us know people who have been infected.” Spain is back in the high-risk zone with over 600 cases per 100,000 inhabitants over 14 days, more than double the accumulated cases seen before last year’s winter holidays. The Omicron strain has increased from 5% of new cases in Spain to 47% within one week, according to the health ministry. The British government needs to provide certainty, not just handouts for Covid-hit firms, a business owner has said. Nathan Godley, of restaurant supplier Premier Seafoods, told BBC Radio 4’s World at One: This time of year I need to know what I need for the restaurants and they are unsure what to tell me, and I am unsure what to tell my supplier. Fish doesn’t just go from the boat to the restaurant. There’s quite a few of us in this supply chain in between and we all need to know what is happening. Godley said he wanted an idea of how he could plan a week in advance, adding: “I don’t need any handouts. I am not asking for that. I am just asking for certainty.” His remarks were echoed by the president of British Chambers of Commerce, who said the new grants for hospitality businesses this Christmas are a “good start”, while calling for more certainty about future restrictions. Conservative peer Baroness Ruby McGregor-Smith told BBC Radio 4’s World at One: We asked very much for grant support, so we are delighted that grant support has been given, but we don’t know yet the definition of eligible businesses and companies. I think it is a good start. Our concern is around the fact that we need business confidence and we have got uncertainty. We need to know that we can stay open and continue to trade and consumers will return. Shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves said Labour “will be going through the details” of the new support measures for businesses, adding the government had been “dragged kicking and screaming” to announce them. Mark Davyd, founder and chief executive of Music Venue Trust, described the announcement of a further £30m for the government’s culture recovery fund this winter as “inadequate” to deal with the impact of rising cases on the sector. Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said newly-announced support for the culture sector was “far too little” and “borders on the insulting”. Sweden will urge all employees to work from home if possible and impose tighter rules for social distancing, the government said on Tuesday, as it ratchets up restrictions aimed at fighting a surge in new infections of the Covid-19 virus. The new rules also will also require seated-only service at bars and restaurants as well as at larger public events. “We must now take joint responsibility and we need to adapt to the new reality,” prime minister Magdalena Andersson told a news conference. “I understand that many are tired of this – so am I – but we now have a new virus variant, which means we are in a new situation.” The Swedish Health Agency said on Tuesday that the worst case scenario in an updated pandemic model would lead daily new Covid infections to rise beyond 15,000 by mid-January. In previous waves of the pandemic, daily infections have peaked at just over 11,000 cases, Reuters reports. The new model projection factored in the spread of the more contagious Omicron variant, assuming it is 25% more contagious than the Delta variant and factored in varying degrees of protection offered by vaccines. A bailout package worth about £1bn for businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge was announced by the British chancellor, Rishi Sunak, on Tuesday. The funding will primarily help firms in the leisure and hospitality sector in England, and follows concerns that they have faced cancelled bookings and plummeting custom since the government implemented its Covid plan B. My colleagues Andrew Sparrow and Richard Partington have the full story. Hundreds of far-right protesters gathered in Romania’s capital, Bucharest, on Tuesday to oppose a bill that would introduce “green certificates” in workplaces, which authorities hope will limit the spread of coronavirus infections and prevent another collapse of the country’s health care system, AP reports. The protest was attended by various rightwing groups including supporters of Romania’s nationalist AUR party, which holds seats in parliament. Romania, a European Union nation of about 19 million, faced its deadliest wave of coronavirus infections and deaths in October and November when intensive care units across the country were overwhelmed with Covid-19 patients, and hospital morgues ran out of space. In response to the unfolding disaster, authorities tightened restrictions in late October, and daily coronavirus cases have since dropped to their lowest since August. Authorities are concerned another surge is on the cards, after Romania confirmed more than a dozen cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Romania’s new coalition government is discussing a bill that would require people going into their workplaces to present green certificates – available to those with proof of full vaccination, those who have recovered from Covid-19, or those who have a negative test. They would be introduced after three consecutive weeks of an increasing Covid-19 infection rate, and once a certain incident rate is exceeded. Only 40% of Romania’s population, or 7.7 million people, have received two doses of a coronavirus vaccine. About 2 million of those have also received the booster dose. Over the winter holidays, hundreds of thousands of Romanians living abroad are expected to return home, which prompted authorities to implement on Monday passenger locator forms to improve the traceability of infections. In 24 hours, more than 100,000 forms have been filled out. Germany’s Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases recommended on Tuesday that “maximum contact restrictions” should be imposed immediately, to curb a surge in infections caused by the Omicron variant. Among the body’s other recommendations, which applied through mid-January 2022, were restricting travel only to what was absolutely necessary, accelerating the vaccination campaign and ensuring that enough free coronavirus tests were available, Reuters reports. Federal and state leaders are expected to meet later on Tuesday to decide on new measures, which are likely to include contact restrictions even for the vaccinated and those who have recovered from an infection, but a nationwide lockdown seemed to be off the agenda on Tuesday morning. The RKI reported 23,428 new infections on Tuesday, and 462 deaths, taking Germany’s total to 108,814. Paul Hunter, professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia (UEA), said the previous rapid increase in cases in England appears to be slowing and, if that is true, there is no need for a lockdown. Meanwhile, Prof Hunter told PA Media that measures such as social distancing and lockdowns “never ultimately prevent infection unless eradication is a possibility”. He said: What they do is flatten the curve and delay the inevitable. Sometimes that is sufficient if the epidemic would overwhelm the health service, or if effective new treatments or vaccines are coming. No new treatments or vaccines are likely to come soon so the issue is all about flattening the peak. But if you flatten the peak you prolong the epidemic, or as we say, ‘the area under the curve remains the same’. Prof Hunter said if Omicron cases continue to double every two days “then it would not be long before we got to seriously high numbers that would eventually put the NHS under a dreadful strain and under some predictions could ultimately overwhelm the NHS.” Under some modelling scenarios, high hospital admissions are “pretty much locked in” and “a lockdown after Christmas would probably be too late”, he said, but at the lower end of the predictions, hospital admissions would not overwhelm the NHS. He added: If restrictions are not needed then they would only delay illness and prolong the impact on health services as well as the other negative impacts that lockdowns have on our wellbeing. Prof Hunter said the “latest data suggests that total case numbers, and therefore Omicron, may already have plateaued or even peaked”. Indeed, infection numbers may have fallen slightly in the last few days. Transmission of the Omicron variant in the UK is “eye-wateringly high”, though there is still uncertainty about its impact on the NHS and whether the situation warrants further restrictions, a leading expert has said. Sir Jeremy Farrar, director of the global charitable foundation Wellcome and a former government adviser, said “we’re in the most difficult, most uncertain time, perhaps of the whole pandemic, certainly since March of 2020.” The government is expected to release further details on Tuesday about supporting firms struggling due to the advice for people to rethink some of their Christmas plans. Farrar told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: Omicron is spreading unbelievably fast. It is a phenomenal variant, transmission is eye-wateringly high, but there is great uncertainty. What is it going to lead to in terms of pressure on the health system, people going to hospital, people dying, but also what impact is it going to have on the broader society, staff absences, the ability to have functioning other services? So there is great uncertainty. My personal view is that I think we can wait at the moment until there are more restrictions formally placed, but each of us can do a lot of things today that would make the chances of further restrictions lighter. More data will be available today and tomorrow and I would act on those if transmission is rising still and if hospitalisations are going up across the country. He said that, until recently, Omicron was doubling every two days and it was not yet known if that was levelling off. People were already changing their behaviour and workplaces were breaking up for the Christmas break, meaning previous predictions of between 6 and 10 million cases by the New Year were “unlikely to happen”, he said. Nevertheless, Farrar warned of a potential impact on essential workers, including nurses, doctors and teachers, if transmission is not curbed. He said: At the moment, with the incredibly difficult policy and political decisions that need to be made, this is a time of great uncertainty, but I think waiting for that data for the formal decisions doesn’t mean to say that all of us can’t do what we can do over the coming days and weeks to reduce the chance of transmission and all of our sectors suffering and the economic damage that comes from that. There is data coming out today and if it does show the transmission is continuing to rise and if hospitalisations in London and across the rest of the country are starting to rise, then the government will have to act before Christmas. In New York City, nearly 42,600 people citywide tested positive from Wednesday through Saturday last week, compared with fewer than 35,800 in the entire month of November, AP reports. The city has never had so many people test positive in such a short period of time since testing became widely available. On Saturday, the state of New York recorded the highest number of daily Covid cases since the pandemic began. Governor Kathy Hochul urged New Yorkers to not be complacent, get vaccinated and boostered once eligible and wear a mask. There is no clear picture of how many people got the virus during the city’s first surge in the spring of 2020. US president Joe Biden plans to avoid a lockdown and instead increase support for hospitals, improve access to Covid-19 testing through hundreds of millions of rapid at-home tests and expand the availability of vaccines that can reduce the risks from the Omicron variant. A senior administration official, insisting on anonymity, provided details on the proposals Biden will announce in his speech Tuesday afternoon, the Associated Press reports. The administration is prepared to deploy an additional 1,000 troops in medical professions to hospitals as well as direct federal medical personnel to Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, Arizona, New Hampshire and Vermont. There are also plans to send out additional ventilators and equipment from the national stockpile besides expanding hospital capacity to handle infected patients. The government will purchase 500m rapid at-home tests to be delivered for free to the homes of Americans who request them, and put up new testing sites and use the Defense Production Act to help manufacture more tests. In a preview of Biden’s speech, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said at Monday’s press briefing that the president doesn’t plan to impose any lockdowns and will instead be encouraging people to get vaccinated – and, if they’re eligible, to get their booster shot. “This is not a speech about locking the country down. This is a speech about the benefits of being vaccinated,” Psaki told reporters. Biden’s top medical adviser, Dr. Anthony Fauci, said over the weekend that Biden will issue “a stark warning of what the winter will look like” for unvaccinated Americans. Psaki said Biden has tested negative twice since Sunday and will test again on Wednesday, after he had been in close contact with a staff member on Air Force One who later tested positive for Covid-19. There are 40 million eligible but unvaccinated American adults. Psaki said the president plans to appeal to survival instincts. “Our health experts assess that you are 14 times more likely to die of Covid if you have not been vaccinated versus vaccinated,” she said Monday. The Omicron variant has already become the dominant strain in the US, accounting for nearly three-quarters of new infections last week. Early studies suggest that the vaccinated will need a booster shot for the best chance at preventing an omicron infection but that even without the extra dose, vaccination should still largely protect people from serious sickness or death. About one in four local authority areas in the UK are recording their highest rate of new Covid-19 cases since mass testing began in summer 2020, new analysis shows. PA Media reports: The areas include two-thirds of authorities in London, more than half in south-east England and nearly a half in eastern England. Most of the rest of the country has yet to reach record levels, however, with only a handful of areas in the north and west seeing rates at an all-time high. The figures, which have been compiled by the PA news agency, show that: • 21 of the 32 local authorities in London now have record Covid-19 case rates, with the capital accounting for the top 10 highest rates in the UK and 20 of the top 25. • Four London areas have rates above 2,000 cases per 100,000 people: Lambeth (2,461.4), Wandsworth (2361.9), Hackney and City of London (2,096.8) and Southwark (2,064.0) • In south-east England, 37 of the 64 local authorities are now seeing record rates, led by Elmbridge (1,384.7), Reigate and Banstead (1,317.3) and Epsom and Ewell (1,271.6), all of which are in Surrey. • 21 of the 45 local authorities in eastern England have record case rates, including St Albans (1,311.3) and Cambridge (1,177.0). These are not the highest rates in the region, however – Brentwood (1,460.3) and Thurrock (1,342.2) in Essex are higher, though this is slightly below the record for both areas, which was set during the second wave of the virus last winter. • 12 of the 40 areas in the East Midlands are at a record high, led by South Northamptonshire (970.8), Broxtowe in Nottinghamshire (917.8) and Charnwood in Leicestershire (916.6) All figures are for the seven days to 16 December, as data for more recent days is still incomplete. In total, 102 of the 377 local authority areas in the UK (27%) are now recording their highest Covid-19 case rates since mass testing was rolled out across the country in May and June 2020. Figures for case rates in the early months of the pandemic are not directly comparable, as only a small number of people were being tested, mostly in hospitals and care homes. Of the 102 areas, only 11 are outside the south and east: six in north-west England (Bury, Cheshire West and Chester, Manchester, Salford, Stockport and Trafford); three in Scotland (East Lothian, Edinburgh and West Lothian); one in Northern Ireland (Ards and North Down); and one in the West Midlands (Newcastle-under-Lyme). The contrast between the south and east and the north and west reflects the way the Omicron variant of Covid-19 has spread in recent weeks – in particular, how London was the first area of the UK where Omicron became the dominant variant of the virus. Although nine in 10 local authorities in the UK are recording a week-on-week rise in rates, most areas in the north and west of the country have yet to hit levels seen during the second wave of the virus. But this could change in the days and weeks ahead, once Omicron has become the dominant variant in all parts of the country. Weekly registered deaths with Covid-19 in England and Wales have fallen to their lowest level in two months, new figures show. Seven hundred and 64 deaths were registered in the week to 10 December where “novel coronavirus” was mentioned on the death certificate, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said, accounting for 6.4% of all deaths registered over this seven-day period. This was a 4% decrease in the number of deaths compared with the previous week when 792 deaths were recorded. It is the lowest number of weekly deaths registered since the week to 15 October, when the total was 713. It is too early to see what impact the rapid spread of the Omicron variant will have in the weekly ONS data on Covid-19 deaths. Overall, England registered 3,185 deaths due to Covid-19 in November 2021, an increase of 774 compared to October, the ONS said. In Wales, there were 302 deaths due to Covid-19 in November 2021, compared with 284 deaths in October. The figures also show that 65 care home resident deaths involving Covid-19 in England and Wales were registered in the week to December 10, down slightly from 67 in the previous week. In total, 44,406 care home residents in England and Wales have had Covid-19 recorded on their death certificate since the pandemic began. The ONS figures cover deaths of care home residents in all settings, not just in care homes. A total of 173,525 deaths have occurred in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate, the ONS said. Hello everyone, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over now for the next few hours. As ever, feel free to get in touch to flag anything you think is relevant for our coverage, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. Here is a round-up of all the day’s top Covid news stories from around the world: The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that holiday festivities would in many places lead to “increased cases, overwhelmed health systems and more deaths” and urged people to postpone gatherings. Covid vaccine maker Moderna does not expect any problems in developing a booster shot to protect against the Omicron variant of coronavirus and could begin work in a few weeks, chief executive Stephane Bancel said in an interview. Catalonia is preparing to become the first Spanish region to reinstate serious limitations given the latest spike in infections in a country that is among the world leaders in vaccination. New Zealand plans to shorten the gap between second Covid vaccine doses and boosters, as well as pushing back the phased reopening of its borders. Germany looks set to introduce new contact restrictions around New Year’s Eve, as chancellor Olaf Scholz and the federal heads of state meet this afternoon to discuss ways to protect the country’s essential services from being overwhelmed by an anticipated new wave driven by the highly infectious Omicron variant. In Australia, a NSW man who absconded from hotel quarantine in Hobart and sparked a three-day lockdown across southern Tasmania has been sentenced to five months’ jail for breaching public health orders. Thailand will reinstate its mandatory Covid quarantine for foreign visitors and scrap a quarantine waiver from Tuesday, the Reuters news agency reported. India has recorded 200 cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant across 12 states, mostly in the western state of Maharashtra and the nation’s capital New Delhi, the health ministry said on Tuesday. Concerns are growing in Spain as the country prepares to enter the Christmas season without a clear plan. The sixth wave of Covid has sent infection rates soaring – the number of cases per 100,000 people hit 609 on Monday, up from 381 a week ago and 290 a fortnight ago. People hopping over the border to Belgium and Germany to avoid the Dutch lockdown are filling the neighbouring countries’ restaurants and shops despite calls for them to “stay away”. Hungary has decided to rejoin the European Union’s Covid vaccine procurement process to shield its population from the Omicron variant, ordering 9.5m doses of the jab developed by BioNTech and Pfizer. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. I will be back tomorrow morning but, for now, I am handing over to my colleague Jedidajah Otte, who will be bringing you all the latest coronavirus news throughout the day. Catalonia is preparing to become the first Spanish region to reinstate serious limitations given the latest spike in infections in a country that is among the world leaders in vaccination. Health authorities have asked the courts to authorise a battery of measures including a new nightly curfew between 1am and 6am, a limit of 10 people per social gathering, the closure of night clubs, and capping restaurants at 50% of seating indoors and stores, gyms and theatres to 70% capacity. If approved by the courts, they would take effect on Friday and last for 15 days in the north-east region surrounding Barcelona. Regional health chief Josep Argimon said that the measures are needed because of the arrival of the more contagious omicron variant. “Infections have grown 100% over the past week,” he said. People hopping over the border to Belgium and Germany to avoid the Dutch lockdown are filling the neighbouring countries’ restaurants and shops despite calls for them to “stay away”. Since Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, announced the closure of hospitality and non-essential shops from Sunday, border regions have experienced a rush of visitors. While the hospitality industry in the Netherlands is shuttered, Belgium has resisted scientists’ calls for stricter measures, with restaurants open until 11pm to customers who can prove full vaccination. The German Länder, or states, have been given the power to close restaurants but such measures are generally yet to be enforced. At a meeting with the governor of the Belgian province of Antwerp, Cathy Berx, on Monday, local mayors expressed their concern about the potential spread of the Omicron variant due to border-hopping. Berx said: “Letting this happen is the shortest route to a closure of the catering industry, and nobody wants that. And so the friendly but firm appeal is: don’t come to cafes or restaurants in the province of Antwerp now.” Germany looks set to introduce new contact restrictions around New Year’s Eve, as chancellor Olaf Scholz and the federal heads of state meet this afternoon to discuss ways to protect the country’s essential services from being overwhelmed by an anticipated new wave driven by the highly infectious Omicron variant. A draft proposal, seen by several German papers, proposes banning gatherings of more than ten people, closing clubs and discotheques and holding larger sports events behind closed doors from at least 28 December. Children under the age of 14 are exempt from the rule, while unvaccinated people are already only allowed to meet no more than two people from outside their own household. Germany’s rates of new infections and deaths have dropped over the last week, but the government’s council of scientific advisers has warned the expected spread of the Omicron variant will soon create “extreme pressure” not just on hospital’s emergency care unit but critical infrastructure like police, fire services and delivery services. The new measures come as the country continues to debate the introduction of a general vaccine mandate in the spring, with parliament likely to hold a free vote on the subject early in the new year. Justice minister Marco Buschmann, of the Free Democratic party (FDP), said there would likely be three motions that delegates will vote on: a general mandate that would see fines for those who continue to resist vaccination, an outright rejection of a general mandate, and a compromise whereby a vaccine mandate would be phased in by age groups. Chancellor Scholz and finance minister Christian Lindner have indicated their support for a general mandate, while a group of around 30 FDP delegates have said they would outright reject a general mandate. Concerns are growing in Spain as the country prepares to enter the Christmas season without a clear plan. The sixth wave of Covid has sent infection rates soaring – the number of cases per 100,000 people hit 609 on Monday, up from 381 a week ago and 290 a fortnight ago. The surge is already putting some hospitals and medical centres under strain. Although the proportion of ICU beds occupied by Covid patients stands at 15.5% nationally, it rises to 25% in the Basque Country and almost 30% in Catalonia. The prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged people to remain calm but called an emergency meeting of Spain’s regional presidents on Wednesday afternoon to discuss the response. Some regional administrations are already taking their own measures. On Monday, the Catalan government said it was seeking legal permission to introduce a curfew between 1am and 6am that would begin on Friday and last for two weeks. It also plans to close nightclubs and limit gatherings to 10 people. In Madrid – where the regional president, Isabel Díaz Ayuso, has fiercely resisted restrictions, arguing they are too damaging economically – school authorities have called on the regional government to “urgently” consider shutting schools two days before the end of term to help counter the spread of infections. Doctors in the capital and the surrounding region have also warned that immediate action must be taken to stave off collapse as the highly infectious omicron strain accounts for 60% of new infections. The Official College of Madrid Doctors said trying to control the spread of the variant through nothing but testing and isolation risked collapsing the region’s primary care system. It called for restrictions on the number of people allowed in enclosed spaces such as bars and restaurants, and caps on social gatherings. The college also said that the vaccination of school-age children needed to be brought forward to help arrest the spread of the new strain. Hungary has decided to rejoin the European Union’s Covid vaccine procurement process to shield its population from the Omicron variant, ordering 9.5m doses of the jab developed by BioNTech and Pfizer. Prime minister Viktor Orbán also told a news conference on Tuesday that he expected the European Commission would publish a clear stance before the end of the year including nuclear energy in its “sustainable finance taxonomy”, a rulebook that will restrict which activities can be labelled as climate friendly investments. Rail operators in the UK have blamed coronavirus-related staff shortages for widespread cancellations during the Christmas getaway. A number of firms are running reduced timetables due to workers being off sick or isolating, PA Media reported on Tuesday. CrossCountry said it is “expecting widespread disruption to our services this week”. It went on: “Please pull your journey forward to sooner rather than later to get to your end destination as early as possible.” Dozens of trains are being cancelled by the company each day, and many others have fewer carriages than usual. Cancellations have been made on several of its routes, including Manchester to Bournemouth via Birmingham; Bristol to Paignton, Devon; Cardiff to Nottingham; and Birmingham to Stansted airport. Avanti West Coast told passengers: “The pandemic is unfortunately resulting in some staff shortages. We’re doing everything we can to run our full timetable but there may be some short-notice cancellations.” The firm has removed all peak ticket restrictions over the Christmas period in a bid to spread demand. Govia Thameslink Railway said a train crew shortage means there will be a reduced service across the Southern, Thameslink and Great Northern network until the end of the day on Christmas Eve. Greater Anglia said it has removed trains from its timetables due to falling passenger numbers “as people follow advice to work from home”. It added: “We also have to plan for our staff being affected by the Omicron variant, especially as we’re already starting to see the early signs of its impact, to ensure we can continue to provide a reliable service.” In Australia, a NSW man who absconded from hotel quarantine in Hobart and sparked a three-day lockdown across southern Tasmania has been sentenced to five months’ jail for breaching public health orders. Much of the island state, including the capital, was forced into lockdown on 15 October after Timothy Andrew Gunn, 31, returned a positive coronavirus test having spent time in the community. He had been directed to quarantine at Hobart’s Travelodge hotel for two weeks when he landed several days earlier on a flight from Melbourne. Gunn told emergency staff he had been in Queensland for the 14 days before arriving when he had in fact spent time in NSW. Tasmania had banned travel from NSW at the time. Gunn had earlier pleaded guilty to failing to comply with the lawful direction of an emergency management worker, and knowingly providing false or misleading information. He was sentenced in Hobart magistrates court on Tuesday to five months’ jail, with two of those suspended. The UK government borrowed £17.4bn in November, outstripping economists’ predictions and suggesting debt could far overshoot officials’ forecasts if the Omicron coronavirus variant slows the economy as expected. It was the highest November borrowing since comparable records began 30 years ago, barring last year. Last year, during the furlough scheme, the Treasury under Rishi Sunak set successive peacetime records for monthly borrowing as it covered the costs of 80% of salaries for millions of people as well as support schemes for businesses. Significant borrowing has continued in 2021, with £136bn borrowed between April and November, according to data published on Tuesday by the Office for National Statistics. That was the second highest since records began in 1993. Some breaking news has just come in from Thailand. The country will reinstate its mandatory Covid quarantine for foreign visitors and scrap a quarantine waiver from Tuesday, the Reuters news agency reported. The move was confirmed by a government spokeswoman who said the action was being taken due to concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. Germany’s leaders are set to decide on new restrictions to come in after Christmas aimed at slowing the spread of the new Omicron variant of Covid, but plans so far fall short of a full lockdown. Chancellor Olaf Scholz and Germany’s 16 state governors plan to consult later on Tuesday after the government’s new panel of experts called for action to be taken within days and said that nationwide measures are needed, “in particular well-planned and well-communicated contact restrictions”.” Officials have said that nightclubs will likely be closed regardless of local infection rates, on which closures currently depend. There are likely to be further restrictions on crowds at major events, while new contact restrictions are expected to be introduced for vaccinated people — with gatherings reportedly to be capped at 10 people. Restrictions already in place target mainly the unvaccinated, with proof of vaccination or recovery required to enter non-essential stores among other things. There would be “economic consequences” to further Covid restrictions, a UK government minister has stated as he said Parliament is not yet due to be recalled to discuss new measures. Steve Barclay told BBC Breakfast: “The Prime Minister has given a commitment that where there are additional regulations bought forward that Parliament would be recalled in order that Members of Parliament can scrutinise and debate those issues, but we are not at that stage. “We are looking closely at the data and we need to recognise there are economic consequences to further restrictions.” He also said that the government will “say more” about its discussions with business leaders calling for more financial support later on Tuesday He added: “There is much that we still don’t know but we are still looking at that data on what are very finely-balanced decisions.” Covid vaccine maker Moderna does not expect any problems in developing a booster shot to protect against the Omicron variant of coronavirus and could begin work in a few weeks, chief executive Stephane Bancel said in an interview. Moderna hopes to start clinical trials early next year on a vaccine to protect against the fast-spreading Omicron variant but for now is focusing on a booster dose vaccine. “It only needs minor adjustments for Omicron. I don’t expect any problems,” Bancel said in an interview with the Swiss newspaper TagesAnzeiger published on Tuesday. The company was awaiting important information on the variant to begin development. “That will take another week or two,” Bancel said. “It will take a few months before we can produce 500m doses after [regulatory] approval. But our capacities are much higher today than a year ago,” he said. If approval bodies such as the US Food and Drug Administration and Switzerland’s Swissmedic require further studies, that would add at least three months. “Some authorities want a study, others are still undecided. In my opinion, it depends very much on how severely the disease progresses,” he said. Iran’s top diplomat to Yemen died on Tuesday after reportedly contracting coronavirus, Iranian state TV has said, just days after he was abruptly recalled from his mission in the war-torn nation. The Associated Press reports: State-run media in Iran said Ambassador Hassan Irloo had become infected with the coronavirus in Yemen, where a conflict between Iran-backed Houthi rebels and a Saudi-led military coalition has raged for six years. Authorities said he was flown out of the country for urgent medical treatment in Iran over the weekend. However, The Wall Street Journal earlier reported that Irloo was being removed from his post over growing strains between Iran and the Houthis, who seized Yemen’s capital, Sanaa, and much of the country’s north in 2014. In an effort to oust the Iran-backed rebels on its southern border, Saudi Arabia intervened in the war months later with a U.S.-backed bombing campaign. Iran’s foreign ministry has denied that his departure was the result of tensions with the Houthis. Houthi spokesman and chief negotiator Mohammed Abdul-Salam offered his condolences on Monday. He said earlier this week that the ambassador had departed Sanaa on an Iraqi flight made possible despite a Saudi air blockade on the capital through “an Iranian-Saudi understanding via Baghdad.” Hello, I’m Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you all the latest Covid news over the next couple of hours. Let’s start with the news that New Zealand plans to shorten the gap between second Covid vaccine doses and boosters, as well as pushing back the phased reopening of its borders. Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins told reporters the government has agreed to a “suite of precautionary measures” in light of the threat posed by the omicron strain of the coronavirus. The gap between a second vaccine dose and a booster will be shortened from six to four months, meaning 82 percent of vaccinated New Zealanders will be due for a booster by February. New Zealand’s strict border regulations so far have been successful in keeping omicron from spreading in the community. The only cases reported so far have been in travelers who are in managed isolation and quarantine. “Public health advice suggests that soon every case coming into our border, into our managed isolation facilities, will be the omicron variant,” Hipkins said. “We already know that booster vaccinations significantly lift an individual’s immunity, reducing the spread and the severity of Covid-19.” India has recorded 200 cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant across 12 states, mostly in the western state of Maharashtra and the nation’s capital New Delhi, the health ministry said on Tuesday. The country’s tally of Omicron cases has nearly doubled within a week, but there have been no deaths reported so far. In less than 40% of cases, patients either fully recovered or were discharged, the data showed. India has been accelerating its vaccination campaign amid fears of potential surges in infections, with at least one dose given to 87% of the eligible 944 million adults. India recorded 5,326 new Covid-19 infections in the past 24 hours, the lowest overnight tally in more than one and a half years. Overall, the country has reported 34.75 million cases, the second-highest behind only the United States. Health Minister Mansukh Mandaviya told parliament on Monday that 80% of Omicron cases were asymptomatic. Bereaved families have accused Boris Johnson of showing “flagrant disregard” for the public as ministers struggled to explain the justification for a wine and cheese event in Downing Street at the height of lockdown. A Cabinet Office inquiry into other alleged government parties in breach of Covid rules could be expanded after the Guardian published an image showing the prime minister alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden in May 2020. Amid growing fury over the photograph, Johnson said on Monday: “Those were meetings of people at work, talking about work.” Labour dismissed Downing Street’s explanation and said it amounted to evidence of law-breaking. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group said the lack of any signs of work, with red wine and a cheeseboard visible rather than laptops or pens, showed Johnson “presided over a culture of believing that the rules applied only to other people”. Read the full story here. Kuwait will require travellers arriving to the country to have a Covid booster shot if more than nine months have passed since their vaccination, the government communication centre said in a tweet on Monday. The procedures are to be followed for those arriving to Kuwait as of 26 December, the announcement said. Kuwait will also require incoming travellers to quarantine at home for 10 days unless they receive a negative PCR test for the coronavirus within 72 hours of their arrival. Scientists have reacted with dismay to Boris Johnson’s decision not to impose fresh restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron, emphasising that waiting until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. Because the rate of growth in infection rates may already have plateaued or fallen by then, it may also be too late to know what impact those restrictions would have had if they had been introduced earlier. “We are damned if we do and damned if we don’t,” said Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the University of East Anglia. The prime minister announced after a cabinet meeting that he would not be introducing any further Covid restrictions for now, adding: “The situation is extremely difficult and the arguments either way are very, very finely balanced.” Data on the hospitalisation rate for those infected with the Omicron variant would be kept under “constant review”, he said, with government sources hinting that further restrictions were likely after Christmas, possibly starting a week tomorrow. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog today as we unpack a busy day of Covid announcements and government changes over the Omicron variant. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that holiday festivities would in many places lead to “increased cases, overwhelmed health systems and more deaths” and urged people to postpone gatherings. “An event cancelled is better than a life cancelled,” Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters. In a blow to those wanting to join in on the celebrations in England’s capital, London mayor Sadiq Khan has announced the New Year’s Eve celebration event scheduled in Trafalgar Square will not go ahead because of the surge in Omicron cases. The event was set to host 6,500 key workers and members of the public but has been cancelled “in the interests of public safety,” Khan said. Here’s a wrap-up of the day’s news so far. The Omicron variant is spreading faster than Delta and is causing infections in people already vaccinated or who have recovered from Covid, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) says. Travellers to Hong Kong from Britain will have to initially quarantine in a government camp from Tuesday, joining 12 African nations and the United States on the city-state’s strictest entry tier, Agence France-Presse reports. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison has rejected a return to Covid lockdowns. New Zealand has announced a suite of measures to strengthen its defence against the Omicron variant, including pushing back the start of its quarantine-free border reopening for its citizens returning from Australia to the end of February. The Chinese city of Xi’an began testing millions of residents for the coronavirus on Tuesday after the detection of 42 new cases. Singapore has detected a cluster of three Covid-19 cases linked to a gym, its ministry of health said late on Monday. The White House says US president Joe Biden had close contact with a staff member who later tested positive for the coronavirus and is experiencing symptoms of Covid-19. Health officials in Texas say the state has recorded the first death related to the Omicron Covid variant. It is believed to be the first known recorded Omicron death in the United States. Omicron is now the dominant version of the coronavirus in the US, federal health officials said on Monday, racing ahead of Delta and other variants and accounting for 73% of new infections last week. Los Angeles has called off its New Year’s Eve celebrations as the Omicron variant sweeps across the US. The World Health Organisation declared 2022 to be the year ‘we end the pandemic’ while sounding a new warning about the Omicron variant, arguing some events over the festive period should be postponed. The Chinese city of Xi’an began testing millions of residents for the coronavirus on Tuesday after the detection of 42 new cases raised concerns of wider transmission, Agence France-Presse reports. China is now fighting local outbreaks in several cities, including key industrial hubs in the east and south. Authorities are intent to extinguish the flare-ups ahead of a crucial period that will see the capital Beijing host the Winter Olympics in February as well as a surge in cross-country travel during the Lunar New Year. Xi’an - a historic northwestern city of around 13 million people -has also shut schools and large indoor recreation venues while encouraging residents to avoid going out and congregating in large groups, according to local government notices. The museum housing the world-famous Terracotta Army - the 2,000-year-old mausoleum of China’s first emperor - said in an online statement that it had closed from Sunday “according to the needs of epidemic prevention work”, without giving a reopening date. The president of the Australian Medical Association (AMA) Dr Omar Khorshid has called on the national cabinet to institute a national plan to tackle Omicron, while reinstating mask mandates for indoors and high-risk settings as well as density restrictions. “Tightening public health restrictions should not be seen as a policy failure,” Khorshid said. “There is a growing consensus among key medical experts [that] we need to do more to slow the spread of Omicron.” Khorshid described NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s approach as “reckless”. DIY contact tracing, watered-down check in requirements, the abandonment of mask wearing mandates, and the removal of density limits altogether [are] a recipe for disaster and by the time hospital admissions and ICU cases grow beyond whatever benchmark he is working to – it will be too late. A much more cautious approach is required, at least until we know more about Omicron and its severity of illness. We are not going to be able to eliminate Omicron, but we can do a lot to slow its spread, reduce pressure on the health system, save lives and keep businesses open. Indoor mask mandates, mandatory check ins, density limits for venues and major sporting events, all need to be part of a stronger national response to Omicron.” Travellers to Hong Kong from Britain will have to initially quarantine in a government camp from Tuesday, joining 12 African nations and the United States on the city-state’s strictest entry tier, Agence France-Presse reports. Throughout the coronavirus pandemic, Hong Kong has maintained some of the world’s toughest quarantine restrictions, with curbs increasing due to the Omicron variant. Most people arriving in Hong Kong must undergo 21 days of hotel quarantine and frequent testing before being allowed out. However, people from countries deemed to have high Omicron infection rates must spend the first four days of quarantine in a government-run camp before seeing out the rest of their isolation in a hotel. Britain was added to that list from midnight on Tuesday. The other countries on the highest tier are Angola, Botswana, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa, the United States, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Will the UK face another Covid Christmas? That’s the question Guardian science correspondent Nicola Davis attempts to answer on the latest Today in Focus episode. The British government hasn’t cancelled Christmas – yet – but the rate of the Omicron variant’s spread should make us all reconsider our plans, Davis reports. Last winter, after promising the nation it would get to enjoy Christmas as usual, prime minister Boris Johnson’s government made an 11th-hour U-turn, introducing new Covid-19 restrictions in a last-ditch attempt to control the virus. It was “the right decision – made at the wrong time and in the wrong way”, as the Observer put it. This year, the government has been reluctant to be seen cancelling Christmas again. But as the Omicron variant sweeps through the country, rising case numbers are making the situation harder to ignore. Over the weekend, Sage issued guidance suggesting that whole households should stay home if one member tests positive for Covid-19. These guidelines, however, are only recommendations. On Monday afternoon, the prime minister and his cabinet held an emergency meeting to discuss the possibility of introducing new official restrictions, but ultimately decided not to announce binding new curbs quite yet. All this comes just days after the Guardian published a photo from a May 2020 garden party at Downing Street where Johnson and his partner can be seen apparently breaking lockdown rules. Guardian science correspondent Nicola Davis tells Michael Safi that while trust in the government has suffered, the public has consistently demonstrated a desire to adhere to measures for the collective good. Listen to the latest Today in Focus episode here. The NHL will begin a leaguewide shutdown on Wednesday amid an increase of positive Covid-19 test results among players across the league, ESPN confirmed on Monday night. Beginning the annual holiday break two days early means five additional games will be postponed, bringing the total this season to 49. The league and NHL Players’ Association on Sunday said in a joint statement they were attempting to avoid a leaguewide shutdown and were making decisions on a team-by-team basis. The latest shift gives all 32 teams an extended break before players, coaches and staff can gather again Sunday to skate and undergo coronavirus testing. Read the full story here. It’s been a busy day with announcements from global health bodies and governments changing course on Covid plans. Here’s a wrap-up of the day’s news so far. The Omicron variant is spreading faster than Delta and is causing infections in people already vaccinated or who have recovered from Covid, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) says. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison has rejected a return to Covid lockdowns. New Zealand has announced a suite of measures to strengthen its defence against the Omicron variant, including pushing back the start of its quarantine-free border reopening for its citizens returning from Australia to the end of February. Singapore has detected a cluster of three Covid-19 cases linked to a gym, its ministry of health said late on Monday. The White House says US president Joe Biden had close contact with a staff member who later tested positive for the coronavirus and is experiencing symptoms of Covid-19. Health officials in Texas say the state has recorded the first death related to the Omicron Covid variant. It is believed to be the first known recorded Omicron death in the United States. Omicron is now the dominant version of the coronavirus in the US, federal health officials said on Monday, racing ahead of Delta and other variants and accounting for 73% of new infections last week. Los Angeles has called off its New Year’s Eve celebrations as the Omicron variant sweeps across the US. The World Health Organisation declared 2022 to be the year ‘we end the pandemic’ while sounding a new warning about the Omicron variant, arguing some events over the festive period should be postponed. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison has rejected a return to Covid lockdowns. Ahead of a national cabinet meeting, Morrison told reporters: We have to move from a culture of mandates to a culture of responsibility.” We’ve got to get past the heavy hand of government and we’ve got to treat Australians like adults.” State and territory leaders will hold a snap meeting before Christmas to discuss the issues posed by the Omicron variant. Morrison has been urging state leaders to avoid lockdowns and mandates. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has also issued a statement of reassurance while cautioning the country is “not out of the woods yet”. “We’re not out of the woods yet. But we’ve got your back, and we can get through this,” Trudeau said in a tweet on Monday evening local time. “We’ve secured enough boosters for adults across Canada, we’ve got enough vaccines for kids over 5 to get their first shot, and we’re sending more rapid tests to the provinces and territories.” US president Joe Biden has addressed Omicron concerns in a series of tweets on Monday evening. “Folks, Omicron cases are on the rise in the United States. I want to give you all a sense of where we are and what we know,” the president said, adding that vaccines are working. If you’re an adult choosing to be unvaccinated, you will face an extremely difficult winter for your family and community. Omicron cases will increase in the coming days—even among fully vaccinated individuals. If you’re vaccinated and boosted, you may still get a breakthrough case but doctors say you will likely have no symptoms or mild ones. We still need to take precautions and remain vigilant. Listen to the advice from doctors: even if you’re fully vaccinated, you should wear a mask when indoors in a public setting. It will help protect you and others—especially kids under 5 who can’t get vaccinated yet. We are working around the clock to increase testing capacity, vaccine availability, and support for our hospitals. I’ll have more to say on this tomorrow. In the meantime: Get vaccinated, get boosted, wear a mask. And keep the faith. We’ll get through this together.” South Korea is reporting 5,202 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 52 deaths over the last 24 hours. A total of 1,022 people are believed to be in critical condition. The country now requires its citizens over the age of 18 to present a quarantine pass, or proof of Covid vaccination or negative PCR test, in order to access indoor sports events, movie theatres or concert halls. Singapore has detected a cluster of three Covid-19 cases linked to a gym, its ministry of health said late on Monday. The variant was found in two men, aged 24 and 21, and an 18-year-old woman. Two cases have reportedly tested preliminarily positive for the Omicron variant and the result for the remaining case is pending. All three cases are fully vaccinated and have mild symptoms. The health ministry is now pursuing contact tracing, it added. “All three cases had no recent travel history. Our epidemiological investigations found that they recently visited Anytime Fitness (Bukit Timah Shopping Centre) between 15 December and 17 December 2021,” the statement read. There have been 71 confirmed Omicron cases detected in Singapore so far, with 65 imported cases and 6 local cases. The White House says US president Joe Biden had close contact with a staff member who later tested positive for the coronavirus and is experiencing symptoms of Covid-19. Press secretary Jen Psaki said in a statement Monday night that the staff member tested positive earlier in the day. The statement read: On Monday morning, a mid-level staff member, who does not regularly have contact with the President, received a positive result for a Covid-19 test. Three days earlier, on Friday, that staff member had spent approximately 30 minutes in proximity to the President on Air Force One, on the way from Orangeburg, South Carolina to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. This staff member is fully vaccinated and boosted, and tested negative prior to boarding Air Force One, as is required for everyone traveling with the President. This staff member did not begin to experience symptoms until Sunday, and was tested on Monday.” Psaki added that Biden, 79, is tested regularly for the virus and has had two negative tests since Sunday. She says he will be tested again Wednesday. Los Angeles has called off its New Year’s Eve celebrations as the Omicron variant sweeps across the US. Organisers of the New Year’s Eve party planned for Grand Park in downtown LA nixed plans for an in-person audience, saying the event will be live-streamed instead, as it was last year. The event, which is operated by the Music Center, had been slated to include an invite-only audience of the county’s front-line workers and first responders. “Given the recent uptick in Covid-19 cases in the county, the Music Center/Grand Park team determined the safest route to continue with this popular annual tradition would be to eliminate a live audience,” event officials said, the Los Angeles Times reports. New Zealand has announced a suite of measures to strengthen its defence against the Omicron variant, including pushing back the start of its quarantine-free border reopening for its citizens returning from Australia to the end of February. Our reporter Eva Corlett has the full story below. The government will also accelerate the booster vaccine roll-out by shortening the gap between second and third shots, meaning 82% of the vaccinated population will be eligible for it by the end of February. The Covid-19 response minister Chris Hipkins announced travellers returning to the country will now be required to provide a pre-departure Covid test 48 hours before travel and the government is temporarily lengthening the time of stay in managed isolation and quarantine from 7-10 days. Read the full story here. Hipkins said: “All of the evidence so far points to Omicron being the most transmissible Covid-19 variant yet and public health advice says that soon, every case that comes into MIQ will be Omicron.” “Covid-19 keeps throwing new curve balls and we have to respond in a way that continues to protect lives and livelihoods without putting in place restrictions and lockdowns unless absolutely necessary.” Hipkins said the re-opening delay will be disappointing for those who had made travel plans over summer, but added that waiting until the end of February to open would increase New Zealand’s overall protection and slow Omicron’s spread. Cabinet also confirmed that the Pfizer vaccine will be rolled out to 5-11 year olds from January 17. The Omicron variant is spreading faster than Delta and is causing infections in people already vaccinated or who have recovered from Covid, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) says. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a Monday briefing: There is now consistent evidence that Omicron is spreading significantly faster than the Delta variant. And it is more likely people vaccinated or recovered from COVID-19 could be infected or re-infected. WHO chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan added it would be “unwise” to conclude from early evidence that Omicron was a milder variant that previous ones. “... with the numbers going up, all health systems are going to be under strain,” Soumya Swaminathan said. The variant is successfully evading some immune responses, she added, meaning that the booster programmes being rolled out in many countries ought to be targeted towards people with weaker immune systems. “Although we are seeing a reduction in the neutralisation antibodies, almost all preliminary analysis shows T-cell mediated immunity remains intact, that is what we really require,” WHO expert Abdi Mahamud said. “Of course there is a challenge, many of the monoclonals will not work with Omicron,” she added. Health officials in Texas say the state has recorded the first death related to the Omicron Covid variant. It is believed to be the first known recorded Omicron death in the United States, according to a statement from Harris County health officials. The victim was reportedly a man in his 50s, who was unvaccinated and had underlying health conditions. The statement read: The death reported this afternoon was of a man between the ages of 50-60 years old who was unvaccinated and had been infected with Covid-19 previously. The individual was at higher risk of severe complications from Covid-19 due to his unvaccinated status and had underlying health conditions.” County Judge Lina Hidalgo made the announcement during an afternoon news conference. “My phone was ringing, I’m sure you guys noticed, and it was our public health director telling me we just had our first Omicron-related death,” she said. Omicron is now the dominant version of the coronavirus in the US, federal health officials said on Monday, racing ahead of Delta and other variants and accounting for 73% of new infections last week. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention numbers showed nearly a six-fold increase in Omicron’s share of infections in only one week. In much of the country, Omicron’s prevalence is even higher. It’s responsible for an estimated 90% of new infections in the New York area, the south-east, the industrial midwest and the Pacific north-west. Since the end of June, the Delta variant has been the main version causing US infections. As recently as the end of November, more than 99.5% of coronaviruses were Delta, according to CDC data. Read the full story here. The World Health Organisation sounded a new warning about the Omicron variant, arguing some events over the festive period should be postponed. “All of us are sick of this pandemic,” said WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. The fastest way to do this, he said, could mean potentially cancelling or delaying holiday events. “An event cancelled is better than a life cancelled,” he said. The WHO says there’s now consistent evidence that the Omicron strain is spreading faster than the Delta variant Watch the video from Monday’s briefing below. The world must pull together and make the difficult choices needed to end the Covid-19 pandemic within the next year, the World Health Organization’s director general told reporters in Geneva. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus offered some hope to ending the pandemic, which already killed more than 5.6 million people worldwide, saying: 2022 must be the year we end the pandemic.” WHO pointed towards the development of second and third generation vaccines, and the further development of antimicrobial treatments and other innovations. The WHO’s top emergency expert, told the briefing: (We) hope to consign this disease to a relatively mild disease that is easily prevented, that is easily treated. If we can keep virus transmission to minimum, then we can bring the pandemic to an end.” As end-of-year festivities approach, the UN health agency chief said countries should rein in national events linked to the holidays because allowing crowds to gather would be a “perfect platform” for Omicron to spread. WHO warned that holiday festivities would in many places lead to “increased cases, overwhelmed health systems and more deaths” and urged people to postpone gatherings. “An event cancelled is better than a life cancelled,” Ghebreyesus said. It would be better to cancel events now and celebrate later “than to celebrate now and grieve later”, he added. Since it was first reported in South Africa in November, Omicron has been identified in dozens of countries. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you for today’s Covid blog as we countdown until the holiday break. First up, some positive news to share with you. The World Health Organization (WHO) has offered some hope to ending the Covid-19 pandemic, which has so far killed more than 5.6 million people worldwide. “2022 must be the year we end the pandemic,” WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters on Monday. “(We) hope to consign this disease to a relatively mild disease that is easily prevented, that is easily treated,” Mike Ryan, the WHO’s top emergency expert, added. “If we can keep virus transmission to minimum, then we can bring the pandemic to an end.” Over in the US Omicron has been found to be the dominant version of the coronavirus, federal health officials have said, racing ahead of Delta and other variants and accounting for 73% of new infections last week. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) numbers showed nearly a six-fold increase in Omicron’s share of infections in only one week. Omicron is responsible for an estimated 90% of new infections in the New York area, the south-east, the industrial midwest and the Pacific north-west. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: The UK government held off announcing further Covid restrictions but its prime minister, Boris Johnson, warned further measures remain on the table, with data on the threat of Omicron monitored “hour by hour”. Johnson was accused of failing to follow scientists’ advice on the need for immediate restrictions while leaving millions of people and businesses in limbo after a two-hour cabinet meeting ended with no decision on Monday. Schools, bars, gyms and cinemas in Quebec will close as of Monday as public health officials race to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. All non-essential workers are being asked to work from home and restaurants will have to reduce their capacity to 50% and limit their hours from 5am to 10pm. London’s New Year’s Eve celebration event in Trafalgar Square will not take place because of the surge in cases of the Omicron Covid variant in the capital, the city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has said. The European Union’s drugs regulator has given the green light to a fifth Covid vaccine for use, granting conditional marketing authorisation to the two-dose treatment made by the US biotech company Novavax. Donald Trump was greeted with boos from a live audience after revealing he has received a Covid-19 vaccine booster shot. The former US president dismissed the crowd’s negative response and claimed his administration was responsible for developing the coronavirus vaccines. Moderna said a booster dose of its Covid vaccine appeared to be protective against the fast-spreading Omicron variant in laboratory testing and that the current version of the vaccine would continue to be Moderna’s “first line of defence against Omicron”. Britain reported 91,743 new Covid cases on Monday, the second-highest figure since the start of the pandemic, as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. The number of deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test was 44. Queen Elizabeth will celebrate Christmas at Windsor instead of her usual choice of Sandringham over Covid safety fears, according to a palace source. The monarch usually spends the festive holiday at her estate in Norfolk and sources have said the decision was “a personal one after careful consideration and reflects a precautionary approach”. The Russian maker of the Covid Sputnik V vaccine is due to submit its latest data by the end of December, with manufacturing site inspections expected to follow in February, a World Health Organization official said. Panama has detected its first case of the Omicron variant of Covid, the Central American country’s health ministry said.GPs in New South Wales have been left scrambling less than a week before Christmas after the state health department told them they will now be responsible for the management of Covid patients in the community. On Friday NSW Health informed GPs through the state’s 10 primary health networks that there is a new state-wide approach for the management of low-risk Covid-positive patients, effective immediately. It comes as NSW Covid cases spiral with a record 3,763 new infections on Wednesday. Each region of NSW is managed by a different primary health network, which collaborate with general practitioners and other health professionals to support and manage the health workforce, and to provide care to patients in that region. A directive sent to health workers from the Nepean Blue Mountains primary health network said low-risk Covid-19 patients “will be ‘self-managed’ and will receive information via SMS from NSW Health about managing any mild symptoms”. “NSW Health has announced that from today there will be a new state-wide approach for the management of low-risk Covid-19 positive patients,” the statement said. “Patients who have been identified to self-manage at home will be advised to contact their GP or a dedicated Covid-19 service for an initial assessment and continued care.” “Patients who are self-managed will require a GP to complete their de-isolation.” De-isolation means permission to leave isolation, which requires medical clearance for people with confirmed Covid-19, including for the those who are fully vaccinated. A separate letter signed by the NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant and sent to GPs, also seen by Guardian Australia, said: “We now face a significant challenge with rapidly increasing Covid-19 case numbers related to circulation of the Omicron variant”. “It is anticipated that contacting and managing all positive cases by telephone will become more difficult,” Chant wrote. “I would therefore like to take this opportunity to advise you that we are making some changes to the way we manage Covid-19 cases in the community. “NSW Health will still screen all Covid-19 cases for certain risk factors and escalate those with known higher risk for increased support, but cases that meet the criteria for low-risk will be advised to undertake self-care at home in the first instance, she wrote. An urgent meeting was held on Tuesday night by the health network with GPs who are distressed about how to manage Covid patients at such short notice. One Sydney clinician told Guardian Australia that while GPs knew such a move was on the cards, they assumed the government would give them more notice before implementing it, along with additional support and resources. “We were told the week before Christmas, when already many staff are already on leave, with no planning and no protocols in place,” she said. “An urgent meeting is being held so we can be informed how the hell we are supposed to manage this.” Low-risk patients in NSW are considered to be those aged three months to 50 years old, those who have received two or more doses of an approved Covid-19 vaccine, those who are not identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders, who are not pregnant, and do not have any specified chronic conditions are deemed at low risk of hospitalisation. The president of the NSW branch of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Danielle McMullen, who is a GP, said most of the low-risk patients would have minimal symptoms. McMullen said she was shocked there was no additional funding offered to GP practices. “We need more flexible funding offered to general practices so they can field the calls that will come and have them handled by the most appropriate staff member,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “So that might be funding for more reception staff or clinic nurses. But those staff, and GPs, are exhausted, broken and were looking forward to trying to get a bit of a break. This additional work has come on top of ramping up boosters and managing vaccinations including for children. “We are all feeling the pinch of these increased Covid numbers and it’s not easy for anyone in health. But general practice has been thrown this at the last minute and we were not expecting it to come the week before Christmas. GP Jane Basden told Guardian Australia that there was an expectation that GPs now hold a telehealth consult on the day the Covid patient contacts their doctor. She said doctors felt Chant understood the pressures, even if they felt premier Dominic Perrottet did not. “What I am feeling - and what I’m hearing from many of my colleagues - is that this is a move Dr Kerry Chant and NSW health have virtually been forced into making as case numbers in NSW rise out of control,” she said. “We are so angry at the politicians who are ‘letting this rip’ - as if the only sign of a health system and health workers being under incredible strain is the number of ICU beds being filled. “Every one of the thousands of new Covid cases per day is a person who needs a long, same day appointment either with already stretched ‘Hospital In The Home’ services, or now with already stretched GP practices. It’s not like GPs have been twiddling our thumbs for the last 21 months. Just about every health and government announcement has ended with ‘talk to your GP’. “We’re all busting our guts to look after our communities…. and the current premier hasn’t been able to bring himself to just ensure masks are worn to slow the spread. All he - and now Morrison - can talk about is ‘personal responsibility‘.” The president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, Dr Karen Price, said there is no need for undue alarm and that the changes “were necessary and a sensible move as cases rise. “My message for all NSW GPs, practice managers, nurses, receptionists and admin workers is keep up the great work,” she said. “I know it’s been the most trying of years and your communities have never needed your more”.Romanian researchers have called on academic publishers to remove Elena Ceaușescu’s name from almost two dozen scientific papers and books fraudulently published as her work, more than 30 years after the wife of the former communist dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu was executed. Elena Ceaușescu was celebrated by state propaganda under her husband’s regime as a world-famous chemistry researcher, despite having no credible qualifications. The researchers say some of her work is still being cited and accessed, even though she was barely literate in science and unable to recognise basic formulas taught to first-year chemistry students. They also want Ceaușescu’s honorary titles, awards and PhD to be revoked, and for institutions that honoured her – including the UK’s Royal Society of Chemistry and the Polytechnic of Central London (now the University of Westminster) – to withdraw recognition and acknowledge that her scientific career was bogus. Her PhD was never retracted in Romania, even though it was widely known she did not write it. Chris Isloi, a neuroscience and psychology researcher based in London, and Andrei Dumbravă, a doctor and senior lecturer at the Alexandru Ioan Cuza University in Iași, are leading the call to have the scientific record corrected. But Isloi says it is proving difficult “since no academic publishers ever wrote their publishing guidelines anticipating an author might be a communist dictator’s illiterate wife”. The Ceaușescus were executed on Christmas Day 1989 after Romania’s attempt to follow the other countries of eastern Europe in a peaceful overthrow of their regimes descended into bloodshed that ultimately allowed former communists to retain power under the guise of democracy. Craving for legitimacy Elena Ceaușescu’s claim to scientific status was driven by her own desire for prestige and Romania’s curious position as the communist state most indulged by the west, despite the crushing brutality of the regime. Nicolae Ceaușescu came to power in 1965 and won praise in the west for opposing the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia three years later. In 1969, Richard Nixon visited Bucharest, the first US president to set foot in a communist country. Ceaușescu was invited to the White House in 1970 and 1978, and in the same year was the first communist head of state to visit London. Margaret Thatcher, herself a qualified chemist, visited Bucharest in 1975 as opposition leader and was received by the Ceaușescus, then met them again on the 1978 visit, a year before her first election victory. But at home he drove the Romanian economy into the ground, presided over an appalling human rights record, cut funding for science and medicine, and constructed a shameless personality cult around himself. “They were hard times,” Dumbravă says. “It’s always complicated to tell the whole story for people who never experienced any kind of totalitarianism. “It was a world in which everything was dictated to you,” he said. “The efforts of the Ceaușescus to pay off foreign debt meant they wanted to avoid any imports which required currency … Everything from oranges to bananas disappeared … And everything was under strict control. You could not sacrifice a cow in your village. It was illegal. You could go to prison if you got caught with some meat.” Isloi believes the Ceaușescus’ craving for international recognition and legitimacy was the reason Elena’s scientific credentials were raised to such heights, but her connection to chemistry research began well before Nicolae came to power. Her biographer Lavinia Betea, a professor and historian at the University of Arad, says holding the title of scientist legitimised Nicolae Ceaușescu’s “rise as a leader of the intellectual elite”. “The Ceaușescus never needed money again after Nicolae Ceaușescu was appointed general secretary of the Communist party in 1965,” Betea says. “All their expenses for food, clothes and leisure were taken care of. However, the constitutions of communist countries stipulated that citizens had both a right and an obligation to work. As the wife of the most powerful politician in the country, Elena Ceaușescu wanted to portray herself as a role model, worthy of being next to the ‘great political leader’, her husband. She wouldn’t hear of having just any job. As communism prized science as a force for industrial production, and being an intellectual had also been valued when she had been younger, a job as a scientist would work well with being the first [female] comrade of the country.” Elena Ceaușescu was born to a family of farmers and traders in 1916, according to her biography in the Romanian national archives. She attended night school at the Polytechnic Institute in Bucharest for seven years from 1950, and after her graduation went to work at the National Institute for Research and Development in Chemistry and Petrochemistry (ICECHIM), in the department working on elastomers – a type of polymer. Dumbravă says this is probably why she “specialised” in polymer research in her academic publications. “It was just a matter of chance,” he says. “Before she got her ‘PhD’, and before she got her bachelor of science ‘degree’ in chemistry, she was an unskilled worker in the institute, under the supervision of the person who had most worked on her PhD.” In his book Kiss the Hand You Cannot Bite: the Rise and Fall of the Ceaușescus, Edward Behr writes: “There is no record of her chemistry degree in advance of her doctorate … but by 1960 she had a full-time job as a researcher at the Chemical Institute (ICECHIM), and by 1965 she had become its director. “Mircea Corciovei, a scientist at ICECHIM … recalled that ‘in her [Ceaușescu’s] new position it was very difficult to talk to her. She gave orders, she wanted no arguments’,” Behr writes. “It was impossible for him to discover the extent of her knowledge of chemistry, for she never discussed the scientific aspects of the institute’s work, ‘concerning herself only with political and administrative matters’ … Corciovei discovered she didn’t know what a chromatograph was, and didn’t recognise the formula for sulphuric acid – H2SO4 – taught to first-year chemistry students.” The book describes how in 1967, when Ceaușescu was due to appear before a board of examiners to defend her chemistry doctorate while she was still working at ICECHIM, Corciovei tried to attend – such events were open to the public by law and university tradition. But when Corciovei showed up, the door was locked. The session had occurred in camera. ‘Everyone knew she was an imposter’ Ceaușescu’s scientific reputation may have had the full resources of the Romanian state behind it, but it could not have reached international proportions without the help of western publications, institutions and political leaders. “Her international fame was supported by forcing Romanian chemists to write papers, some of which were published in international journals, as well as a book that was translated in English and published by Pergamon Press, a widely known British academic publisher,” Isloi says. That book – based on Ceaușescu’s PhD – was published by Pergamon under the title Stereospecific Polymerization of Isoprene and carries a foreword by the Nobel prize-winning British chemist Dorothy Hodgkin, who wrote: “I am not equipped myself with enough technical knowledge of the field of this work to give a critical scientific evaluation of its contents. “But even a necessarily brief reading makes one think that the field of research surveyed by the author is vast and recent.” Pergamon, which was owned by Robert Maxwell, also published hagiographic biographies of several eastern bloc leaders, including one on the Romanian dictator titled: Nicolae Ceaușescu: Builder of Modern Romania and International Statesman (1983). In 1991, a few months before his death, Maxwell sold Pergamon to the academic publishing giant Elsevier, where Ceaușescu’s two books are still available. Her work is also available through the publishers Taylor &amp; Francis and Wiley. Journal articles under her name appeared in publications such as the Journal of Macromolecular Science and the now discontinued Journal of Molecular Catalysis. Ceaușescu’s reputation was also promoted by Romanian officials who pushed for recognition from respected institutions in the west. Dumbravă says she had a “childish desire” to be showered with gifts from around the world as a sign of her prestige. Ion Mihai Pacepa, the former head of Romania’s intelligence service, who defected in 1978, wrote in his 1987 book Red Horizons that Ceaușescu demanded he arrange for universities in New York and Washington to award her honorary titles. “I tried my best to explain that the American president did not have the same power that the Romanian did,” Pacepa wrote. “The only result, however, was Elena’s wrath.” Dennis Deletant, a historian and emeritus professor of Romanian studies at University College London, says in 1978 he was approached by the principal of London University, who told him Romanian diplomats had been trying to get Ceaușescu an honorary title ahead of her state visit in June of that year. Deletant was asked whether this was a wise decision. He says: “The Romanian embassy in London made strenuous efforts to persuade certain British academic institutions to recognise Elena’s ‘scientific achievements’– she was trumpeted in the Romanian press as ‘a scientist of world renown’, even though her doctorate was the work, I was reliably informed by Romanian sources, of a professor at the University of Iași. “I was invited by the principal of London University to discuss with him the grounds for the award of an honorary doctorate to Elena,” Deletant says. “I expressed a strong opposition to such a step.” An emissary from the Romanian Academy was also sent to plead Ceaușescu’s case for recognition by the Royal Society, the oldest national scientific society in the world. Deletant’s wife, Andrea, who taught Romanian at Bradford University, acted as interpreter at a meeting with the society’s president, the Nobel prize-winning chemist Alexander Todd. “After giving the emissary generous hospitality, in which alcohol played a significant part, Professor Todd asked the emissary in all frankness whether Elena deserved an honour from the society,” Deletant says. “The answer he received was no.” Both the University of London and the Royal Society rejected the Romanian requests. The Romanian embassy then turned to the Royal Society of Chemistry, which made Elena an honorary fellow, and the Polytechnic of Central London, which gave her the title of honorary professor. The latter did not respond to a request for comment on the call to revoke Ceaușescu’s credentials, but in a statement the Royal Society of Chemistry said “We acknowledge the lasting impact of Elena Ceaușescu being granted such recognition and the importance of clarifying her place in the history of science”. “The process of revoking her association with the Royal Institute of Chemistry – our antecedent society until 1980 – had been started in the days before her death, which effectively ended her honorary fellowship. Since the formation of the Royal Society of Chemistry in our current form in 1980, we make public all of our honorary fellows. We have a code of conduct for anyone in our profession.” Her biographer Betea says it is important that those outside Romania share responsibility for the legitimisation of Ceaușescu. “Her first ‘recognitions’ came from France and the United States, before entering the Romanian Academy,” Betea says. “Can you excuse the interests of those who did not live in a communist dictatorship, and blame only those in the country? Or just her? That’s not fair, in my opinion. “Obviously, everyone knew she was an imposter. Those who gave her titles or pressured others to do so … are guilty of having contributed to an intellectual imposture of colossal proportions. “Those who took part in the deception were not penalised. Without them, those like Elena Ceaușescu would not have existed as a ‘world-renowned scientist’.” ‘Offence’ to honest scientific work Professor Mircea Teodorescu from the Polytechnic University of Bucharest’s Department of Bioresources and Polymer Science, co-authored papers with Elena Ceaușescu between 1984 and 1989. He is part of the push to have her name retracted from scientific works. At the time, Teodorescu was a young assistant professor with a research laboratory in ICECHIM’s rubber department. “The whole scientific output of this department had to have Elena Ceaușescu as the first author, because of the orders of the Communist party,” Teodorescu says. “This included all joint projects with researchers from other institutions, like me and other colleagues of mine. I knew from the very beginning that all papers resulted from these joint projects would have Elena Ceaușescu as the first author, but I accepted the situation due to the location of the laboratory and also because the projects I participated in involved high-quality scientific research which offered me the opportunity to learn a lot and gain research expertise.” Teodorescu wants the works on which she was the sole author withdrawn and her name removed where she was a co-author. The science in those papers was sound, Teodorescu says – it’s just that Ceaușescu had no involvement in it. “In fact, I believe that she did not even read those works because I very much doubt she had the ability to understand them,” he says. “I consider that it is a moral issue to correct this.” In their letter to Elsevier, sent on 10 December, Teodorescu, Isloi, Dumbravă and their co-authors call Ceaușescu’s behaviour “a ruthless act of intellectual misappropriation”. “In the name of the self-correcting nature of science, as well as the hard-earned Romanian democracy, we ask that you consider retracting the titles bearing her name, as her authorship on these works is not only fraudulent, but an offense to Romanian anti-communist protesters who were killed during the Romanian Revolution, as well as every Romanian scientist who has ever done honest work. “We are well aware that these titles have ended up in your catalogue through no fault of your own. However, we consider this correction of the scientific record to be crucial.” Similar requests have been sent to Wiley and to Taylor &amp; Francis. All the publishers have guidelines stating that false claims of authorship and plagiarism are grounds for retraction. A spokesperson for Wiley said: “We take all allegations of authorship abuse very seriously and thank the individuals who brought this to our attention. “Since receiving their letter, we have quickly initiated an investigation into four articles in Acta Polymerica, a journal which was discontinued in 2003, in accordance with industry standards set forward by the Committee on Publication Ethics.” Elsevier and Taylor &amp; Francis did not respond to a request for comment. The co-authors are also calling for 36 patents registered under Elena Ceaușescu’s name with the European Patent Office to be retracted. ICECHIM’s website still lists her as a former general manager, but says nothing about her dark history, harsh cuts to scientific funding or lack of credentials. Its current general manager, Mihaela Doni, said: “The period of 1970-1980, in which Elena Ceaușescu held the position of the institute manager, cannot be removed or permanently erased from the history of this institution. “Our institute, as it is now, has no [qualification] in determining whether Elena Ceaușescu would have asked to be the co-author of some scientific works to which she did not contribute, and even more, to ask the publishers to withdraw her name from the published works,” she said. “The only ones who are entitled to do this are the co-authors themselves.” Isloi says Ceaușescu’s impact on science in Romania persists. “In Romanian academia, plagiarism is rampant, as is nepotism,” he says. “Sloppy science is ubiquitous, [much of it] a consequence of Elena Ceaușescu’s nefarious and outsized influence in the 70s and 80s.” Betea says Ceaușescu is now perceived less harshly than when she was alive. There’s a certain collective guilt over her hasty trial and execution, she says. But her fraud had a lasting impact on politics and science. This month, Romania’s minister of innovation resigned after an investigation found significant irregularities on his résumé and evidence he plagiarised from an academic paper. “Being enrolled as a student in a private university, and paying to have your own books or articles published in order to advance your academic career, is usually associated with Elena Ceaușescu’s model,” Betea says. “As is the Romanian politicians’ objective of having academic titles or PhDs, which is looked upon as a consequence of the obsession that the Ceaușescus had of embodying both political and scientific figures.”The case of a young Colorado truck driver sentenced to 110 years in prison over his role in a fatal collision has prompted widespread calls for leniency and fueled criticism of the US justice system. On Tuesday, the Colorado district attorney whose office prosecuted the case asked the court to reconsider the sentence of Rogel Aguilera-Mederos, 26, following the backlash over a punishment that’s been called unduly harsh. Aguilera-Mederos was convicted in October of vehicular homicide and other charges related to a deadly crash in April 2019, which occurred while he was hauling lumber in the Rocky Mountain foothills. He has said he was descending a steep portion of the highway when the brakes on his semi-trailer failed, leading to a multi-vehicle pileup and four deaths. The judge in the case has said he was obligated to give Aguilera-Mederos the lengthy sentence based on minimum sentencing laws for the charges, prompting further criticism of the criminal justice system. . More than 4.5 million people have signed a petition calling for Colorado’s governor, Jared Polis, to grant clemency to Aguilera-Mederos or commute his sentence. Meanwhile, truckers and civil rights groups have expressed outrage over the sentence. “It is a stark miscarriage of justice,” said Domingo Garcia, the president of the League of United Latin American Citizens (Lulac). “Here’s a man with no prior criminal record who went to work to feed his family. The brakes go out on his truck. It was a terrible accident. He’s given 110 years for the first crime he’s ever committed, a crime that was not intentional.” Lulac sent a letter to Polis on behalf of Aguilera-Mederos, a Cuban immigrant, requesting a pardon or a reduction of his sentence. Aguilera-Mederos’ lawyer has filed a clemency petition to the governor. Aguilera-Mederos’s truck plowed into vehicles that had slowed because of another wreck in the Denver suburb of Lakewood, leading to a chain-reaction collision involving 28 vehicles that ruptured gas tanks and caused a fireball that consumed vehicles and melted parts of the highway. The crash killed Miguel Angel Lamas Arellano, 24, William Bailey, 67, Doyle Harrison, 61, and Stanley Politano, 69. Prosecutors argued that Aguilera-Mederos could have used a runaway ramp alongside the interstate, which is designed to safely stop vehicles that have lost the function of their brakes. But, Aguilera-Mederos testified that he was struggling to avoid traffic and to shift his truck into lower gear to slow it down. Alexis King, the district attorney whose office prosecuted the case, told the Denver Post that Aguilera-Mederos didn’t accept efforts to negotiate a plea deal, and that the convictions recognized the harm caused to victims of the crash. Under the reconsideration motion filed by the district attorney, the court can modify the sentence and go below the mandatory minimum, said Ann England, who teaches in the criminal defense clinic at the University of Colorado law school. The judge in the case, Bruce Jones, had said the sentence was the mandatory minimum term required under state law, but that a lesser punishment would be appropriate. Mandatory minimum sentencing laws required that sentences on 27 counts of vehicular assault, assault, reckless driving and other charges run consecutively. “I will state that if I had the discretion, it would not be my sentence,” he said. Mandatory minimum sentences have helped to drive mass incarceration and over-incarceration in Colorado and the US, England said. “I think people should be asking why we have these mandatory minimum prison sentences,” England said. Mandatory minimum sentencing takes the discretion out of the courts, and moves the balance of power from the court to the prosecutor, she said. This case, England added, is “a condemnation of the way the system works and the way the mandatory sentencing works”. The ACLU of Colorado has condemned the sentence and supports efforts to get the governor to take up the case, said Mark Silverstein, the legal director of the ACLU of Colorado. “The sentence is extraordinary especially in light of facts of this particular case,” Silverstein said. “It underscores the problems with the criminal justice system.” At Aguilera-Mederos’ sentencing, relatives of those killed in the collision said he should serve time for the crimes. Duane Bailey, the brother of William Bailey, asked the judge to sentence Aguilera-Mederos to at least 20 years, the Post reported. “He made a deliberate and intentional decision that his life was more important than everyone else on the road that day,” he said. Aguilera-Mederos wept as he apologized to the victims’ families at his sentencing. He asked for their forgiveness. “I am not a murderer. I am not a killer. When I look at my charges, we are talking about a murderer, which is not me,” he said. “I have never thought about hurting anybody in my entire life.” On Wednesday, relatives, lawmakers and other supporters rallied in Denver Wednesday to plead for clemency. Speaking at the rally at the state capitol, Leonard Martinez, one of the lawyers representing Aguilera-Mederos, said the injustice of such long sentences needs to be addressed, both by reforming sentencing laws but also looking at the actions of prosecutors and judges. “This fight is not just for him but for all,” he said. His family said in a statement they do not want to minimize the loss of those killed in the crash, but are calling on Polis to “take immediate action” to reduce the sentence. Polis, a Democrat, said Tuesday he is reviewing a clemency application. The Associated Press contributed reportingHealth facilities in western New South Wales are “chronically understaffed” and the situation could be exacerbated as Covid-19 cases climb in regional local health districts before the holiday period. The NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association raised the alarm about growing nurse vacancies in the state’s west with communities such as Lightning Ridge left with more than 140 vacant nursing shifts in their multi-purpose services over the coming month. The widespread inability to fill rising nurse vacancies and critical gaps in rosters led to senior nurse managers in 12 health facilities across western NSW taking the unprecedented action of stopping work for two hours on Tuesday. This problem comes as Peta Rutherford, the chief executive of the Rural Doctors Association of Australia, said there were continued outbreaks and increasing numbers of Covid-19 cases in regional Australia, with the expectation that cases will rise as more people travel during the holiday period. Brett Holmes, the NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association general secretary, said nurses, particularly nurse managers, were doing excessive additional hours, working unbroken periods of more than 18 days straight, often more than 16 hours a day. The situation was at “the point of totally exhausting the nursing workforce”. “These services can’t continue to operate without minimum nursing staff levels and we can’t fill even those,” Holmes said. “These facilities are chronically understaffed. “Every day is a potential patient disaster waiting to happen. Nurses live their lives knowing that anything can come through their door unexpectedly and they may not be able to deliver the care they know these patients need.” The rising number of Covid-19 cases in NSW had the potential to make the situation even more dire, he said. In many locations it only took one nurse having to isolate to make the health service unviable. Holmes said any acutely ill Covid patients would require transfer to a larger hospital in a regional centre or Sydney but, because nurses had to wait with the patient for the transport to arrive in case of the need for resuscitation, they would not be able to look after the aged care residents they were also responsible for in multipurpose services. Mark Spittal, the acting chief executive of the Western NSW local health district, said that on average 25 people a day were being infected with Covid in the region, with case numbers rising. Spittal said 40 staff were unable to work because they had been infected or were a close contact of someone who was. “We recognise as Covid-19 numbers grow amongst the community, so they’ll grow amongst our staff … At the moment we’ve been able to manage those staff exposures,” Spittal said. “We are expecting to see a significant increase in the numbers of cases across NSW and across our district, but I have to stress Covid-19 in the context of a community that is 96% double vaccinated is a very, very, very different scenario to what it was back in July before vaccination got taken up by the community.” Asked if the rising case numbers would exacerbate the problem of unfilled nursing shifts, Spittal said it was “always a possibility moving forward” but that a pandemic response, similar to natural disaster response, would see the NSW health system come together to deploy staff across the state. But Rutherford said the Rural Doctors Association, at both state and federal level, had flagged that there was limited surge workforce capacity because most of it had been taken up by demand in capital cities or large regional centres, where there have been much larger outbreaks. “We’ve got an overstretched workforce that was already short on the ground pre-pandemic that is now being absorbed through the testing and vaccination clinics, and now that we’re getting cases in these communities, the workforce shortages are being felt and being felt hard in these hospitals,” Rutherford said. When Covid-19 broke out in Mildura, she said, despite the talk about surge capacity “we know on the ground” it was the local workforce that absorbed the demand, working extra shifts and overtime. Of the 3,057 cases reported to 8pm Monday night in NSW, most emerged in the Hunter New England local health district, with 820 infections. Peter Wark, a conjoint professor at University of Newcastle and a senior member of the Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs, said there had not been a significant increase in hospital admissions but quite a lot of people were receiving in-home care. Wark said it was probably too early to see the full impact, but he expected the next few days to be “telling”, as hospital admissions typically increase seven to 10 days after infection, with the super-spreader event at the Argyle House nightclub having been held last Wednesday. He said the potential increase in presentations would come at “a tricky time of the year as it is a time when the system steps down rather than steps up”. It was a struggle for a regional and remote area where there was never any surge capacity in the first place, and it would not be made any better by the Christmas period. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Wark said the outbreak was “very much urban-centred” in Newcastle but “that will inevitably change”. Of communities experiencing their first outbreak, Rutherford said: “It is concerning we do know that many of our rural and regional locations still have not got well-drafted or well-coordinated plans in place. “Often it’s not until communities get their first case that we see true development of a cohesive plan in relation to treatment of Covid patients. And that’s unacceptable.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe World Health Organization’s European head has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in Covid-19 cases as Omicron spreads, and advised the widespread use of boosters for protection. Since it emerged in late November, Omicron has been detected in at least 38 of the 53 countries in the WHO’s European region and is already dominant in several of them, including Denmark, Portugal and the United Kingdom, Hans Kluge told a news conference in Vienna on Tuesday. “We can see another storm coming,” said Kluge. “Within weeks, Omicron will dominate in more countries of the region, pushing already stretched health systems further to the brink.” The WHO’s Europe region includes Russia and other former Soviet republics, as well as Turkey. WHO data shows the region has in recent weeks reported the highest number of Covid-19 cases compared to population size anywhere in the world. Even before Omicron, officials had warned of a further 700,000 deaths. WHO headquarters in Geneva has advised that vaccine boosters be saved for the most vulnerable, but Kluge urged people to “boost, boost, boost”. “The booster is the single most important defence against Omicron,” he said. A WHO spokesperson did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Kluge’s remarks. So far, 89% of the early Omicron cases in Europe were associated with common Covid-19 symptoms such as cough, sore throat and fever, Kluge said. Most cases had been reported among adults in their 20s and 30s, spreading initially in cities at social and workplace gatherings, he added. “The sheer volume of new Covid-19 infections could lead to more hospitalisations and widespread disruption to health systems and other critical services,” he said. “Governments and authorities need to prepare our response systems for a significant surge.” The WHO said on Monday that Omicron is spreading faster than the Delta variant, causing infections in people already vaccinated or recovered from the disease. Its chief scientist has called it “unwise” to conclude from early evidence it is a milder variant than previous ones. The news came as some countries in Europe tightened curbs, with Portugal ordering nightclubs and bars to close and telling people to work from home for at least two weeks, and Germany reimposing tighter rules on social contact. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, met the country’s 16 state leaders on Tuesday to decide on new measures including a ban on gatherings of more than 10 vaccinated people. Children under 14 are expected to be exempt from the rules, which will not come into effect until 28 December. Unvaccinated people are already only allowed to meet a maximum of two people from outside their own household. In Sweden, people are being urged to work from home if possible, along with tighter rules for social distancing and a requirement for seated-only service at bars, restaurants and larger public events. Concerns were also growing in Spain, where the country’s sixth coronavirus wave has sent infection rates soaring at it prepares to enter the Christmas season. The number of cases per 100,000 people hit 609 on Monday, up from 290 a fortnight ago. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged people to remain calm but called an emergency meeting of the country’s regional leaders on Wednesday afternoon to discuss the response. Boris Johnson, meanwhile, ruled out further restrictions before Christmas. Johnson said he understood that families across England needed certainty to press ahead with Christmas plans but warned curbs could still be imposed after 25 December because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. From Tuesday, the Covid self-isolation period in England will be cut from 10 days to seven for vaccinated people in a move that could also help save Christmas for tens of thousands of people if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests on days 6 and 7, the government announced. The Christmas decision, which follows deep splits within the cabinet, was in contrast to moves by the Scottish and Welsh governments on Tuesday. Edinburgh’s annual Hogmanay street party has been cancelled, while in Wales employees face £60 fines for failing to work from home as governments tightened rules to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. With ReutersA ticket to a big show, a blockbuster exhibition or a summer arts festival makes a great last-minute Christmas present. But the current wave of Covid – driven by the Omicron variant – isn’t going anywhere, and the cancellations are already beginning. The popular Sydney production of Come From Away, playing at the Capitol Theatre, was forced to cancel four performances this week, after a company member was identified as Covid-positive. And Jimmy Barnes, the Hoodoo Gurus and Faith No More shows are among the at least 300 live events scheduled over the Christmas period which have been cancelled or postponed. Shows on London’s West End and New York’s Broadway are already putting up the shutters. Buying a ticket in coming weeks could be a roll of the dice. On the upside, Australian producers and promoters have made significant changes to their box office policies since 2020 and continue to tweak their ticketing exchange and refund models. Whatever happens, it’s unlikely you will be left with a useless piece of paper promising a good night out that never happened. Always read the fine print Before making any ticket purchase, make sure to read the fine print. The really fine print. What happens, for example, if the production you’ve bought tickets for suddenly cancels one or more shows? What happens if the person you’ve bought the tickets for can’t attend on the night because they’re in isolation? What if the entire city has been plunged into a circuit-breaker lockdown? Australia’s ticketing code of practice has been developed over the years by Live Performance Australia. Just about every theatre company, music festival, concert presenter and gig promoter follows its guidelines. For the most part, when you purchase a ticket, the presenter or venue had the upper hand. They have the right, for example, to change or reschedule dates, substitute artists and vary the advertised programs. So if you buy a ticket for a friend and they don’t fancy going out that night, or have gone right off the artist for some reason, you are not entitled to a refund. If they are unwell, however – and you may be asked to prove it with a medical certificate or text from a state health authority – there are other options. Covid has forced a loosening of hard-and-fast rules. “If a ticketholder is unable to attend the event because they are unwell or other personal circumstance, they are not entitled to an automatic refund under Australian consumer law,” explains Evelyn Richardson, chief executive of Live Performance Australia. “However, event organisers always have discretion to provide a refund or other remedy, if they wish, even though there may not be a legal requirement to do so.” Different rules for every event Companies and venues across the country are reacting to the pandemic in different ways – which becomes apparent when you dive into their individual terms and conditions of sale. “There isn’t an across-the-board party line anymore,” says Lisa Campbell, chair of the programming committee of Sydney’s Hayes Theatre Co. “A small company like ours can usually work on a case-by-case basis. If someone calls us we can work out what their situation is and if can we refund – for example, if they were coming up from Melbourne, but now can’t cross the border.” According to the Live Performance Australia, any entitlement to a refund, exchange or other remedy depends on the ticket terms and conditions at time of purchase. “But we do expect our member organisations to treat ticketholders fairly if shows are forced to cancel or are postponed due to government mandates,” Richardson says. From Bangarra to Belvoir to MTC For example, if a ticket holder is unable to attend due to Covid-related illness or isolation, Sydney’s Belvoir will try to move them into an alternative performance. If that’s not possible, the ticket purchaser is credited the cost of the ticket towards another show in the season. Subject to availability, Bangarra Dance Theatre (whose new production Wudjang: Not the Past premieres in the upcoming Sydney festival, before heading to Hobart and South Australia) will exchange tickets for those experiencing illness or isolation. They also waive exchange fees and, if an exchange is not possible, the ticket can be converted into a gift voucher valid for three years. The Sydney Opera House will also exchange tickets for a future production, though it must be one by the same presenter. A ticket that can’t be used can also be converted to a gift voucher valid for three years. Opera Australia offers exchanges and gift vouchers if a ticket cannot be used. Refunds are at the company’s “absolute discretion”. If a Melbourne Theatre Company ticket can’t be used, it can be turned into a credit for future MTC productions, gift vouchers, subscriptions or MTC Digital Theatre video passes. Refunds, if granted, can take up to six weeks to process. Sydney Theatre Company now offers free ticket exchanges up to two hours before performances and asks ticketholders to contact box office staff to discuss exchange, transfer or refund options. “We want people to have confidence and are currently offering patrons free exchange of tickets up to two hours prior to performances,” an STC spokesperson says. “All reasonable return requests will be considered.” Box office flexibility can cut both ways, Lisa Campbell says. “The relationships between theatres and audiences are changing. People really understanding how hard it is to put on a show, so when we have to cancel, or someone can’t come, they basically donate their tickets. It’s been amazing. “We want to reward the patrons for coming back to the theatres. We recognise it’s a tentative time and that we are all in this together.” The summer festivals Things get a little trickier when it comes to arts festivals. Seasons are generally shorter (unless the show is being co-presented by a local company), and it may be hard for those experiencing lengthy isolation or illness symptoms to rebook into the same show. A spokesperson for Sydney festival, which opens on 6 January, says the festival will consider and process refunds if ticket holders are feeling unwell or have Covid-like symptoms; if they have been told to isolate; and if they are unable to attend the festival due to border restrictions. Requests for refund can be submitted as late as four hours before the show. The 2022 Perth festival opens on 11 February, a week after Western Australia opens its border to the rest of the country. At time of writing, it is sticking closely to the LPA guidelines. Even if you are isolating or test positive, its website says, “We are not required to provide a refund or exchange of tickets, vouchers or gift certificates.” Tasmania’s Mona Foma arts festival (Launceston, 21-23 January; Hobart, 28-30 January) will refund up to 24 hours before an event (with a medical certificate). “It is a fragile time for events,” says Mona Foma artistic director, Brian Ritchie. “We encourage our performers to take artistic risks. As presenters on the other hand, we strive to minimise risks to the audience by creating a safe environment, comfortable capacities and smooth operation.” Adelaide festival, which opens in March, is freeing up its box office policies to buoy consumer confidence. “We get it,” says Rachel Healy, the festival’s co-artistic director. “We’ve been programming in a pandemic and we understand the challenges for audiences and artists better than anybody. A night at the festival should be a source of hope and optimism and not a source of anxiety.” A large proportion of the Adelaide festival audience comes from interstate and overseas (nearly 20,000 in 2019). If border closures or changes to quarantine regulations are a feature of 2022, Healy wants to assure ticket buyers that they won’t be out of pocket. “We have the most fantastic team of ticketing staff who have worked in the arts forever and they are really sensitive and when it comes to selling tickets and coming to the theatre, we will do whatever we can do to exchange and if we can’t exchange we will refund. We’ve got your back. “This is the new normal.”Olympic and Paralympic sports will benefit from an unprecedented quarter-of-a-billion-dollar windfall in the buildup to the 2024 Paris Games after the Australian Institute of Sport and the federal government revealed a new long-term funding model for elite sport. The AIS announced on Wednesday it will, through government support, commit $257m over the next three years in an attempt to capitalise on Australia’s successful campaign in Tokyo earlier this year. It is the first time funds have been allocated for a full Games cycle, removing the uncertainty sports had previously faced on 12-month plans. The new model is not based on rewarding success from the Tokyo Games, the AIS CEO, Peter Conde, said, but rather a commitment to build towards Paris and beyond – with a home Games looming in Brisbane in 2032. Several sports stand to benefit from cash increases, notably women’s football and the Matildas, who will receive just over $1.9m over the next three years dedicated specifically to the football tournament in Paris, after Sam Kerr’s team fell just short of winning a medal in Tokyo. Canoeing, women’s rugby sevens, rowing, surfing and skateboarding are among the other sports also set for sizeable increases. The women’s sevens program will jump 39% to an annual total of $2.5m, while surfing will get a 30% increase to $2m a year. Para and able-bodied canoeing increases to $7.15m a year, while rowing will get $10.055m. “This funding commitment is made possible because of the belief and confidence the Australian government and the AIS has in Australian sport,” Conde said. “The Tokyo Olympic Games and Paralympic Games inspired us all and we have worked with government to secure longer-term funding to forward plan and continue building on that success. This is why we are now launching an even stronger platform for Paris. “This additional high performance funding for the 2024 Games is in addition to $14.6m a year in direct athlete grants being provided leading into Paris, as well as the $82.2m allocated in the 2021 federal budget to fund wellbeing programs and extend performance pathways to develop our champions of the future. “This overall commitment to high-performance sport furthers the aim of the National High Performance Sport Strategy to create conditions for sustainable success, not only for Paris, but Los Angeles 2028 and our home Games in Brisbane in 2032.” The new funding is in addition to existing direct athlete grants ($14.6m) and the government’s $82.2m wellbeing and future athlete package, which has already led to increased investment in sports including softball, baseball, gymnastics, women’s hockey, men’s football and rugby sevens. “Through this commitment by the federal government and via a collaborative process with the AIS, sports are enabled to build their plans in advance for a full summer Games cycle, with funding right through until the end of 2024,” the minister for sport, Richard Colbeck, said. “This will be the first time that sports have received funding certainty so far out from an Olympic and Paralympic Games, and we’re proud to have made that commitment to building sustainable success for our high-performance athletes and their support teams.”Much of the pandemic modelling to make news headlines since Covid-19 hit has depicted concerning scenarios involving high case numbers and hospitalisations. On Thursday, modelling from the University of NSW and cited by NSW health minister Brad Hazzard found Covid-19 cases in the state could reach 25,000 a day by the end of January. The latest modelling to raise alarm bells came from the Doherty Institute and was leaked to the media on Tuesday after being sent to politicians ahead of a meeting of national cabinet on Wednesday. It said Australia could see 200,000 new Covid cases a day by late January or early February. Early into the pandemic in 2020, other models predicted “hundreds of thousands” of Australian deaths, while health workers in NSW were told to prepare for 8,000 deaths in the first wave. But these are worst-case scenario models and are just one scenario out of dozens of different scenarios that are calculated by epidemiologists and biostatisticians. What is often lost in the reporting of these worst-case models is that they rarely ever eventuate but are calculated to allow governments to see what might happen if they did nothing at all to control an outbreak, and to plan accordingly. The leaked Doherty Institute modelling projecting 200,000 cases came with an important caveat: this would only eventuate if nothing was done, including if people did not change their behaviour at all of their own accord. It also assumed no change to the pace of booster rollouts, and that only very basic restrictions, such as requiring masks in hospitals, were maintained. But already, people are changing their behaviour in states like NSW where mask mandates for retail don’t exist, wearing masks anyway to shopping centres or cancelling bookings for crowded venues. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) is constantly reviewing data on boosters and adjusting its recommendations accordingly. What doesn’t make headlines are the other less worrying scenarios depicted by the Doherty Institute and other institutions that project what may happen if, for example, masks are worn, vaccines prove to offer fair protection against variants, or data changes on the reproduction rate of the virus. There is no one model or scenario experts rely upon, and models are constantly tweaked as more information is gathered about the virus. Ahead of national cabinet meeting on Wednesday the chair of the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, Prof Paul Kelly, said the 200,000 figure “presents one of the worst case of all potential scenarios including assumptions that the Omicron variant is as severe as the Delta variant, an absence of hospital surge capacity, a highly limited booster program, no change to baseline public health and social measures and an absence of spontaneous behaviour change in the face of rising case numbers”. “None of these five assumptions represent the likely state of events, let alone all of them together, therefore presenting that scenario as the likely scenario that will occur is highly misleading.” The problem is that when parts of reports leak ahead of time, the most concerning picture, rather than the full story, is often presented. Chair of biostatistics and epidemiology at the University of South Australia, Prof Adrian Esterman, said epidemiologists now model by creating individuals with certain ages, occupations, social movements and other characteristics. It’s known as agent-based modelling, and it is used by the Doherty Institute. “They then do this a million times, each person with slightly different characteristics, then they simulate what happens when all of these individuals interact,” Esterman said. “To do that, they not only have to enter all these details about each individual person, they have to add in the things like the generation interval of the virus, its incubation period, its effective reproduction number as well. “And the point is, every single one of those things is an estimate, and is subject to change. So we now have dozens and dozens of parameters in the model, each of which are estimates creating ‘what if’ scenarios. “Taken together, these different scenarios help governments aim for the best but plan for the worst. But they are only estimates, never certainties.”The Melbourne Cricket Club will implement Covid-19 protocols to welcome fans to the MCG for the Boxing Day Test but the ground’s capacity will not be limited, despite the Omicron variant increasing cases of the virus across Victoria’s capital. The state’s acting premier James Merlino confirmed on Tuesday that a capacity crowd of over 90,000 people would be allowed to attend the match, although MCC CEO Stuart Fox said on Wednesday he anticipated a figure closer to 70,000 based on ticket sales so far. “We’ve got the stadium prepped, a lot of protocols in place for Boxing Day, and we can’t wait to welcome fans back to cricket,” Fox said. “Huge build-up, we’re just keen to get going.” Protocols at the ground will include checks for vaccination certificates at the gate, QR codes on entry and at some restaurants in the Members Reserve, cashless systems at bars and restaurants, and no entry for children under 12 unless accompanied by a vaccinated adult. The measures are less strict than those mid-year during the football season and mask-wearing has not been mandated. But Fox couched it in the language of personal responsibility. “We’re all used to wearing masks, and we’d encourage everyone to bring a mask at this point in time, and when you’re in congested areas we’d encourage you to wear it,” Fox said. Following a national cabinet meeting on Wednesday the prime minister, Scott Morrison, “strongly recommended” the wearing of masks and called for the use of common sense. Yarra Park around the MCG will be used to space out people queuing for entry, who are advised to come earlier than usual given the slower process at the gates. Professor Nancy Baxter, head of the Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, told the Guardian that it would be safest not to have the event, but that balance was required given the way the virus has derailed so many important parts of people’s lives. “If they’re going ahead then masks should be used,” Baxter said. “No one is personally responsible for a pandemic. Scott Morrison used the analogy of skin cancer. My use of sunscreen doesn’t affect your risk of skin cancer. My wearing a mask affects your chances of contracting Covid. “It’s a long day, people will eat and drink, which means that even people who are wearing masks will take them off. People will be shouting, people will be breathing each other’s air. If it’s important for people in Melbourne, if we want a safe event that everyone can enjoy – we probably shouldn’t be having the event, but we for sure should be wearing masks.” With Melbourne back above 1,500 cases recorded per day, it seems almost inevitable that there will be exposures recorded at the Test match over the five days. That will also influence some people to stay away. “There’s always risk, but we’ve got a Covid safe plan in place for a reason,” said Fox. “We had one significant issue this year at the football, and we’ve managed that quite well. We had the data through to Health within two or three minutes. We’ve got a good handle on it, and we’re confident that we’ll get through our five days. “I’d be lying if I said there wasn’t a concern [but] people who’ve bought tickets will want to come to this event.” Players’ interactions with fans will remain limited in Melbourne and they will be kept away from crowded indoor spaces, but Cricket Australia is resisting placing them in a hard bubble. “Ultimately what it comes down to is these people want to participate,” CA’s head of operations Peter Roach said. “They are working with us, not against us.” After Melbourne the series moves onto Sydney for the new year’s Test – the penultimate match of the series – at the SCG, starting on 5 January.I have been working from home since 2011, long before the pandemic, and getting enough exercise without a daily commute to the office has proven a challenge. I exercise most effectively when it’s just built into my day, like cycling to work was previously. My home office is also my person-cave and it is rigged out with a small couch and a TV. At some stage I independently discovered the concept of “temptation bundling” before it became a thing. At night I was binging TV shows while doing what I called the Batman Workout – situps, pushups and pull-ups, which was all Christian Bale’s Dark Knight ever seemed to need. By the time all six seasons of The Sopranos were finished, I actually was on my way to getting slightly ripped. But then I must have hurt my back, run out of good TV shows, or got the shits with it or something because I stopped. I necessarily digress here. I’m a tinkerer and a nerd and some years ago I started pulling apart exercise treadmills that had been abandoned on the side of the road and turning the parts inside into other things. My first effort was converting my old-tech metalwork lathe to variable speed – its name is Frankenlathe. The second effort was a benchtop drill press – its name is just Drill Press. Meanwhile, to address my lingering home office fitness and ergonomic concerns, my carpenter father-in-law knocked up for me a very simple sit-stand computer workstation – basically some lengths of timber screwed to my workshop bench that cantilever out to support a keyboard/mouse work surface. I bought a gas-lift drafting chair so I would be sitting at the right height, and an elevating arm for my computer monitor. When wanting to stand, I could push the chair aside and raise the monitor up – the keyboard and mouse stayed at the same level. Just standing up at your desk does burn calories – but as a form of exercise it is dead boring, your feet get sore, your legs want to walk off somewhere else, and eventually you realise that it’s easier to think sitting down. I decided a treadmill workstation or “walking desk” would be the go. You can buy these in various forms but I decided to improvise. Your average exercise treadmill is too long for what my workspace could accommodate, but on Gumtree I found one shorter than usual and in full working order. I may have gotten it for free – it was a “need it gone” ad – though an exchange along the lines of “$10 and I’ll help you load it” comes to mind. I started stripping down the mini-treadmill, first discarding the handrails and figuring out the controls, but eventually it just languished in the Land of Unfinished Projects (garage) for several years, being variously shoved out of the way, tripped over, or having things stacked on or draped over it. Then I got interested in craft beer. Very interested. Then came the pandemic. Then between both of those combined, I was out one belt-hole in my trousers, then two, and it was time to take action. Since breaking my hand in three places when I fell headlong while trying to take adult tennis lessons(!), a Dark Knight Rises workout regime has been out of the question, at least while the hand is in rehab – a frustratingly longwinded process. So the idea of a walking desk was revived. Exercise treadmills can be raised to a vertical position so you can move them around more easily or stow them. I decided that mine would fold up in front of me when not in use, with the keyboard/mouse work surface sitting between me and the vertically stowed treadmill. The “arms” supporting my existing cantilevered desk just needed to be moved a bit further apart and screwed down again with good ol’ batten screws. The upright treadmill would then fit in between. When standing on the treadmill, both the desk surface and the monitor would need to raise up by quite a lot. So my elevating monitor stand now attaches to a Besser/cinder block, which is clamped to the workbench using a bit of hardwood cut into an L-shape and another batten screw going into the workbench. The desktop was more complicated. In the raised position, it has to be elevated and forward (away from me) in relation to its lowered position, so that I can be further forward, otherwise I would shoot off the back of the treadmill mid-stride. And when swinging the treadmill up and down, the desktop surface also needs to be shifted out of the way. Those are the basics of how this pandemic project came to exist. What kills exercise for me is the knowing you are doing it, and the waiting for it to end. Walking is one of the few things that I can do adequately and indefinitely without thinking about it very much. And with a treadmill desk, I don’t need to find the time. Typing and using a mouse is a challenge when desk-walking, but you adapt, including by going into your computer settings and putting the mouse tracking on low, and sort of bracing your wrists on the desk surface to steady your hands as you type. The Dirty Secret here is that my home office/bunker/person-cave is air conditioned. I despise the heat of summer, but now I can walk my daily five kilometres or so without becoming sweaty and angry like I would outside. The air conditioner is a repurposed one of those box-type ones that you see hanging out the wall of a cheap motel room. I put a second, outward-swinging door on my office, cut a rectangular hole and hung the air conditioner in that hole, so when I need it, I can just swing the door shut and plug it in. But that’s another story …Many Australians could end up spending the festive holiday period alone in isolation after being exposed to a Covid case even as governments resist shutting borders and insist Christmas won’t be cancelled. Overworked health systems are struggling to cope with new outbreaks and some state and territory governments have moved to tighten mask mandates and social distancing restrictions. Adelaide man Geoff Goodfellow, 72, says at least three generations of his family will be spending Christmas in quarantine. Goodfellow was exposed to coronavirus during a dinner to celebrate his son’s 50th birthday at Arkhe – a new restaurant in Adelaide – where his granddaughter works. He said his granddaughter had no idea she had been exposed and infected when she greeted the family with a hug and a kiss before serving them their meals. Two days later she called to say South Australia Health had declared the restaurant an exposure site and she was one of a handful of workers to test positive. Several family members – including an emergency department nurse – had to isolate and endure long waits at testing sites. Goodfellow said another son – who had also been at a separate exposure site – had a security guard try to solicit a bribe to move him into a priority queue. “My son told him to piss off, basically, and had a further four-hour wait,” the 72-year-old said. The situation meant long-made Christmas plans were immediately cancelled. “Christmas day is a day we share as a family,” Goodfellow said. “We’d eat inside and then sit outside under a white cedar tree in the shade in the afternoon and tell stories. But now everything is postponed until at least mid-January. It’s been a rather expensive dinner, to say the least.” A similar story was shared by Amos, a 37-year-old who said he and his partner had been planning to drive to South Australia from Victoria the weekend before Christmas to visit family when his partner unexpectedly tested positive. “Here’s your headline: We’re not travelling,” Amos said. “We’ll be spending Christmas in quarantine, or at least my partner will be, as she’ll still be in quarantine riding out the end of Covid. “We were going to stay for 10 days to see family, see nieces and nephews that we either haven’t met or haven’t seen in almost a year, catch up with friends – just actually enjoy a holiday.” Amos, who didn’t want to use his real name, said his partner had tested positive two days before receiving any official notification of the actual exposure, forcing them to take measures without key information. “It was pretty fucking serious,” Amos said. “It’s not something you want someone who you actually care about to have. It sucks even if you’re a double-vaxxed person.” Though Amos has consistently returned negative results, he said the couple would be quarantining through Christmas while also attempting to take precautions within their home to prevent him being infected. The situation means the couple’s Christmas plans will be postponed until at least March when they are planning to travel for a wedding and to celebrate a friend’s pregnancy. “Political decisions have ruined our Christmas,” he said. “Ending mask mandates is just ridiculous. Two years into the pandemic and governments still not have seen the benefit of having a fully functioning public health system. It’s all really frustrating.”Heartbroken families are being forced to cancel Christmas and holiday plans as Queensland Covid testing requirements leave them locked out or turned away. Almost 260,000 Australians have crossed the border into Queensland since Monday but many more have been turned away and sent home or forced to cancel family reunions and expensive holiday bookings because of testing delays. To enter Queensland, travellers are required to return a negative Covid test 72 hours before arrival, leaving thousands scrambling to get a test before travelling and placing extraordinary pressure on health systems in the lead-up to Christmas. The scramble for tests has led to delays in results being issued. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, stood by the border restrictions, but said on Wednesday she was considering allowing rapid antigen tests for interstate travellers from 1 January. “I have had a good talk with the NSW premier [about] rapid antigen tests. We will look at whether this is approved, and we may legalise them in the New Year, but between now and the New Year we will require those PCR tests for people coming into a state. “It was part of our plan, and we want to keep the virus out as much as we possibly can over Christmas and new year.” There were 151,443 tests processed in New South Wales on Tuesday, the highest tally of swabs collected in more than four months, as the Christmas travel rush slowed the system. Palaszczuk told reporters that 10% of those tests were for people making their way to Queensland, but NSW Health has not commented or confirmed that figure. The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, said on Tuesday there would not be an extension of the 72-hour test window. He said he was aware of the long wait times to even get the test interstate. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said at a later press conference 25% of people trying to get tested were doing so to travel interstate. “We have all seen the terrible queues and the long waits people have had,” he said in Canberra on Wednesday afternoon. “Some 25% are not symptomatic … they just want to travel to another state. This is putting unnecessary pressure on the testing system.” He said national cabinet had discussed the abolition of PCR tests as a prerequisite for travel. “There was a positive discussion and a panel will give further advice on whether testing is required at all for travel.” Morrison indicated state governments might look to rapid antigen tests as a means to “make the system a lot more workable”. At the same press conference, the chief health officer, Paul Kelly, said the requirement for PCR tests before travel was holding up health resources. “In Victoria it is very difficult to get a test, and if you’re getting a test you are waiting for many hours. So this reliance on testing to travel is interfering with one of our few things we have to decrease the caseload and protect Australians.” Casey Van Soest, her partner, Luke Van Soest, and daughter Xara Wademan, from Sydney’s south-west, were all stuck at the NSW side of the border on Wednesday after a delay in their test results. Casey’s mother, Colleen Anne Collier, feared she would not be able to see her family, with their 72-hour window to present their tests about to expire. “It’s left me feeling frustrated and worried for the kids because they are literally sitting outside in the hot sun waiting for test results to come back. They have two of the three results, but are waiting on the third one. “They’ve left their accommodation that they stayed in last night, in anticipation that the results would be back by now. The plan was to travel on today over the border but no one has told them when to expect the results back. “Some people have been at the border waiting five days for their results. They can’t go forwards or backwards, although my daughter is considering turning around now. We haven’t seen her in two years for Christmas and it’s just heartbreaking.” Collier said her daughter and her family booked accommodation near the border and left Sydney after getting tested on Monday, anticipating they would get the results before crossing. But with accommodation being snapped up by the many travellers in similar situations, they have had to resort to waiting in their car. “They’ve already spent so much on this, and planned to get here for Christmas. And they’re particularly wanting to come this year because my father has probably six to nine months left, he’s in kidney failure at the moment and is 90 years old. “For us, this could be the last Christmas with him, and we want it to happen. If they don’t have a test result by Thursday evening, I think they could turn around.” Tourism operators reported cancellations due to testing uncertainty. The Queensland Tourism Industry Council chief executive, Daniel Gschwind, said the current testing regime had dampened many operators’ optimistic outlook for the summer. Up to 10% of Cairns bookings have reportedly been cancelled. “It is absolutely exhausting to face hurdle after hurdle, and just when relief was in sight, to be frustrated by the logistics of this requirement is definitely a concern. “The situation is obviously not helpful, and is acting as a deterrent. But we are still hoping demand will overwhelm concern at this point.” Gschwind said he hoped the Queensland government would respond with some “flexibility” to the situation, citing rapid antigen tests or increased testing capacity as potential solutions. “The logistics of the testing requirements are not working out the way we would hope so that’s absolutely an issue.” “We are aware that some bookings have been cancelled in some parts of Queensland and hopefully that can be avoided in the future. We are still hopeful and optimistic that Christmas and the next month will deliver a strong boost to the tourism industry in Queensland.”Senior EU officials are working behind the scenes to “correct” a new law in Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH) that criminalises denial of the massacre of 8,000 Muslims in Srebrenica, after privately concluding it risks reigniting fresh regional conflict. Milorad Dodik, the Serb member of the tripartite BiH leadership, has been accused in recent months of seeking to break up the country by withdrawing its Serbian part from state-level institutions. He has claimed there is an imbalance of power and that when Valentin Inzko, the outgoing head of Bosnia’s office of the high representative (OHR), outlawed genocide denial this summer, it was undemocratic and symptomatic of the problem. Dodik’s moves to take back powers have been widely condemned by the international community, which accuses him of leading the region to war, but leaked minutes reveal that the European commissioner for enlargement, Olivér Várhelyi, has concluded that Inzko’s law is responsible for the current crisis. During a meeting with EU delegation to Bosnia, Várhelyi – who is responsible for strengthening the bloc’s relations with BiH – gave his “frank assessment” that Inzko “was to blame for the current political crisis” in the country and the “delegitimisation” of the office of the high representative. “While the Inzko amendments could not be disputed from the point of view of the law’s substance, the fact that it was imposed on the last day of the HR Inzko’s mandate had been problematic,” the minutes report Várhelyi as saying at the meeting on 25 November. “Especially because it was an important decision, it should have been based on thorough debate having everyone on board. The question was now how to correct this.” Várhelyi, a Hungarian close to his country’s rightwing prime minister Viktor Orbán, told his fellow EU officials that the Bosnian Muslim leadership had signalled willingness to resolve this issue through the adoption of a new law that could bring Dodik and the Serbian Republika Srpska entity back into the fold. The current holder of the office of the high representative, Christian Schmidt, confirmed in a statement that he supported new legislation that was explicitly even-handed over the denial of any genocide. The OHR said: “The High Representative takes the issue of glorification and war crimes very seriously. “The High Representative’s main focus, however, is on the clear need to create the basis for a parliamentary legislative process through a broad social discussion involving social and religious stakeholders. He warns very clearly against politicising the issue. “When faced with the graves of innocent people, party politics must remain silent. Humanitas is the focus, and not inciting turmoil”. The Dayton peace accord of 1995 ended a civil war that cost about 100,000 lives after the breakup of Yugoslavia, including that of more than 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys killed in and around the town of Srebrenica. The agreement established a new constitution for BiH, made up of two entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, consisting predominantly of Bosnian Muslims and Croats, and Republika Srpska. Bosnia’s three-member presidency is held by representatives of those three main ethnic groups. The so-called Bonn powers of 1997 also grant substantial lawmaking powers to the office of the high representative in charge of implementing the deal. It has the authority to impose decisions or dismiss officials who undermine the postwar ethnic balance and reconciliation efforts. Inzko, an Austrian diplomat, made genocide denial punishable by up to five years in prison in July. He cited a refusal by the Bosnian Serb assembly to withdraw decorations awarded to three convicted war criminals as part of his reasoning. The minutes reveal that Várhelyi said he believed there was a way out of the current crisis and that he had sanctioned a special sitting of Republika Srpska’s assembly on 10 December where members backed a resolution supporting the taking back of powers. His condition, however, was that the legislation required to take back powers from the state in the fields of tax administration, the judiciary, intelligence and even the national army, in order to create a Serb force, should be postponed for six months to allow time for negotiation. Várhelyi said that dealing with the genocide law was vital in order to get Dodik to recognise Inzko’s successor, who has said the region faces its biggest crisis in a quarter of a century. A European Commission spokesperson said: “The reconciliation process requires acknowledging what happened, honouring the victims and genuinely promoting reconciliation by confronting the roots of hatred that led to the genocide. Local ownership over the process is also key.” • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. An earlier version said the Dayton peace accord was reached in 1994, rather than 1995.The first big blows of north-easterlies brought down fieldfares from Scandinavia with snow on their wings and beaks sharpened in frost and ice. Their redwing cousins seeped into Britain all through the autumn, but fieldfares are true winter thrushes, best served up chilled to the British countryside. At the tail end of November, a fellow birder in Lancashire emailed me a reply – “redwings yes, fieldfares none”. I missed their calls, those endearing rattles that remind me of customers passing through a faulty turnstile. And now, carried in by cold winds, they’re back, chack-a-chack, bouncing across the field in a straggly flock maybe 50-strong, self-choreographing into the topmost branches of a rowan. Silhouetted against the sky, they adopt an identical stance, pointing due north, stuck all over the tree like so many Christmas baubles. Motionless and now mute – they scarcely speak when still – the fieldfares perch as if awaiting instruction. Fieldfares were ever present here in the first months of the year, an infectious antidote to lockdown, for they were everything it wasn’t – gregarious, exuberant, highly mobile chatterers, riding out over our grounded troubles. One morning they hedge-hopped down the lane on either side of me shouting “this way!” and their excitable cries had me racing to keep up. Running with fieldfares? Silly man. A soundless exhortation now shakes them out of the rowan, like a fist exploding into an open palm, the birds fanning northwards on a broad front. In a rebellious instant, one bird breaks away from the splintering flock, taking a wide arc to the east and then banking round to head south. I see it cut a lone path across my path, a high flyer, with that typical fieldfare tilt towards the sun. Then the whole flock it has left appears to vote in midair: ayes to the right. One, two, four birds sheer off, triggering the whole group to bend and coalesce behind them, now in an unusually tight formation. They are drawn into the slipstream of the breakaway bird and the flock tilts, this time to the right. Westward ho! • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiarySouth Korea is struggling to contain a surge in Covid-19 cases, reporting 7,456 infections on Wednesday and a record number of people with serious symptoms, as countries across Asia face a similar battle. The new infections bring South Korea’s total to 583,065, while the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said the number of critically ill patients rose to a new high of 1,063. It is placing intense pressure on medical services, prompting the prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, to commit to securing an additional 10,000 hospital beds for patients with moderate to serious symptoms by the middle of next month, the Yonhap news agency reported. South Korea now requires citizens over 18 to present a quarantine pass, proof of Covid vaccination or negative PCR test to access indoor sports events, cinemas and concert halls. Other new restrictions include social distancing measures that will last until at least 2 January, limiting gatherings to no more than four people and forcing restaurants, cafes and bars to close by 9pm. Neighbouring Japan has decided to extend strict border controls “for the time being”, the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said despite criticism from students waiting to take up university places and families who say they have been unfairly separated by the restrictions. Kishida had originally said those measures would stay in place until early January. Japan is recording comparatively few daily cases, but Kishida warned of the need to remain vigilant, speed up the booster rollout and promote the use of orally administered Covid-19 drugs, the Kyodo news agency said. Currently only citizens and foreign residents are permitted to enter Japan, and they must quarantine in government-designated facilities. Thailand reported 2,532 new coronavirus cases and 31 deaths on Wednesday, according to the ministry of health. It will reinstate mandatory Covid quarantine for foreign visitors and scrap a quarantine waiver from Tuesday, Reuters reported. The move was confirmed by the government, which said the action was being taken due to concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. China, where the pandemic began two years ago, is fighting local outbreaks in several cities, including key industrial hubs in the east and south. Authorities are determined to quash fresh outbreaks ahead of a crucial few weeks that include the Beijing Winter Olympics in February and a surge in domestic travel during the lunar new year. China’s health authority reported 77 new confirmed cases on Tuesday, down from 81 a day earlier. Of the new infections, 57 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, and mostly in the north-western province of Shaanxi. The Philippines has halved the waiting time for a Covid-19 vaccine booster to three months after a second vaccination, in an attempt to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant. “We are exploring all possible options to safely mitigate the effects of more transmissible variants of Covid-19,” said the health secretary, Francisco Duque. The Philippines has received more than 192m doses of Covid-19 vaccines and fully inoculated about 44.2 million of its 110 million population, according to the government. Covid-19 cases have fallen to an average of 378 a day in December, from a peak of 18,579 daily in September, and the country has so far detected three imported cases of the Omicron variant. The new variant is also present in Singapore, where authorities have discovered three Covid-19 cases linked to a gym, with two of them being Omicron, according to a report citing preliminary tests. All three people were fully vaccinated and had mild symptoms, the health ministry said, adding that it was attempting to trace contacts. Singapore has so far detected 71 confirmed Omicron cases, with 65 imported and six local. Indonesia has recorded 4,829 cases and 11 deaths in its latest reporting period, bringing its total caseload to 4.26 million with 144,024 deaths, according to government health data. A total of 73.4% of eligible people have received at least one Covid vaccine dose and 51.8% have received two doses. On Monday, Indonesia added people traveling from Britain, Norway and Denmark to the list of those banned from entering the country, while Hong Kong was removed, senior minister Luhut Binsar Panjaitan said, according to Reuters. Indonesia identified its first case of the Omicron variant last week.Last Friday, Charlamagne Tha God had a remote sit-down with Kamala Harris for his new late-night chatshow Tha God’s Honest Truth on Comedy Central. It was a big moment for a legendary provocateur who in little more than a decade has gone from dismissable radio sidekick to the leading interviewer on urban radio, as at ease grilling presidents as japing with Migos. During his interview with Harris, it seemed as if the host, real name Lenard Larry McKelvey, would bite his tongue and give the vice-president space to hit back at the legion of critics who moan about her not doing more. But what seemed like a softball interview quickly changed tone when Charlamagne asked her, point blank: “Who is the real president of this country, Joe Biden or Joe Manchin?” As soon as he asked the question, Harris’s spokesperson Symone Sanders swooped in and demanded a stop to the interview, citing audio difficulties. Seated in a gaming chair, Charlamagne swiveled around to face his studio audience. “They’re acting like they can’t hear me, y’all,” he snarked. When Harris confirmed that she could indeed hear him, he repeated the question. “C’mon, Charlamagne,” she scolded with a wagging finger. “Don’t start talking like a Republican. It’s Joe Biden, and I’m vice-president and my name is Kamala Harris.” Her defiant response might have gone down as one beleaguered politician’s attempt to win points with her boss if it hadn’t been followed by news of Manchin’s Senate-chamber nuking of the Biden administration’s signature Build Back Better legislation the next day. Rather surprisingly, Charlamagne had stumbled into something that’s become increasingly rare in Washington: a genuine moment. The Harris interview now enters the pantheon of Tha God’s honest gotcha moments. Before that, there was Biden telling Charlamagne during the 2020 election that African Americans who didn’t turn out for him “ain’t Black”. (Biden’s handlers tried shutting down that interview, too.) There was him calling Elizabeth Warren “the original Rachel Dolezal” while cross-examining her about her false claims to Native American ancestry. And there was him going all Jim Acosta on Hilary Clinton when the then presidential candidate came clean with her habit of carrying hot sauce in her purse. “Now,” he joked, “I just want you to know people are gonna see this and say, ‘OK, she’s pandering to Black people.’” To which she asked, “Is it working?” If the Moncks Corner, South Carolina, native has a gift for producing cringey exchanges, it’s because Charlamagne learned from one of the best line-steppers while a sidekick to Wendy Williams in the late aughts on New York’s WBLS R&amp;B radio station and on VH1. But where Williams, although risqué, could reliably flirt her way back to safety in interviews, Charlamagne became notorious for rankling the industry’s popular and powerful. He spent a year out of work after parting ways with Williams before the iHeart radio network brought him back to New York in 2010 to anchor the hip-hop station Power 105.1’s Breakfast Club show: a kind of Good Morning America for the streets known for its no-holds-barred interviews with Black luminaries in music, on screen and in sports. And while he’s done as much as the co-hosts DJ Envy and Angela Yee to elevate Birdman’s walkout, Soulja Boy’s meltdown and Monique’s Netflix controversy into memes, it’s Charlamagne’s sociopolitical curiosity that’s made the show an important stop for thought leaders and policymakers. Two bestselling biographies have only given him further standing to lead those discussions. All the while a shadowy past looms just as large. He’s talked openly about serving jail time for dealing drugs as a teenager. In 2018, he was forced to reckon with a 2001 rape charge when his accuser, who was 15 at the time, sought to reopen the case. (Ultimately, a special prosecutor declined, citing the three years’ probation Charlamagne served after agreeing to a plea deal on a less serious charge of contributing to the delinquency of a minor.) Around the same time, a 2015 podcast interview resurfaced in which Charlamagne seems to characterize his first sexual encounter with his now wife, Jessica Gadsden, as rape, saying that she was too drunk to meaningfully consent. (“For the record, in 1997 I was having consensual sex,” he’d say later. Gadsden, too, appeared on the Breakfast Club in his defense.) None of it this has appeared to dim his stardom, nor has it stopped him positioning himself as an ally of the #MeToo and social justice movements. If anything, Charlamagne’s career has taken the same shape as those of Don Imus and Howard Stern before him. Which is to say he’s a Teflon-grade, old-school shock-jock. Before the late-night chat with Harris, who stopped by the Breakfast Club during her presidential campaign to reminisce about her days as a weed-smoking Howard University sorority girl who now vibes to Tupac and Snoop, it was Charlamagne scoring the first interview with Travis Scott since the Astroworld festival disaster that had the media buzzing. But for all of his confrontational instincts, Charlamagne doesn’t have the combative chops of John Oliver or Jordan Klepper, who cut their teeth on Comedy Central. He is largely deferential to distinguished “gets”. Even the testy exchange between Charlamagne and the vice-president ended with him telling her, with a hand on heart, “we need you to be the superhero who saves democracy” and her gesturing in kind while saying “I wanna see those babies”. By that, of course, she means his kids, an indication that these two sparring partners might actually be friends.How was it possible to enjoy It’s a Sin, knowing what was to come? Russell T Davies’s great skill was in making it seem like it would be rude not to. It might have been reasonable to expect a certain solemnity from this five-part drama about the arrival of Aids in Britain and the devastation it wrought, but what was less predictable, perhaps, was the furious, beautiful joy of it. It was gut-wrenching and it was terrible, but god, it was funny and it was full of life. The story corralled a group of young men into the flatshare that would become known as the “Pink Palace”, under the capable watch of house mother-type Jill (Lydia West). At the centre of this ensemble was Ritchie (Years &amp; Years’ Olly Alexander, returning to his former acting career), a bright-eyed dreamer who arrives in London to become an actor; Colin, a sweet-natured walking anorak who eventually swaps his suburban digs for a room in the house; and Roscoe (Omari Douglas), a tart-tongued queen who flames out of a meal with his traditional Nigerian family with inimitable style, eventually finding himself at the heart of the British establishment, in a roundabout sort of way. Like most of Davies’s shows, from the pioneering Queer As Folk to the Nostradamus-esque Years and Years, it had a defiant bounce to it, a sense of humour that made the darkest moments all the more heart-rending. Ritchie and Roscoe discover a lively gay scene in the city’s pubs and clubs, bringing the party home with them as they learn about sex by having lots of it. (A scene in the first episode, in which Ritchie learns about sexual hygiene, felt quietly revolutionary.) Colin finds a different side of gay life, at first, through his colleague Henry, an older man who lives with his partner in the shadows and tries not to rock the boat. It is Henry who disappears first, as a mysterious new illness arrives, hitting a now-familiar wall of fear, denial and misinformation. The disappearances keep coming. Friends from the scene “go home” to their families and never return, lost to what relatives might decide to call cancer. In March 2020, the former Conservative MP Ann Widdecombe wrote a column for the Daily Express suggesting that Aids was one of a number of frightening epidemics that had not “proved as devastating as feared”. Though this series finished filming before the current pandemic, it stands as a riposte to such an abhorrent idea. The sheer waste of lives is devastating. It’s a Sin dealt with complicated ideas, too, which made it a talking point. As the title makes clear, it puts the notions of gay shame and pride up for discussion – that complex concoction of ego and self-loathing – as Ritchie first denies Aids, arguing it is a tool of oppression used by authorities to stop gay men having sex. Eventually the conversation shifts on to his mother, a magnificent Keeley Hawes, who battles it out with Jill until the very end, when both are broken, in different ways. The notion of family looms large here, both given and chosen. The Pink Palace is chosen family, right down to the “La!” that unites them. Roscoe rejects his real family before they can reject him, but later finds reconciliation with his sister. Colin’s mother knows nothing of his life until he is stricken and nonsensical in a hospital bed, in some of the show’s most painful scenes, but she finds solace in his friends, who rally round her. And Ritchie’s family – his disapproving, distant father and hard, brittle mother – are infuriating and cruel, but crucially, also human. They love their son, and the loss of him will destroy them. It’s a Sin was full of humanity. It had to be. Mistakes are made, because that’s what people do. Ritchie makes big mistakes, from his refusal to get tested and his self-destructive promiscuity, even when he knows what the cost might be, but small ones, too, like his bleak attempt to seduce an old school friend, to make himself feel better. Judgment is mostly absent, reserved for those who most deserve it. It is the institutional mistakes, deliberate refusals to engage with what happened, and not the personal ones, which are the sources of rage. This was television full of energy and vitality. That’s not to say it failed to take its subject matter seriously enough. It’s a Sin was deeply upsetting, as it was supposed to be, and Davies made us love these characters, flaws and all, before he took them away. I cried at the end of the first episode, knowing what was going to happen, and I wept as it did happen, again and again. The real-world effects of this historical piece came quickly: requests for HIV tests shot up, and a significant amount of money was raised for the Terrence Higgins Trust through sales of a T-shirt bearing the word “La”. Its cast and creator spoke of people whose memories were excavated by the show; young people talked about stories they had not known; activists discussed and argued its finer points. The people who died of Aids were commemorated. Sometimes television is more than just storytelling, even if storytelling is all it strives to do. How was it possible to enjoy it? Because even though we knew some of these men would not survive, Davies made us care deeply about their lives. Even at their most flawed, and most infuriating, we were willing them to live.Suspected Covid outbreaks in hospitals across the UK have doubled in a week, official figures reveal – though the number of people admitted to wards with the virus is falling across much of England. As parts of the NHS battle to cope with a surge in infected staff and patients, UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) data show there were 66 acute respiratory infection incidents in UK hospitals in the seven days to 16 December. Coronavirus was confirmed in most of these incidents, according to a UKHSA document reviewed, by the Guardian. It represents a doubling in outbreaks compared with the previous week (33) and is the highest total recorded since the third week of January 2020. Most of the outbreaks happened in London, with 28 recorded in the last week, almost half of all those in England (62). Nine were recorded in West Midlands hospitals, six in the east of England and five in the east Midlands. Hospitals are scrambling to try to stop the highly transmissible Omicron variant spreading between patients and staff, NHS leaders said, while trying to cope with more pressure than last year. Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “The safety of staff and patients is a key priority of trust leaders, and trusts are doing everything they can to keep nosocomial [hospital-acquired] infections to a minimum, including following stringent infection control measures and social distancing rules.” Increasing numbers of NHS trusts were now having to scale back care, she said, because they were under greater pressure overall than the previous big wave of Covid last winter, even though hospital admissions were lower. Nationally, the NHS has not yet experienced a major rise in Covid hospital admissions but there were significant regional variations. In London, admissions doubled in the last three weeks, and in north-west England the seven-day growth rate was 14%, the Health Service Journal (HSJ) reported. Covid admissions were falling in the south-east, south-west, the east of England, the north-east and Yorkshire, and the Midlands. NHS officials have remained concerned, though, as hospital admissions reflect infections picked up on average about a fortnight previously, suggesting a sharp rise was already almost certain. The increase in hospital outbreaks reflected rapidly rising levels of the virus among the population, they said. However, the 100% rise in one week was 10 times the increase in outbreaks seen in care homes, where such incidents were now lower than levels recorded in November. The British Medical Association has predicted that anywhere between 32,000 and 130,000 NHS staff in England could be off sick by Christmas Day. Guy’s and St Thomas’ trust in London told staff last Friday that it was facing “significant shortages” because 350 employees were off because of Covid, a figure that had increased 25% in just 24 hours. Ben Travis, chief executive of Lewisham and Greenwich trust, last week told staff it would soon have to take “difficult decisions” about whether it could keep providing usual services in the face of the Omicron surge, including non-urgent surgery. One specialist lung doctor in north-west England said: “Numbers have gone up on both the ward and intensive treatment unit. Incidental swab positive – people coming in with something else [but then] swabbing positive – is a problem.” But Dr Nick Scriven, a past president of the Society for Acute Medicine, who is a consultant in Yorkshire, said: “Our Covid numbers today are probably lower than at any time in the last 12 months at least. We can only hope that the spread will be attenuated by the booster programme and that illness requiring hospitalisation will be reduced, as with the current ongoing pressure there is realistically no room to expand unless the elective work is again cancelled – which I get the feeling is now the very last resort.”It will be toasts and talk of bonuses at ITV this Christmas as management savours a year to remember: a startling recovery has brought the broadcaster more advertising income than at any time in its 66-year history, TV production revenues are back above pre-pandemic levels and a belated foray into streaming is starting to pay off. And yet as Carolyn McCall enters her fourth year as chief executive she will be wondering why investors – and potential buyers – still do not view the company as a rejuvenated, digital-age crown jewel of British broadcasting. When McCall left easyJet to take the reins from Adam Crozier, now installed as BT’s new chairman as the telecoms giant becomes a takeover target for billionaire investor Patrick Drahi, investors valued ITV at £7.25bn. The broadcaster’s market capitalisation has remained stubbornly well below that level ever since, with a current valuation at £4.3bn. Despite that reduced price and the rush of foreign private equity firms snapping up UK firms this year, there is no sign of any takeover suitor as yet. “The problem is that fairly or unfairly it is perceived as an ex-growth business,” said one City source. “From time to time it is talked about as a target, everyone knows it’s there, but no one has taken it out. The market decided some time ago that companies that are dependent on TV advertising were not going to be worth much again. The world’s stock markets have stuck with that credo, ascribing value to companies seen as in the digital space.” The pandemic recovery has ITV’s ad business firing on all cylinders. Its portfolio of channels accounts for about 40% of the UK’s £3.7bn traditional TV ad market, with more good news expected next year with sectors including travel, cars and high street retail forecast to return along with the advertising gold of the next football World Cup. McCall’s focus is to get investors to reassess ITV beyond the narrow focus on TV advertising – 60% of the broadcaster’s total revenues come from non-advertising sources – by beating the drum for its digital and media content businesses. Earlier this month, she unveiled a five-year plan for ITV Studios – which makes in-house shows such as Coronation Street, I’m a Celebrity … and Love Island, as well as third-party productions such as Line of Duty for the BBC and Countdown for Channel 4 – with a firm eye on exploiting the surge in demand for expensive, prestige TV shows from streaming platforms such as Netflix. She unveiled the eye-catching goal of increasing the proportion of ITV Studios’ total revenues accounted for by commissions from streaming companies to a quarter, up from 14% this year, and doubling the number of hours of high-end scripted TV shows to 400. “We have grown our revenues from streamers as we have tilted our business towards the strong growth in demand from that part of the market,” said Julian Bellamy, managing director of ITV Studios, at a presentation for analysts and investors. The third element of McCall’s vision is to build a convincing domestic streaming business in ITV Hub, which also offers an ad-free, paid-for tier in the form of ITV Hub+, and internationally through its BritBox joint venture with the BBC. Last month, McCall hailed the progress at ITV Hub, calling it an “increasingly scaled digital business”, with monthly active users hitting 9.6 million and online viewing climbing by almost 40% year-on-year to 494m hours in the first nine months of 2021. While ITV Hub is a success story among traditional broadcasters – analysts at Ampere estimate it makes more in ad revenue than similar services run by all other major commercial broadcast groups in western Europe combined – it remains small in a world dominated by digital beasts such as Netflix, Disney and Amazon. Its reach is also dwarfed by its biggest British rival, the ad-free iPlayer, which is currently on track to break 6bn streams in a year for the first time. Just 4% of the 12bn total hours of video from all sources watched by ITV viewers in the first nine months of the year was on ITV Hub, which as it grows risks cannibalising the broadcaster’s far more profitable traditional TV business. “The digital story is anaemic,” says one City source. “They didn’t prioritise it before. They came at it late. ITV Hub and BritBox will become successful, but on a very small scale, not significant enough to re-rate the business.” Business fundamentals aside there is, of course, a significant impediment to any potential takeover in the form of John Malone’s Liberty Global (LG), ITV’s largest shareholder. LG, which earlier this year merged Virgin Media with mobile firm 02, has held a 9.9% stake in ITV for the last six years. “They have always been a deterrent, a very serious media company that no one wants to piss off,” says Claire Enders, of Enders Analysis. “They aren’t your average garden variety deterrent, they are a big monster deterrent.” While ITV may not be at the top of a private equity or trade buyer shopping list, the broadcaster has an ambitious, TV landscape-changing potential target of its own: Channel 4. ITV has quietly been positioning itself as the ideal solution for the government’s potential privatisation plans – a British consolidator giving both broadcasters a boost in scale – although the resulting 60%-plus share of the UK TV ad market would have advertisers and rivals up in arms and the competition regulator on high alert. There is change planned at the top next year, with Peter Bazalgette expected to step down after six years as ITV’s chair, and nine on its board, when his term expires in May. With Rona Fairhead, the former chair of the BBC Trust, tipped as a contender to replace him and become the first woman in the role, ITV’s mission to become a “loved” stock will continue. “It is not viewed as a badly run business, it is efficiently and well run,” said Enders. “Every part of their business is doing extraordinarily well at this time. A couple of exceptional years and people will see the core of the business is not in this secular decline. ITV is not getting the credit it should, but it will do.”Boris Johnson rose to the top by getting people to like him. His problems are the result of them subsequently getting to know him. There is no mask that has slipped, just a change in the light that gives a dark edge to the same features. It is often this way with leaders on the way down. The trait people dislike is the origin of previous appeal inverted. The stolidity that once recommended Theresa May and Gordon Brown turned robotic. The charm of Tony Blair and David Cameron went from smooth to slippery. With the current prime minister that trait is indifference to difficulty – meeting adversity with good cheer; solving problems by declaring them non-existent; clearing practical obstacles by leaps of the imagination. The ethos is expressed in Johnson’s subversion of a famous proverb: “My policy on cake is pro having it and pro eating it.” It has been a catchphrase of his for years, but it was the dilemmas posed by Brexit that turned it into a doctrine – cakeism. In the cakeist view, Britain could retain the benefits of EU membership without any obligation to European law. It meant leaving a trading bloc without loss of trade. It meant having different customs regimes for Great Britain and Northern Ireland without erecting a politically toxic customs border between them. “I want you to see this as a cakeist treaty,” Johnson said of the post-Brexit trade deal he signed in December 2020. A year later: there is no cake, Conservative MPs are hungry, and voters are abandoning the bakery. Europe is not the proximate cause of that discontent, but cakeism has evolved into a creed for the denial of all the choices that make governing difficult. It explains a “levelling up” agenda and a “green industrial revolution” that presuppose massive increases in public investment without offending Tory ambitions for a smaller state. It is the vain hope of limiting the spread of Covid infections without imposing restraints on individual freedoms. A cakeist pandemic strategy urges people to avoid mixing in crowds, without instructing them to stay away from shops and bars. It results in a cabinet meeting to debate new restrictions that concludes, after two hours, with a decision not to decide. It is the prime minister saying he “will not hesitate to act” as long as that action can wait until after Christmas. When Johnson was at the height of his powers he would prevaricate at leisure, comfortable in two minds or more, happy to make eager courtiers compete for his ear and hang on his decision. When the Covid crisis first struck, he used delay as a management technique, letting time and events winnow the options while ramping the urgency, until the lockdown decisions made themselves. Now, brought low by scandal and besieged by aspiring successors, inaction is the course imposed by an absence of authority over his party. Those are the different stages of cakeism, from insouciance to paralysis, via denial. At its core sits monumental arrogance – a feeling of superiority to forces that constrain the inferior class of politician who submits to history instead of mastering it. From that vanity it follows that rules are for the little people. Helmsmen of history are allowed to unwind over cheese and wine on the Downing Street terrace, even while the families of Covid victims hold funerals by Zoom. The prime minister might not have issued an explicit licence to flout lockdown rules in government, but none was needed. He radiates the entitlement to self-gratification and the pomposity that justifies it as fair recompense for a hard day’s service to the nation. It is a particular type of corruption, common to revolutionary regimes that have lost ideological momentum. It is the decadent stage that comes when the party elite has understood that the utopia they promised is unattainable, but is enjoying the trappings of power too much to break the bad news to the people in whose name they seized power. The pandemic has dominated Johnson’s time in office, but Brexit gave him his mandate. It was the cause that won him an election but, more important for his style of government, that victory was understood by Eurosceptic hardliners as an expression of the true will of the people. It was the refutation of the naysaying, cosmopolitan remainer elites, fussy civil servants, busybody bureaucrats, bean-counting trade experts and meddling judges who claimed that Johnson could not have his cake and eat it. To that roster of shame can now be added “unelected public health spokesperson”, which is the term one Tory MP used to denounce Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, for daring to sound downbeat about the spread of Omicron in the runup to Christmas. That is where cakeism tends – the suspicion that science itself is part of an elite conspiracy against liberty. That is not Johnson’s view, but he has lost control of the doctrine he pioneered. Having acquired the taste for unlimited cake, the Conservative party will not easily be put back on a calorie-controlled policy diet. Cakeism is not a formula that works in government because, in reality, the cake has to be rationed and people notice. They notice, too, when the prime minister and his friends help themselves to the fattest slice, while urging the public to abstain out of civic duty. They see how the man who treats everything as a joke is also laughing at the people who elected him. That is when the light changes, the smile darkens into a sneer, the populist loses his people, the polarities of his magnetism are flipped, and the force that was once attraction turns repulsive. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistThe ruddy duck, Oxyura jamaicensis, should have been exterminated by now in the UK, hunted down and shot at a cost of roughly £3,000 a bird. If you see one you are supposed to report its position so it too can be eliminated. Peak numbers 20 years ago were 6,000 birds – that was down to 26 in 2018 and now there may be as few as 10 to 15. This is part of a Europe-wide programme aimed at preventing the enthusiastic males impregnating the closely related but endangered white-headed duck, Oxyura leucocephala, of southern Spain. That species was down to 22 birds in 1977 but thanks to careful conservation now numbers more than 2,500. The ruddy duck was brought to Slimbridge sanctuary in Gloucestershire in the 1940s from North America and thrived, with numbers growing steadily across Europe until the danger to white-headed ducks became apparent. In a rare spirit of European cooperation every colonised country agreed to a cull, aiming at total elimination. The British effort alone has cost £3.3m, mostly to hire the marksmen. It has been a controversial programme, with many nature lovers appalled at the idea of shooting sitting ducks on their nests. Some bird spotters have therefore been reluctant to report sightings, so there may still be some survivors.Geneva in March 1986 was cold. I had travelled overnight on an extremely long train journey from London to Switzerland. I and several other women heading for a huge lesbian feminist conference had failed to find affordable flights and instead had bought train tickets with vouchers collected from very large boxes of Persil washing powder. The journey was hellish. There was no heating on any of the trains and we only had enough booze for the odd warming sip from a hip flask. I was wearing every pair of socks I had packed and would run up and down the carriages every half-hour trying to get my circulation moving. I had hoped conditions would improve once we arrived, but the conference was held in a university building, and to say it was basic is an understatement. Being a lesbian in the 1980s was no walk in the park, and we were not considered worthy of elevated heating bills. Some of the 800 delegates had come from warmer climes in South America, Asia and Australia, as well as parts of Europe and North America. Everyone was cold, even the women I met from Winnipeg, known for its freezing winters. Our accommodation was a bus ride away, beneath the ground in nuclear bunkers. It was obvious that I was not going to get warm any time soon. We were issued bunk beds with thin blankets, the showers ran cold to tepid, and the food was mainly the feminist staples of pasta salad and hummus. And then I met charismatic Carla (not her real name), an anarchist from New York. Carla was different from my usual crowd of hardline feminists. Whereas we would picket porn cinemas to protest against sexual exploitation, Carla’s crowd called for class war, believed all work was exploitation and dressed like goths. But our mutual attraction was enough to gloss over differences in politics. Over steaming cups of herb tea laced with cheap brandy we talked late into the night, pausing to listen to the women from the Greenham Common peace camp singing campfire songs (no doubt in part to invoke the image of crackling logs and flames), about property being theft, lesbian vampire films and whether feminists should be vegetarian (Carla said “yes” because men see women as meat, and learn to do so from butchering animals, but I said “no” because all I could think of was eating a hot bowl of lamb stew to warm me up). As we snuggled up, I smelt patchouli oil and roll-ups. I would love to be able to say that “that night [we] were not divided”, as Radclyffe Hall wrote in her infamous lesbian novel, The Well of Loneliness, but I am afraid that not only did the bunk beds mean there was no privacy, but they were so small a leprechaun would struggle to fit in one. The Greenham women, appalled at being accommodated in a nuclear bunker, constructed wigwams in which they congregated during the conference sessions, and despite the awful caterwauling of anti-war songs, I crawled in with them to keep warm. As evenings drew in, and the cans of cider appeared, the lesbian drumming group started bashing out rhythms that prompted many of the women to dance like crazy, doubtless to keep the blood flowing. During these activities, Carla and I would be in a passionate clinch somewhere, our collective breath visible as though we were puffing on fat cigars. There was much to love about the conference and, as I travelled home, fantasising about a hot bath and a thick duvet, I allowed my mind to wander, imagining meeting Carla in a little more comfort back in London. But, silly me, Carla was an anarchist and therefore lived in an unheated, grotty squat in Brixton. To make matters worse, the gas had been cut off, so there were no cups of hot chocolate, and we couldn’t afford brandy. Our romance was short-lived, and I did wonder, for some time afterwards, whether it would have been different had we met in the summer months. I somehow doubt it, because, although I look back at our fling with fondness, the most prevailing memory I have of that weekend is of my feet feeling like two blocks of ice that would never be warm again.It was once home to literary and artistic greats including Oscar Wilde, but now Tite Street in west London has a new claim to fame after Halifax named it the most expensive street in England and Wales, with an average house price of £28.9m. The mortgage lender said the top 10 priciest streets in 2021 were all in the capital, mainly in Westminster or the borough of Kensington and Chelsea, where Tite Street is situated. However, its £28.9m average property price is 5% lower than the £30.5m recorded for the most expensive street a year ago – Avenue Road in London’s St John’s Wood. Halifax added that desirable roads outside the capital had seen prices increase at a faster rate. London has typically not experienced the same property boom as other regions this year, as pandemic-fuelled desires for a new lifestyle led many to quit big cities for homes elsewhere with more space and bigger gardens. The average price of a home on one of the 10 most expensive streets in the north of England and the West Midlands increased by 11% in a year, making them the two best-performing regions, said the Halifax. In the north-west, prices have typically increased by 5%, followed by the East Midlands at 4%. London, by contrast, experienced just a 1% rise. Tite Street, lined with red brick mansion blocks and set between the banks of the River Thames to the south and Kings Road to the north, has risen from No 2 on the list last year to the top spot. However, you do not need to spend close to £30m to own a slice of this prime real estate: a two-bedroom flat in the street is currently for sale and has been reduced to £1.65m, according to property website Rightmove. Wilde was the street’s most famous resident, reaching the height of his fame while living at No 34, where he wrote The Picture of Dorian Gray and The Importance of Being Earnest. Other notable residents included the American artists James McNeill Whistler and John Singer Sargent. On 27 November 1974, the IRA carried out two bomb attacks in Tite Street. A small bomb exploded in a post box and was followed by a larger one that went off behind a hedge, injuring 20, including six police officers and two ambulance workers. Twenty years later, Diana, Princess of Wales posed for a portrait at No 33. Last week, Halifax forecast that the boom in UK house prices was likely to end next year as household finances become increasingly stretched. Rightmove said earlier this month that the UK’s housing market was likely to return to more normal levels of activity in 2022 but would still be “busy”. Halifax said its latest data was based on transactions between January 2016 and September 2021 recorded on the Land Registry database and compiled from more than 1.78m postcodes. Only locations where there have been at least two transactions over the period are included. The most expensive street in each region Greater London – Tite Street, Chelsea: average price of a home £28,902,000 South-east England – South Ridge, Weybridge, Surrey: £7,125,000 North-west England – Barrow Lane, Hale, Altrincham, Greater Manchester: £3,706,000 East Anglia – Chaucer Road, Cambridge: £3,610,000 South-west England – Pearce Avenue, Poole, Dorset: £3,478,000 East Midlands – Benscliffe Road, Newtown Linford, Leicester: £3,288,000 West Midlands – Carpenter Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham: £3,088,000 North of England – Old Hall Road, Windermere, Cumbria: £2,508,000 Wales – Benar Headland, Pwllheli, Gwynedd: £2,152,000 Yorkshire and the Humber – Fulwith Mill Lane, Harrogate, North Yorkshire: £1,797,000 Source: HalifaxDozens of asylum seekers are begging Boris Johnson to help rehouse them, claiming the Home Office accommodation in his constituency is not fit to live in. The 18 rundown flats in Uxbridge and South Ruislip have housed some asylum seekers for years without any improvements being made – despite repeated complaints. Each apartment has five tiny bedrooms and no communal space, besides kitchens and bathrooms left filthy from a lack of maintenance. Some residents are victims of torture, have been trafficked and have faced other forms of persecution. One man says he is a victim of organ theft, having a kidney stolen by an organ smuggling ring while en route to the UK. A charity supporting him said he has made several suicide attempts. The rooms are so small there is only space for a bed and a cupboard. Damp and mould are rife, while water leaks from walls and through ceilings. Rodents and cockroaches are also a problem. Broken appliances such as fridge-freezers and vacuum cleaners are not removed from the properties, even though space is scarce. The flats were provided by Clearsprings, the Home Office contractor that provides accommodation for asylum seekers in some parts of the UK. When charity workers asked the firm’s accommodation manager if the flat put aside for one asylum seeker was kept to a decent standard, the manager replied “lol”. A screenshot of the exchange of the messages has been shared with Clearsprings but it declined to comment. A Home Office spokesperson said that the accommodation “clearly falls short of the high standards we expect from our contractors, who are now resolving this”. Hillingdon council has organised an urgent inspection of all the flats on Wednesday to investigate whether the accommodation meets minimum standards of “repair, safety and comfort”. Residents claim the power has been switched off at night to save money. People have also complained the hot water is turned off without warning. The landlord told the Guardian he knew nothing about these claims and was not responsible for the maintenance of the accommodation. Cromwood, the firm that manages the properties, said: “We take residents’ safety and wellbeing very seriously and will always carry out repairs reported to us promptly.” An asylum seeker who was imprisoned in his home country said: “The room I have to live in is the same size as my prison cell in Iran.” A teenager from Sudan, who looks much younger than his 18 years and spent five years travelling in extremely difficult conditions before reaching the UK, told the Guardian that a hole in his sloping roof means that water pours in when it rains. “When the water comes I put plastic bags on my bed to keep it dry and crawl under the bed to keep dry and sleep there,” he said. One resident repeatedly complained to Home Office contractors and Hillingdon council that smoke and fumes were entering the flat from a nearby restaurant’s grill extractor. The asylum seeker claims to have then developed breathing difficulties. He eventually made a complaint to the local ombudsman for failing to investigate appropriately. The ombudsman ruled against the council and said it was at fault for failing to investigate the issue properly and had caused injustice to the asylum seeker who complained. The ombudsman’s report, published in January, called on officials to inspect the property. The council said it had made two unannounced inspections in September and November but did not identify smoke during its visit. A spokesperson said the asylum seekers in the flat have been asked to contact them when the problem occurs so they can come and inspect then. The asylum seeker said: “I have lived here for more than five years and have complained many times but nothing is done. When I contacted Boris Johnson’s constituency office a few years ago about problems with the accommodation they helped. But I contacted them again asking for help because of our bad living conditions at the beginning of the pandemic and never got any response. I have asked the prime minister to help us get out of this place.” Boris Johnson’s constituency office has been approached for comment. Hannah Marwood of the charity Care4Calais said: “We were horrified to see the conditions that so many people have been living in for so long. This is not the first time we have supported people in such unacceptable accommodation. It is an undignified and ultimately unsafe way to be forced to live.” The Home Office spokesperson added: “We are dealing with unprecedented pressures on the asylum system but, despite this, we continue to ensure the accommodation provided is safe, comfortable and secure.”This list is drawn from votes by Guardian TV writers: each votes for their top 20 shows, with points allocated for every placing, which are tallied to create this order. 50 Ladhood (BBC Three) For some years now, Liam Williams has been blossoming into one of the sharpest observers of niche contemporary culture. In the second season of Ladhood, though, he continued to turn his gaze inward, unpicking moments from his adolescence that were critical to his development. It might just be his best work yet. What we said: By the end of series two, nothing has been resolved and nobody has grown as a person, just as the rules of sitcom demand. Liam doesn’t know what he is doing, but as a writer/performer, Williams really does. Read more. 49 Four Hours at the Capitol (BBC Two) Jamie Roberts’ film, covering January’s failed insurrectionist coup, had one huge advantage over most documentaries; almost everyone there was filming it. From the police officers’ bodycams to gurning selfie footage from the insurrectionists, Four Hours at the Capitol could take you right inside the terrible events of 6 January. At its most intense, when we watch a mob try to beat an officer to death, it stands as some of the most claustrophobic television ever broadcast. What we said: The underlying collective testimony furnished by Four Hours at the Capitol is that the age of Trump has not yet ended – and the true day of reckoning in the United States is still to come. Read more. 48 The North Water (BBC Two) Now that his days as a heart-throb leading man are over, Colin Farrell can concentrate on what he does best: intriguing character work. The North Water saw him bulk up and head out to the Arctic, where he could terrify the crew of a whaling ship to impossible ends. His best performance in years. What we said: This is a well-executed adventure story to be watched by firelight, wrapped in a sweater as robust – if less blood-drenched – as the seamen’s own. Read more. 47 US Open women’s final (Channel 4/Amazon Prime Video) With less than 24 hours to go, Channel 4 struck a deal to show tennis sensation Emma Raducanu (who had just done her A-levels in Bromley) appearing in the US Open final. And a staggering 9 million of us tuned in to watch and weep as she and the brilliant Leylah Fernandez – herself only 19 – battled it out. A gripping night of television, and a glorious slice of the future. What we said: In a few small weeks she has improved as much as some do in years … and there is so much more to come. Read more. 46 Together (BBC Two) Written by Dennis Kelly, directed by Stephen Daldry and starring James McAvoy and Sharon Horgan, this Covid two-hander certainly didn’t want for talent. A couple are, like the rest of the country, stuck inside together. And, like the rest of the country, they’ve started to hate each other. The real anger, though, is reserved for the government. As such, especially for those who lost a loved one in the first flush of Coronavirus, it was a staggeringly hard watch. What we said: “An absolute wonder.” Read more. 45 Lupin (Netflix) The story of a century-old French gentleman thief might not have screamed “blockbuster”, but that’s what Lupin was. Updated to contemporary Paris, Lupin became a sensation this year, largely due to the juggernaut charisma of star Omar Sy. What we said: The winning combination of charismatic star and stage illusionist visuals in an iconic city setting bears comparison to the BBC’s London-set Sherlock. Where Lupin betters its English equivalent is in its effortlessly chic updating of the revered source material. Read more. 44 The Pursuit of Love (BBC One) Emily Mortimer’s retelling of Nancy Mitford’s novel could have fallen back on all the old Sunday-night TV chocolate-box tropes. Instead, Mortimer worked hard to boost both the joy and sadness of the source material. A clatteringly good watch that deserves to go down as a classic. What we said: The insistent intertwining of the pain with the laughter, instead of flattening the tale into a Wodehouse-with-women yarn, makes this adaptation feel like a classic in its own right. It is a treat for all. Mitfordians – please, do give it a chance. Read more. 43 The Flight Attendant (HBO/Sky One) Not only did The Flight Attendant start with one of the best premises of the year – an alcoholic comes to with a murdered man in her bed – but it was inventively, breathlessly told, and held together by an all-time great performance from Kaley Cuoco. What we said: The premise is fun, the execution is slick and the action is fast and relentless (it only really pauses to let Cassie top up her blood-alcohol level or call her straight-arrow brother to assure him that she’s sober and will be home on time). Full of style and brio. Read more. 42 Hellbound (Netflix) Destined to be overshadowed by its fellow South Korean export Squid Game, Hellbound was far greater than the sum of its parts. A drama about demons who come to Earth and drag people to the underworld, Hellbound was much brainier – and more satirical – than you would imagine. And dark. So dark. What we said: Although the “here’s when you will die” hook is lifted straight from The Ring, tonally it has much more in common with The Leftovers and The Returned, shows that shone a light on the fragility of the human experience that reminded us that it doesn’t take much for everything to fall apart completely. Read more. 41 The Hunt for a Killer (BBC Four) If you were worrying that Scandi noir was going to be outpaced by the dubious charms of the true crime fad, relax. This series about a real-life missing girl from the 1980s managed to combine the style and drama of Wallander with the queasy complicity of contemporary crime shows. What we said: It’s not the tortured psyches of the detective that are of most urgent interest here. Like series Mindhunter, which dramatised the founding of the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit, this takes the familiar “case of the week” structure from police procedural thrillers and applies it to a serious-minded study of forensic psychology. Read more. 40 Bo Burnham: Inside (Netflix) It’s hard to know what was more impressive about Inside: the fact that Bo Burnham wrote, performed, directed and edited the whole thing by himself, the fact that it was simultaneously funny, inventive and gut-wrenchingly sad, or the fact that he was only 29 when he made it. Future generations will see Inside as the definitive document of the Covid lockdown. What we said: It is a comedy Gesamtkunstwerk, a journey to the nerve-centre of the quarantined entertainer’s mind, a son et lumière Robinson Crusoe musical for the age of not just social but digital isolation. It could be a breakdown – or it could be the pandemic’s wildest gift to comedy. Read more. 39 Pose (BBC Two) Ryan Murphy’s series about New York City’s African American and Latino LGBTQ+ and gender-nonconforming drag ball scene was already an important show. But in wrapping up the story, Pose became an out and out celebration of an under-represented demographic. It’ll be missed. What we said: Its version of revolution always included bettering the bleak truth through sheer force of imagination. And so, this show has offered up the happy ending that real life so cruelly denies. Read more. 38 Clarkson’s Farm (Amazon Prime Video) Just when it looked as if he had ossified into an obnoxious pub bore, Jeremy Clarkson suddenly went and became charming. In Clarkson’s Farm, we saw him trying his hardest to make profit from his land, aided by employees who don’t care a jot for his celebrity. If the success of this first series doesn’t go to his head, Clarkson’s Farm will be a highly successful reinvention. What we said: To watch Clarkson’s Farm is to watch a man realise that the hobby he seemingly picked up for a lark is exhausting and all-consuming and increasingly unlikely to bring any real rewards. The show, like the job, has all the hallmarks of a labour of love. Read more. 37 Blair and Brown: The New Labour Revolution (BBC Two) A five-part retelling of the last time Labour got anywhere even close to power, Blair and Brown was the document New Labour deserved. And, just maybe, that British voters deserved as well. What we said: It is an inside job, with Labour veterans as unreliable narrators. Brown’s speechwriter Douglas Alexander even says: “They were literally the Lennon and McCartney of British politics.” Rubbish. They were more like Wham!, with no George Michael and two Andrew Ridgeleys. Read more. 36 Gods of Snooker (BBC Two) The US had The Last Dance, an all-out spectacular retracing a vital moment in time for a figure who once arguably counted as the biggest name in all of sport. In the UK, we got a documentary about snooker. The amazing thing, though, was that this might have actually been better. What we said: You cannot fail to be captivated by archive footage of Jimmy White spinning a ball around a table before, suddenly, decades later, the same man is in a hotel room telling you exactly how much of his winnings he spent on crack. Read more. 35 Motherland (BBC Two) By its third series, you pretty much know where a sitcom will go. That’s true of Motherland, which barely attempted to deviate from its formula of middle-class mums being horrible to each other. But why bother when the blueprint is so good? What we said: Motherland is at its best when it is skewering what it knows: the snobbery, hypocrisy and narcissism of a specific strain of white, middle-class London, plus the hellscape of the school gate. And when it is at its best, it is glorious. Read more. 34 Ghosts (BBC One) The best all-round British sitcom in years, Ghosts’ third series mined slightly more heartfelt territory than before. Not only were the phantoms fleshed out more fully, but Charlotte Ritchie’s Alison found herself yearning for a family that couldn’t quite manifest itself. As beautiful as it was funny. What we said: I’m quite pleased the old guff survived. But my worry is that Ghosts will become ruined by the exclusivity of its admission policy. Somebody, preferably somebody likable and interesting, needs to die to save Ghosts. But who? Read more. 33 Insecure (Sky Comedy) Issa Rae’s comedy about a group of black LA girlfriends living, loving and frequently falling flat on their faces while doing both has spent five seasons deftly combining laugh-out-loud hilarity (who could forget Kelli getting tasered?) with real poignancy. Its ongoing final series has given fans a steady stream of zingers, contrasting the reality that a happy ever after for Issa, Molly, Lawrence and co is far from guaranteed. What we said: The fifth and final season of this comedy about a group of black millennial girlfriends is all about giving its fans what they want. Namely, will-they-won’t-they drama, existential crises and pitch-perfect Kelli-isms. Despite its angst, it remains resolutely fun. Read more. 32 The Cleaner (BBC One) Greg Davies adapted and starred in this adaptation of the German series Der Tatortreiniger, about a man tasked with removing crime scene evidence from the homes of several guest stars. It might not be the most original premise, but when The Cleaner worked, it really worked. What we said: The Cleaner is a curious mix, attempting to balance slapstick moments, such as the brutal kicking of a pie, with pathos-laden observations about ambition and freedom. Sometimes, it works wonderfully. Read more. 31 Unforgotten (ITV) A dusty old survivor like this ITV detective show always runs the risk of becoming set in its ways. Not so with Unforgotten, which this year said goodbye to its star Nicola Walker. It’s bittersweet: she was perfect in this role, but now she’s freed up to become an Olivia Colman-style megastar. What we said: Over the years, Unforgotten has turned into one of the finest shows on British television. By the time it reached its fourth series, which attracted more viewers than ever before – thanks to its growing reputation as a sure bet – it was as lean as an elite athlete. Read more. 30 Master of None (Netflix) Once Aziz Ansari was sucked into #MeToo’s bonfire of reputations, it seemed unlikely that he would ever make more Master of None. When he did, staying behind the camera for a new series subtitled Moments in Love, it was with a completely new focus. This run concentrated on Lena Waithe’s character Denise, and was composed of still, quiet episodes that paid off stunningly. What we said: For conflicted comedy fans the solution might be to stop worrying and start watching. These 192 minutes speak more directly to the shifting status of women on screen than any public statement could. Read more. 29 Guilt (BBC Scotland/iPlayer) The first series of Neil Forsyth’s crime thriller was a word-of-mouth hit, largely thanks to Mark Bonnar’s psychotic growl of a performance. This year’s second series lost a little of its pace, but was still as compelling as ever. Let’s all cross our fingers for a third series. What we said: Guilt is a guilty pleasure, and I won’t be missing a second of it. Read more. 28 Help (Channel 4) Another one-off Covid drama, Help starred Jodie Comer and Stephen Graham as a care home worker and resident respectively. Jack Thorne’s script surged with rage at the indifference with which the care sector was left to rot as the first wave of the pandemic rolled in. There’s plenty of warmth, but you’re never allowed to forget who the villains are. What we said: Comer and Graham remain faultless to the end, and the first hour is a fine addition to the wealth of pandemic testimonies that can and must be entered into the record in any way they can be, from television drama to heart-wall monuments to official enquiries. Read more. 27 The Beatles: Get Back (Disney+) Ambient Beatles? Slow Beatles? Peter Jackson’s Fab Four epic leaned into the sheer quantity of extraordinary footage at its creator’s disposal, capturing a band on the verge of dissolution but still full of heart and creative inspiration. Watching the song Get Back emerge, almost fully formed, from Paul McCartney’s fevered imagination was just one of numerous jaw-dropping moments. What we said: There are fantastic moments. Lennon and McCartney’s eyes locking as they harmonise on Two of Us; Lennon’s delighted cry of “Yoko!” as McCartney’s adopted daughter starts screaming into a microphone; and especially McCartney, casting around for a new song, idly strumming his bass and singing nonsense words, gradually settling into a rhythm and melody that turns into Get Back. It is hard not to boggle. Read more. 26 Reservation Dogs (Disney+) Taika Waititi and Sterlin Harjo’s comedy drama about bored youths trying to make it out of Oklahoma would have been brilliant in any case. But what elevated it is its cast (and near-uniform crew) of Indigenous North Americans. There’s a cultural specificity here that felt not only authentic, but authentically funny and sweet, like meeting a daft, lovable new circle of friends. What we said: Reservation Dogs is able to lay waste stylishly to centuries of myth and misrepresentation due to one simple, crucial, innovation: almost everyone involved in the production is a Native American, offering a perspective which never panders to the often-fetishising gaze of outsiders. Read more. 25 Only Murders in the Building (Disney+) A new show starring Steve Martin and Martin Short didn’t have to try very hard; a splash of the old charm and viewers would have fallen in line regardless. The genius of Only Murders in the Building, though, was how deftly it glued its comic shtick to a rigorously tight murder mystery. Much, much better than it had any right to be. What we said: The investigation pings around with comic incompetency, from suspecting Sting (playing himself), to a bit involving a dead cat. The main event remains the unlikelihood of watching two comedy titans batting around with Selena Gomez – an enjoyable enough pairing, though it never quite transcends the clear beats of the scripts. Read more. 24 Call My Agent! (Netflix) Call My Agent!’s fourth season saw a change of personnel, with showrunner par excellence Fanny Herrero moving on to pastures new. With her departure came a noticeable drop in quality, but let’s be clear. A Herrero-less Call My Agent! is still Call My Agent! It was stylish, funny and star-studded, and still ran circles around most other shows. This year’s season was publicised as its last, but calm down – a fifth season and a movie are now on their way. What we said: While the much-maligned Emily in Paris offered a kind of escapism for those hankering but unable to go to the city of lights and love, Call My Agent! gives you a far more authentic immersion into French culture. Read more. 23 Vigil (BBC One) How to create one of the most nail-biting televisual experiences of the year? Take a tense, twisty procedural plot, get Suranne Jones to fire on all cylinders as a trauma-racked action hero badass, then cram her into a ready-made environment for a claustrophobic whodunnit: a nuclear sub. What we said: Throughout, Vigil has been a rich and sometimes sickly meal. Just one of its anxiety-inducing scenarios would be enough for most dramas, but this had international conflict, political intrigue, claustrophobic horror, psychological trauma, murder, cops, romance and nerve agents thrown in and set to various clock-ticking countdowns. Read more. 22 Inside No 9 (BBC Two) By now you could be forgiven for taking Inside No 9 for granted. But this year, Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton managed to find even greater heights. There was a Brexit episode, an episode about the uneasy relationship between fans and creators, an episode where Sian Clifford played against type twice at once. The invention here continues to be phenomenal. What we said: As writers, actors and occasionally directors, the pair have shown that they can switch from bleak domestic drama to Shakespearean light comedy to full-on horror without dropping a stitch. Read more. 21 Maid (Netflix) A devastating and compelling portrait of life on the poverty line in the US, starring Rylea Nevaeh Whittet, the cutest child actor in years, as Maddy, Margaret Qualley as Alex, a woman willing to do anything for her family – and her real-life mother Andie MacDowell (the strongest she’s ever been) playing her gullible, free-spirited artist mum Paula. Right up there with Squid Game for word-of-mouth hit of the year. What we said: It dramatises the precariousness of existence without a fixed abode and conjures a world rarely seen in real life or on screen. It is also good at showing the insidious forms and effects of emotional abuse without insisting that Alex be an ever-broken victim. Read more. 20 Can’t Get You Out of My Head (BBC iPlayer) Adam Curtis polarises audiences like few other documentarians. For some, he is television’s ultimate truth teller. For others, he’s an impenetrable conspiracy theorist. If you’re in the first group, Can’t Get You Out of My Head was an absolutely breathless delight. What we said: It is vanishingly rare to be confronted by work so dense, so widely searching and ambitious in scope, so intelligent and respectful of the audience’s intelligence, too. Read more. 19 Line of Duty (BBC One) Now overshadowed by its finale, dismissed as anticlimactic by viewers and aggressively defended at length by Jed Mercurio, Line of Duty’s sixth series was just as tight and knotty as ever. And it absolutely pummelled everything else on television to pieces. Sixteen million people watched its final episode in May. In 2021, that’s incredible. What we said: At the risk of sounding like a mere embittered fan shouting at Johnny-come-latelies … man, you should have seen it back in the days when it was good. Read more. 18 Back to Life (BBC Three/iPlayer) Daisy Haggard and Laura Solon’s Hythe-set comedy-drama returned in just as good shape as it left us: a sad, strange tale about the reputations we cannot shake. Exquisitely observed, sensitively performed and gorgeous to look at. Who could ask for more? What we said: The show has lost none of its delicacy or nuance, nor have its makers disturbed its heart and soul – in fact, they have only added to it. Quality pum-pum all round. Read more. 17 This Way Up (Channel 4) Like Back to Life, the second series of Aisling Bea’s This Way Up improved on its first. This time, as well as focusing on the recovery of Bea’s character Aine, the show was also bold enough to tackle Covid as a storyline. The fact that it was almost entirely alone in making the subject work with this little distance makes it doubly worthy of praise. What we said: The best thing of all about This Way Up is that we don’t know what is going to happen next. Bea’s is such a nuanced, delicate portrait of mental health that Aine is neither a one-note self-sabotager, or manic, or depressive. She is a real person and, as such, she could go anywhere or do anything depending on when and if her circumstances change. Read more. 16 WandaVision (Disney+) The Marvel Cinematic Universe’s first real extension into television could have gone horribly wrong – and, indeed, the shows that came afterwards prove that much is still to be mastered in that area – but WandaVision was a delight from start to finish. By basing each episode on a sitcom from a different era (for reasons that do make sense at the end, honest), this was Marvel reassuring us that it reveres television as much as it does comics and film. The most unexpected love letter of the year. What we said: It’s all deliciously, confidently, stylishly done. The parodies are fantastic fun, the jokes are great, the performances are wonderful, and it has the glorious air of something shaped by people who know exactly what they’re doing, where they want to go and how they’re going to get there. Read more. 15 We Are Lady Parts (Channel 4) A sitcom about an all-female, all-Muslim punk band, We Are Lady Parts is the sort of show a cynic might write off as tokenistic. Until they actually watched it, that is, because Nida Manzoor’s comedy was exactly that; a silly, giddy half hour that was actually designed to make people laugh. The band’s song names – Voldemort Under My Headscarf, Bashir With the Good Beard – were just a glorious bonus. What we said: We Are Lady Parts is an assured mix of second-generation cultural confusion and millennial feminism, one part Chewing Gum to two parts Wayne’s World. Read more. 14 Ted Lasso (Apple TV+) What else is there to say about Ted Lasso? Its achievements are already numerous – it’s funny, warm-hearted, wildly celebrated and it made people actually want to watch Apple TV+ – and yet you sense that more is to come. The first season was an unexpectedly sweet fish out of water comedy, the second dug a little deeper into the compulsions of its characters. What on Earth will a third do? Initiate world peace? What we said: The broadening and deepening must have felt like a risk to everyone involved in a show predicated on bringing light comic relief to viewers, and which then became frankly essential to their mental wellbeing. But it’s paid off. They shot and they’ve scored. Read more. 13 The Underground Railroad (Amazon Prime Video ) Director Barry Jenkins’ harrowing, bravura adaptation of Colson Whitehead’s award-winning novel about slavery, which turned the networks that smuggled enslaved people to safety in the north into a literal train network with stations hidden in the homes of sympathetic white folks. Scene for scene, this was some of the most visually staggering television in years – and a rare show that was impossible to binge watch. What we said: An extraordinary adaptation – hallucinatory, magical, allegorical and yet permanently in the pursuit of historical and eternal truths, the resurrection of lost perspectives and the uplifting of unheard voices. Watch it, but slowly, one complex, virtuosic, heartbreaking episode at a time. Read more. 12 Uprising (BBC One) Following his Small Axe anthology series last year, Steve McQueen returned with a documentary that dug much deeper into a subject that underpinned many episodes. Uprising told the story of the 1981 New Cross fire, carefully setting it in political context, then unleashing the horror of a crime that took 13 Black lives, then refusing to back down from its consequences. Unbelievably powerful. What we said: To watch this knowing the horrors to come is almost unbearable, but it has a clear-headed determination to show the real, full, human lives of the people who died. Read more. 11 Stath Lets Flats (Channel 4) In its third series, Jamie Demetriou’s sitcom remained as riotously silly as ever – witness the tender song about eggs Stath sings to his newborn child – while mining the characters for a deeper vulnerability. There were moments of unbearable sweetness nestled among the idiocy this year, and the thought of a life with no more Stath is almost too much to take. What we said: Stath is not a show designed to assess the state of the nation, or dive deep into a dysfunctional psyche, but to make people laugh: the clothes are funny, the situations are funny, the speech patterns are funny, the relationships are funny. Read more. 10 I Think You Should Leave With Tim Robinson (Netflix) In its second outing, Tim Robinson’s absurd comedy sketch show scaled new heights of surreal, laugh-out-loud greatness. Its meme-friendly skits somehow managed to cram subplots into scenes shorter than most ad breaks, often managing to draw belly-laughs through cleverly wrong-footing the viewer. At its best, it felt like it was reinventing what a sketch show should be in the internet era – and it was often at its best. What we said: In its second season Robinson and his co-stars pulled at the threads of their gags almost to the point of unravelling the very sense of them – and it left viewers astounded at their capacity to create hilarity from increasingly outrageous situations. Read more. 9 Starstruck (BBC One) In New Zealand comic Rose Matafeo’s lovable romcom, her character Jessie is having a strange old time living in London, with a titchy flat, tedious jobs – and the fact that she can’t stop bumping into a movie star named Tom Kapoor (Nikesh Patel) that she had a one night stand with. What we said: It was basically the 2021 version of Notting Hill, and – gladly – like the 90s, all the meet-cutes happened in real life rather than in the ninth circle of dating app hell. At just over 20 minutes an episode, it was a sweet, gentle, moreish confection that could have easily stretched to more than its six episodes. Read more. 8 Alma’s Not Normal (BBC Two) Sophie Willan’s autobiographical show about the childhood she describes as being “the baby in Trainspotting, if she’d lived” won a comedy Bafta for the pilot alone. So this six-episode series, which saw her move from a job in a sandwich shop to becoming a sex worker and finally joining a theatre troupe, was an absolute riotous delight. What we said: Serious ground is covered – observations on the welfare system, the reality of living with addiction – and Alma’s attempt to address her childhood will leave a tear in your eye. But, throughout, the show is an invitation to acknowledge life’s lemons and laugh in the face of them. One of the most joyous comedies of the year. Read more. 7 Time (BBC One) Jimmy McGovern’s hard, horrifying look at prison life was seen largely through the eyes of former teacher Mark Cobden (Sean Bean), who was serving his first stretch. Bean’s performance was a masterclass in understatement, communicated mainly through silence and shuffles on the wing – and it made for even more devastating television. What we said: McGovern is known for polemics but the brilliance of Time is that it manages to show, not tell. There is very little grandstanding here – we are simply presented with the grim realities of our dysfunctional penal system and asked, implicitly, how we would cope. Read more. 6 Feel Good (Netflix) Mae Martin’s exquisite romcom returned, this time fuelled not by love but by trauma, as Mae returned to Canada to confront her past and her gender identity. Though that makes it sound heavy, Feel Good is so glorious that it not only managed to make it work, but also outdo its first run. What we said: Series two dug deeper than the first. It was funnier, darker and more prescient. Each of its six episodes are mini-masterpieces – as taut, atmospheric and perfectly paced as short stories. The Channel 4 executives who unfathomably chose not to pick Feel Good up must be kicking themselves. Read more. 5 Squid Game (Netflix) The grim, grisly South Korean drama became a global word-of-mouth smash in a matter of days. We saw 456 debt-riddled contestants compete in a horrific gameshow whose winner goes home with 4.6bn won (£28m), and losers get killed on the spot. What we said: This was a drama that encouraged us to follow the logic of capitalism to its extreme by treating everything, including fellow humans, as commodities. Would you, in extremis, resemble the relatable dad – player 456, Seong Gi-hun – or self-serving venal gangster – player 067, Kang Sae-byeok? Read more. 4 Succession (HBO/Sky Atlantic) For half a season, the third outing of this captivating drama about a dysfunctional media dynasty took things slowly. Then it went supernova, finding a gear that, even by the show’s own impossible standards, it had never found before. It’s not overstating it to say that this was the show’s best ever run of episodes. What we said: All the storylines that had been humming away in the background snapped to attention, and the stakes are colossal. Professionally, everything is on fire. Personally, the ground is littered with bodies. If the first six episodes were about sharks circling the water, this is where we get to see them rip each other apart. Read more. 3 Mare of Easttown (HBO/Sky Atlantic) So gripping was this twisty, compelling detective drama that for two months of 2021, Mare-mania took hold. Who killed Erin? Would anyone pay for her poor baby’s ear surgery? And was it OK to use the term Katenaissance to describe Kate Winslet’s finest ever performance? Mare of Easttown could easily have fallen into familiar tortured-cop-investigates-dead-teen territory. Instead, the depth and detail of every character arc and subplot was incredible, with even seemingly minor moments delivering some of the most horrifying TV scenes ever. By the end, as each character’s full tragedy was laid bare, it was a miracle anyone was still standing. What we said: This was a whodunnit that blindsided the viewer from start to finish – and had so much more besides. It was thrilling: tense and edge-of-the-seat stuff, excellently paced with plenty of twists and cliffhangers. Read more. 2 The White Lotus (HBO/Sky Atlantic) Was it a murder mystery? A tragicomedy? A social satire on the way America contorts itself around the requirements of late western capitalism? Mike White’s immaculate six-part creation was all of these and more, serving up a hilarious drama, brought joyously to life by a brilliant ensemble cast and hooky story, kept from slipping into soapiness by delicate dialogue and a firm hand on the narrative reins. At times, it was so good, it felt rather like you’d been treated to a luxury holiday yourself. What we said: A hysterically funny drama that folded in every kind of comic moment, from alpha mom Nicole’s fretting over lumpen, screen-addicted scion Quinn (“so alienated”) because there’s never been a harder time to be a straight, white male, to Rachel’s giddily awful mother-in-law, to the simple joy of Armond’s scatological revenge in the finale. Read more. 1 It’s a Sin (Channel 4) A five-part drama about the arrival of Aids in Britain and the devastation it wrought was always going to be gut-wrenching viewing. But it was the furious, beautiful joy of the show that took you by surprise, with Russell T Davies serving up a viewing experience that was funny and full of life in a way that was – strange though it sounds to say – genuinely enjoyable to watch. Not only did it make you care deeply about its characters’ lives, it did so with a sense of humour that made the darkest moments all the more heart-rending. What we said: This was television full of energy and vitality. It’s a Sin was deeply upsetting, as it was supposed to be, and Davies made us love these characters, flaws and all. I cried at the end of the first episode, knowing what was going to happen, and I wept as it did happen, again and again. Read more.As Covid cases surge in Australia, attention is turning to how the health system is coping. To track the impact of the spread of the Omicron variant on hospitals, we have brought together the data on hospitalisations and new case numbers – both nationally and across states and territories for the last six months. Cases include those infected locally, overseas and where the source is unknown or under investigation. Due to the difference in reporting times between jurisdictions it can be difficult to get a picture of the numbers, trends and impact on the healthcare system. But the seven-day average of new cases shows how cases are trending in each jurisdiction. Experts say there can be a lag of 10 to 14 days from when cases are reported and subsequent hospitalisations. Here, you can see hospitalisations and 7-day rolling Covid cases average in New South Wales: Here, you can see hospitalisations and the rolling case average in Victoria: In Queensland, the number of hospitalisations is higher as the state has at times required all active cases to be admitted in Covid wards. Here are the figures for South Australia: And here is the data for the ACT showing the difference between case numbers and hospitalisations: Notes: The data is released daily and this page will be updated throughout the day. As there are different reporting times for each jurisdiction, the most recent day’s data may not always be available for each state and territory. States and territories have differing criteria for when someone is admitted to hospital for a Covid infection. Some states such as Queensland have periodically isolated all active cases in hospitals, which can make comparisons across states difficult. The states also have differing thresholds for when their healthcare networks become overburdened. You can find this data and more on our main Covid cases tracking page, or continue to check here for the updated charts.The Great British Sewing Bee: Celebrity Christmas Special 8pm, BBC One New host Sara Pascoe brings us wholesome content with a sewing extravaganza. Anneka Rice, the Rev Kate Bottley, Antony Cotton and Kiell Smith-Bynoe are tasked with transforming a charity shop bundle into fancy-dress outfits. A New Year special follows next Thursday. HR The Hairy Bikers Go North for Christmas 8pm, BBC Two A series that’s powered by the warmth of the hosts’ friendship is well suited to a festive special, as is the show’s emphasis on independent producers in northern England. Todmorden pork, artisan marshmallows in Leeds and Sheffield’s hot sauce all look heavenly. Jack Seale Live at the Apollo Christmas Special 10pm, BBC Two Back following a one-year hiatus when Christmas was cancelled, this festive edition of the show sees Jason Manford hosting. He’s joined by one-time best newcomer nominee at the Edinburgh comedy awards Maisie Adam and ex-Britain’s Got Talent act Nabil Abdul Rashid. Alexi Duggins Madame Tussauds: The Full Wax 9pm, ITV Even the best digital deepfake cannot hold a candle to a good old waxwork. This documentary goes behind the scenes at 190-year-old Madame Tussauds to see what goes into crafting doppelgangers of 21st-century celebrities including Little Mix, while there is also a visit from a talismanic Liverpool FC player to view his super-sub. Graeme Virtue First Dates at Christmas 9pm, Channel 4 It’s been brutal out there for many singletons during the pandemic, so Fred Sirieix is back to warm up some cockles. Tonight, 25-year-old Dan is a jobbing Father Christmas who, despite spreading joy each year, struggles to sprinkle some magic on his own love life. HR Film choice Die Hard (John McTiernan, 1988), 10.45pm, ITV Yippie-ki-yay! John McTiernan’s action movie shows how to bring a family together at Christmas – all you have to do is defeat heavily armed bank robbers. As NYPD cop John McClane, Bruce Willis went from TV comedy regular to bona fide film star in one multistorey leap. McClane’s attempt to reconcile with wife Holly (Bonnie Bedelia) at an LA skyscraper is interrupted by Alan Rickman’s Hans Gruber taking the building hostage. Luckily, Stallone and Schwarzenegger turned down the role, as Willis’s ordinary Joe shtick fits the tale perfectly. Simon WardellA man who emailed his employer to prove his vaccination status accidentally included a link to a fake certificate website, according to a ruling of the Fair Work Commission. The incident was revealed in a 20 December decision discontinuing his claim to have been unlawfully stood down, handed down by commission deputy president Richard Clancy. The Victorian worker had taken his fight to the workplace tribunal after he stopped getting shifts with O&amp;M Pty Ltd, a construction and maintenance company based in Gippsland, Victoria, earlier this year. But things went awry for the employee mid-conference as Clancy asked to see the proof he had sent to O&amp;M, discovered the website, and declared his certificate may have been a fraud. “Fuck this, I’m not wasting any more time with you corrupt idiots,” the man said following a further exchange about a different issue, before abruptly ending the call, according to the decision. At the conference, the man argued he was unlawfully stood down, while O&amp;M contended he was a casual employee and had not been stood down. Regardless, the company submitted, it had been unable to give the man work since 14 October as he had not provided proof of vaccination or a first dose booking, as was then required under Victorian health directions. The man said he had emailed proof of vaccination to O&amp;M on 22 November. But, Clancy wrote, “The company held some concerns about the vaccination certificate produced by [the worker].” Why exactly became clear after the deputy president asked for a copy of the man’s email and saw it contained a hyperlink to a website with the phrase “theboyzareathepub” in its url. When the Guardian visited the URL it hosted what appeared to be a fake vaccination certificate generator. “Welcome to the Medicare vaccine pass generator,” the website, which is still active, reads. “Please input the data needed to make the pass here.” People are asked to input their name, date of birth and vaccination details and offered instructions on how to make the certificate appear as a smartphone app. “Make sure your dose dates add up,” the website reads. “Remember, 12 weeks between AZ and 5 (give or take 1) between Pfizer.” After viewing the website, Clancy told the conference it looked to him as though the man’s certificate “may be a fraud” that the worker had obtained by “fraudulent means”. A short time later, after the conversation had moved on, the man declared he would not be wasting any more time with the “corrupt idiots” on the call and hung up, according to the decision. The parting remark was taken as the man having discontinued his application, and Clancy closed the file. The deputy president suggested the authorities investigate the website. “If the vaccination certificate is a fraud and has been fraudulently obtained via an illegitimate hyperlink on the internet, this would be a matter of extremely serious public policy concern,” he wrote.‘When I was a child in Afghanistan I loved to watch my uncle play chess. Now I have joined the local club here.” Samir is grinning as he talks about settling into life on England’s south coast. “I’m very happy here, just being with my family, going for walks to look at the Christmas lights. It’s really beautiful.” After arriving in Greece alone two years ago, when he was just 16, and spending many months homeless and terrified in the port city of Patras, Samir recently made a journey that most refugees can only dream about. He said goodbye to the friends he had made in a camp for unaccompanied minors – other teenagers from Somalia, Iraq and Palestine – and travelled safely and legally to join his father and sister in the UK. There were no lorries or dinghies involved; he was given a plane ticket and arrived at Heathrow. “My sister came to meet me and she was so excited that she wanted to take me straight to London to show me Oxford Street, but I was too tired,” he says. “So we just went to an Afghan restaurant. That was so good after such a long time, to eat real Afghan food again.” But for the lawyers and campaigners who fought for months to bring him here, Samir’s happiness is bittersweet. He is one of the last unaccompanied young refugees to arrive in the UK under the EU family reunion laws that ended with Brexit. “These are the final cases,” says Beth Gardiner-Smith, head of the child refugee charity Safe Passage. “We have one or two more children transferring to family here from France in the next couple of weeks, but these are the last young people coming through our Greek office.” After the Home Office admitted in 2018 it was planning to end family reunion when the UK left the EU after Brexit, there was a scramble by lawyers and families to complete applications by the deadline of 31 December 2020. The children who managed to achieve that are now here, but the door has been slammed shut behind them. For Gardiner-Smith, it is painful to see a safe route to the UK shut down just as the tragic cost of illegal journeys is becoming increasingly evident in the Channel. “It’s just such a waste of all the work we did showing that this route works,” says Gardiner-Smith. “It is so frustrating. The need is still there, children are still asking for our help in Greece, we are seeing lots of young Afghans arriving who have family in the UK. “We want to help them but we only have the very restrictive British immigration rules. Children can’t join uncles or aunts or siblings – these are the majority of our cases. Even joining a parent will be very difficult. “We are already seeing children get tired of the legal route and vanish to make their own way to the UK.” Safe Passage was set up in 2015 when the refugee crisis saw thousands of children travelling through Europe during the Syrian war. In France, lawyers found children living alone in the Calais camp and fought in British courts for them to join family in the UK. Since then, hundreds of children have safely joined uncles, aunts and cousins in Britain. Mohamed is another one of the final arrivals. He is living in the Midlands now and celebrating his 18th birthday this week with his aunt after a difficult few years that saw the Home Office refuse him family reunion three times. “I love England – it is so safe and organised. I was living for years in a refugee camp in Iran after my family fled the Taliban in Afghanistan. Iran wanted to send us back to Afghanistan but we stayed, living in hiding. “I left on my own and reached Greece, which was a very bad place for refugees. I met a social worker who said there is a group called Safe Passage [who] will help you,” says Mohamed. “They did – they helped my aunt, we found a solicitor and after refusing me three times, finally I got the evidence I needed. It was unbelievable to come here on the plane; it was like being born again. I am so grateful. “I wish I had the power to help the friends I have left living in tents in Greece; some have been there for many years and they are so afraid.” Like many of the children who applied for a family reunion visa, his case suffered multiple delays as the Home Office requested he provide more and more evidence. “I was refused three times, they didn’t believe me because I was missing documents and information,” he says. “I was so sad. “I couldn’t focus on anything, my aunt was in the UK and I was alone in Lesbos and Athens, but friends helped get money so a lawyer could get me a DNA test. Finally, I’m here.” Even when it was available to families, those granted a right to remain under the EU reunion process faced long delays. In cases highlighted by the Guardian, children were left living alone in dangerous conditions despite having the legal right to be in the UK. But without it, the future is bleak for unaccompanied minors stranded in Europe. While Samir finally celebrates being with his sister, his thoughts are with the people he left behind. There are more than 2,000 unaccompanied minors living in Greece, many of them without a safe place to stay. “I thought I was young to be travelling alone,” he says. “But when I got to Greece there were so many children and some were much younger than me. I was homeless for the first six months – it was very scary. “When I did get a place in a shelter for underage boys, there was one small boy there, just 13 years old. He had family here in the UK – two uncles – but nobody with him. I was a year and five months in the camp and every time a new boy got his family reunion and left – to Holland, to Germany – this boy was crying. When I left, he cried. I wish someone could help him.” Samir’s father is in Afghanistan now, desperately trying to get permission to bring his wife and their other children to the UK. Even though he is now a British citizen, he is finding it difficult to get permission for them to travel. Gardiner-Smith says her team are trying to help children in an increasingly difficult atmosphere in Greece. “The Greek government introduced hostile legislation, similar to what the UK government is trying to bring in. If you have come through Turkey then most asylum seekers are deemed inadmissible. “Although it doesn’t apply to under 15s, a lot of our unaccompanied minors are between 15 and 17 and their support is cut off.” The immigration bill now going through parliament will, she fears, make things worse in Greece as well, and she is working with a handful of supportive politicians in an effort to get provision for family reunion increased. “There will be two tiers of asylum seekers and those who arrived irregularly will be deprived of the right to family reunion,” Gardiner-Smith says. “We know what this means realistically – it means more people getting into small boats to try to join their families here.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The US recorded the lowest rate of population growth in its history in the first year of the coronavirus pandemic, according to the US Census Bureau. The year from July 2020 to July 2021 was also the first time since 1937 that the population of the US grew by fewer than 1 million people. Only 392,665 people were added to the count, growth of barely 0.1%. The figures released on Tuesday would appear to indicate that although tens of millions of Americans were forced to quarantine at home in the early months of the pandemic, there was no consequential rise in the birthrate. If anything, analysts say, the numbers were far lower than anticipated, even though the tally of births in the US has dropped every year since 2008, with the exception of 2014. “I was expecting low growth but nothing this low,” William Frey, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution metropolitan policy program, told the Associated Press. “It tells us that this pandemic has had a huge impact on us in all kinds of ways, and now demography.” Other factors also influenced the slow growth. “We have an aging population and that means fewer women in child-bearing ages,” Frey said. “We see younger people putting off having children, and they’re going to have fewer children.” According to the census bureau, slower population growth has been a trend partly because of decreasing fertility and net international migration, combined with increasing mortality due to the aging population. “In other words, since the mid-2010’s, births and net international migration have been declining at the same time deaths have been increasing. The collective impact of these trends is slower population growth,” Luke Rogers, head of the census bureau’s population estimates branch, said in a press release. The District of Columbia saw the largest percentage population decline, a 2.9% drop from 690,093 to 670,050 residents. In terms of sheer numbers, New York saw the greatest fall, by 319,020 people to 19,835,913. Other states bucked the trend, notably Idaho, which saw a 2.9% increase in its population to 1,900,923. Utah and Montana saw the next biggest rises of 1.7% each, while Florida – which overtook New York as the nation’s third most populous state in 2014 – also featured in the top 10 with 1% growth, to 21,781,128. The figure means the sunshine state’s population swelled by almost 580 new residents every day.We are due to fly to Tenerife for a family holiday on 29 December. It was rolled over from last year. I have two children, aged nine and 12. The Spanish government requires all children of 12 and over to be fully vaccinated, but the UK government has not permitted 12- to 15-year-olds to receive a second jab. Consequently, my 12-year-old only received one dose. Do we need to cancel this holiday? KL, London Young people aged 12 to 15 have found themselves in a legal limbo when it comes to international travel. They were, until recently, too young to qualify for a second jab in the UK, so count as unvaccinated by countries which insist arrivals are double-dosed, but too old to be exempt from international vaccine requirements. This means they are barred from Germany, Malta and Canada, as well as Spain. Ski trips to Austria or Italy are a no-go since, although they would be allowed across the border, they are banned from public spaces, including ski lifts, while in France and Portugal they must take lateral flow tests to enter any tourist attractions. Given that this is your second attempt to take the holiday, the timings have been especially unlucky. Spain’s new rules came into force on 1 December in response to the arrival of Omicron, and will have flung the plans of many families into disarray. At the same time, the UK government announced that 12- to 15-year-olds can now receive a second jab and, as of last week, those who have received both doses can get an NHS Covid pass letter for international travel. This will have come too late for you. The second jab has to be at least 12 weeks after the first and, given that vaccines for your son’s age group were not available until late September, and Spain requires the second dose to have been taken at least 14 days before arrival in the country, there was a tiny window for compliance. I fear you’d better try to postpone the holiday again, although there’s no guarantee you’ll get your money back. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsChristmas was always such a magical time for me when I was young, and the beginning of December 1970, filled with excitement and anticipation, was no different. I was six and though I had already figured out there was no Santa, I didn’t quite understand how presents materialised in the pillowcase annually hung from the post of my upper bunk bed. My parents were adamant about Santa’s existence, but my friends and older brothers had confirmed the awful, heart-wrenching, nihilistic truth of my suspicions. There were a lot of other existential questions in my mind that year. What was death? Did people seriously spend eternity in a box buried underground? What if they woke up? At school, the alternative of an eternity in heaven was presented by our overtly Christian teacher and, on balance, heaven definitely sounded preferable to an afterlife of maggot-ridden decomposition. The caveat of complete faith and devotion to a bearded man who floated on a cloud seemed a small price to pay for everlasting bliss. God even looked a lot like Santa, only his beard was more straggly and his suit less fun. Maybe God delivered the presents. Sorted. Roll on Christmas. Then came the curve ball. I remember, that December, looking at a photograph in my mum and dad’s bedroom. I stared in shock. I asked who was in the picture. “That’s Rabindranath Tagore,” replied my mum. “He wrote plays, songs and poems.” My mouth dropped open at this tall, white-bearded figure, who the great pandit-ji Ravi Shankar would later in life tell me “looked like the sun”. “How many people out there have this look?” I wondered. “There’s God, Santa and now this dude. All with huge beards and a wise grin.” It was disconcerting. Which one delivered the presents? That December my mum also started explaining Hinduism to me. I know it was then because I remember what I was practising on the piano. Suddenly, there were lots more gods, but the beards varied hugely. Many had no beards at all. There were also goddesses, which confused me because the only female I’d heard of in Christianity ran around naked in a garden, tempting a man to follow her, with an apple. Also, with Hinduism you were cremated after death, which seemed altogether less boring. I told my mum we were being presented with an alternative perspective at school, of eternal damnation or heavenly bliss as opposed to the less intimidating magical stories of Krishna and Ganesh at home. She said that Hinduism accepted all other faiths and everything was really about being a good person. That helped a lot, because I’d heard Santa only gave presents to kids who were good. So even if there was no Santa, whoever was going to give me the presents felt my moral fibre was important. Everything seemed to tie up. Roll on Christmas. That year I could not wait to see the TV animation of Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer. I’d watched it the year before and it was the most magical thing I’d ever seen. I loved Rudolph. I could already play the theme tune on the piano, and Rudolph himself was simply fantastic. Then it came, and I was so disappointed and unmoved. Rudolph had lost his magic. If there was no Santa, I realised, then Rudolph couldn’t possibly be real or meaningful. Just like the Lone Ranger was fiction too. People were making this stuff up. How deep did the lies go? Christmas finally came and I waited up in bed the whole night. Who should I expect? Could I be wrong about Santa? Was he real after all? Or would I be visited by some other bloke with a longer, more flowing beard? Or should I expect someone blue with eight arms and an elephant trunk? I’d seen one of those on the living room wall and I’d been told that was also God. Definitely not the one Miss Churchill talked about in class though. Hmm. So, early on Christmas morning, when Dad ran giggling into the room and slapped a pillowcase full of gifts on my bed, I just shouted: “Dad? What are you doing?” Belief is such a strange thing, I learned that Christmas. If we want to believe something, we seem to ignore reality till we have no choice. I do miss that magical world though … the world before dad ran into my room with no beard or extra arms … before I discovered the lies you hear as an adult are far less innocent and well-meaning than those accompanied by marvellous, warm, cosy dreams. To mark Coventry’s tenure as UK City of Culture, and the 60th anniversary of Coventry Cathedral, Nitin Sawhney has been commissioned to create a new site-specific performance in response to Benjamin Britten’s War Requiem. Ghosts in the Ruins takes place on 27-29 January. Tickets are available at coventry2021.co.ukA jovial chorus of voices was fast approaching, punctuated by the excited yelps from an accompanying dog. “Beautiful morning for it, how far you walking?” came the call from the man at the front. Yet my party of 16 did not answer. The two people nearest to him moved awkwardly aside, as he became increasingly inquisitive. Then our leader – Abigail Rowe – approached him, clasping a sign that read: “We are on a silent pilgrimage. We mean no disrespect”. Almost at once he voluntarily lowered his voice to a whisper and bade us good luck, then wandered on with his friends, now also in silence, too. I was an hour into an eight-mile silent pilgrimage with the ever-innovative British Pilgrimage Trust (which was set up in 2014 with the aim of bringing back spiritual journeys to Britain almost 500 years after Henry VIII banned them during the reformation). This latest offering – a one-day pilgrimage between the small church at Stoughton, in rural West Sussex, to the historic cathedral in the centre of Chichester – was offered to give anyone, regardless of their religion or lack thereof (they very much tout their “bring your own beliefs” motto), chance for quiet contemplation in the chaotic run-up to Christmas. For me, as a mother of a 14-month-old, the silence was a treat, but I was quickly discovering that the hardest part was not being able to chat to passing walkers – which is something of a sacrilegious offence between hikers. The 15 other souls who joined me had come from as far as Mexico (via London), the Isle of Wight and Hampshire – with a few locals thrown in for good measure. Their reasons for taking part ranged from thinking of loved ones who had recently died or were seriously ill, to coming to terms with a health diagnosis and trying to make peace with a religion that had scorned them for their sexuality. Then there were those who, like me, were in no way religious and simply wanted some peace in the outdoors. No matter what the reason, our guide Abigail, trustee of the BPT, asked us to think of an intention or subject we wanted time to consider and pick up an object to carry with us to remind us of it along the way. I wasn’t sure whether to think of something big – the recent loss of a friend – or something small, such as what should I do with my hair now it’s growing out post-lockdown? But I did decide to use the spiky husk of a beech nut as a symbolic reminder, which I placed in my pocket. Abigail read the poem Leisure, by WH Davies, after which the Stoughton rector, Lindsay Yates, offered us a pilgrim blessing. Then, without a word, we were off. At first it felt like a bit of a novelty – big grins on everyone’s faces as a cyclist called hello. But soon we were on an uphill footpath where we all seemed to fall into a rhythm. I began to notice sounds more than ever – the birds singing, the wind rustling the leaves, the popping sound walking boots make on stones. Even in silence there was still a rich soundtrack. I was still not really contemplating anything deeper than whether I could pull off a Rachel cut in the year 2022 when we passed the first chatty group just before the Downs at Kingley Vale on the (fittingly named) Devil’s Humps – a trio of burial mounds. Here more passersby were shown Abigail’s sign and reacted much the same, with a contemplative silence. We began descending the hillside to a path that took us to one of the oldest yew trees in Britain. It would have been tempting to talk about these ancient specimens, about how they were used as gathering places by druids, worshipped by pagans, used to make longbows for battle by the church and – these particular ones – believed to hold the deceased souls of the Viking soldiers who were defeated here, but instead we all just stood and admired them in quiet reverie. Here a few people gave the improvised sign to indicate a toilet stop (a necessary bit of sign language quickly learned to ensure no one got left behind), before we walked on to West Stoke Church, where we ate lunch in the glow of candlelight. From there it was a march towards Chichester, first along a minor roadside, then a pleasant diversion into Brandy Hole Copse, a small, wild woodland on the outskirts of the city. My thoughts kept wandering as freely as my feet. Though now it was more about my surroundings: pondering the type of fungi growing on a felled branch, or questioning the whereabouts of some particular noisy bluetits. When we emerged on the Centurion Way, which, in taking us to our destination, would cross the course of an old Roman road, I thought of the many who had walked this land before us and what their reasons might have been. Then I placed my hand in my pocket and felt the prickles of the beech nut husk. It was then I thought about my friend. No great revelations came, but I did feel I finally had earned the time to linger with my thoughts – and my friend – for a while, and for that last half-hour I felt oddly at peace with the world. We soon arrived at Bishop’s Palace Gardens, where the wild woods were replaced with the manicured gardens of the cathedral, and the tweets of woodland birds became the raucous cries of gulls. It was here, standing on the top of the old city walls, that we were to let go of our objects. I smiled for the friend I’d had the privilege to know and now, like the beech nut, had lost to the darkening light. Moments later we entered the cathedral where the choir were singing a Christmas carol, which we were invited to join in with. Suddenly, 16 new voices began to emerge from our small crowd in unison. I looked to my fellow pilgrims and thought how odd it was to have spent six hours with a group of people without really getting to know any of them at all. Yet without a word being spoken, we had all learned something collectively – that no matter how chaotic it gets, silence is there waiting. All we have to do is stop talking, start walking and listen. • This article was amended on 22 December 2021 to clarify details about the Centurion Way’s association with a Roman road. The trip was provided by the British Pilgrimage Trust, which offers a range of pilgrimages throughout the year from single to multi-day options. The next silent pilgrimages are from Chidham to Chichester on 15 January and 14 April 2022 (with the latter including a swim in the sea), £40pp, or £35 each if booking for twoA £14 own-label champagne from Aldi has become a hit in the UK and is second only to Moët &amp; Chandon in sales as shoppers seek luxury but without the hefty price tag. Veuve Monsigny, available only at the discounter, has overtaken Lanson, one of France’s most storied names, according to figures from the data firm IRI. Veuve Monsigny is made for Aldi by the French producer Philizot &amp; Fils. The company, run by the married couple Stéphane and Virginie Philizot, is based in Champagne’s Marne valley and has had to expand rapidly to keep up with demand. Christmas week is the biggest of the year for food retailers as Britons stock up to tide them over the holidays. But with inflation at a 10-year high, many households will be trying to save money by shopping around. Britons spend about £400m a year on champagne but prices are up sharply as producers have been hit hard by production problems as well as the delivery issues that have bedevilled the whole retail supply chain. The price of champagne increased 8% in the three months to September, according to Wine and Spirit Trade Association figures. Even Aldi, which vies to be the cheapest grocer in town has not been immune, as at £13.99, a bottle of Veuve Monsigny costs £1 more than last Christmas. Veuve Monsigny has won a number of accolades over the years, including a bronze award at the International Wine Challenge, where it was described as having a “floral palate, fresh with little development but beautiful balance and restraint”. Julie Ashfield, Aldi’s managing director of buying, said it was extremely proud of the champagne that was “up there with the best bubbles available”. In its annual champagne taste test, the consumer group Which? ranked offerings from Waitrose, Tesco and Marks &amp; Spencer above the likes of Moët and Lanson – and Aldi. Lisa Barber, the group’s home products and services editor, said the results showed supermarket champagne brands could “more than hold their own against the famous champagne houses, delivering excellent quality and great value for money”. However, Aldi’s bubbly was overlooked by the judges who instead singled out Lidl’s Veuve Delattre Brut as the “great value pick”. At just £12 a bottle, they praised its “subtle, complex aromas, fresh acidity and clean, fruity taste”.Scott Morrison insists it’s not necessary for the states to introduce mask mandates in response to a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases, despite health advice recommending they be compulsory in indoor settings. Speaking after a national cabinet meeting on Wednesday, the prime minister instead said it was “highly recommended” to wear masks indoors, urging Australians to use common sense and to reduce their risk of spreading Covid to their loved ones over Christmas. Health advice circulated to state and territory leaders late last week made the case for mandating masks in all indoor settings, including retail, entertainment facilities, and hospitality when not eating and drinking. “Implementation of mask wearing measures should occur prior to Omicron case escalation to have maximum benefit,” said the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) advice. But after the unscheduled meeting with states and territory leaders Morrison called for a “greater level of self-regulation” as he brushed off the idea of explicitly calling on the states and territories to mandate masks. The premiers would make their own decisions about how best to promote mask usage, Morrison said, adding that some leaders “like to use mandates” and others “rely on the individual responsibility to achieve that”. The emphasis on personal responsibility echoes the language used by the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, who has defended the decision to recently relax mask mandates. NSW reported a record high 3,763 new Covid cases on Wednesday, and Victoria 1,503. “What matters is that people wear them, not whether people get fined,” Morrison said. Morrison urged Australians to “think of the person sitting on the other side of the table” and to wear a mask in indoor settings. “Think of the person you’re going to meet this weekend. Think of Christmas Day where you’ll see elderly relatives, and wear a mask. It’s pretty simple. And so I would encourage you to do exactly that, as the medical advice has highlighted.” Standing alongside Morrison at the media conference, the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, said he wanted to be “very clear” that masks worked to reduce the spread of Covid-19. “They do protect yourself, they do protect others,” Kelly told reporters. When pressed on the specific health advice he had provided, Kelly said: “The health advice is wear a mask.” In his post-national cabinet press conference, Morrison urged states and territories to stop requiring negative PCR tests for interstate travel, blaming it for unnecessarily extending Covid-19 testing queues and wait times. One in four PCR tests in Victoria and one in five in NSW were taken in order to be able to travel to Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia, according to Morrison’s office. Morrison said the national cabinet would meet again in two weeks. He said they would all work on a common definition of close and casual contacts, and isolation and testing requirements, to try to end “different rules in different places”. Kelly will also provide the 7 January national cabinet meeting with advice on close contacts in health and aged care settings, “noting the impact on the workforce from furloughing a fully vaccinated staff”, Morrison said in a later statement. Leaders will also discuss how the home isolation of air crews and passengers affect confidence in domestic travel, the statement said. There was no change on Wednesday to the interval for booster shots, which has already been reduced from six months to five months, despite calls from some premiers to further shorten the gap. Morrison said he would rely on the advice of the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) on that issue. “That will be determined by the immunisation experts and no one else.” He said the focus of the booster program was vulnerable Australians, but he said also flagged further advice on “prioritisation”, including younger age groups. “We know that the Omicron variant moves very quickly amongst young people, and so we’ll be taking more advice on those issues.” The prime minister said the federal government would increase payments to GPs and pharmacists by $10 a jab, to provide an added incentive to continue the vaccination rollout over the summer period. He called on state and territories to reinstate vaccination hubs that were closed in recent months. In turn, states and territories “committed to increasing capacity at state clinics to previous peak levels”, according the national cabinet statement. The statement described the Omicron strain as “the next challenge facing Australia” and said case numbers were “expected to increase significantly within a short time period”. “Importantly, after almost four weeks of Omicron in Australia, there has been only one confirmed Omicron case in ICU and no deaths,” said the statement. “States and territories have confirmed that hospitals and health systems remain in a strong position despite rising cases - with all states and territory health systems working within capacity.” The national vaccination coordinator, Lt Gen John Frewen, said Australia was on track to start the vaccination of five- to 11-year-old children from 10 January as planned. Morrison said Australians had “worked very hard” this year and were looking forward to Christmas. “My main message is to stay calm, get your booster, follow the common sense behavioural measures,” he said. “One of the things we agreed today is we’re not going back to lockdowns, we do not want to go back to lockdowns.” The acting Labor leader, Richard Marles, accused Morrison of “a complete failure of leadership”. Asked about Morrison’s focus on personal responsibility over mask mandates, Marles said the prime minister should act on “the best medical advice” in order to spare people “a single extra day of lockdown”. “If there are low-cost, easy measures that can be taken, which ensures that people can get on with their businesses, can get on with their lives [and] see the economy keep going, then we should be walking down that path.”If there had been a popularity contest at Cop26, the Costa Rican president, Carlos Alvarado Quesada, would have been a clear winner. Leonardo DiCaprio, Jeff Bezos, Boris Johnson and Prince William all wanted to speak with the leader of the tiny Central American country, eager to bask in its green glow. The climate summit in Glasgow was, in effect, Costa Rica’s Super Bowl, another chance to show off its impressive environmental credentials. It is the only tropical country that has successfully halted and reversed deforestation, a commitment dozens of others made at Cop26 but are far from achieving. Costa Rica, which celebrated its bicentenary in 2021, is aiming for total decarbonisation by 2050 – not just a net zero target – and is helping lead the world on efforts to protect 30% of the Earth by the end of this decade. From Christiana Figueres, who was head of the UN climate convention that achieved the Paris agreement in 2015, to Carlos Manuel Rodríguez, chief executive of the Global Environment Facility, Costa Ricans are routinely found in international leadership positions on the environment. Alvarado was proud of Costa Rica’s record when he spoke with the Guardian in early 2021. But in his final interview at Cop26, after an exhausting schedule, Alvarado cautioned that his country’s example should not be taken as a blueprint for others to follow. “The Costa Rican example ought not to be taken literally. Take whatever is good that we have, but also adapt it locally. The thing about our example is the possibility of change and not the particular change itself,” he said. “We have seen the world make global decisions in Glasgow but we cannot be tempted by the idea that they can be a one size fits all solution.” In October, Costa Rica was among the five inaugural Earthshot prize winners for its policy to pay citizens to protect standing forest and restore ecosystems. The scheme is credited with helping reverse one of the worst deforestation rates in the world at the time by altering the cost of clearing trees for coffee, banana and pineapple plantations, recognising that forests are worth more alive than dead. The policy has led to an ecotourism boom. But Alvarado, who is coming to the end of his term as president, does not want to stop there. He acknowledges Costa Rica is “green – but not blue”, prompting the announcement at Cop26 of his country’s involvement in a vast new marine-protected area. “The more we provide an example, the more moral and political leverage there is for others to follow. That’s our approach,” he says. In Glasgow, Denmark and Costa Rica launched the Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance (Boga) to speed up the end of the fossil fuel industry, attracting intense media attention. While the initiative was set up by a small group of countries that had already committed to phasing out fossil fuels, it is hoped a coalition of the willing can translate into global change. Andrea Meza, Costa Rica’s environment minister who helped announce Boga, says winning the Earthshot prize was a moment of national unity akin to winning a football match. She underscores the importance of combining the inherent value of nature with financial realities to ensure its protection, along with environmental education for all citizens. “What we have learned from the Costa Rican case is that you need to put nature in as part of your development model. It’s not about development and protecting nature. It’s understanding that nature needs to be part of the kind of development that you want. We understood that,” she says. “After one or two generations, you’ll see the change. We can see the different species: the sloth, the hummingbird … and we feel proud.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features • This article was amended on 22 December 2021 to correct the surname of President Alvarado.Russell T Davies doesn’t hold back. If he’s thrilled, he shouts about it. And sure enough, the 6ft 6in giant of a man is shouting today. “I’m gobsmacked. I’ve never come first in this. Ever,” he exclaims, admitting that he has always had his eye on the Guardian’s list of the best TV of the year. “If I’ve had a show on, I spend every December watching that countdown wondering if I’ll be on it – I think A Very English Scandal got to No 2.” He’s right, it did. Three years on, his wonderful Channel 4 mini-series It’s a Sin has been voted the Guardian’s best TV show of the year. “I’m ridiculously thrilled,” says Davies, who is Zooming from his home in Manchester. It’s 30 years since his first TV series – Dark Season, featuring a 15-year-old Kate Winslet – aired on the BBC. Since then, Davies has created any number of groundbreaking dramas (including Queer as Folk; Cucumber, Banana and Tofu; Years and Years) as well as breathing new life into Doctor Who. But he is particularly pleased to have won for It’s a Sin, the five-part drama about a group of young gay friends living – and dying – through the Aids era of the 80s and early 90s. This is the show he knew he had to write 30 years ago, and spent the intervening decades years putting off, because it was simply too personal and painful. Davies, who is 58, takes me back to his teens and a West Glamorgan youth theatre he attended. “It was the campest place in the world. Nearly all the older boys went on to become drag queens.” But when Davies went to study English at the University of Oxford, the drag queens went to London to embrace a life of adventure. “They walked into a slaughterhouse. It was extraordinary – so sad, fucking hell. All those boys would be with us now. What great men they would be.” As in It’s a Sin, his friends lived in a place they called the Pink Palace, and were joined by Jill, the unifying force and beating heart of the show. In the series, Jill is close to all the boys, unites them when they fall out, fights for them when they are attacked, lies for them when they need cover, and emboldens them when they need strength. Most importantly, she is there for them when they fall ill and succumb to the virus. The real-life Jill is one of Davies’s oldest friends. Jill Nalder is an actor who spent 20 years in the chorus of Les Misérables and is now part of the WestEnders, a group that sing numbers from musicals on cruise ships. As a result of It’s a Sin, Nalder has written a memoir, Love from the Pink Palace, which will be published next year. Davies couldn’t be more proud of the woman who made him realise he had to tell this story. “It must have been about 1990 when she told me about the mother and father turning up on a hospital ward to discover their son is gay, that he has Aids and is dying, all in one moment. I never asked her what they said because I wanted to imagine it. And I’ve been imagining it for 30 years.” Oxford was more sober and safer than London, where young gay men partied hard and perished fast. “I wasn’t at the heart of the hurricane, but I did lose lovely people. I lost the very first person I slept with, whose name I still can’t say because his parents don’t see his death as an Aids death.” Again, this is something we see in the drama – parents in denial, silenced by shame, insisting their boy died of pneumonia or cancer. Davies soon discovered that this was a common story for many families. But it wasn’t just parents who were in denial. In It’s a Sin we see Ritchie, played by Olly Alexander, denying he is gay, then denying the existence of Aids itself. Ritchie is a classic Davies character – self-absorbed, pigheaded, morally compromised and sympathetic. I ask Davies if there is any of him in Ritchie. “Yes!” he roars. “His selfishness, and the fact that he thinks he’s so clever he can talk his way out of any situation. That’s me. All his worst faults are mine. People often say my lead characters are unlikable, and I think, well, I’m doing that on purpose, because we often are. Likable is very easy to write, isn’t it?” He prefers gay characters who are unlikable – not least because it subverts a trope in TV drama. “There’s often a feeling that the gay character should be the nice character. And I’m like, nobody worries about Tony Soprano, do they? But gay people have to be nice! I love ignoring that.” Ritchie is convinced HIV is a conspiracy. How can a virus discriminate alphabetically, he asks – how can it target everything beginning with H: homosexuals, haemophiliacs and Haitians. Davies says he was also a denier in the early days. “That was me sitting in the pub, so certain, like any anti-vaxxer now. The blood link was staring us in the face, but people like me thought we were too clever.” It’s a Sin is personal in another way. Three years ago, Davies lost his husband and partner of 20 years, Andrew Smith, to a brain tumour. In the show, we see Colin, a gentle soul dubbed “Colin the virgin” slowly fade away. Davies says his death scene was inspired by sitting with Andrew as he died. “There’s that moment of Colin staring into space with his eyes flickering side to side. That was Andrew for his final six to seven days. He was actually asleep, but his eyes just happened to be open, bless him. That haunts me. Sometimes you put those things in the script to exorcise them.” And has it? “No, it never does.” Davies smiles. “I’m making myself sound tender and heroic, using something heartbreaking in my life, but writers are like vampires. There’s also a glint in my eye as I think: ‘Oooh that’s a good scene.’” Like so many of his characters, Colin was a composite of people he has known. “He’s partly somebody I fancied like mad, who I went out with once or twice, who worked in a gentleman’s outfitters and went to New York to measure lords for shirts. That’s all real. The nice thing is he got in touch after all these years and said: ‘Was that me?’ What’s happened to him? “He’s very well and living in Manchester and still very good-looking, frankly … I must say hello to him properly. Hahahahahaaaaa!” cackles Davies with a laugh that could blow down houses. Has the real Colin got a fella? “I don’t think so. I think he’s single. Stop it! He’s far too good-looking for me. He was way out of my league then.” I ask why he delayed writing It’s a Sin so long. “Imagine if I’d got this wrong, if it had been rubbish,” he says. “Imagine if I’d let down all those people for whom this is a life-defining thing. We all lived with their deaths for so long, and doing it justice was an enormous weight to bear. It took me a lot longer to write the first episode than anything else I’ve ever written. I normally write it in about a month. This took about six months.” On a practical level, Davies wasn’t sure how to tell the story. Initially, he started writing it as a docudrama, but it lacked his normal spark. So he started again – this time as fiction. As well as the tragedy, he wanted to capture the exhilaration of youth – the laughter, the lust, the dreams. Davies mentions Mark, another friend who died. “When I look at Mark I don’t think of him on his deathbed and I don’t think of him crying – though we did cry many times. I think of him laughing that time we stayed up all night, that awful man he went out with, and how we stole all his jumpers and ran away with them into the night. It’s a great age to write about. Becoming what you are is a great thing to write about.” It’s only since It’s a Sin that Davies has realised how little he and his friends have talked about this seminal period in their lives. “Somehow we believed or echoed that straight reaction that dying from Aids was shameful.” He has had so many calls from old friends in the past year, desperate to talk, to acknowledge all they had blocked out. “A friend phoned me up in tears and said in the late 80s, he’d taken a friend who was dying into his flat to live in the spare room. His family ended up being there, too, as he died. And my friend said: ‘I forgot it happened.’ He didn’t literally forget, but it was part of his past that was so horrible it just got parcelled up and put away in his memory.” One old friend wrote to him. “She sent me an old-fashioned letter and said in one line what I took five hours to say on TV. She said: ‘We sent our best friends home to die in their childhood bedrooms while their parents hid them from the neighbours.’ Bang! I’m not kidding – five hours I took to say that.” And there are strangers who have got in touch to tell him they now realise their relative died of Aids. “The children of these families are speaking up. They’re all saying: ‘Oh my God, that was my uncle and he died of Aids, it wasn’t cancer, and I’m proud of him. That’s the point. They’re not ashamed or embarrassed by an Aids death or who he had sex with and they’re piping up.” He looks emotional. Has writing it been cathartic? He nods. “I’m not haunted by it any more,” he says. Davies is now putting his mind to other matters – a drama about Crossroads legend Noele Gordon, starring Helena Bonham Carter, and Doctor Who, which he has returned to after an 11-year-break. Why can’t he keep away? “Because I love it. It’s the first thing I watched on television.” He points to a cabinet. “In there is every single edition of Doctor Who Magazine.” He can’t contain his excitement. “I’ve already written some of the episodes. The first will go out in November 2023 – that’s the 60th anniversary of the show.” Give us a scoop then, I beg. He says he can’t. Is Olly Alexander the new Doctor? “Behave! Stop it! We have genuinely not cast anyone yet. We’re just starting auditions.” I ask how his life has changed since Andrew’s death. “It hasn’t in many ways. I’m in the same house. I sit in the same chair watching television. I still talk to him. I know what would make us both laugh on television.” Do they talk aloud? “Yes. In the first few months after he died, I once said something out loud to him then I knew he wouldn’t have heard me so I repeated it. Hahahahahaaaaa!! Then I thought that’s a bit mad, actually.” Sometimes he thinks he should sell the house in Manchester, because there are so many memories. Other times, he thinks he should keep the house because there are so many memories. “I Imagine this being stripped and emptied. Brrrrr,” he says as if suddenly feeling a chill in his heart. He points to a corner of the living room. “His bed is over there. Maybe I should get out and buy a flat in town and go dating?” He answers his own question. “Fifty-eight and dating. That’s not a good look.” Perhaps you should go on Grindr? “At my age? I don’t think there’s much action at my age, do you?” He pauses. “I am on Grindr. I’ve been on there for years because I find it fascinating. Unfortunately, everyone goes: ‘Oh, you’re the man who wrote Doctor Who.’ I’d never meet anyone off Grindr – I’ve got too much fear of being murdered.” You just look? “I write a lot about the modern world, and it’s very helpful. That’s why I read Twitter but don’t belong to it. I go on Grindr, but I don’t Grind. I think it would be mad if I didn’t look at all those modern forms of communication.” Is he planning to take a break at Christmas? “I’m hoping I get Christmas Day off!” Does he ever stop? “Not really. I’ll probably nip upstairs that afternoon for a couple of hours.” Why should he stop, he says, when he loves it? “When I’m washing up or drawing or lying in bed or walking into town, I imagine dialogue from dramas I’ll never write. My head is constantly turning things over. It’s compulsive. I can even see it laid out on the page.” Before we leave each other, he returns to It’s a Sin. So many amazing things have come out of it, he says. He tells me about Philip Normal, a fashion designer and the first openly HIV-positive mayor (of Lambeth, south London). Normal made a T-shirt with the It’s a Sin catchphrase “La” on it, thinking he would shift a handful. “He said he’d give the profits to the Terrence Higgins Trust, and six months later he has singlehandedly raised £500,000. Half a million pounds – from a T-shirt and a single catchphrase!” Davies says the success of It’s a Sin has been the surprise of his life. Even his friends gave him a pitying look when he told them he was making a series about young men dying from Aids. “I’d see their face fall. I thought it was dead in the water. I genuinely thought: ‘Who wants to watch a drama about Aids?’ especially in the middle of the pandemic.” He roars with delight. “Hahahahaaaaaaa! Who could have known?”There’s probably never a good time for the chancellor of the exchequer to visit California, but doing so when whole business sectors are on the verge of collapse was a particularly bad look. Yesterday Rishi Sunak announced a bailout package worth around £1bn for businesses losing trade because of Omicron, but Labour has understandably accused the chancellor of being missing in action at the crucial moments. The charge sheet, however, is actually much more serious than that. The chancellor might have been invisible over recent weeks, but his fingerprints are all over the government’s current policy problems. Why has the government been so reluctant to issue official guidance that would limit public socialising, as Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, has recommended? Because to do so would effectively mean that the government was forcing the closure of the hospitality sector; and in turn that would require the Treasury to reinstitute the furlough scheme, the most economically sensible response to the current crisis but a short-term hit to the public finances that Sunak is desperate to avoid. Why did the government’s railway plans for the north – the centrepiece of Johnson’s ‘levelling up’ strategy – receive such a raspberry from businesses and local authorities there? Because Sunak had cut the investment funding available, forcing the abandonment of part of HS2 and the critical trans-Pennine route. Why was the government’s net zero strategy delayed for six months, then when finally published criticised by both environmental and business groups? Because the chancellor had refused to provide the levels of public investment needed to achieve the strategy’s emissions-cutting objectives. Independent estimates put the sums required at four times the £30bn he allowed. And why was the government’s social care plan lambasted by almost everyone, from the independent King’s Fund to the Tory chair of the health and social care select committee? Yes, you guessed it. Because Sunak had seriously underfunded it. His parsimony even extended to recalculating the household cap on care costs in a way that will leave many poorer households at risk of being forced to sell their homes, which was precisely what Boris Johnson had promised would not happen. Each of these underfunding decisions arises from the same source: the chancellor’s new “fiscal rules”. One of these is relatively uncontroversial: that in normal times government should only borrow for investment, with day to day spending covered by taxes. But the other two have powerful effects. Sunak has insisted that the total level of government debt should be on a downward path within three years. And he has placed a cap on annual public investment, at 3% of GDP. By adopting these rules, Sunak is placing a tight limit on public spending. This was disguised in last month’s budget, because the spurt of economic growth in the autumn had given him more revenues than anticipated, allowing him to give more money to almost every government department. But as each of the subsequent policy announcements has shown, his largesse is much less than required by the prime minister’s policy and political objectives. Gordon Brown introduced the idea of fiscal rules in 1997 to reassure the City that he would be prudent with the public finances. If the Treasury must follow preordained rules, the chancellor cannot manipulate the economy for political benefit, such as stoking a consumer boom before an election. But rules are only useful if they remain fixed. In practice, every chancellor from Brown himself onwards has adjusted the rules to allow them to adopt the fiscal stance they prefer. Sunak’s are the fifth set announced in the last six years. So no one should let Sunak claim that the fiscal rules mean his hands are tied, that he simply cannot spend more. The chancellor has pulled the rope tight around his wrists himself. But do the present rules at least make economic sense, so even though self-imposed they constitute a rational fiscal constraint? No. Sunak’s rules are peculiarly illiterate from an economic point of view. There is no economic justification for saying that 2024 must be the moment when public debt starts to fall. It is true that, at 95% of national income, the UK’s debt is much higher than it used to be. But what makes debt “unsustainable” is not its absolute level, but how much it costs the government in interest payments. And these are currently at their second lowest level – because interest rates have been so low for so long – since the 1950s. This makes Sunak’s 3% cap on public investment quite extraordinary. The UK economy is crying out for investment: in building homes, insulating homes, renewable energy, railways, broadband, childcare and social care, schools, nature conservation, business innovation and productivity improvement, to name just a few key fields. In the past much of this would have been done by the private sector. But in today’s “financialised” economy, where banks put more money into land and property than into productive businesses, and companies prefer paying dividends to investing for the long term, there is a crucial role for the public sector to invest instead. Given that it can now borrow at highly negative real interest rates (that is, once inflation is taken into account), it would indeed be absurd not to. In these circumstances, putting an arbitrary cap on public investment is exactly the opposite of what is required. So why is Sunak doing this? He gave the game away earlier this month, with a careful leak to the Times that he intends to cut income tax before the next election (due in 2024). He will only have room to do this if public spending – however valuable – has been tightly reined in. You don’t need to be a political genius to see that Sunak is positioning himself for the next Conservative party leadership election, as the tax-cutting, small-state heir to Margaret Thatcher so fervently longed for by the party’s MPs and members. Everyone in Westminster can see this. On Tuesday, the astute Westminster watchers at website Politico acknowledged his ambitions with the label “King Rishi”. But what makes it so astonishing is that the collateral damage has gone largely unremarked upon. Sunak is effectively undermining every single one of Johnson’s policy priorities. It is surely as brazen an act of political treachery as modern times have seen. Michael Jacobs is professor of political economy at the University of Sheffield, and managing editor of NewEconomyBrief.netThis time last year, Covid-19 cases were soaring in the UK, hospitalisations were steadily increasing, and the government had tightened restrictions to try to get a handle on a concerning new variant. Twelve months on, there is a sense of deja vu. A weary public is worried about its festive plans being cancelled, an outcome that would be all the more painful in light of the Christmas party scandal that has enveloped Downing Street in recent weeks. This time around, the government is pinning its hopes on the booster campaign to hold back a “tidal wave of Omicron”. Although not a complete triumph, the UK’s vaccination campaign has been a success: it helped weaken the link between Covid infections and death. However, the decision in mid-July to declare “freedom day” feels less and less like the mission-complete moment foreseen by libertarians within the Conservative party. With more than 170,000 Covid deaths to date – including 17,000 since restrictions were lifted in July – the Guardian plots the UK’s vaccination progress against government decisions and the fatalities in 2021. With 2022 around the corner, the one thing that we can say for sure is that a line has not yet been drawn under the Covid pandemic. Data notes and methodology UK daily deaths are based on the government’s primary metric sourced from the Covid-19 data dashboard which only includes those deaths occurring within 28 days of a positive Covid test. At the time of publication the latest death count as recorded by the Office for National Statistics – which includes all deaths where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate deaths to 10 December – stood at 173,525 occurences. Vaccination data is also sourced from the government’s Covid-19 data dashboard. The percentage figure represents the proportion of the full adult population to have received two doses of the vaccine. The restrictions level is sourced from the University of Oxford’s coronavirus government response tracker. A stringency index score of above 75 is classed as “very high” restrictions level, above 50 “high”, above 25 “medium” and then anything below is classed as “very low”.“On Christmas Day 1981, Liverpool were in the bottom half of the table (12th of 22) and ended up winning the league,” tweets Derek Brosnan. “On Christmas Day 1994, Norwich were seventh and ended up getting relegated. Can any teams beat these ascents/descents to success/relegation?” Let’s start with teams who hit form after Christmas. Liverpool were indeed 12th in 1981, a position they stayed in after an infamous defeat by Manchester City on Boxing Day. Then, from nowhere, they won 18 of the next 20 games to take control of the title race. They eventually finished four points ahead of Ipswich after an impressive post-Boxing Day run of 63 points from 25 games: 20 wins, three draws and two defeats. That looks impressive now but in the early 80s, when the top division was a lot more competitive, it was extraordinary. In the same season, there was an even more greater post-Christmas surge in Division Three. “Can I put forward Burnley, 1981-82?” offers Mark Jones. “Eighteenth in the table at Christmas, promoted as champions.” The interesting thing about Burnley is that, even when they were 18th at Christmas, they were on a great run of form. After losing six of the first eight league games, they were beaten only twice in the last 38 and pipped Carlisle to the title on goal difference. Dave Mackay’s Derby were champions of England in 1974-75 despite being 10th at Christmas. Manchester City were eighth this time last year, though the late start to the season meant they had only played 13 games. Arsenal were sixth and in a perceived crisis on Christmas Day 1997; just over four months later, Tony Adams was summing it all up for the double winners on an idyllic day at Highbury. Sunderland were 11th in the Championship on Christmas Day 2006, before their players twigged that the best way to make manager Roy Keane happy was to win football matches. They won 17 of the last 22 and were promoted as champions. The play-off system offers greater scope for snakes and ladders, the ladders bit at least, in the second half of the season. On Christmas Day 2003, Iain Dowie’s Crystal Palace were 19th in what is now the Championship. They dropped to 20th after losing at home to Millwall on Boxing Day, but then won 14 of their last 21 games to sneak – and we mean sneak – into the play-offs. You know the rest. There are loads of examples of teams plummeting in the second half of the season. As mentioned in the question, Norwich were seventh in the Premier League on Christmas Day 1994. They lost to Spurs on Boxing Day and Nottingham Forest on 27 December, a scandalous fixture schedule that triggered a spectacular slump. Norwich won only two of their last 22 games and were relegated after losing at Leeds on the penultimate weekend. “Norwich’s fall matched Spurs in 1927,” notes Gary Cumberland, “and was beaten by Blackpool (from sixth place in 1977), but the winner was Crystal Palace in the 1924-25 season. They opened their presents in fifth place in Division Two on 25 December 1924, before plummeting to 21st place which was second bottom and earned them relegation to Division Three South.” Middlesbrough were 12th at Christmas in the inaugural Premier League season before becoming decisively embroiled. Manchester City were 11th at Christmas in 1908-09 and went down; the same thing happened to Millwall in 1995-96, though that doesn’t tell the whole story. At the start of December, they were top of the league. “On Christmas Day 2019, Hull City were 11th but only four points off sixth place,” writes Kirk Buxton. “A win on New Year’s Day took them up to eighth, after which they won only once more for the rest of the season, picking up nine points from the final 20 games and finishing bottom of the league.” Lincoln were eighth in the old Division Four on Christmas Day 1986, but went into freefall and dropped out of the Football League on a dramatic final day. Hellas Verona were eighth in an 18-team Serie A on 25 December 2001, and were still eighth in mid-March. But they lost six of the last eight games and dropped into the relegation places for the first time on the final day of the season. A few more to finish up. The following teams were all relegated despite looking comfortable at Christmas: Walsall (11th, League One, 2005-06), Reading (12th, Premier League, 2007-08), Blackpool (10th, Premier League, 2010-11) and Notts County (seventh, League One, 2014-15). Finally, the one that got away. Thirteen years ago, Phil Brown’s Hull were sixth at Christmas in their debut Premier League season. Then, after Brown administered an on-field brollocking at the Etihad on Boxing Day, they experienced a variant of second-season syndrome. Hull suffered second-half-of-the-season syndrome, winning only one of their last 20 league games. Eventually they avoided relegation by a point, and it was time for karaoke. Knowledge archive “Have any footballing thespians ever tread the boards in panto?” mused Chris Callaghan back in 2011. Manchester United used to run an annual pantomime, which was written by and starred the club’s youth players. According to no lesser a source than the Sun, 2011’s panto included skits on Wayne Rooney and David de Gea. One youth player appeared in a Rooney shirt with a Shrek mask and gave a mock interview about how his hair transplants had changed his life. Anderson was teased about his weight, while De Gea’s run-in with the doughnut police was also recreated. In years gone by, former Newcastle player Peter Beardsley appeared in Sleeping Beauty (“he impressed as King Pedro of Gallowgate in a part written specially for him,” in 1999, according to Observer Sport Monthly’s account). Vinnie Jones shunned pantomimes for bigger things (like Midnight Meat Train, presumably), declaring as he set off for Hollywood: “I want to be a big player. I’ve been offered pantos and turned them down – they didn’t do Frank Bruno any favours.” Ian Botham appeared on the festive stage – he played professional football for Yeovil and Scunthorpe, lest we forget – making his panto debut at the Alhambra in Bradford on 21 December 1990 alongside George and Zippy from Rainbow. The Daily Express reviewed his performance thus: “The expressionless Botham is the only wooden thing on stage apart from the beanstalk – and even that projects itself better.” Cruel. Can you help? “Was there ever a match where all the players were so woeful that no player of the match was awarded?” asks Umar Faruk. “What is the longest length of time a player has had to leave the pitch, only to eventually return to the game?” wonders Guy Stephenson. Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU. We’ll be back on 5 January.That’s it for the blog - Thursday turned out to be quite busy! Here’s the main news: Confidence in interstate travel plummeted over Omicron uncertainty International doctors called for immediate release of Julian Assange AMA called for the reintroduction of some restrictions “given the uncertainty” of Omicron Victoria recorded 1,503 new cases, NSW 3,763, Tasmania 12, the ACT 58, Queensland 186, and SA 198 new Covid infections South Australian premier says boosters should be brought forward New Zealand recorded 56 new community cases Queensland to increase mask requirements for cinemas, theatres and hospitality staff Pharmacists called for urgent reinstatement of mask mandate In NSW 1,364 healthcare workers are in isolation Morrison said government won’t mandate masks after national cabinet meeting WA announced it will close its border to TAS and NT and mandate booster shots for some workers Lockdown extended in Tennant Creek And that is it! I am going to risk it all for a last minute Christmas shopping trip in town now - wish me luck. After a big day of pressers, things have really quietened down tonight. I thought some of you would enjoy this quite incredible fact: For those interested, you can read the Nat-Cab statement here: From AAP: Ballarat’s Catholic diocese has been found liable for the sexual abuse of a young boy by one of its priests. The decision, believed to be an Australian first, was handed down by Victoria’s supreme court on Wednesday. The diocese and its current bishop, Paul Bird, were sued by a man who said he was sexually assaulted by Father Bryan Coffey at his parents’ home in Port Fairy in 1971. He was five years old. Coffey received a three-year suspended sentence in 1999 after being convicted of charges including indecent assaults of males and females under 16 and false imprisonment. The man, known as DP in court documents, didn’t tell anyone except for his partner about the assault until 2018. He made a claim for more than $1.5 million for loss of earnings as a result of the assaults, a figure described by Justice Jack Forrest as “bold”. The judge instead made an order for DP to receive $200,000 in damages for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life as well as $10,000 for medical expenses and $20,000 in other damages. Residents in Weilmoringle Sth, NSW, are also being asked to evacuate. From AAP: Dozens of children are likely to spend Christmas behind bars in the Northern Territory’s infamous Don Dale youth detention centre, four years after the government agreed to close it. Inmate numbers climbed to 44 in recent months after the NT government toughened youth bail laws earlier in the year. Darwin lawyer John B Lawrence SC is representing an 11-year-old Indigenous boy on remand in the former men’s prison. “It’s disgusting that a child so young is in custody and away from his family over the holidays,” he told AAP on Wednesday. “But it’s a fact and it’s appalling that we accept and let this happen in Australia”. Mr Lawrence said the facility was “dystopian and derelict” and his client was locked in a cell alone most of the day without activities. In 2017, the NT government accepted recommendations from the NT juvenile justice royal commission to shut down and replace Don Dale. But four years on, a new facility is not complete. Most of the alleged child offenders the NT justice system deals with are Aboriginal. A NSW coroner has recommended bassinets be banned in childcare centres after finding a series of failures contributed to the death of a seven-month-old baby at a Sydney facility. Jack Loh was found unresponsive after being put to sleep in a bassinet in March 2019. It was just his fourth visit to the family childcare provider in Randwick. Following an inquest earlier this year, deputy state coroner Derek Lee on Wednesday found undiagnosed pulmonary hypertension caused Jack’s death on 4 March at the Rhythm and Rhyme Centre but that “unsafe” sleeping conditions contributed to it. A man linked to a website which appeared to generate fake vaccination certificates in an email to his employer that was meant to contain proof he had received the jab, according to a ruling of the Fair Work Commission. The incident was revealed in a 20 December decision discontinuing his claim of having been unlawfully stood down, handed down by commission deputy president Richard Clancy. The Victorian worker had taken his fight to the workplace tribunal after he stopped getting shifts with O&amp;M Pty Ltd, a construction and maintenance company based in Gippsland, Victoria, earlier this year. Masks will be made mandatory in cinemas and theatres in QLD from 5 am tomorrow. Hospitality workers across the state will also have to wear masks. Many Australians could end up spending the festive holiday period alone in isolation after being exposed to a Covid case, even as governments resist shutting borders and insist Christmas won’t be cancelled. Overworked health systems are struggling to cope up with new outbreaks and some state and territory governments have moved to tighten mask mandates and social distancing restrictions. Adelaide man Geoff Goodfellow, 72, says at least three generations of his family will be spending Christmas in quarantine. While we’re on the pressers (which just went back-to-back for a hot hour) we’ve got this video of McGowan on the rule changes: Hi everyone - this is Cait Kelly back in the blog seat. I’ve got this video for those who missed it of Morrison on masks (and Murph going hard on what exactly the health advice is). Heartbroken families are being forced to cancel Christmas and holiday plans as Queensland Covid testing requirements leave them locked out or turned away. Almost 260,000 Australians have crossed the border into Queensland since Monday but many more have been turned away and sent home or forced to cancel family reunions and expensive holiday bookings because of testing delays. To enter Queensland, travellers are required to return a negative Covid test 72 hours before arrival, leaving thousands scrambling to get a test before travelling and placing extraordinary pressure on health systems in the lead-up to Christmas. The scramble for tests has led to delays in results being issued. Annastacia Palaszczuk is standing by the border restrictions, but says she is considering allowing rapid antigen tests for interstate travellers from 1 January. Read the full story here: The Melbourne Cricket Club will implement Covid-19 protocols to welcome fans to the MCG for the Boxing Day Test, but the ground’s capacity will not be limited, despite the Omicron variant increasing cases of the virus across Victoria’s capital. The state’s acting premier James Merlino confirmed on Tuesday that a capacity crowd of over 90,000 people would be allowed to attend the match, although MCC CEO Stuart Fox said on Wednesday he anticipated a figure closer to 70,000 based on ticket sales so far. It’s First Dog on the Moon time, and today he’s tackling ... the Minister for Other People Taking Personal Responsibility. If I knew how to add a thinking face emoji to this blog post, I would put one here. It’s been a big afternoon - here are some reactions to the PM’s presser from Twitter. On the sunscreen analogy: And that’s it from the NT. Manison says a PCR test will be required with 72 hours when entering the NT, but then interstate visitors can test with RAT. “I will now move on to testing requirements for interstate arrivals into the Northern Territory. During today’s discussions at national cabinet, all states are experiencing demand pressures on PCR testing. “So moving forward you will still be required to take a PCR tests within 72 hours prior to landing in the Northern Territory. “You will still have to undertake a day three and a day six test however, these will be RAT not PCR tests. The RAT test is much easier to use and it can be self administered. “If you do get a positive read test, you will be required to isolate immediately and get a PCR test and contact the Covid hotline.” The NT acting chief minister, Nicole Manison: “The lockdown in Tennant Creek and Ali Curung will be extended for a further 24 hours until 5pm, Thursday, the 23rd of December. “We are very mindful that it is Christmas and a lot of people have a lot of work to do to prepare for Christmas Day. “The mask mandate in the Barkly LGA is also going to be extended for a further 24 hours.” We are going to Darwin now. A 48-hour mask mandate has also been introduced for Alice Springs and Amoonguna. Sydney’s Northern Beaches Council has asked the New South Wales government to declare the area a disaster zone. The declaration would release funds to help them clean up after Sunday’s storm which killed one woman. More than 700 insurance claims have been filed. And that’s it from WA. To re-cap: They’re closing the border to Tasmania and the Northern Territory on Boxing Day. They will also become the first state to mandate vaccine booster shots. McGowan says much of the opinion from commentators in the east is that WA is a “disaster”. “They have no idea. They haven’t been here over the course of last two years. “They have no idea what we’ve been through, so they don’t understand. We’ve had an incredibly free and open society with wonderful health outcomes and terrific economic outcomes, so I don’t get it. “So that’s why I don’t know what prime minister’s motivation is. I don’t know if it’s about elections, or it’s about other things.” McGowan says you “can’t keep the government out of people’s lives.” “The governments have to lead up to difficult things to save people’s lives and keep the community safe.” “I think there’s a lot of different attitudes in New South Wales and Victoria, based upon their experience, and our experience has been totally different, worlds apart. “You know, we haven’t had long lockdown. “We haven’t had people kicked out of the workplace in the hundreds of thousands. We haven’t had the economy crash. We’ve had none of those things. So obviously over there attitudes are very difficult. “And for us, it’s hard to place ourselves in a position, or if you’d like, it’s hard for them to place themselves in opposition over there.” McGowan says he hopes ATAGI will make a decision on booster times soon. “You need to start thinking about booking a third dose as soon as possible. Before Omicron comes into our community. “Our state clinics will continue to operate over the festive season so people can go out and get vaccinated.” McGowan: “Specifically in relation to third doses. A third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine will now be mandatory for all eligible workers in industries covered by a vaccine mandate. “Under the mandate workers will now be called to have a third dose within one month of becoming eligible. “Currently more than 266,000 people are eligible for a third dose. And so far 89,900 people have received their dose. “Everyone is strongly urged to receive a third dose when eligible, even if they’re not covered by this policy.” McGowan says more than one million workers will now have to get booster shots under an expanded mandate. This is the first time boosters have been mandated. “As I’ve already mentioned, this morning, I attended national cabinet where leaders were given an updated briefing on the threat posed to all by the Omicron variant. “What we are told is concerning. The picture that is starting to emerge, it is troubling. But there is hope and there is help. It comes in the form of vaccination. “Specifically the third dose, which ... is far more effective against the Omicron strain than two doses. Therefore we are now announcing changes to our vaccination program.” McGowan says the decision has not “been taken lightly”. “No one wants to stop families returning home to Western Australia during the festive season. “No one. But given the escalating crisis in other parts of Australia, and based on updated health advice, we’re taking this step to protect Western Australians and stop any spread of the virus into our community.” McGowan is closing the border to Tasmania and the NT from Boxing Day morning. “This means Tasmania and the Northern Territory will transition from low-risk to medium-risk jurisdictions, and travel will not be permitted with these jurisdictions, unless approved. “Any Western Australian who has recently travelled to Tasmania or the Northern Territory is eligible to return under compassionate grounds and must apply through the G2G pass system. “We’re giving people notice now to get bored from Sunday morning. Travel with these jurisdictions will cease unless you are approved to travel under the new G2G system. “Anyone approved to travel must be double dose vaccinated and will be subject to quarantine and testing requirements.” “Western Australia has recorded four new positive Covid cases in returned travellers who are in hotel quarantine. “After flying in from different locations in Africa. The two others are from Queensland, a couple in their 30s who flew in from Brisbane on Sunday night. “Both are double-dose vaccinated. They tested positive after arriving in Western Australia. Both are in self-quarantine. Four family members, all of whom are vaccinated had tested negative and are also in quarantine for 14 days.” Stay with us, we are now going to WA where Mark McGowan is talking. The state has four new Covid cases. Lastly, the PM is asked about the Voices movement of independents running in Liberal seats. They’re representing themselves as something they’re not. And I’m calling it out. This is not an independent movement. This is a political party, and it’s funded by donors, like other political parties. They’re pretending to be voices of a local community. And we’ve got at least two of them who used to be members of Labor. The PM said this would be discussed closer to the election. The PM has given the last Covid question to the Courier Mail – the journo has asked about when Atagi will make its decision on booster times. Well, that is what Atagi is considering right now. But I would add this note of caution. There are ample numbers of people right now that need to go and get the booster and that can be supported by the vaccination program. Making more people eligible doesn’t get boosters into arms any quicker. If anything, it can actually lead to a situation where those groups that you want to prioritise to get those boosters can be crowded out. The PM says that’s why Nat-Cab agreed on three things: So that’s why I stressed the three things we have to do on vaccinations is we’ve increased the incentive payments for GPs and pharmacists that starts from tomorrow. The second is to get the site hubs up and running and functioning again, so we can achieve those levels. And the third is to ensure we got the right priorities and that message into the distribution system to get the maximum impact of the doses that are being delivered to protect lives. Morrison: I was in this situation last week. I had been at an event where I was informed that I’d met someone who had Covid. Now, I wasn’t defined as a close contact. I was a casual contact. And until I had further information, I got a Covid test from the local pharmacy and I ... took the test [and] it was negative. I wore a mask and at a later time because I had to travel somewhere else, I took a PCR test. So I self-managed that contact. I didn’t need the government to tell me to do anything. Morrison: So there are some things that do require uniformity; there are other things that just require common sense. This one just requires some common sense, and Australians have great common sense. Morrison: What matters is the behaviour ... to wear those masks in those settings. And so premiers will make calls about what’s the best way to encourage people to do that. Some like to use mandates. Others like to use that encouragement and rely on the individual responsibility to achieve that. What matters is that people wear them, not whether people get fined or not. The PM has jumped in: Mandates also require enforcement and that requires resources to be applied to enforcement. GA’s political editor Katharine Murphy is now asking if the medical advice is to mandate masks. Kelly won’t answer, just says people should wear a mask. We know that the masks work, they do protect yourself, they do protect others if you happen to have Covid. And people should wear masks. Kelly says they think 60% of cases in NSW are Omi. Chief medical officer, Professor Paul Kelly, now: It’s a very new phenomenon. We’re learning a lot. Every day we learn something new about Omicron. But there’s still some things we don’t know about it. And we also don’t know about how that is progressing in Australia in terms of, particularly, the severity issue. What we do know is that as I predicted three weeks ago, it is a transmissible, very transmissible virus. It is spreading rapidly around the world, official figures over 100,000 cases – [but probably] many many more than that, because of the need for confirmation being a genomic test, which is not available in many countries. Here in Australia ... 500 cases have been diagnosed through that genomic testing. But again, we know that that is an underestimate. PM says Nat-Cab agreed they didn’t want more lockdowns. One of the main things we agreed on today is, we do not want to go back to lockdowns. The PM says his main message today is to “stay calm and get boosted”. The PM talked about testing rates and how people travelling is putting pressure on the system. So there was a very good discussion about the impact of public health orders in other states. And there was a positive discussion and a panel will give further advice on whether testing is required at all for travel. The governments might look at rapid antigen testing for travelling, he said. Or we can move to the more simple method of RAT testing with those queues, and make the system a lot more workable. He adds: So QR codes and that process will take on different roles as we go forward – in some states with very low cases, they will continue to be using them for tracing. But in states which have very high case numbers – well, that’s not a realistic proposition, but again, can provide a very helpful role. He says QR codes will play a ”different role in the future”. What that means is the QR code system is not being used to police people or to impose sanctions on people. What it’s being used to do is to ensure that people can be alerted through the QR code system about if they’ve been at a particular place where an infection has been identified. He says if an individual is not a close contact they will be able to “self manage their response”. Morrison says there will be a national definition of “casual contact”. We’ve agreed today that we must have a common definition right across the country on what is a casual contact, and what are the implications of being a casual contact: isolation, requirement for a PCR test, and things of that nature. We cannot have different rules in different places about what a close contact is and what a casual contact is. And there is even an argument which says that there shouldn’t be any requirement to have a casual contact definition at all. What matters is how you’re managing those close contacts and how they’re defined and what you have to do. He says a medical expert panel will decide within a fortnight what the national definition will be. Nat-Cab will meet again to review and agree on it. Morrison says there are heaps of vaccines in the country. Now there are plenty of vaccines ... there are 20 million in Australia right now. And about a quarter of those, just over that, in fact, are either in fridges, and pharmacies ... and in state hubs. He adds: But whether it’s five months or six months, or less than that, the response from all of us as governments is exactly the same and that is to increase those daily dosage rates from where we’ve already built back up to more than double in the in the past week or so. Morrison is now talking about the timeframe between shots. There’s been plenty of discussion about whether the interval should be five months, four months, three months, that will be a decision for the vaccination experts at Atagi. That is not a decision for myself as prime minister or the premiers and chief ministers. Morrison said the feds are going to increase payments to GPs and pharmacies for vaccine appointments by $10. I can announce I advised the premiers and chief ministers today that we’ll be increasing the payments to GPs and pharmacists. We’ll be increasing them up by $10 a day in addition to what they’re already getting now. And we think that’s important, particularly over the summer months, when normally, just like many other Australians, they’d be looking to take leave. Morrison said state vaccination hubs that have been rolled back will be put back in place. Now as the country moved past 80% [double vaccinated], then we did see the demand at state-based clinics decline. And as a result, some of those facilities were withdrawn. There’s about a quarter of them, which were stood down. They now need to be ramped up again. And that was a key issue we discussed today. More than 50% of those eligible for boosters have now had them and they have been predominantly amongst the older population, which are of course most vulnerable. Morrison says Nat-Cab agreed on “three areas where we agreed to move forward”. First up is masks: Mask wearing is “strongly recommended,” he says. Mask wearing in indoor spaces in public areas is of course highly recommended, whether it’s mandated or not. ... That’s what we should be doing in the same way as we go into the summer season. People will be slapping on their ... sunscreen. There’s no rule or requirement to do that. But it is strongly recommended health advice. It’s in the same category. And so Australians have common sense and they know what they need to do to protect their own health. Morrison said hospitals are coping with the increase of cases. Despite those rising cases, hospitals and health systems remain in a strong position, but of course they’ll be tested. And our shared goal is to ensure that we keep it that way, when it comes to the protection of our health system, to deal with the demands of the new strain of the virus. Morrison said they “had a positive meeting” and that they are taking Omicron very seriously. Omicron, we all agree, presents another new challenge, but we have faced so many challenges already during the course of this pandemic. On each occasion, we’ve worked together to ensure that our response across the country and across governments has been able to deliver one of the lowest death rates in the world from Covid, one of the strongest advanced economies in the world coming through Covid, and thirdly, one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. The PM is speaking now from Canberra. From AAP: Six players at A-League Men champions Melbourne City have tested positive for Covid-19, prompting the postponement of one league match and two FFA Cup games. Rapid antigen tests picked up the six cases on Tuesday morning and subsequent PCR tests confirmed the results. City’s FFA Cup quarter-final against Wellington on Wednesday night was postponed along with their A-League Men away game against Brisbane Roar on 27 December. In addition, Melbourne Victory’s FFA Cup round of 16 trip to face Gold Coast Knights was postponed – after Victory players were potentially exposed to coronavirus in Saturday’s Melbourne derby against City. “The A-Leagues can confirm that six players from Melbourne City FC’s A-League Men’s football department have tested positive for Covid-19 and are currently in isolation and all report to be currently feeling well,” the A-Leagues said in a statement. “The case involves double-vaccinated individuals who tested positive to a PCR test on 21 December enacted after their daily rapid tests earlier in the day. “As a result of the number of cases, the A-Leagues have determined that Melbourne City’s scheduled round six away match against Brisbane Roar has been postponed.” It is another daily record for the state. Five people are being treated for the virus in hospital but none are in ICU. Of the new cases, 33 are local contacts, all traced to the current outbreak, 15 are from interstate and 149 are still being investigated. It brings the total number of active cases in the state to 742. Domestic flight prices are down by 23% compared to December 2019, data from travel search engine Kayak reveals. Prices for flights to two of Australia’s most popular cities, Sydney and Melbourne, have dropped significantly. The cost of a plane ticket to Sydney from within Australia has dropped by 44%, while one to Melbourne has gone down by 41%. Flights to Proserpine, the gateway to the Whitsundays, from within Australia have seen the biggest decrease in price, down by 47% from December 2019, and by 36% this summer compared to last summer. Searches for flights to Ballina, the gateway to Byron Bay and the northern NSW region, increased by a whopping 11 times for December 2021 travel compared to December 2019. This is the biggest increase in flight searches among the top 20 destinations, the company said, with Byron Bay continuing to be one of Australia’s hottest holiday destinations. National cabinet is meeting now, so we will bring you the updates as soon as it is finished. Get masks, boosters and personal responsibility on your bingo cards. Much of the pandemic modelling to make news headlines since Covid-19 hit has depicted concerning scenarios involving high case numbers and hospitalisations. On Thursday, modelling from the University of NSW and cited by NSW health minister Brad Hazzard found Covid-19 cases in the state could reach 25,000 a day by the end of January. The latest modelling to raise alarm bells came from the Doherty Institute and was leaked to the media on Tuesday after being sent to politicians ahead of a meeting of national cabinet today. It said Australia could see 200,000 new Covid cases a day by late January or early February. The A-League Men’s game in Newcastle on Boxing Day will be behind closed doors. From Sydney, Perth and Adelaide festivals to major shows, tickets make great last-minute gifts. But they could also be a roll of the dice. A ticket to a big show, a blockbuster exhibition or a summer arts festival makes a great last-minute Christmas present. But the current wave of Covid – driven by the Omicron variant – isn’t going anywhere, and the cancellations are already beginning. Yesterday Steph reported on the Covid outbreak among the Come From Away cast – they’re closing for longer now. NSW Health has told Guardian Australia 1,364 healthcare workers are in isolation as a result of being exposed to Covid-19. The figures are current as of 20 December. There are about 140,000 staff total employed by NSW Health. Of those furloughed, almost one-third were exposed at work, and the rest were the result of exposure in the community. In a statement, a spokeswoman for NSW Health said: Staff were furloughed because they’ve been a close contact with a Covid-19 case and are not necessarily ill or presenting symptoms when they’re placed into isolation. ... Since the start of the pandemic, NSW Health has engaged in forward planning with clinicians to ensure our hospitals have capacity to care for Covid-19 patients who need to be hospitalised. She added: NSW’s healthcare system is fully integrated and staff can be deployed to different parts of the health system as needed due to patient demand, workforce supply challenges and the hospital’s capacity to surge. All local health districts have well developed workforce surge and demand management plans in place, and our networked hospital system ensures patients can be transferred or redirected to other hospitals where necessary, including private hospitals. NSW Health recently updated its isolation guidelines for healthcare staff to make them less stringent, so that fewer staff would need to be furloughed. RATs are now the haute couture of the pandemic. Influential but totally overpriced. I know this probably feels like too much to handle for many Victorians but like – no one wants to be sick over Christmas. Wash ya hands. A timely reminder – for those who can even get their hands on one. Australian pharmacists are calling on state and territory governments to urgently reinstate Covid-19 mitigation measures like mask mandates, QR check-in codes and density limits to protect public health as infection rates spiral out of control across the country, particularly in NSW. Professional Pharmacists Australia president Geoff March said that the alarming spike in Covid-19 case numbers was becoming a major public health crisis and mitigation measures were urgently needed. “Australia’s pharmacists are on the frontline in the war against Covid and provide services, including vaccination, which are fundamentally important to protecting the community’s health,” March said. “The spiralling Covid-19 case numbers across Australia, but particularly in NSW, put the health of pharmacists and their customers, many of whom are elderly and immunocompromised, at risk.” Early indications are that the Omicron variant is up to five times more infectious than Delta, but not necessarily less severe, he said. “It also appears that even fully vaccinated Australians have only low protection against the new strain, meaning that almost everyone who hasn’t had their booster is at risk of infection,” March said. “Now is absolutely not the time to be abolishing mandatory mask-wearing in retail and indoor areas, a measure that has been scientifically proven to slow down COVID transmission. “We urge all state and territory governments, particularly in NSW to immediately reinstate mandatory mask-wearing in indoor areas to slow down the spread of the virus and to protect public health.” He also called for the state to reinstate QR check-in codes. NSW Labor is going hard on free rapid antigen testing this afternoon. Chris Minns, NSW Labor leader, said he was calling on the government to source more RATs to keep up with demand and distribute these for free, particularly as people were going away for the holidays. Many people across NSW are simply trying to do the right thing by their families and communities, and want to get a test for peace of mind, or before a family gathering. A free rapid antigen test will provide peace of mind to many and it will also free up some capacity at PCR testing sites. We can’t have a situation where people get a PCR and clog up the system simply because they couldn’t afford or couldn’t locate a rapid test. Anything that helps hardworking healthcare staff process PCR tests more quickly and ease the backlog and queues is a sensible move and worthy of consideration. We’ve got some more info on the 56 cases in NZ today. This is from AAP: All cases were on the North Island, with 33 in Auckland and 11 in the Bay of Plenty including one in poorly vaccinated Murupara. The Wellington case recently visited the Lakes district, centred on Rotorua, and a string of retail places in Lower and Upper Hutt from Saturday before their positive test on Tuesday. Wellington last recorded a case in November, which was later believed to be historical, with the previous cases in August at the start of the Delta outbreak. Wastewater testing results from the Hutt Valley showed a positive result – as have a string of places which are yet to return positive cases, suggesting undetected community transmission in Napier, Whitianga, Dargaville and Gisborne. On Wednesday, 51 people were receiving treatment in hospital, including seven in intensive care. NZ is intent on trying to stop the Omicron variant from entering the community, pushing back plans to allow fully vaccinated Kiwis to self-isolate on arrival from Australia. Hello everyone – this is Cait Kelly. First, a big thanks to Caitlin Cassidy, who has done a great job this morning. We’re going to start the afternoon with an unconfirmed report the NSW government is considering charging people who are unvaccinated for their hospital stays. Ray Hadley dropped this bomb on his show earlier but said he did not know how the premier felt about it. “It’s a rather radical move put forward by cabinet ministers,” Hadley said. “I don’t know where Perrottet sits with it at the moment but he certainly has forwarded the issue to Brad Hazzard.” With that, I will pass you onto Cait Kelly, who will keep you company into the evening. Sydney’s iconic Imperial Hotel has made the decision to close until 29 December due to escalating Covid numbers. Cafe Fredas in Darlinghurst made the same announcement earlier today. A huge blow for hospitality venues hoping for a strong end to the year. The NSW Labor party is calling for rapid antigen tests to be freely available in the state, to alleviate pressure on testing centres. There has also been a moderate flood warning issued for the Bogan River. Bit of tennis news. Craig Tiley is “confident” Nadal will be in Melbourne to play at the Australian Open. But Novak Djokovic will need a medical exemption from ATAGI, or a vaccination. “It’s his choice”. Yes. Palaszczuk is asked if there is a case where the chief operating officer reports directly to the minister, not the director general. She replies: We are Queensland and we can do what we want, excuse me, in terms of how we have reporting requirements. She’s really digging her heels in at the journalists, again citing the 10% figure: Everybody knew our plan. You are all here when we announced it and everyone accepted it. We’re going around in circles now ... I want to go to national cabinet, so I’m going to leave Dr Gerrard with you. And off she goes! Palaszczuk is asked about huge testing lines in Victoria, New South Wales and the ACT in the lead up to Christmas. She says people attempting travel interstate only account for 10% of tests. I am unsure where she got this number from, but she says “we’ve got the data”. Reporter: It safe to say Queensland is now holding the rest of the country ransom because this testing is causing angst amongst populations in NSW? Palaszczuk: No, you got this wrong ... Omicron is rampant in NSW. I don’t want rapid spread here in Queensland. I want Queenslanders to have a good and safe new year. I have a lot of elderly population who don’t have boosters yet. I want them to get their booster shots. With due respect, 10% of the lineups are for people who want to get their PCR tests to travel all around Australia, not just Queensland. 90% of people are concerned they have the Omicron variant and want to get tested. Reporter: How do we know the 10% number? Palaszczuk: That’s our advice. We have the data. In relatively useless news for people coming to Queensland for Christmas, Palaszczuk is looking at approving rapid antigen tests in place of mandatory PCR tests for high risk arrivals from the new year: I spoke to the NSW premier and we had a good conversation ... we are happy to get some further advice from AHPPC about rapid antigen tests. We will look at whether this is approved, that we may be to legalise them in the new year from 1 January but between now and the new year, we will require those PCR tests for people coming into the state. It was part of our plan and we want to keep the virus out as much as we possibly can over the Christmas and New Year. Palaszczuk says new measures will be introduced in order to stem the spread of the virus. From 5am tomorrow, masks will be mandatory in cinemas and theatres for patrons and staff, and for hospitality staff. Masks were already mandatory in limited settings. Palaszczuk says the industry and unions understand why the regulations are necessary, in light of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. We’ve had 257,000 people crossing the border from Victoria, ACT and NSW since Monday. Everyone wants to come to Queensland but we want to make sure that it is safe. If you think about it, it’s more than the population of Townsville has come into Queensland. We are a tourist destination. Because the variant, the Omicron, is highly contagious and we want to ensure that Queenslanders and people coming into Queensland have a safe Christmas and new year. That means we [offer] as much protection as we possibly can. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is up now. There have been 186 new Covid cases recorded in the state. Some 89.9% of Queenslanders have now received a first dose, with the 90% milestone expected to be reached today. New Zealand has recorded 56 community cases of Covid and six cases of Omicron in isolated returnees. There are 51 people being treated in hospital with the virus. Melbourne friends may consider heading to the Royal Exhibition Centre if you’re looking to get a booster shot. Weimar acknowledges we are facing a “significant challenge” for the healthcare sector, particularly at a time to be spent with loved ones: It is an incredibly busy time for the entire health care sector. Can I say a few words around the literally the tens of thousands of health care workers across our system. They have been providing the basic care, but also vaccinating and testing, and our teams have been running incredibly hard for the last 22, 23 months and here we are again, as we run into Christmas, gearing up again for a number of significant surges. We are concerned about the increased risk of hospitalisations. We are concerned about the ongoing pressures around providing care within our health care system and as a result we know that our team also will be working incredibly hard over the holiday period right into January and February when we would all rather be doing something else, but that’s the role we have to do. If the booster interval is reduced following national cabinet, an additional one million Victorians will become eligible for the jab. As it stands, some 400,000 who are eligible are yet to receive their booster shot. Victoria’s Covid commander Jeroen Weimar is up. It’s been a while since we heard from him. He confirms there are just over 60 Omicron cases in Victoria, and expects to see more in the coming days. Can I thank our colleagues across primary care for the tireless work they’ve done on the vaccination program to date and also recognise the hard yards they will put in over December, January, February and the months ahead as we get on top of our booster program. But it really is a very important thing now for us all to do and to make sure we get ready to get that done. On top of that, of course, record numbers of testing, so now over 92,000 completed PCR tests yesterday run through the state labs. Thousands of people out there across 260 testing sites across the state and hundreds working in the pathology labs processing those results. Nine out of 10 tests are coming back with results the next day, thanks to their efforts. If you are symptomatic, you must get a PCR test. If you have been told you are a close contact, whether at work, socially or in your household, you must get a PCR test. If you are just concerned, and you are not quite sure what it is all about, please think about getting a rapid antigen test, readily available at a pharmacy or supermarket. Check in on your own health and how you’re going, but I ask you to think about some of the high-risk activities that we might be doing over the coming days. Oh dear that’s quite a jump. There have been 58 new Covid cases recorded in the ACT. No deaths, three people in hospital, none requiring intensive care. Queensland health authorities are due to give an update shortly. We’ll bring it to you here. ACT Health has stopped posting Covid testing centre waiting times to its social media and are instead referring Canberrans to the government website. As of 10am, they’ve increased: Mitchell drive through testing clinic (open 8am to 10pm): at capacity Garran testing clinic (open 7.30am to 9pm): 4 hours+ Kambah drive through testing clinic (open 8am to 4pm): 3 hours 30 minutes+ Nicholls testing clinic (open 8am to 3.50pm): 3 hours 30 minutes+ Wait times have relatively eased in South Australia following the lifting of mandatory testing on arrival to the state. Tasmania has reported 12 new cases of Covid-19, bringing active cases to 26. Borders won’t be closing in South Australia after Christmas, Marshall confirms: That’s certainly not our intention in South Australia. We made it clear we didn’t want any more statewide lockdowns or lockouts after we got the vaccination rate up over 80%. We achieved that and ruled that out. We did that on 23 November. South Australia’s premier Steven Marshall is up now. He says it is his “strong belief” boosters should be brought forward and will say as much at national cabinet later today: We have been looking at the availability of all of our vaccination clinics at the moment. We are very hopeful that at the national cabinet today we will get agreement to go from a five-month interval down to a four-month interval. That means we will have to flex up our vaccination clinics and that’s exactly what we will do. Especially disappointing for those who diligently waited hours to get tested, were turned away, or haven’t received results. Fourteen temporary testing sites are now closed in Melbourne. The prime minister has said Australians “don’t have to wait to be told” to wear masks. What are the odds Morrison will announce he is buying 500 bottles of sunscreen* to be able to order online for free starting in January? Morrison earlier: One of the advantages we have got is the time of year, unlike overseas in the northern hemisphere where they are in winter, we are in summer. That means you can meet outdoors ... where you can, it’s a beautiful time of year, do it outside. But remember ... wear a hat and wear sunscreen! ...the other thing that everybody needs to do is as you say, we have to exercise common sense. It’s like wearing sunscreen and a hat. We were talking about that yesterday with the sunscreen campaign. *Nothing against sunscreen of course. The Covid testing line is snaking around the block at Sydney’s Royal North Shore hospital. About 900 of Sydney’s northern beaches residents are still without power after the damaging weekend storm blacked out more than 30,000 properties, AAP’s Luke Costin reports. Ausgrid crews have been working around the clock to restore the power after trees and other debris hit powerlines during Sunday’s brief tornado-like storm. The storm, which particularly impacted beachside areas from Narrabeen to Dee Why, claimed the life of 68-year-old yoga instructor Susan Cobham, ripped roofs off apartment buildings and blacked out 35,000 homes. There are now fewer than 900 customers without power and it’s hoped power will be restored to the majority of them on Wednesday. Northern beaches council chief executive Ray Brownlee wants the area declared a disaster zone, as hundreds of insurance claims are filed and some residents face abandoning Christmas plans for a second year. More than 700 insurance claims have been filed, with more expected in coming days. The Insurance Council of Australia warned disaster chasers were in the area, offering tree and debris removal and requesting payment upfront in cash, but either doing a poor job or charging far too much. The World Health Organization has just published its latest report on Covid, and it says during the week 13-19 December, the global number of new cases remained similar to those reported during the previous week; however, the weekly incidence of deaths decreased by 9%. Nonetheless, this corresponds to over 4.1 million new cases and just under 45 000 new deaths. As of 19 December, over 273 million cases and over 5.3 million deaths have been reported globally. As of 21 December 2021, the Omicron variant has been confirmed in 106 countries. The report says the variant is highly concerning: Recent evidence indicates that Omicron variant has a growth advantage over the Delta variant and is spreading rapidly, even in countries with documented community transmission and high levels of population immunity. It remains uncertain to what extent the observed rapid growth rate can be attributed to immune evasion, intrinsic increased transmissibility, or a combination of both. There are still limited data on the clinical severity of Omicron. Hospitalisations in the UK and South Africa continue to rise, and given rapidly increasing case numbers, it is possible that healthcare systems may become overwhelmed. As a result of this, the overall risk related to the new variant of concern Omicron remains very high. People are being turned away at the Callan Park testing centre in Rozelle. “If you want to go outside when the sun is shining, you have got to put sunscreen on. This is the same thing.” Fallout from rapidly increasing Covid cases in New South Wales – Hamilton is suspending two upcoming shows after positive cases were detected within the company. The ACT government has released Covid waiting times and as of 9.15am, one site is at capacity and all are beyond three hours: Mitchell drive through testing clinic (open 8am to 10pm): at capacity Garran testing clinic (open 7.30am to 9pm): 3 hours+ Kambah drive through testing clinic (open 8am to 4pm): 3 hours+ Nicholls testing clinic (open 8am to 3.50pm): 3 hours 30 minutes+ Ahead of national cabinet, the Royal College of GPs is calling on the federal government to provide support to GPs to deliver vaccines to children aged between 5 and 11, as well as boosters. They say the situation is making the job of delivering vaccines and making ends meet increasingly difficult for some practices, and they’re already seeing many vaccinators pulling out of the rollout, including pharmacies: RACGP president Dr Karen Price: We need to vaccinate as many children as we can as quickly as we can to protect our community, particularly as we’re seeing rising cases of both the Omnicron and Delta variants in Australia. The problem we face with rolling out Covid-19 vaccines to children is that vaccinating children is a more complex job, compared to adults. Without appropriate funding, it will be harder for practices to get the job done and make ends meet at the end of the day. And while GPs don’t get into this career for the money, our practices need to remain viable. The last two years have been very challenging for many practices. They’ve been under pressure managing the pandemic, delivering our nation’s largest vaccine rollout, and managing ongoing care for patients. Many practices are operating on wafer thin margins, and some are actually losing money on the vaccine rollout. On top of this, many practices are taking on even more because other vaccinators are pulling out of the rollout and some states are scaling back or closing their state vaccine hubs. In an ideal world we would be able to vaccinate all children by the time the school year starts, because we know it has been a significant source of infections, and it’s disruptive for children when schools have to close. However, it is a mammoth task. We need to throw everything we have at it, not try to get the job done with one hand tied behind our backs. Commending everyone currently in a Covid testing line. Lines at the Randwick testing centre in New South Wales are looking similar to Melbourne. Good morning. If you’ve been following the news in the last 24 hours, you’ll know that the national cabinet meets later today. Before the leaders meet at lunchtime, let’s step out what has happened behind the scenes over the past few days. Last night, the Nine papers broke a story detailing new modelling undertaken by the Doherty Institute outlining some scenarios given the arrival of the Omicron variant. I’m told Doherty did some work for the health department and the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee earlier this month. A paper with a preliminary set of assessments, titled Anticipating Impacts of Waning and Boosting Immunity on Delta and Omicron Epidemics, went to the health department on 17 December. That work and further advice from the AHPPC went to Scott Morrison on 18 December. According to material I’ve seen, on 18 December, Morrison wrote to the premiers and chief ministers asking them to “respond to me with a strategy for your jurisdiction by close of business 23 December 2021”. The PM said the objective needed to be “to ensure maximum coordination of our efforts to control the spread of Covid-19 over the holidays”. Just so your understand the options, the AHPPC gave leaders the following advice: masks should be worn in indoor settings, particularly high risk settings; vaccination coverage needed to be increased through boosters; jurisdictions should maintain tracking, tracing and quarantine strategies; the international travel ban on high risk countries could be removed now Omicron was spreading rapidly around the world; jurisdictions should develop specific strategies to protect vulnerable settings and individuals, like residential aged care. Further on face masks, the AHPPC said wearing them was “particularly important in high risk settings”. The health advisers said masks should be mandatory “in all indoor settings including retail, hospitality when not eating or drinking, and entertainment facilities”. The health advisers added: “Implementation of mask wearing should occur prior to Omicron case escalation to have maximum benefit”. That advice looks pretty clear and unequivocal, right? But New South Wales has resisted and Morrison has talked about personal responsibility. Tracking back to midday and the national cabinet, I’m told the current plan is NOT to circulate any updated advice Doherty may have. Updated work will be referred to during today’s deliberation, but not circulated. This was the guidance early this morning. The final thing to note is this is a pandemic and this is a group of leaders – all things liable to change without notice. Stay tuned. We’ll report updates as they happen. In better news, the reference rate in Victoria is now at 0.98%. And it’s been a huge day for testing. In NSW, though, 2.48% of tests came back positive. As we know, Omicron is expected to account for a number of cases in the state. This is quite a significant development in Israel: Turning to hospitalisations, there are now 302 people hospitalised with the virus in New South Wales including 40 people in ICU. That’s an increase of 18 people hospitalised since yesterday. Heading to Victoria, there are 394 people in hospital including 70 in ICU. That’s an increase of two in hospital since yesterday, and a decrease of three people requiring intensive care. So numbers are relatively stable there. Numbers in New South Wales are in, and it’s another record. There have been 3,763 new Covid cases. That’s a rise of more than 700 on yesterday’s number, a previous record day. Sadly, there have been two deaths. Victoria has recorded 1,503 new Covid cases overnight. Sadly, six lives have been lost. AAP are reporting 13 testing sites are now closed in Melbourne. To clarify as many media outlets have been reporting, some people simply can’t access Covid tests after being turned away at testing centres, or not receiving results within the 72 hour timeframe. The Northern Territory government has today released $1.64m of land across seven sites for registered Specialist Disability Accommodation (SDA) providers to develop into accessible housing blocks for people living with a disability. The new SDA homes will provide housing for up to 20 people, and will be spread across Darwin, Palmerston and Alice Springs. Australia’s chief medical officer Paul Kelly has released a scathing statement in response to Doherty modelling which has predicted up to 200,000 cases per day in a “worst case” scenario: I wish to address selective and misleading media reporting about ongoing modelling used to inform decision making by governments. Recent modelling, both in Australia and internationally, presents a range of potential scenarios as a result of the Omicron variant. While modelling is an important tool to help guide decision making, it is just one of a range of tools and cannot be viewed in isolation. Modelling helps to prepare for all scenarios and to mitigate the risk associated with the pandemic. A preliminary scenario, of many being considered to help inform decision making, presents one of the worst case of all potential scenarios including assumptions that the Omicron variant is as severe as the Delta variant, an absence of hospital surge capacity, a highly limited booster program, no change to baseline public health and social measures and an absence of spontaneous behaviour change in the face of rising case numbers. None of these five assumptions represent the likely state of events, let alone all of them together, therefore presenting that scenario as the likely scenario that will occur is highly misleading. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews will temporarily return from leave to attend today’s national cabinet meeting. Acting premier James Merlino yesterday called for the shortening of the interval between booster shots. 2022 is shaping up to be a corker: AMA vice president Dr Chris Moy has just appeared on ABC News Breakfast, calling for the reintroduction of some restrictions in light of the new variant of the virus: The AMA’s position is given the uncertainty about Omicron and already the pressure we are seeing across the country it makes absolute sense as soon as possible to implement pretty simple things like mask-wearing which has been shown to reduce the spread of Covid, but also things like re-institution of QR codes in New South Wales and also some density limits at the moment, because what we are seeing is massive outbreaks, a lot stemming from places like nightclubs and pubs. That seems to make sense, while we make sense of what Omicron brings to us and whether it is something that, despite the predictions of a large number of cases, whether it is something that is going to be very serious and is going to cause significant disease, breakthrough the vaccines and cause a lot of hospitalisations. Channel 10 is reporting 11 testing sites have already closed in Melbourne: More than 300 doctors around the world have written to deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce today urging him to seek Julian Assange’s immediate release from prison in the UK on medical grounds. The letter cites concern over Assange’s apparent mini stroke, warning it may be “the tip of a medical iceberg”: Indeed his symptoms suggest as much. It is therefore imperative that Mr Assange be released from prison, where his health will otherwise continue to deteriorate and where his complex medical needs cannot be met. In appendices to the letter, the doctors have released all former correspondence with the federal government – including previously unpublished material – in which they warned of cardiovascular pathology. They write: Perhaps our concerns were previously dismissed by your colleagues as hyperbolic. They are not. On the issue of cardiovascular pathology, we have been proven right. We do not wish to be proven right on the issue of Mr Assange’s survival. We implore you, as Deputy Prime Minister, to intervene with the UK Government to seek Mr Assange’s immediate release on urgent medical grounds. We reiterate that he is an Australian citizen innocent in the eyes of the law, and guilty of and charged with nothing in the UK. The threat of state and territory borders slamming shut as the Omicron variant spreads is front of mind for many Australians, with confidence in travelling interstate now lower than it was this time last year before the vaccine rollout had begun. A survey of traveller confidence commissioned by the Australians Airports Association (AAA) has found that only 72% of respondents would be willing to cross state borders these holidays compared with 86% last Christmas. While there is growing uncertainty about Covid rules going into the festive period, the survey also found that 97% of travellers are not booking trips more than three months in advance. Of the 500 respondents, 62% said they feared the risk of border closures, while 35% expressed concern over health risks. New South Wales and Victorian residents are the most willing to travel interstate, while Western Australian and Queensland residents are the least willing to travel across state lines. Just 45% of fully vaccinated respondents who were regular travellers before the pandemic are willing to book a flight abroad. James Goodwin, AAA chief executive said “there is a real fear among the travelling public that borders could close again as a result of the current Omicron strain and rising case numbers”. Passenger numbers at Australian airports are still well-below pre-pandemic levels, even with Christmas just days away. There is going to be a long lag between the opening of state and territory borders and full consumer confidence when it comes to taking to the skies again. In Melbourne, testing at Albert Park has been suspended before opening after reaching capacity for the third day in a row: Deputy Labor leader Richard Marles is up on ABC radio national, and is asked about Morrison’s response to the Doherty Modelling which predicted up to 200,000 cases a day. To refresh, Morrison said it was “very unlikely”: Modelling is what it is, it gives a range of possibilities, I guess the prime minister was outlining that but there’s a whole lot of challenges that are now being faced by the country and what’s really clear is we need leadership and what’s also clear is we’re not getting that from Scott Morrison. If the gap in getting the booster is reduced to four months, 7.2 million Australians become eligible to get a booster as of Saturday week...the first thing here is the government needs to guarantee there is going to be supply. All of this scenario should have been foreseen, we’ve known for months the country is going to be opening up...we’ve known for months a proper booster rollout is critical in this time. Morrison is asked whether rapid antigen tests will be made free in Australia as has been done in the UK. He says the government is “looking at all these options”, and brings up sunscreen again: We have never had a set and forget policy when it comes to managing the pandemic. As I think people have seen, everything from jobkeeper to the Covid disaster payment, the support we provide to pharmacists and GPs for the vaccination program. I mean, we pay the states to deliver the vaccines, I do not know if people know that. And we are watching those rates in hospitals, at the moment, they are performing very well. You remember, Victoria has over – had over 1,000 cases a day for some time now and their hospital system is standing up very well. The same is true here in New South Wales was not one of the advantages we have got is the time of year, unlike overseas in the northern hemisphere where they are in winter, we are in summer. That means you can meet outdoors ... where you can, it’s a beautiful time of year, do it outside. But remember ... wear a hat and wear sunscreen! Still on Morrison, who is going really hard on this sunscreen analogy, partially as a way to plug that sunscreen campaign announced yesterday: The other thing that everybody needs to do is as you say, we have good exercise common sense. It’s like wearing sunscreen and a hat.* We were talking about that yesterday with the sunscreen campaign. Wear a mask indoors in public areas, wash your hands, particularly for young people. Can I encourage you on this? Because that is where Omicron is moving most rapidly, amongst young people. *Yeah, mate, except sunburn isn’t highly contagious. Back to Covid: the prime minister Scott Morrison has just appeared on breakfast television rejecting Doherty Modelling which predicted up to 200,000 Covid cases per day under a “worst-case” scenario. Morrison: The modelling that has been reported is a very unlikely, extreme case scenario that assumes that nobody does anything, nobody gets boosters, there are no changes that take place, no one exercises common sense. We saw similar numbers at the start of the Covid pandemic which were never realised. The chief medical officer and I just want to assure people that those sorts of numbers are [not] what we are expecting, they ... are extreme scenarios. In non-Covid news, Daniel Hurst has an exclusive today which shows Australia’s defence department wrote to France’s Naval Group a week before the submarine contract was cancelled, acknowledging the successful completion of one requirement for moving to the next stage of the project. The letter acknowledged that at least one of those conditions was “successfully completed” as of 8 September, and said the Australian government “has, to date, demonstrated its commitment to working collaboratively with Naval Group”: Good morning, It’s three sleeps until Christmas and I’m crossing my fingers for Santa to bring the end of Omicron and, ideally, the novel coronavirus. Caitlin Cassidy here with you this morning to guide you through the news. Today, it’s all about the national cabinet, which will be gathering this afternoon for an emergency meeting to discuss the issues posed by the new variant. The prime minister Scott Morrison yesterday rejected the return to Covid lockdowns and called for the move from a “culture of mandates to a culture of responsibility”. But it comes with New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet under increasing pressure to reintroduce restrictions after a record 3,057 Covid cases were detected yesterday, amid rising hospital admissions. Perrottet will today push for the interval between Covid booster shots to be brought forward, which is expected to be high up on the agenda at the national cabinet amid discussion on indoor mask use. Australian Medical Association president Dr Omar Khorshid yesterday called for the reintroduction of some restrictions to deal with the new variant including the reintroduction of density limits and mask wearing. The ACT is today joining Queensland and Tasmania in reinforcing indoor mask restrictions. Meanwhile, testing lines are already starting to form as interstate travellers rush to test negative in the lead-up to Christmas. Let’s dive in.Despite a global pandemic, inflation being at a decades-high and supply chain issues around the country, Americans are still shopping this holiday season, and not just online. Retail sales have been soaring during the pandemic as stimulus payments, a low unemployment rate and savings from spending less on travel and going out have encouraged Americans to buy more things. In November 2021, Americans spent 18% more than they had in November 2020. Experts predicted that this holiday shopping season will be the highest on record. The increased spending seen over the last year has revived the presence of bricks-and-mortar stores across the country. Once thought to be dying in the shadow of e-commerce’s massive growth, data from this year has shown that more retailers are opening stores than closing them, according to research and advisory firm IHL Group. The firm found that for every retailer that closed a store in 2019, five more are opening stores in 2021. The data is surprising given the dire outlook for brick-and-mortar stores at the end of 2020, when a record 12,200 stores closed. But many customers still shop in stores: e-commerce makes up just 13% of all retail sales in the US, according to the US Census Bureau, though that number is expected to continue to rise over time. On Black Friday weekend this year, foot traffic in stores was up by a third compared to last year, though it was still 21% below 2019’s levels. Some malls saw lines of people standing outside of store. Experts say that while the role that brick-and-mortar stores play for consumers and retailers is changing, this holiday shopping season is highlighting the fact that they are not obsolete. “The store, the role that it fulfills, is changing,” said Mark Mathews, vice-president of research development and industry analysis at the National Retail Federation. “It’s not just about the transaction.” Fewer consumers are using brick-and-mortar stores for casual browsing and are instead using it as an extension of their online shopping experience. Curbside pickup, where customers go to stores to pick up a purchase made online, has become popular for customers and is likely to stay, Mathews said. Retailers can now use their stores as fulfillment centers, allowing them to save on shipping and warehouse space. This year specifically has also seen supply chain issues affecting online retailers: American shoppers saw over 2bn out-of-stock messages online in October, according to Adobe Analytics. “Consumers feel like they probably need to go pick it up and have it in hand. A lot of folks are really worried that [their items are] not going to get there in time,” said Rod Sides, a vice-chair at Deloitte and leader of its US retail and distribution practice. For retailers, brick-and-mortar stores also serve as a way to expose customers to their brand. Many retailers have found that their online sales increase in the areas where they have bricks-and-mortar stores set up. When Macy’s announced last month that it will probably delay a batch of closures that it was considering, the company cited the symbiotic relationship between its brick-and-mortar stores and its e-commerce business. “The delayed closure of certain stores allows us to maintain a physical presence in the market, which is critical to our top line growth,” said Macy’s chief financial officer Adrian Mitchell during a call with analysts. “Digital performance is stronger in the markets where we have stores.” Perhaps the strongest sign that bricks-and-mortar stores will stick around is the fact that many online retailers are opening up stores of their own. Amazon is looking to substantially increase its physical footprint, and other major e-commerce retailers are doing the same. Store closures are likely to continue in the US, but Sides notes that the amount of retail square footage per capita far exceeds other countries and has for some time. “We could argue that we were oversaturated,” Sides said, adding that there will probably be an “equilibrium” of online and brick-and-mortar stores that makes sense for retailers and consumers. “You really need to have both.”Sometimes the imagination and skill involved in construction can blow your mind. It’s a privilege to be able to feature two such achievements this month in the news section – the Chapel of Sound in China which looks like a rock dropped from space and a Gingerbread City made to raise money for the UK’s Museum of Architecture. As well as the grand statement designs, we also have thoughtful construction with the individual in mind in the form of a library designed to help you connect with your emotions and a previously unseen installation from Ettore Sottsass, founder of the Memphis movement, designed to give personal space. For more news on architecture, sustainable living, art, fashion and new ideas, sign up for our monthly newsletter here Building a brave new world China is in the middle of a building boom that has made it the largest construction site in human history. With almost half of the world’s building work set to take place in this one country in the coming decade, the architects and builders who shape this skyline are paramount. A new generation of local architects is now replacing western names as the creators of China’s most prestigious buildings. Not only is their fresh vision gaining international recognition but their more sustainable practice is also helping the planet. An exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, Reuse, Renew, Recycle: Recent Architecture from China, showcases this generation’s commitment to social and environmental sustainability – featuring work by Pritzker Prize winning Amateur Architecture and Aga Khan Award laureate Zhang Ke and his studio ZAO/Standard. Reinventing Cultural Architecture, a book covering the work of Open Studio, is published this spring. This Beijing-based studio has just completed work on a concert hall called the Chapel of Sound situated in the shadow of the Great Wall. Open Studio strives for harmony with the environment in design and materials used. Its best-known work is the UCCA Dune Art Museum built into a beach in Bohai Bay. The Chapel of Sound is similarly elemental, built like a rock and open to the elements. Open Studio was founded by Li Hu and Huang Wenjing and their comments on their new work seem to sum up the new Chinese ethos: “We are at a time when the question of our relationship with nature as human beings is more acute than ever. Can we be humble enough to hear what nature is murmuring to us? We wanted to create something different, something meaningful.” Ettore Sottsass’s room in a room Today we’re familiar with the idea of a man cave as a place for the male of the species to get some precious alone time. The same concept was present in mid-Century, post-modern Italian design – albeit in a rather more stylish incarnation. In the mid-1960s, the architect, designer and Memphis Group founder Ettore Sottsass built Sala Sottsass, a “room within a room”, in Casa Lana, the Milan home of a typographer friend. Sottsass was intrigued by the relationship between men, their needs and their rituals, and the inhabited space. So Sala Sottsass consisted of a wooden structure with sofas arranged so that they formed a “protected space” to sit, chat and listen to music. The project has never been seen by the public but now the Sottsass Archive has meticulously rebuilt it in Triennale di Milano, the design and art museum in Lombardy. To accompany the installation, the Triennale has organised three exhibitions throughout 2022 that will look deeper into the world of Sottsass. In the meantime, any men shuffling off to the spare room for some peace and quiet this Christmas might like to gaze on this “little piazza… where one can move and meet” as Sottsass himself put it in 1967 – and dream. For more information on the upcoming Sottsass exhibitions, check the Triennale website Express your feelings at a pop-up library Skip Gallery was founded in 2017 by curators and artists Lee Baker and Catherine Borowski in, yes, a skip. “We couldn’t find anywhere to show our work, but Borowski came up with the bright idea of dropping a skip as a gallery into a parking space and our bonkers project was born,” says Baker. For Christmas 2021, Skip Gallery brings you the Feelings Library. This project is a collaboration with architects Caukin Studio and therapy service Self Space. The Library is a strange, slightly forbidding thatched pop-up sanctuary – built in a skip, of course – in Spitalfields market, London. Inside is a cosy reading room where you can learn about emotions from the library shelves of journals provided by Self Space. “This was two years in the making, and we are over the moon to launch Feelings Library. We feel strongly about creating opportunities for artists and designers and showcasing creativity in public spaces.” With mental health problems on the rise during the ongoing Covid pandemic, let’s hope the Feelings Library helps someone to have a happy Christmas. For more information, visit feelingslibrary.com Artist Florine Stettheimer’s remarkable life German American Florine Stettheimer was one of the 20th century’s most significant feminist artists. Marcel Duchamp helped stage a retrospective of her work two years after her death in 1944, and Andy Warhol said she was his favourite artist. Stettheimer was celebrated for her poetry, costume design and theatre sets, but perhaps one of her most significant accomplishments was a painting which has been described as the first nude self-portrait from the perspective of the “female gaze”, completed back in 1915. After spending her early years in Europe, she and her sisters, Carrie and Ettie, helped introduce the modernist movement to America and supported the Harlem Renaissance through their Bryant Park salon in New York. The Stetties, as the sisters were known, each had their own creative pursuit. Carrie created a doll-house containing an art collection of miniatures donated by their artist friends. Ettie wrote feminist novels under the pseudonym Henrie Waste. Florine made overtly political artworks long before it was the norm – addressing gender identity, segregation and women’s rights, as well as the burgeoning avant garde scene in her native New York. A new biography by art historian Barbara Bloemink focuses on these more political works and brings new focus to the innovative artist, reminding the world that behind her faux-naive style – so beloved by Warhol – was an intelligent woman, way ahead of her time. Florine Stettheimer, a Biography (Hirmer Publishing/ University of Chicago Press,) is published 24 January Architecture good enough to eat Following on from the release of 2020’s gingerbread Ikea furniture, new festive edible design projects have materialised this year. American designer Kelly Wearstler made a limited edition California Modern-style gingerbread house with LA food company Flamingo Estate, with all proceeds going to Create Structure, a charity that helps communities rebuild with sustainable housing after natural disasters. Swedish studio Ulf Mejergren Architects (UMA) decided to see how they could use gingerbread biscuits and created an edible hut out of the festive cookies. Miller beer released a limited edition gingerbread dive bar kit which has sadly now sold out. If you want to admire the very best in biscuit construction, then go to the London Museum of Architecture. They hold an annual exhibition where designers and engineers create a gingerbread metropolis. The show raises money to support the museum’s charity. The Gingerbread City show runs until 9 January 2022 at the Museum of Architecture, 6-7 Motcomb Street, Belgravia, London A new eco yarn made from kelp This year a World Economic Forum report found that the fashion industry supply chain is the third biggest source of pollution on the planet. A big contributor to this is synthetic fibre production which uses fossil fuels. The development of biomaterials to replace these nonrenewable fabrics is a key area of research in fashion and, this month, Algiknit revealed its new kelp-derived yarn and plans to start collaborations with fashion brands in 2022. AlgiKnit has spent four years developing technology to produce yarns using seaweed on a commercial scale. Kelp is renewable, regenerative and can be used to make versatile, durable threads for shoes and clothes which has a much lower carbon footprint than conventional yarn, especially synthetics. “We know consumers want more cost-competitive, environmentally-sound options that perform as well as conventional materials,” said Aaron Nesser, co-founder and chief technology officer of AlgiKnit. “The yarn we’re producing today has the look and feel of natural fibres, plus all the makings of a no-compromise conscious material.”At one level, it feels pedantic, three days before Christmas, to be debating the difference between a formal mask mandate and a strong recommendation to wear a mask. But this distinction is important when public health risks are real, and governments of Australia have spent much of this pandemic congratulating themselves for listening to experts and following the health advice. If you’ve missed the mask fracas, let’s summarise it quickly. New South Wales is experiencing a surge of new infections as people head off for their summer break, but the premier, Dominic Perrottet clearly does not want to impose a general mask mandate. Scott Morrison has been backing in the NSW premier, trialing a new mantra. The prime minister says people need to take personal responsibility for managing their own risks rather than wait passively for instructions. In the context of moving from pandemic to endemic, Morrison’s point is valid enough. People do need to exercise more personal responsibility as we make this transition. But the current health advice is just that: current. It reflects current risk assessments. It reflects what is known right now about the threat posed by the Omicron variant and what remains unknown. Are we there yet isn’t the test. The advice reflects on-balance judgments by experts about present risk. When the risks are life and death, the nuances have meaning. They matter. So let’s be clear because the health advice is very clear. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) has recommended that face masks be worn in indoor settings “particularly in high-risk settings”. The advice also says “masks should be mandated in all indoor settings” including retail, hospitality and entertainment. The experts say implementation of mask-wearing measures “should occur prior to Omicron case escalation to have maximum benefit” – which is a polite way of saying do it. Now. Do not mess around. Get the masks on your people. This is not a drill. Given compulsion is a way of being clear with people – a way of telling people preventive behaviour has value – some jurisdictions have already imposed mandates in line with the AHPPC guidance. But despite possessing that very clear advice, Morrison walked out of a meeting of the national cabinet on Wednesday afternoon and declined to use the word mandate in relation to mask wearing. Now the prime minister did strongly encourage people to wear masks in indoor settings. At the end of his remarks, he also demonstrated putting on his mask before he retreated indoors (see what he did there) to his office. But the prime minister vaulted right over the “M” word. “Ms” were for someone else. Some other nanny state-ist busybody. Not him. Morrison told reporters any “public health social measures” (regulations or directions in other words) were “always determined by states and territories … not by the commonwealth government”. Technically this is true. The states do issue the directions (although the commonwealth has invoked its own seeping biosecurity powers to manage this crisis). But Morrison’s new script is not only selective – it erases the custom and practice of the very recent past. The prime minister has never been shy of telling the premiers and chief ministers what he thinks they should be doing in the interests of their constituents. Morrison also, famously, pushed mandatory vaccinations for workers in the aged care sector – and not in another lifetime. That campaign was only six months ago. In that particular example, the prime minister’s enthusiasm for mandatory vaccinations was so profound he front-ran the health advice. The health advice eventually caught up. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Given the AHPPC had advised mandatory mask wearing, and the prime minister wasn’t echoing that recommendation, Morrison and the chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly were asked on Wednesday afternoon whether or not the health advice had changed? Kelly said: “The health advice is wear a mask.” So, no, in other words. The health advice had not changed. What’s changed is the politics. Perrottet doesn’t want to impose a mask mandate unless he absolutely has to – and Morrison needs, somehow, to balance the present public health risks with his re-election messaging. Two years into this pandemic, Australians are fatigued. Everyone wants this crisis to be over. People are craving a normal Christmas. Understanding this, Morrison has been warming up for a re-election pitch in the opening months of 2022 which is about getting government out of people’s lives. Pandemic Scott wants to shapeshift into Post Pandemic Personal Responsibility Scott because that’s where he thinks the zeitgeist is – at least the zeitgeist of the people who will determine the outcome of next year’s election. You don’t have to be Einstein to work out Morrison advocating an enforceable mask mandate three days before Christmas doesn’t align with that objective. But in trying to avoid one problem, Morrison is creating another. Morrison is lecturing Australians about taking personal responsibility, while opting out of one of the clear responsibilities of the prime ministerial office – backing in his health advisers at a critical moment with one clear message. Perhaps Morrison will luck out. Perhaps the Omicron variant will be mild enough to facilitate the desired prime ministerial shapeshift. Or perhaps it won’t. It’s one hell of a gauntlet to run. In the coming weeks, we’ll see how it pans out. In the meantime, if you just need simple information about what to do to keep yourself and others safe over the next few days as you race about preparing Christmas (and most of us appreciate facts) – be in no doubt what the expert heath advice is. If you are indoors, in a crowd, wear your mask.Britons are many times more likely to have experienced shortages of food and fuel than people in half a dozen EU member states, according to a poll. Global supply chain problems prompted by the pandemic have disrupted the international trade network since the summer, with transport backlogs combining with labour shortages to create scarcities of various goods around the world. The government has argued that the shortages are part of a worldwide pattern and no worse in the UK than elsewhere, although logistics experts and other professionals – particularly in the food sector - have said the problems are amplified in Britain by a shortage of east European workers, including drivers, since Brexit. The YouGov poll showed residents of the UK were multiple times more likely to have experienced, or to know people who have experienced, shortages of food and fuel than people in France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Sweden and Denmark, and somewhat more likely to have experienced them than those in the US. Asked in early December whether they had personally experienced any scarcity of foodstuffs in recent weeks, 56% of respondents in the UK said yes, while 9% said they had not personally experienced any but knew people who had. The corresponding figures in the US were 49% and 10%, but in continental Europe, the proportion of people who said they had been personally affected was between three and nine times lower: 18% in Germany, 16% in France, 12% in Sweden, 8% in Denmark, 7% and 6% in Italy. The proportion saying they knew people who had experienced food shortages ranged from 13% in France to 8% in Denmark and Italy – where 58% of respondents said they were not even aware that supply chain problems had led to food shortages. The UK was also the only country where substantial numbers of people said they had experienced fuel shortages in recent weeks, since the crisis in September and October. One in three Britons (33%) said they had personally experienced a recent scarcity of fuel, compared with no more than 10% in any other country. Only 8% of German respondents, 7% of those in France and 5% of those in Italy said they had been personally experienced fuel scarcity, with 37%, 38% and 53% respectively saying they had not even heard of the issue – compared with just 11% of respondents in Britain.There’s no need for a blue pill. The Matrix Resurrections is, by and large, an engaging and energetic motion picture, and worthy of being on the same shelf as the groundbreaking original from 1999. Unlike the soul-crushingly dull previous entry, The Matrix Revolutions, it remembers that mind-scrambling pseudo-intellectual yammering gets tiresome on-screen if there isn’t also some fun. Luckily, director Lana Wachowski, working apart from her sister Lilly for the first time, and her screenwriting partners David Mitchell and Aleksandar Hemon, have included plenty of flashbacks. A rewatch isn’t absolutely necessary. But talking about the new one after you see it is. It’s time for some game theory After an introduction to new characters (who are somehow inside the first scene of The Matrix? Is this the Holodeck?) we check back in with Keanu Reeves’s Neo, only he’s back as an office drone, plugging away as Thomas Anderson. It’s no longer 1999, it’s 2021, or so we think. Could this be the true base reality, not the story of The Nebuchadnezzar and The One liberating Zion from The Architect and the Machines? If so, then The Matrix trilogy as we know it was just a game series that Anderson created, and the peculiar feeling he has about the world around him is something he needs to work through with his analyst, played by Neil Patrick Harris. But the line between fiction and reality in Anderson’s life gets even blurrier at the same time that it does in The Matrix Resurrections’s script. In a wildly self-referential turn, Anderson is informed that he must make a sequel to his original Matrix trilogy, as corporate overlords Warner Bros are going to do it with or without his involvement. (This is, essentially, what happened to Wachowski in the weirdest reality of all: Hollywood.) It gets stranger when we see how Anderson based his soulmate Trinity on a gal he sees at his local coffee shop (called the Simulatte, ha ha ha), played by Carrie-Anne Moss, who also has a sense something about the world is off. What is the Matrix, again? Anderson’s niggling unease inspires him to create a “modal”, a little program that independently tries to get to the root of the fabric of existence. Two things happen: first, a program (played by Yahya Abdul-Mateen II) assumes the identity of Morpheus, Laurence Fishburne’s character from the original trilogy. (We’ll discover the real Morpheus died a while ago, and it’s been a lot longer than the 20 years we think has passed.) The other strange thing about this modal is that a hacker named Bugs (Jessica Henwick) from “the real world” (the world where Neo, Trinity and Morpheus once fought for Zion) somehow (and don’t ask me how) gets into Anderson’s new modal. This all makes sense, it really does. But the big question is what, exactly, is this new Matrix that Anderson (and Moss’s “Tiffany”) find themselves in? I think we’re all going to need a second viewing to nail this down, but the most interesting aspect is how Harris’s Analyst, basically serving the same purpose as the original trilogy’s Architect, has found a way to draw more power out of pod-sleeping humans by tormenting them with what we in the Jewish faith call tsuris. Heartache, woe and general bad vibes certainly seem ubiquitous of late, and The Matrix Resurrections suggests this is due to a malevolent computer program pushing our psyches for a little extra juice. Of course, what the Analyst doesn’t realise is that an even stronger force emerges when Neo and Trinity work together: the power of true love. The new “bullet time” When Anderson and his group of game developers are mapping out their sequel, they realise that there was something ineffable about the first Matrix. Yes, all the heavy metaphysics was part of it, but it also looked cool! The new entry will need to find its “bullet time”, the effect from the 1999 movie in which Neo arched backward, the camera swirled around, and time seemed to stand still. The Analyst even mentions it when he is tormenting Anderson/Neo during a moment of great peril, but nothing on the screen pops just yet. The “holy crap, what am I seeing?” moment comes during the final chase, in which the new iteration of Agent Smith possesses the bodies plugged into the Matrix in an attempt to kill Neo and Trinity. The 2.0 version is called swarm mode, and this time, anyone sleeping or working in a high-rise building that happens to be looming above Trinity’s racing Ducati will suddenly get a weird look in their eyes and dive out the window, becoming a human torpedo. It’s one of the most bonkers visuals in any Matrix movie. The Matrix as a transgender allegory During that montage of the brainstorming game developers there’s some rapid dialogue about what The Matrix trilogy is really about. Somewhere in the mix of theories someone says that it is about transgender issues. (Lilly Wachowski indeed discussed this explicitly last year.) There’s much in the new entry that adds to this conversation. Firstly, the game that Anderson is currently struggling with (and abandons) is called Binary. Then there’s the entire third act of the movie, in which Neo and his gang try to rescue Trinity from her sleeping life as Tiffany, a bored, married women. She knows that her true self is the one that pairs with Neo as a martial arts-savvy badass, but it is far easier to stay submerged in the role the false society has written for her. Neo stresses that she’ll only be happy as Trinity if it is her choice, and she backs away, worried that she’s been acting as Tiffany so long that it is simply too late. That sentiment – feeling that it is too late to transition – is a common issue for many trans people, so this exchange between Trinity and Neo will likely resonate. As will Moss telling the dopey husband character (whose name is actually Chad) to stop deadnaming her, and to call her Trinity. Lastly, there’s the film’s final reveal, where it seems that in the new Matrix, most of the special powers (such as flying) have transitioned from the male Neo to the female Trinity. Closing credits A movie as wild as The Matrix Resurrections has many little treasures (a cruise through something called “the fetus fields” is just one of them) but the hits keep coming during the credits. As with the 1999 Matrix, the movie ends with the song Wake Up by Rage Against the Machine, but this time it’s a cover with a female vocalist. The new version is by the group Brass Against, and if that name sounds familiar it either means you love rock anthems featuring a sousaphone, or you remember the incident from mid-November in which the group’s lead singer Sophia Urista pulled down her pants, squatted over a fan and urinated on him during a performance. (While the fan appeared to be consenting, the janitorial staff at the venue surely were not!) Of course, there’s no way Lana Wachowski could have predicted Brass Against’s current stream of notoriety, but it’s further proof that she’s still got the golden touch.Liverpool’s captain, Jordan Henderson, is concerned that player welfare is not being taken seriously enough. The midfielder is expected to air his views to the Premier League on Thursday in a meeting the league has scheduled with captains or senior players from all 20 clubs. On Monday the league announced its intention to continue with the scheduled matches over the Christmas period, even though there were 90 confirmed coronavirus cases among players and staff last week. A handful of clubs, including Liverpool and Arsenal, wanted two rather than three matches to be played over the holiday programme but they were overruled by the vast majority of teams, who indicated a desire to play. The league intends to explain in detail to the players – and to the managers in a separate meeting – why it is important not to voluntarily pause the season. It fears that it could lead to a horrendous fixture pile-up, especially as 10 matches have already been postponed because of Covid-19 and must be rescheduled and there is a danger that more will follow. “I don’t think people can appreciate how intense it is until you actually see it first-hand,” Henderson told BBC Sport. “Football to us is everything and we want to be able to perform at the highest level every time we set foot on the pitch. And unfortunately, in this period it is difficult to do that. “That has been like this for a few years now and it has been difficult but then, on top of that, you chuck in Covid and it becomes even harder and even worse. I am concerned that nobody really takes player welfare seriously. “I think decisions get made – of course we want to play as footballers, we want to get out there and play – but I am worried about player welfare and I don’t think anybody does take that seriously enough, especially in this period, when Covid is here. “We will try to have conversations in the background and try to have some sort of influence going forward. But at the minute I don’t feel the players get the respect they deserve in terms of having somebody being able to speak for them independently and having the power to say actually this isn’t right for player welfare.” Liverpool were without four first-team players for last Sunday’s 2-2 draw at Tottenham: Virgil van Dijk, Fabinho, Thiago Alcântara and Curtis Jones. Including that game, they have five games in two weeks. Liverpool’s assistant manager, Pepijn Lijnders, has described the decision to press on with the Premier League’s festive schedule as “absurd” and warned it will increase the risk to players’ health. Henderson, who missed the Spurs game because of illness, has been a positive voice on helping others during the pandemic. In April 2020 he was at the forefront of setting up a coronavirus fund to raise money for the NHS.As the US supreme court prepares to decide a case that could deny women the right to abortion in much of the US, Latin American activists like me are holding our collective breaths. The continent has some of the most restrictive abortion laws in the world, in spite of recent progressive reforms in the past decade in countries including Uruguay and Argentina. The end of Roe v Wade would deliver a frightening message throughout the region. El Salvador’s courts have sentenced women who have had a miscarriage to 30 years in prison – treating an obstetric emergency as an abortion. In Honduras, where abortion is already illegal in all circumstances, congress amended the constitution to state that life starts at conception. Against this dismal legal backdrop, Roe v Wade has long been a source of inspiration to women in Latin America fighting for their basic rights. It has given us a strategic model as well as strong legal arguments against constitutional obstacles. Like women in the US, we have taken our cases to court, sometimes securing significant and progressive gains in the last decade. In Colombia, the constitutional court ruled in 2006 that women could have an abortion in cases involving rape or incest, when it posed a risk to the pregnant person’s life or health or when the foetus was diagnosed with severe malformations. In Brazil, the supreme court in 2012 authorised abortion if a foetus is found to have anencephaly, a condition that leads to miscarriage, or death in the first weeks of life. And the court is considering another case that could decriminalise all abortions in the first 12 weeks. Most recently, the Mexican supreme court declared the criminalisation of abortion unconstitutional and mandated that state legislatures across the country act on that ruling. In all of these cases, activists drew on the arguments in Roe v Wade for their successful litigation strategy and judges cited the landmark case and related rulings in making their decisions. If the US state of Mississippi succeeds in overturning Roe v Wade after nearly 50 years, we will lose this crucial legal precedent and endanger progress on reproductive rights throughout Latin America. Just this month, the Brazilian senate approved the nomination of a conservative Christian pastor to the country’s supreme court. President Jair Bolsonaro’s choice is expected to oppose expanding abortion rights. One glimmer of hope for Americans is the US Food and Drug Administration’s decision last week to permanently lift restrictions on the abortion pill. This reaffirms that Latin American activists have long made the right choice to bet on self-managed abortion for ensuring access while waiting for rights to be granted through the legislative process. Funders must now expand their support for these direct action strategies throughout the Americas. But few are willing to associate their names with an issue as stigmatised as abortion, which means financial backing is scarce for activists working to expand rights and access. Philanthropists in the US have been fundamental to our success, and they will most likely want to redirect their funding to American organisations if the era of Roe v Wade does come to an end. They would be right to do so, but it would be a mistake to turn away from organisations and activists in other parts of the world that have made so much progress. Emboldened by anti-gender movements, powerful forces have swept Latin America, Europe and Africa, seeking to undermine the quest for greater sexual and reproductive freedom – particularly access to abortion and birth control – for the women who are least likely to advocate for themselves. We cannot fight them alone. Funding community-based self-managed abortion initiatives in countries where access is highly restricted may be the only way to save women’s lives while we battle repressive policies on multiple fronts across the global south. It may require funders to be less prescriptive in supporting our reproductive justice struggles, and to trust local advocates and the solutions we propose. Doing so will make clear that the lives of women matter, no matter who we are or where we live. We may lose Roe, but never the commitment to our fight. • Mariana Prandini Assis is an Aspen New Voices Fellow and a Brazilian human rights lawyer, researcher and activistThousands of people who bought leasehold homes from the housebuilder Taylor Wimpey will be liberated from terms where their ground rent charges doubled every 10 years, after a long-running investigation by the UK competition watchdog. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has been looking into the contractual cost increases imposed by Taylor Wimpey and other property developers, which have left some owners struggling to sell or mortgage their homes, while their rights to their property can also be at risk if they fall behind on the payments. Taylor Wimpey has voluntarily given formal commitments to the CMA that it will remove terms from leasehold contracts that cause ground rents to double in price– a move welcomed by leasehold campaigners. The company has also agreed to remove terms from contracts that had previously been converted, so that the ground rent increased in line with the higher retail prices index (RPI) measure of inflation. As a result, affected leaseholders’ ground rents will remain at the amount charged when they first bought their home and will not increase over time. Taylor Wimpey has also confirmed to the CMA that it has stopped selling leasehold properties with doubling ground rent clauses. Andrea Coscelli, the CMA chief executive, called the announcement “a huge step forward for leaseholders with Taylor Wimpey”. He said: “These are totally unwarranted obligations that lead to people being trapped in their homes, struggling to sell or obtain a mortgage.” The CMA launched enforcement action against four housing developers in September 2020 – Countryside, Taylor Wimpey, Barratt Developments and Persimmon Homes – which it believes may have broken consumer protection law in relation to leasehold homes. In March, the CMA ordered Taylor Wimpey and developer Countryside Properties to remove the terms in their contracts, and wrote to them giving them the opportunity to sign formal commitments, known as undertakings. Countryside Properties said in September it was voluntarily removing the terms from its contracts. The housebuilder Persimmon also agreed at the time to offer leasehold homeowners the opportunity to buy the freehold of their property at a discounted price, and to make repayments to some homeowners who bought their freeholds. In addition, the insurance group Aviva, which bought freeholds from developers, agreed in June to remove ground rent terms that were considered unfair and repay homeowners whose rents doubled after the CMA’s investigation. Of the four housebuilders against whom the CMA launched enforcement action in September 2020, only the investigation into Barratt Developments is ongoing. Coscelli said the CMA was prepared to take further action against companies. “Other developers and freehold investors should now do the right thing for homeowners and remove these problematic clauses from their contracts. If they refuse, we stand ready to step in and take further action – through the courts if necessary,” he said. There are more than 4m residential leasehold properties in England and Wales. The National Leasehold Campaign (NLC), a not-for-profit organisation created in 2018 to highlight the problems faced by leaseholders, celebrated the Taylor Wimpey announcement. The NLC co-founder Cath Williams, a university lecturer from Liverpool who bought a leasehold home from the housebuilder, called the move “a real step forward”. She said: “It will significantly reduce the cost to buy the freehold or extend the lease and ensures that any leaseholders that have converted to RPI from doubling are treated equitably. It validates what we at the NLC have been saying for years – converting doubling ground rents to RPI is not the answer.” Taylor Wimpey’s chief executive, Pete Redfern, said: “Taylor Wimpey has always sought to do the right thing by its customers, shareholders and other stakeholders, and we are pleased that today’s voluntary undertakings will draw this issue to a full close, within our original financial provision.” The company said it was making a financial offer, agreed with the CMA, to third-party freeholders of leases that Taylor Wimpey no longer owns, to enable their leaseholders to revert to a fixed ground rent. As part of its review into the leasehold sector, the CMA is continuing its investigation into two investment groups, Brigante Properties, and Abacus Land and Adriatic Land.Plans for New Year’s Eve parties in England may have to be scrapped, a minister has admitted, as she said there remained uncertainty over the severity of illness caused by the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Gillian Keegan, the care minister, refused to rule out lockdown measures being introduced in England shortly after Christmas and said 129 people had been hospitalised and 14 had died with Omicron in the UK. “There is uncertainty. So, if you can’t change your [New Year’s Eve] plans quickly, then maybe think about it. There is uncertainty. We can’t predict what the data is going to tell us before we’ve got the data,” she said. She told LBC Radio that the government’s approach in England had been to try to allow people to go ahead with Christmas plans, but that the same could not necessarily be said of the following holiday. Boris Johnson has said no new measures will be put in place in England before Christmas Day, but the devolved administrations in Scotland and Wales are introducing some new restrictions before and after the holiday. Keegan told Sky News: “We do not have all the information that you would like to have at your fingertips, in particular … the severity of the disease. So it is a difficult balance but we think we’ve got the balance right. You know, saying to the country we wanted to lock down etc, when you’ve got those kind of figures wouldn’t look proportionate.” She said the decision that was taken on further restrictions was “difficult”. Asked whether there was any chance a “circuit breaker” lockdown might be avoided if the country continued on its current path, Keegan said: “We are waiting for data on the severity, we’ll still have to wait to see where we land on that, but we can’t really say, you know. “What we’ve said is: up to Christmas, we’re fine, looking at the data, looking at the numbers we have at the moment. But, of course, we have to look at where this virus goes, where this variant goes, so we have to look at that data. I can’t tell you in advance of getting that data, but you should be cheerful because we’re doing a lot more than we could last year. We’re able to see our families.” Keegan acknowledged that Johnson was refusing to act based on the same data that had led first ministers elsewhere in the UK to take preventive measures, but she claimed this was not a result of indecision or political calculation. She was asked on Times Radio if the issue was not Johnson’s “own political judgment and that he doesn’t want to do anything with the data that all the leaders are seeing”. Keegan said: “If we see large jumps in the data, large jumps in hospitalisation … then of course we’ll react. But we don’t actually have that yet. So what [Scotland’s Nicola Sturgeon and Wales’s Mark Drakeford are] doing is … they’re looking at the risk and they’re coming up with a different answer.” After Johnson’s announcement of no new restrictions in the short term in England, the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said people would be “breathing a sigh of relief that Christmas is going ahead as planned”. But he said: “The country also deserves some certainty about what comes after Christmas so that families and businesses can plan ahead.” He added: “The virus won’t be taking Christmas off and there’s still a risk of the NHS being overwhelmed in the new year. Boris Johnson is too weak to get any measures to keep the country safe through his cabinet.” Keegan also defended the government’s decision to reduce the isolation period from 10 days to seven for anyone in England – whether vaccinated or unvaccinated – who records a negative lateral flow test result for both the sixth and seventh day. The change in the rules will be introduced from Wednesday. Speaking to Times Radio on Wednesday morning, Keegan talked up the benefits of releasing such people early, saying it would allow many to enjoy their Christmas lunch. But she insisted the government was not seeking positive headlines at Christmas, having been forced to cancel last year’s celebrations. She said health officials believed releasing people with consecutive negative tests after seven days represented a similar risk to releasing everyone after 10.Eddie Jones has called for the tackle height to be lowered in youth rugby union in order to further reduce the risk of brain injuries in the sport. In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Jones said that while he felt rugby was “moving in the right direction” on the issue, and that he was happy with the way it was being handled at the elite level, one change he would like to see is for it to be mandatory for all under-12 players to only tackle below the hips. “We 100% need to protect and minimise contact with the head,” said England’s head coach. “That’s paramount for rugby going forward.” The current Rugby Football Union rule is that all tackles in under-18 rugby need to be below the armpits, but the governing body is also experimenting with a waist-high law in some under-16 and under-18 games this season. Jones would lower it further still for younger players. “I think it is moving in the right direction. The only thing I would change is that I would say that at under-12 [level], everyone has got to tackle under the hips. Teach people how to tackle under the hips from an early age, and make that their normal, trademark tackle, I think in that way we can protect the head even more and that’s really important.” Jones says the game needs “to learn from what’s gone on, and make sure we are proactive [about this issue] in the growth of the sport”. He would also like to see World Rugby put in place a system to make sure former players who have been diagnosed with diseases related to brain trauma are being looked after. “I think World Rugby is trying to do that, to put in place a system where those people can be cared for properly, and I think that’s really important,” he said. “You’d hope that post the next World Cup, where obviously they make their profits to run the game for the next period of time, a proportion of the funds would be apportioned to looking after those players who have suffered that damage.” Jones has been struck by how many former northern hemisphere forwards have been diagnosed. “That makes a lot of sense, doesn’t it? If you think about the amount of collisions northern hemisphere forwards have had compared to southern hemisphere forwards in the previous period, it is probably higher because of the volume of games they’ve played. Traditionally players here have played 35 games a year, whereas in the southern hemisphere you probably played 25, so the volume of games, the number of collisions, all of that could contribute to it. But no one knows for sure, obviously. “I think World Rugby is doing all the right things, and if we can look after those players who have been damaged better then I think we will be in a pretty good spot.”Grief totems aren’t always easy to rationalise. Once a loved one has departed, their footprints can be found everywhere and they often linger in the most unexpected places. A toothbrush casually discarded by the sink. An airline boarding pass shoved into a tatty paperback novel. A few months after my husband died in 2018, I found his credit card during a routine search for my trainers, and with a reverence one might pay a precious artefact, I stroked my fingers over the braille of his name before placing it back inside his wallet. “I’ve got ghosts on my phone,” the Bafta-winning writer, director and actor Mark Gatiss mused in an interview with the Radio Times. “I know this isn’t unique to me but I’ve lost my mum, my sister, my brother-in-law and now my dad, and there is something very odd about being orphaned, even at 54.” Ghosts, phantoms, spectres. For the griever who has been left behind there can be strange comfort to be found in these random markers – the digital ones, too. There is an ethereal otherworldliness that can be seen on an iPhone screen. Speaking of this strange and haunting effect in grief – which is, at its heart, the everyday made holy – Gatiss described the jarring discord between “the curious feeling” and “the practicalities” that can follow a death. “Like I’ll never ring his telephone number again,” he said, referring to the recent loss of his father. And yet, in spite of this rational knowledge, he continued, “Occasionally, when I try to thin out my contacts, there are some numbers I just can’t delete.” Reading these comments, I was reminded of the day, about 10 months after his death, that I listened to voicemails left by my late husband. Countless messages that were still logged and listed on my iPhone; the recently departed mingling like ghostly wisps with the living – my mum, my best friend, the engineer cancelling our arranged boiler inspection next week. When I pressed on the symbol for loudspeaker, the mellow tones that were released seemed to float into the air like a supernatural substance from an enchanted lamp. These voice memos occupy a transitory space between the past and the present – and it can never be as straightforward as simply swiping a screen and pressing the option marked “delete”. There is no neat and linear way to grieve, despite what we’ve traditionally been told. In Patti Smith’s haunting memoir M Train, she writes about her late husband, Fred “Sonic” Smith, and the spells that can be cast by things. Fred’s favourite childhood toy was a red plastic cowboy, she tells us, and one day, when his mother was cleaning his room, it had simply disappeared. Fred came to believe that certain things “become part of our common treasure, occupying a special place in the Valley of Lost Things”. Echoing the nonsensical nature of loss, Smith asks: “Why is it that we lose the things we love, and things cavalier cling to us and will be the measure of our worth after we’re gone?” These days it’s a question that permeates our digital spaces, too. A different kind of treasure. Twitter threads and Instagram posts, WhatsApp groups and voice messages. It’s been three years since my husband died and my instruction to memorialise his Facebook page, a request that had to be accompanied by a screenshot of his death certificate, was only emailed to Mark Zuckerberg’s HQ a few weeks ago. In folklore, a ghost is usually a hazy, semi-transparent outline of a departed soul. In reality, apparitions can be all the fragments that make up the life you had, the person you love, and the memories you still treasure. A bank card hiding between the boxes of shoes. A number still logged on your “favourites” list. A bowlegged cowboy moulded from red plastic. Grief totems and beloved artefacts, our common treasure, occupying that special place between “here” and “there”, between “us” and “them”, the objects we cannot rationalise in the Valley of Lost Things. Kat Lister is author of The Elements: A WidowhoodAs a history professor at Babson College in Wellesley, Massachusetts, Kevin Bruyneel had been tested for Covid-19 more than 100 times and typically waited less than 15 minutes for the free tests. So Bruyneel was upset when he went to get a PCR test at a clinic Sunday in Brooklyn, New York, and waited more than an hour after his scheduled appointment and was billed at least $100 – though he could owe more depending on what his insurance covers. “There were a lot of people in line, incredibly desperate to get tested because they were flying” for the holidays, said Bruyneel, who planned to fly to his native Vancouver, British Columbia, for Christmas. “There was a lot of anxiety.” Bruyneel’s experience is not unique in New York. People across the city are anxiously standing in line for hours outside testing sites because there aren’t enough tests to meet the increased demand due to the upcoming holidays, a surge in Covid cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant. On Monday, the Biden administration released plans to purchase 500m rapid tests to provide free to the public in January and to set up new federal testing sites. While public health experts praised the administration’s plan, they cautioned that the country needs more than 500m tests – and that the administration may have trouble even fulfilling that promise because of supply chain issues. “I’m really happy to see the administration modifying their plans and seeing new urgency to getting tests out to the public,” said Elizabeth Stuart, a professor at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “I think we have to recognize that 500m sounds like a lot of tests, but with 350 million people in the US, for regular use, we are still going to need more.” The problems with the United States’ Covid testing began at the onset of the pandemic, when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention distributed faulty test kits to laboratories in February 2020. Then when vaccines became widely available in 2021 and the country saw a decrease in Covid cases, “everyone thought testing was going to be unnecessary, and we sort of had neglect, which turned out not to be benign”, said Dr Ezekiel Emanuel, a bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania who was on Joe Biden’s Covid advisory team during the transition. Things got so slow over the summer that Abbott Laboratories, an Illinois-based testing manufacturer, destroyed millions of Covid test cards; canceled contracts with suppliers; and closed a plant making the tests, according to the New York Times. While the number of test cards destroyed was relatively small when considering the total number of tests needed, “what it taught us is that we cannot be lulled into complacency,” said Mara Aspinall, a biomedical diagnostics professor at Arizona State University. “We have to keep up our vigilance until we go a long time without any new cases.” The US continues to lag behind places like Great Britain, where Covid tests are widely available, because the UK government placed greater focus on testing earlier in the pandemic and heavily subsidized the cost of testing in the country, Aspinall said. The UK’s public health system also allows them to distribute tests much more effectively, she said. “For many of the countries with nationalized health systems, this is not the first time they have sent health-related materials and products to their whole population, so as a result of that, the cost to doing it is lower and the logistics hurdle is lower,” said Aspinall. As a result, Bruyneel and others in New York City are standing in cold weather for hours outside clinics. The city has seen a 277% increase in Covid cases over the past two weeks, according to the Times, and public health officials expect that number to increase due to the highly infectious Omicron variant. On Tuesday afternoon, 18 of the city’s public hospitals and clinics had wait times of more than an hour, according to an NYC Health + Hospitals dashboard. To catch up, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) must authorize more reliable over-the-counter rapid antigen tests, said Aspinall. In Europe, there are at least 46 over-the-counter Covid tests, Aspinall said. The FDA has only authorized a dozen, according to Kaiser Health News. “The challenge, however, is that we can’t lower the standards,” Aspinall said. “We can’t have tests coming out and have them be at a low standard and therefore not reliable.” To distribute the tests effectively, the federal government must also coordinate with state and local governments rather than having people order them through a website, as the administration has planned, said Jason Feldman, CEO of Vault Health, a virtual healthcare company that provides Covid tests. “I worry that the federal government managing a federal website is a disaster waiting to happen,” said Feldman, pointing to the bumpy rollout of Healthcare.gov, the health insurance exchange website created as part of the Affordable Care Act. The only way to distribute tests effectively “is through state and local government. You can’t have a federal government mailing tests to everybody’s homes. Think about the consequences of 350 million people in this country actively ordering tests.” The National Institutes of Health is already working with states to provide free at-home test kits to residents. For example, New Hampshire, population 1.3 million, offered 1m kits to residents and depleted the allotment in one day, according to the state health department. The state has not announced when they will offer more tests. While the federal government works to ramp up testing, people are trying to figure out when to test before holiday gatherings – or whether to gather at all. Bruyneel tested negative but still decided not to travel to Canada for the holiday because of the Omicron variant “It was tough on my Mom. She understood, but there were a lot of tears, and I feel guilty about it even if I know it’s the right decision,” he said. The long wait times are also not limited to New York. Until recently, Carly Angott, a videographer in Detroit, could just walk into an urgent care clinic without an appointment and quickly get a test. Angott gets tested regularly because she has asthma and allergies and works in the control room at Little Caesars Arena, which holds NBA and NHL games and other large events. Michigan now has the highest Covid hospitalization rate in the country. On Sunday, Angott was experiencing tightness in her chest and post-nasal drip, so she decided to get tested. This time she had to make an appointment. But on Monday, she still waited in her car for more than two hours after her scheduled appointment to get the test. Fortunately, the rapid test came back negative, but she is still waiting for the results of PCR test, which is more accurate but takes longer to process. Her Christmas celebration with her mom’s family has been canceled because a number of relatives have Covid. Now she just hopes to celebrate with her immediate family. “We are a little nervous, but I think more optimistic because everyone we know and love is boostered and doing OK for the most part,” said Angott, 24. “I am trying to remind myself of that, but it’s tough to not get dragged into the whirlwind of craziness.”Christmas was not traditional in my family growing up, so presents were intermittent. But the year I turned 18, I was welcomed into adulthood by a bumper stack of bestselling 90s dating books: Why Men Love Bitches and Men Are from Mars, Women are from Venus (and lesser-esteemed related reading, Why Men Marry Bitches and When Mars and Venus Collide). I had not known, until then, that I came across as the loneliest teenager in the world. Written in a tone that swung between “all-knowing best friend” and “extremely mean personal trainer telling you the suffering means it is working”, these books – overwhelmingly targeted at women – took the reader to an emotional bootcamp of sorts, telling them to buck up and put on much needed emotional armour in the hard-knuckled world of adult dating. There was contempt for the women who cared too much and loved too openly, which would scare men away (and the goal was always a man). Nice girls don’t get the guy. If your man is in a bad mood, let him stew in his man cave rather than be a nag. If you don’t respect yourself, he won’t respect you. The contempt, I think, was all the stronger because we were familiar with the type: weepy and prone to fits of hysteria; ready to throw off dignity at the first hint of true love, forever pining for a world more fantastical and beautiful. In other words, someone we all had in ourselves, to varying degrees, and felt all the more pathetic for. As Flaubert reportedly said, Madame Bovary, c’est moi. I’m not sure how seriously I took those lessons back then, though they were nothing new in the teenage-girl media I read growing up – before the likes of Teen Vogue and Cosmopolitan were liberated to write explainers to Das Kapital, there were how-to guides on dieting, looking good and how to tell if he likes you or likes-likes you. The world may have moved on since then, but it’s hard to shake the lessons internalised when you’re young. Years later, in 2014, when I was exploring the world of Tinder, confronted with image after image of man holding fish, man quoting Drake lyric, man clearly wanting to be Drake, I too hardened my own armour, made clear that even though I was on here I too thought it was a bit of a joke (bio: “enthusiastic self-starter proficient in Microsoft Excel.”) The weepy romantic in me was locked up in the attic, only free to roam on select occasions. It’s a shame; I feel like life would be a lot more delightfully chaotic if she had the key.Size really doesn’t matter in this nonsensical kids’ animation reimagining Gulliver’s Travels. Because according to its version of Swift’s 18th-century satire, although Lemuel Gulliver did once visit a land called Lilliput, the people there were not in fact very small. However, after he left, the Lilliputian king – a right royal nincompoop – decreed that Gulliver was a giant. So when he returns to Lilliput as a man of average stature he is arrested as an imposter. Which makes zero sense and the movie only gets sillier from there. Wayne Grayson voices Gulliver, a silver-tongued smarmy swashbuckler who sails the seas indulging in a bit of light plundering. One day he gets word from his mates on the island of Lilliput – who he once helped out of a jam – that they are under threat from an armada launched by neighbouring Blefuscu. So Gulliver rushes to Lilliput where he is sentenced to death for passing himself off as the Great Gulliver (since he left legend has rewritten him as a man mountain). Like I said, the plot is completely witless. Meanwhile on Lilliput, time has been running at warp speed since Gulliver last visited, following an order by the king introducing “year days”, where all 365 days pass in a day. Quite how the mechanics of this work is never explained. But what it means is that while Gulliver has been gone for little over 12 months, in Lilliputian years four decades have passed. It’s maddeningly stupid. The biggest shame here is that Jonathan Swift’s story, like George Orwell’s Animal Farm, is gateway satire for kids, so easily adaptable to little laughs. Instead, six-year-olds are lumbered with this subpar knockabout gibberish, which has virtually nothing in common with the original other than the name of its hero. It’s not even as if the movie is much to look at either, with the plasticky pasteurised feel that ruins children’s television. The characters’ faces run the gamut of three or four emotions, and they move like marionette puppets. Gulliver Returns is released on 27 December on digital platforms.“Let us be reminded that before there is a final solution, there must be a first solution, a second one, even a third. The move toward a final solution is not a jump. It takes one step, then another, then another.” So began Toni Morrison’s 1995 address to Howard University, entitled Racism and Fascism, which delineated 10 step-by-step procedures to carry a society from first to last. Morrison’s interest was not in fascist demagogues or fascist regimes. It was rather in “forces interested in fascist solutions to national problems”. The procedures she described were methods to normalize such solutions, to “construct an internal enemy”, isolate, demonize and criminalize it and sympathizers to its ideology and their allies, and, using the media, provide the illusion of power and influence to one’s supporters. Morrison saw, in the history of US racism, fascist practices – ones that could enable a fascist social and political movement in the United States. Writing in the era of the “super-predator” myth (a Newsweek headline the next year read, “Superpredators: Should we cage the new breed of vicious kids?”), Morrison unflinchingly read fascism into the practices of US racism. Twenty-five years later, those “forces interested in fascist solutions to national problems” are closer than ever to winning a multi-decade national fight. The contemporary American fascist movement is led by oligarchical interests for whom the public good is an impediment, such as those in the hydrocarbon business, as well as a social, political, and religious movement with roots in the Confederacy. As in all fascist movements, these forces have found a popular leader unconstrained by the rules of democracy, this time in the figure of Donald Trump. My father, raised in Berlin under the Nazis, saw in European fascism a course that any country could take. He knew that US democracy was not exceptional in its capacity to resist the forces that shattered his family and devastated his youth. My mother, a court stenographer in US criminal courts for 44 years, saw in the anti-Black racism of the American legal system parallels to the vicious antisemitism she experienced in her youth in Poland, attitudes which enabled eastern European complicity with fascism. And my grandmother, Ilse Stanley, wrote a memoir, published in 1957, of her experiences in 1930s Berlin, later appearing on the US television show This is Your Life to discuss it. It is a memoir of the normalization years of German fascism, well before world war and genocide. In it, she recounts experiences with Nazi officers who assured her that in nazism’s vilification of Jews, they certainly did not mean her. Philosophers have always been at the forefront in the analysis of fascist ideology and movements. In keeping with a tradition that includes the philosophers Hannah Arendt and Theodor Adorno, I have been writing for a decade on the way politicians and movement leaders employ propaganda, centrally including fascist propaganda, to win elections and gain power. Often, those who employ fascist tactics do so cynically – they do not really believe the enemies they target are so malign, or so powerful, as their rhetoric suggests. Nevertheless, there comes a tipping point, where rhetoric becomes policy. Donald Trump and the party that is now in thrall to him have long been exploiting fascist propaganda. They are now inscribing it into fascist policy. Fascist propaganda takes place in the US in already fertile ground – decades of racial strife has led to the United States having by far the highest incarceration rate in the world. A police militarized to address the wounds of racial inequities by violence, and a recent history of unsuccessful imperial wars have made us susceptible to a narrative of national humiliation by enemies both internal and external. As WEB Du Bois showed in his 1935 masterwork Black Reconstruction, there is a long history of business elites backing racism and fascism out of self-interest, to divide the working class and thereby destroy the labor movement. The novel development is that a ruthless would-be autocrat has marshalled these fascist forces and shaped them into a cult, with him as its leader. We are now well into the repercussions of this latter process – where fascist lies, for example, the “big lie” that the 2020 election was stolen, have begun to restructure institutions, notably electoral infrastructure and law. As this process unfolds, slowly and deliberately, the media’s normalization of these processes evokes Morrison’s tenth and final step: “Maintain, at all costs, silence.” Constructing an enemy To understand contemporary US fascism, it is useful to consider parallels to 20th century history, both where they succeed and where they fail. Hitler was a genocidal antisemite. Though fascism involves disregard for human life, not all fascists are genocidal. Even Nazi Germany turned to genocide only relatively late in the regime’s rule. And not all fascists are antisemitic. There were Italian Jewish fascists. Referring to the successful assimilation of Jews into all phases of Weimar era German life, my father warned me, “if they had chosen someone else, some of us would have been among the very best Nazis.” We American Jews feel firmly at home. Now, where the fascist movement’s internal enemies are leftists and movements for Black racial equality, there certainly could be fascist American Jews. Germany’s National Socialist party did not take over a mainstream party. It started as a small, radical, far-right anti-democratic party, which faced different pressures as it strove to achieve greater electoral success. Despite its radical start, the Nazi party dramatically increased its popularity over many years in part by strategically masking its explicit antisemitic agenda to attract moderate voters, who could convince themselves that the racism at the core of Nazi ideology was something the party had outgrown. It represented itself as the antidote to communism, using a history of political violence in the Weimar Republic, including street clashes between communists and the far right, to warn of a threat of violent communist revolution. It attracted support from business elites by promising to smash labor unions. The Nazis portrayed socialists, Marxists, liberals, labor unions, the cultural world and the media as representatives of, or sympathizers with, this revolution. Once in power, they bore down on this message. In his 1935 speech, Communism with its Mask Off, Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels described Bolshevism carrying “on a campaign, directed by the Jews, with the international underworld, against culture as such”. By contrast, “National Socialism sees in all these things – in [private] property, in personal values and in nation and race and the principles of idealism – these forces which carry on every human civilization and fundamentally determine its worth.” The Nazis recognized that the language of family, faith, morality and homeland could be used to justify especially brutal violence against an enemy represented as being opposed to all these things. The central message of Nazi politics was to demonize a set of constructed enemies, an unholy alliance of communists and Jews, and ultimately to justify their criminalization. Contrary to popular belief, the Nazi government of the 1930s was not genocidal, nor were its notorious concentration camps packed with Jewish prisoners, at least until the November pogrom of 1938. The main targets of the regime’s concentration camps were, initially, communists and socialists. The Nazi regime urged vigilante violence against its other targets, such as Jews, separating themselves from this violence by obscuring the role of agents of the state. During this time, it was possible for many non-Jewish Germans to deceive themselves about the brutal nature of the regime, to tell themselves that its harsh means were necessary to protect the German nation from the insidious threat of communism. Violent militias occupied an ambiguous role between state and non-state actors. The SS began as violent Nazi supporters, before becoming an independent arm of the government. The message of violent law and order created a culture that influenced all the Nazi state’s institutions. As Yale historian Timothy Snyder writes in On Tyranny, “for violence to transform not just the atmosphere but also the system, the emotions of rallies and the ideology of exclusion have to be incorporated into the training of armed guards.” In the US, the training of police as “warriors”, together with the unofficial replacement of the American flag by the thin blue line flag, augur poorly about the democratic commitments of this institution. For a far-right party to become viable in a democracy, it must present a face it can defend as moderate, and cultivate an ambiguous relationship to the extreme views and statements of its most explicit members. It must maintain a pretense of the rule of law, characteristically by projecting its own violations of it on to its opponents. In the case of the takeover of the mainstream rightwing party by a far-right anti-democratic movement, the pretense must be stronger. The movement must contend with members of that party who are faithful to procedural elements of democracy, such as the principle of one voter one vote, or that the loser of a fair election give up power – in the United States today, figures such as Adam Kinzinger and Elizabeth Cheney. A fascist social and political party faces pressure both to mask its connection to and to cultivate violent racist supporters, as well as its inherently anti-democratic agenda. In the face of the attack on the US capital on 6 January, even the most resolute skeptic must admit that Republican politicians have been at least attempting to cultivate a mass of violent vigilantes to support their causes. Kyle Rittenhouse is becoming a hero to Republicans after showing up in Kenosha, WI as an armed vigilante citizen, and killing two men. Perhaps there are not enough potential Kyle Rittenhouses in the US to justify fear of massive armed vigilante militias enforcing a 2024 election result demanded by Donald Trump. But denying that Trump’s party is trying to create such a movement is, at this point, deliberate deception. Black rebellion, white backlash Street violence proved invaluable to the National Socialists in their path to power. The Nazis instigated and exacerbated violence in the streets, then demonized their opponents as enemies of the German people who must be dealt with harshly. Trump’s rise followed Black protest, at times violent, of police brutality in Ferguson and Baltimore. More recently, the murder of George Floyd and a historic protest movement in the US in the late spring has given fuel to fascist misrepresentation. All of these recent developments take place as only the latest in a long US history of Black rebellion against white supremacist ideology and structures, and a parallel history of white backlash. White vigilante groups regularly formed in reaction to Black rebellions, to “defend their families and property against Black rebellion”, the historian Elizabeth Hinton writes in her recent history of these rebellions. Hinton shows that police often acted in concert with these groups. For decades, the instigator of these rebellions has typically been an incident or incidents of police violence against members of the community, following a long period of often violent over-policing that exacerbated these communities’ grievances. Street movements in the US have often been accompanied by vigorous campus protests, from the protests against the Vietnam war of the 1960s, to recent campus protests for racial justice that attracted media rebuke (paradoxically, for “chilling free speech”). Politicians in both parties have feasted on these moments, using them to troll for votes. During these episodes of protest and rebellion, US politicians from Barry Goldwater onwards, placing campus protests together with Black rebellion against over-policing, have encouraged harsh law and order policing and crackdowns on leftists. John Ehrlichman, one of Nixon’s top advisers, said that Nixon’s campaign and administration “had two enemies: the anti-war left and Black people”, and invented the drug war to target both: You understand what I’m saying? We knew we couldn’t make it illegal to be either against the war or black, but by getting the public to associate the hippies with marijuana and blacks with heroin. And then criminalizing both heavily, we could disrupt those communities. We could arrest their leaders, raid their homes, break up their meetings, and vilify them night after night on the evening news. Did we know we were lying about the drugs? Of course we did. Politicians have shown less interest in addressing the underlying conditions that lead to violence in poor Black urban communities – the widespread availability of guns, the massive and persistent racial wealth gap and the effects of violent policing and mass incarceration. And why should they? As long as these underlying conditions persist, politicians of either party can run for office by milking fear and promising a harsh law and order response. Morrison’s 1995 address is a warning that these conditions are ripe for harnessing by a fascist movement, one targeting democracy itself. In its most recent iteration, in the form of the reaction against Black Lives Matter protesters and the demonization of antifa and student activists, a fascist social and political movement has been avidly stoking the flames for mass rightwing political violence, by justifying it against these supposed internal enemies. Rachel Kleinfeld, in an October 2021 article, documents the rise of the legitimation of political violence in the US. According to the article, the “bedrock idea uniting right-wing communities who condone violence is that white Christian men in the United States are under cultural and demographic threat and require defending – and that it is the Republican Party and Donald Trump, in particular, who will safeguard their way of life.” This kind of justification of political violence is classically fascist – a dominant group threatened by the prospect of gender, racial and religious equality turning to a leader who promises a violent response. How to topple a democracy We are now in fascism’s legal phase. According to the International Center for Not for Profit Law, 45 states have considered 230 bills criminalizing protest, with the threat of violent leftist and Black rebellion being used to justify them. That this is happening at the same time that multiple electoral bills enabling a Republican state legislature majority to overturn their state’s election have been enacted suggests that the true aim of bills criminalizing protest is to have a response in place to expected protests against the stealing of a future election (as a reminder of fascism’s historical connection to big business, some of these laws criminalize protest near gas and oil lines). The Nazis used Judeo-Bolshevism as their constructed enemy. The fascist movement in the Republican party has turned to critical race theory instead. Fascism feeds off a narrative of supposed national humiliation by internal enemies. Defending a fictional glorious and virtuous national past, and presenting its enemies as deviously maligning the nation to its children, is a classic fascist strategy to stoke fury and resentment. Using the bogeyman of critical race theory, 29 states have introduced bills to restrict teaching about racism and sexism in schools, and 13 states have enacted such bans. The key to democracy is an informed electorate. An electorate that knows about persisting racial injustice in the United States along all its dimensions, from the racial wealth gap to the effects of over-policing and over-incarceration, will be unsurprised by mass political rebellion in the face of persistent refusal to face up to these problems. An electorate ignorant of these facts will react not with understanding, but with uncomprehending fear and horror at Black political unrest. Sometimes, you trace a fascist movement to its genesis in Nazi influence on its leaders, as with India’s RSS. In the United States, the causal relations run the other way around. As James Whitman shows in his 2017 book, Hitler’s American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law, the Jim Crow era in the United States influenced Nazi law. In 2021, legislators in 19 states passed laws making access to the ballot more difficult, some with specific (and clearly intentional) disparate impact on minority communities (as in Texas). By obscuring in our education system facts about this era, one can mask the reemergence of legislation that borrows from its strategies. Indeed, the very tactic of restricting politically vital information to schoolchildren is itself borrowed from the Jim Crow era. Chapter 9 of Carter G Woodson’s 1933 book, The Mis-Education of the Negro, is called Political Education Neglected. In it, Woodson describes how history was taught “to enslave the Negroes’ mind”, by whitewashing the brutality of slavery and the actual roots and causes of racial disparities. In Fugitive Pedagogy: Carter G Woodson and the Art of Black Teaching, Jarvis Givens documents the strategies Black educators used to convey real history in the constricted environments of Jim Crow schools, strategies that, tragically, will again become necessary for educators to take up again today. Fascist ideology strictly enforces gender roles and restricts the freedom of women. For fascists, it is part of their commitment to a supposed “natural order” where men are on top. It is also integral to the broader fascist strategy of winning over social conservatives who might otherwise be unhappy with the endemic corruption of fascist rule. Far-right authoritarian leaders across the world, such as Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, have targeted “gender ideology”, as nazism targeted feminism. Freedom to choose one’s role in society, when it goes against a supposed “natural order”, is a kind of freedom fascism has always opposed. According to National Socialist ideology, abortion, at any point in pregnancy, was considered to be murder. Just as it was acceptable to murder disabled people and other groups whose identities were considered dangerous to the health of the “Aryan race”, it was acceptable to perform abortions on members of these groups. In the first six years of Nazi rule, from 1933 to 1939, there was a harsh crackdown on the birth control movement. Led by the Gestapo, there was a punitive campaign against doctors who performed abortions on Aryan women. The recent attack on abortion rights, and the coming attack on birth control, led by a hard-right supreme court, is consistent with the hypothesis that we are, in the United States, facing a real possibility of a fascist future. If you want to topple a democracy, you take over the courts. Donald Trump lost the popular vote to Hillary Clinton in 2016 by almost 3m votes, and yet has appointed one-third of supreme court, three youthful far-right judges who will be spending decades there. The Roberts court has for more than a decade consistently enabled an attack on democracy, by hollowing out the Voting Rights Act over time, unleashing unlimited corporate money into elections, and allowing clearly partisan gerrymanders of elections. There is every reason to believe that the court will allow even the semblance of democracy to crumble, as long as laws are passed by gerrymandered Republican statehouses that make anti-democratic practices, including stealing elections, legal. There has been a growing fascist social and political movement in the United States for decades. Like other fascist movements, it is riddled with internal contradictions, but no less of a threat to democracy. Donald Trump is an aspiring autocrat out solely for his own power and material gain. By giving this movement a classically authoritarian leader, Trump shaped and exacerbated it, and his time in politics has normalized it. Donald Trump has shown others what is possible. But the fascist movement he now leads preceded him, and will outlive him. As Toni Morrison warned, it feeds off ideologies with deep roots in American history. It would be a grave error to think it cannot ultimately win. • This article was amended on 22 December 2021 to correct a misspelling of Theodor Adorno’s first name as “Theodore” and on 27 December 2021 to correct a misspelling of Rachel Kleinfeld’s surname as “Kleinfield”.It’s been a bumper year for the slavering ghouls that run some of the games industry’s biggest publishers, who have found fresh ways to extract value from players through NFTs and cryptocurrency while producing little of value. Space Warlord Organ Trading Simulator, with its economy of dripping kidneys and fresh-plucked nerve clusters, feels downright wholesome by comparison, a truly rustic post-capitalist digital hellscape. It’s a premise as old as time: buy low, sell eyes. And spleens. More of a frantic clicker-game than a strategy sim, Space Warlord Organ Trading Simulator is only slightly more complex than a screensaver, though still chemically compulsive. Days are split between navigating a fleshy stock market, and trying to outbid cyborgs and dogs with names like Chad Shakespeare on the freshest human cuts. Think eBay as overseen by Harlan Ellison’s Allied Mastercomputer. You accept orders, wait for the organs to show up, grab them before a rival trader does and try to make a profit. As you progress, your customers get fussier. Organs are graded like trading cards, or Destiny loot drops. Where does a mythic lung come from, anyway? No time to think about it. The market wants what it wants. Director Xalavier Nelson Jr – previously a writer on online satire game Hypnospace Outlaw – has pedigree in fabricating artefacts from bygone internet eras. This, similarly, feels like a lost early-internet browser game, like the MSDOS classic Drug Lord 2. It feels like a subversive secret, simple enough to load up in a tab but moreish enough to vacuum up hours of free time. While limitless profit is the central premise, there are unlockable endings. Satiating requests from particular aliens sends you down different story threads and a sparse narrative unfolds through these snippets. It’s just enough to build intrigue without interrupting all the spleen-slinging, although not substantial enough to be considered a real payoff. Instead, victories arrive in the moment: the subtle bleeps that let you know you’ve scored a profit, however minimal, on your latest acquisition, or the guilty rapture of realising your latest haul of livers are now worth their oozing weight in gold. SWOTS never breaks pace to impose introspection, but like Universal Paperclips or Cookie Clicker, the loop itself conveys all it needs to. The reasons why this blueprint is irresistible to human brains might be best left unexamined. The soundtrack is one of the best of the year, and it’s incredibly stylish. But the sheer gory, numerical compulsion at its core gets more terrifying the more you consider how much sway this manic impulse toward numb, exploitative accumulation holds in our own world. Dystopias like this used to feel creepily prescient. Now, they just feel terrifyingly honest. Merry Christmas, by the way. Space Warlord Organ Trading Simulator is out now; £15Half a billion free at-home coronavirus tests will be sent to the American public in the fight against Omicron, Joe Biden announced yesterday while pushing back against resistance to vaccine mandates by saying they are intended “not to control your life but to save your life”. The president, whose address was intended to rally the troops for the latest Covid battle, began with his signature empathy card. “I want to start by acknowledging how tired, worried and frustrated I know you are. I know how you’re feeling. For many of you, this will be the first or even the second Christmas where you look – across the table will be an empty kitchen chair there.” But then came the Churchillian appeal for stiff upper lips: “While Covid has been a tough adversary, we’ve shown that we’re tougher – tougher because we have the power of science and vaccines that prevent illness and save lives, and tougher because of our resolve.” Should Americans celebrate Christmas as normal? Biden said unvaccinated people have good reason to be concerned, but those who have been vaccinated should celebrate Christmas as planned. Outcry after Colorado trucker given 110 years for fatal accident The case of a young Colorado truck driver sentenced to 110 years in prison over his role in a fatal collision has prompted widespread calls for leniency and fueled criticism of the US justice system. Yesterday, the Colorado district attorney whose office prosecuted the case asked the court to reconsider the sentence of Rogel Aguilera-Mederos, 26, after the backlash over a punishment that has been called unduly harsh. Aguilera-Mederos was convicted in October of vehicular homicide and other charges related to a deadly crash in April 2019. He has said he was descending a steep portion of the highway when the brakes on his semi-trailer failed, leading to a multi-vehicle pileup and four deaths. More than 4.5 million people have signed a petition calling for Colorado’s governor, Jared Polis, to grant clemency or commute his sentence. Meanwhile, truckers and civil rights groups have expressed outrage over the sentence. Why did he get such a long sentence? The judge in the case has said he had to give Aguilera-Mederos the lengthy sentence based on minimum sentencing laws for the charges, prompting further criticism of the criminal justice system. ‘Like a freeway in traffic’: America’s busiest ports choked by a pandemic holiday The holiday season at the ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles, America’s busiest shipping complex, has always been hectic. But 2021 is a year unlike any other. A pandemic-induced buying boom and supply chain crisis led to an unprecedented backlog of ships lingering offshore and towering stacks of colorful containers clogging the entirety of the dockyard. Inside the port, thousands of workers are laboring around the clock to unload these containers one by one, sending the televisions, bicycles, medical supplies and more that they contain out to trains and waiting truckers, whose rigs stretch into nearby residential neighborhoods. The goods eventually make their way to warehouses and stores and into the arms of eager consumers. “It’s like being on a freeway in traffic,” Danny Miranda, the president of ILWU Local 94, the union that represents dockworkers, said of the port complex. “There’s nowhere to go. Every space is being utilized.” What’s behind the congestion? Climbing consumer sales, worker shortages and the slowdown of major transportation hubs during the pandemic created a crisis in the global supply chain and have led to increasing costs and shortages of goods and containers. In other news … Twenty-five years after JonBenét Ramsey was killed, police say DNA has not been ruled out as a means to help solve the case. The six-year-old was found dead in the basement of her family’s Boulder, Colorado, home on 26 December 1996. The case became one of the highest-profile mysteries in the United States. An advertising technology billionaire has resigned his membership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and rebuked the faith over social issues and LGBTQ rights in an unusual public move. Jeff T Green has also donated $600,000 to the LGBTQ-rights group Equality Utah. A Madagascan minister was one of two survivors to have swum about 12 hours to shore after their helicopter crashed off the island’s north-east coast, authorities said. A search was continuing for two other passengers after Monday’s crash, the cause of which was not immediately clear. A Harvard University professor charged with hiding his ties to a Chinese-run recruitment program has been found guilty on all counts. Charles Lieber, 62, the former chair of Harvard’s department of chemistry and chemical biology, had pleaded not guilty to the charges against him. Stat of the day: seconds before a 6.2 earthquake rattled California, half a million phones got a vital warning In the moments before a 6.2-magnitude earthquake struck the northern California coast on Monday, roughly half a million phones buzzed. An early-alert system managed by the US Geological Survey sent warnings out before the ground started to shake, giving residents in the sparsely populated area vital time to take cover. The earthquake brought significant shaking but minimal damage in Humboldt county, and officials said it was an excellent test of the alert system. Don’t miss this: Larry David helped me embrace life as a bald man What Stuart Heritage has learned from baldness is this: choose your role models carefully. For a while his was Stanley Tucci, but in reality, he says, Tucci does the bald a disservice. He is too charming, too handsome, too well-dressed. “We might think that we can harness our inner Tucci, but it’s impossible. He is a movie star, with a movie star’s presence. Instead, I found myself glomming on to Larry David, who has this year become my uncontested bald oracle. Nobody on Earth seems to understand the bald experience like David,” he writes. Climate check: why everyone from Prince William to Jeff Bezos is looking to Costa Rica Costa Rica is the only tropical country that has successfully halted and reversed deforestation, a commitment that dozens of other countries have made but are far from achieving. It is aiming for total decarbonisation by 2050, not just a net zero target. If there had been a popularity contest at Cop26, the Costa Rican president, Carlos Alvarado Quesada, would have been a clear winner. Leonardo DiCaprio, Jeff Bezos, Boris Johnson and Prince William all wanted to speak with the leader of the tiny Central American country, eager to bask in its green glow. Last Thing: McDonald’s rations fries in Japan due to potato shortage A new kind of chip shortage has hit Japanese supply chains, with McDonald’s forced to ration fries as Covid-19 and floods in Canada squeeze potato imports. McDonald’s Japan said it would only sell small-sized french fries for a week from Friday to avoid shortages. “Due to large-scale flooding near the Port of Vancouver … and the global supply chain crunch caused by the coronavirus pandemic, there are delays in the supply of potatoes,” it said.At least one person is dead and dozens more are missing after a landslide at a jade mine in northern Myanmar, a member of a rescue team has said. The landslide in the Hpakant area of Kachin state happened at about 4am on Wednesday local time, and there were fears up to 100 people were missing. Ko Nyi, a member of a rescue team, said: “We’ve sent 25 injured people to hospital while we’ve found one dead.” About 200 rescuers were searching to recover bodies, and some were using boats to search for the dead in a nearby lake, he said. A photo posted on social media by a local journalist who said he was at the scene showed dozens of people standing on the edge of the lake, with some launching boats into the water. Local media outlet Kachin News Group said 20 miners had been killed in the landslide, while Myanmar’s fire services said its personnel from Hpakant and the nearby town of Lone Khin were involved in the rescue effort but gave no figures of dead or missing. An official at the Kachin Network Development Foundation, a civil society group, told Reuters that up to 80 people may have been swept into the lake by mining waste. “Authorities arrived at the site around 7am and are conducting the search,” Dashi Naw Lawn, an official at the civil society group, said by telephone. In another landslide last weekend, media reported at least six people died. Hundreds of diggers have returned to Hpakant during the rainy season to prospect in the treacherous open-cast mines, according to a local activist, despite a junta ban on digging until March 2022. “They mine at night and in the morning they tip out the earth and rock,” said the activist, adding the added weight had caused the land to slip down into the lake. Ko Nyi, a member of the rescue team, said increased pressure from the weight of dumped soil and rock had pushed the ground downhill into the lake. Myanmar’s jade mines are notoriously dangerous. In 2020, more than 160 people were buried alive after a wave of mud swept through a mine in Hpakant, while 54 people died in 2019 when a lake broke its banks. Conditions are treacherous for the low-paid migrant workers who toil in the mines, particularly during monsoon season. Equipment failures and other accidents are common in the industry, which is controlled by the military elite and private conglomerates. People from impoverished ethnic communities, who search for scraps left behind by big firms, are often the victims of such disasters. Hpakant is in Kachin state, home to the world’s largest and most valuable jade deposits, but little of the profits trickles down into the country. In 2014, a report by Global Witness put the value of jade production in Myanmar at about $31bn, nearly half of Myanmar’s GDP that year. The vast majority is smuggled to China, where jade is highly sought-after and associated with royalty, bypassing tax authorities. The ousted government of the Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi had pledged to clean up the industry when it took power in 2016, but activists say little has changed. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportWho doesn’t love a good holiday-season ritual? Weeping through the end credits of Scrooged. Sousing mince pies with brandy cream, and eating them for breakfast. Staying up late on Christmas Day so you can follow the start of the Boxing Day Test, even though England are already two down in the series and you’ve started to remember why the Ashes is cricket’s most consistently overrated contest. It’s such a comfort, in our turbulent modern times, to have these traditions to cling to. If there’s a spectre at the feast, a fly in the eggnog, a potential choking hazard in the plum pudding, it is only the sense that a team with England’s considerable resources ought to be putting up a better fight than this. After all, they’re not just letting themselves and their fans down. Think of the Australian team, who have been waiting all year for a chance to prove themselves after losing to India. Beating this England side isn’t going to prove anything. Still, it’s all part of the routine: that frustrating feeling that England really ought to have a chance this time, that Australia aren’t the force they appear to be. One more stop on our four-yearly tram-ride around the ’burbs of Ashes nostalgia. This tour is already trying its hardest to plagiarise its predecessors: the past two Tests have riffed on Ashes infamy and strung a series of England’s greatest hits into the sporting equivalent of a jukebox musical. To open the show, an embarrassing error on the very first ball of the series that sets the tone and presages England’s ultimate doom. We’ll have Rory Burns perform that one. And why not have England show up at the Gabba Test with an underpowered bowling attack? Hmm, trickier. We’d have to convince them to leave out their two best seam … oh wait, they have. It’s not all straight from Now That’s What I Call The 2000s. There have been plenty of throwbacks to earlier periods, too. After their abject first innings in Brisbane, England let 10 for one become 166 for one. Then, having briefly fought back and ripped the guts out of the middle order, they watched Travis Head and the tail disport themselves to the tune of nearly 200 runs. If that scenario is giving you flashbacks, you clearly lived through the Steve Waugh/Ian Healy era. As for the state of the batting, well, that one’s a golden oldie. Behold, the instantly collapsible travel XI, precariously propped up by a stoic, heroic captain. Anyone over 30 can hum along to that one, because they’re playing Michael Atherton’s song. Although to be fair, even Atherton was doing a cover version of Graham Gooch at the time. There have been any number of episodes, in recent years, that have caused the more experienced England fan to complain that it’s like the bloody 1990s all over again. This, of course, is nonsense. At no stage did a 90s team contain England’s greatest wicket-taker of all time, or an all-rounder capable of emulating and even exceeding the legend of Ian Botham. It barely had a batter who averaged over 40 in Tests, let alone 50. But of course, these facts only make the failure of the current crop all the sadder and more infuriating. Jimmy Anderson, Stuart Broad, Mark Wood, Ben Stokes, Chris Woakes, and even the Secret Santa gift of Ollie Robinson: you could argue it’s the strongest pace attack England have taken to Australia in 30 years, including the one that won in 2010-11. And yet England’s incomprehensibly erratic fielding – not to mention poor bowling strategy and an overthought, overwrought selection policy – have had them firing blanks. One reason why the spirit of the 90s is being evinced in this instance is that the pattern of defeat is so painfully familiar. England have shown spine only when it’s quite literally too late to affect the outcome of the game. Joe Root and Dawid Malan’s century stands, in both games, offered escape from embarrassment, but not from jail, and as for the beautiful but fantastical hope that Jos Buttler might pull off the mother of all miracle draws in Adelaide … well, this is a time of multiple religious celebrations, so it feels wrong to cast shade on anyone’s belief system. Let’s all agree to keep our faith in Father Christmas for now. Which brings us back to England’s record in Australia, and the idea that an Ashes tour is one of the greatest sporting shows on earth. If you exclude the Victorian vanity trips that England dominated before Australia had a serious domestic structure of their own, then since the start of the 20th century England have played 145 Tests in Australia, losing 77 of them, winning 43 and drawing 25. Of the nine Ashes series they’ve won away from home in that time – for comparison, they’ve lost 17 – only one has come since 1987. This edition of the Ashes and England’s performances in it are not helping the creeping fear that the rivalry itself might be gradually evolving into self-parody. England teams heading to the not-so-holy land to hunt for the lost grail do not habitually inspire epic sagas of derring-do. We distract from the one-sidedness of the clash with self-mythologising spin-offs, like Michael Clarke and his broken fuckin’ sledging, or Jonny Bairstow not-quite-head-butting Cameron Bancroft. There are, of course, still three Tests to play, three opportunities for this series to prove all of the above utterly wrong. England will need to find both Christmas magic and new year fireworks to stop this story feeling very familiar indeed. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Texas officials have quietly restarted a controversial program to ask people on the voter rolls to prove their citizenship, sparking alarm that thousands of eligible voters could be wrongfully targeted. The Texas secretary of state’s office has identified just under 12,000 people it suspects of being non-citizens since September, when the program restarted (there are more than 17 million registered voters in Texas). About 2,327 voter registrations have been cancelled so far. The vast majority of cancellations were because voters failed to respond to a notice giving them 30 days to prove their citizenship. The secretary of state flags anyone as a suspected non-citizen if they register to vote and then subsequently visit the Texas department of public safety (DPS), the state’s driver’s license agency, and indicate they are not a citizen. Local election officials in Texas’ 254 counties are then asked to review the names. If those officials cannot verify citizenship, they are required to send them a letter asking them to prove their citizenship within 30 days or else their voter registration gets cancelled. But election officials in Harris county, the most populous in the state, are concerned about the accuracy of the data being used to challenge voters. After the county mailed proof of citizenship requests to 2,796 people, 167 voters - nearly 6% of those contacted – responded with proof of citizenship. The state removed an additional 161 people from the list of people whose citizenship needed to be verified, according to a county official. “We are not confident in the quality of the information we are being mandated to act upon,” Isabel Longoria, the county’s election administrator, said in an email. In Fort Bend county, just outside of Houston, officials mailed notices to 515 people in October. About 20% responded with proof of citizenship and the rest were removed from the rolls, according to John Oldham, the county’s election administrator. Many of the people who responded said they had accidentally checked a box during their DPS transaction indicating they were not citizens, Oldham said. In Cameron county, along the US-Mexico border, election officials have sent out 246 letter since September, almost all to people with Hispanic surnames, according to the Texas Monthly, which first reported the program restarted. About 60 people have been cancelled so far. After the notices went out, a married couple who had heard about the notices came into the elections office to provide their naturalization papers, even though the couple’s citizenship wasn’t challenged, said Remi Garza, the county elections administrator. “It saddened me too,” Garza said. “People who shouldn’t have to be concerned about this type of proving citizenship felt that they had to do that.” Voting rights groups say they are trying to better understand the process the state is using, but are concerned eligible voters are getting targeted. “A US citizen voter who gets a challenge letter is understandably intimidated. And especially for naturalized US citizens, who went through an entire bureaucratic process to be able to vote, getting a letter that accuses them of being an ineligible voter is particularly intimidating,” said Nina Perales, an attorney with the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund. “People will naturally assume, based on this official correspondence, that they might have made some kind of mistake, or that they are not proper voters.” The program had been on hold since 2019, when a federal judge ordered Texas to stop a similar, error-filled, effort that he described as “ham-handed”. As part of a settlement in that case, Texas agreed to only flag people if they registered to vote prior to the DPS visit in which they indicated they weren’t a citizen. It also agreed to reinstate and challenge voters who provided proof of citizenship, even if it was outside the 30-day window. The citizenship check comes as Republicans have moved to blunt the rapidly growing political power of Texas’ non-white population. Texas prosecutors have sought criminal punishments for people, including non-citizens, who make voting mistakes and the attorney general, Ken Paxton, has zealously pursued claims of voter fraud, which is exceedingly rare in Texas and elsewhere. Bruce Elfant, whose office oversees voter registration in Travis county, said his office so far has internally been able to confirm that less than 100 of the 300 to 400 people flagged by the secretary of state’s office were citizens. Most in the group had been flagged because of clerical errors, he said. His office has not yet sent out any challenge notices and is waiting for more information before it does so. In El Paso county, state officials referred 4,000 suspected non-citizens for review, and around 300 had already offered proof of citizenship, said Lisa Wise, the county’s election administrator. The county isn’t currently cancelling the registration of any voter who doesn’t respond, she said. Federal law prohibits officials from conducting mass voter cancellations within 90 days of a primary election. Texas’ primary is on 1 March, so the state can’t remove anyone who doesn’t respond to a proof of citizenship letter until later this spring. Thomas Buser-Clancy, a senior staff attorney with the Texas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, said his organization was trying to understand why eligible voters were being flagged, but it was clear “something is not going right”. “Even if your system flags one eligible voter and threatens to remove them, that’s a problem,” he said. “If you have hundreds, and if you add it up across counties, you’re probably getting to thousands of eligible voters, being threatened with removal.” Sam Taylor, a spokesman for the Texas secretary of state’s office said he was confident in the data. “We’re following the settlement agreement exactly as we’re supposed to. If the counties have additional information where they’re able to cross people off the list who have in fact become citizens and they’re lawfully registered to vote, that’s great. That’s how the process is supposed to work.” But Buser-Clancy noted that those who were able to affirm their citizenship likely only represented a fraction of the eligible voters who were probably affected. “Those people are the lucky ones that both received the notice, like actually went through their mail, looked it up, and had the documentation on hand to send in,” he added. “What that tells you is that there’s some other percentage of people who are going to be removed from the rolls even though they’re eligible voters.”We turn to poems at the big moments in a year, as poetry is the language we reach for when everyday language simply isn’t enough. Great poets can articulate what most of us find impossible to put into words. And when it comes to the wonder – or dread – of Christmas, we find that there’s a poem for pretty much everything, from profound expressions of love and loss right down to the troubled ruminations of a turkey. Poetry anthologies have always been a perfect way to discover the almost infinite variety of poems and poets. My new anthology, A Poet for Every Day of the Year is a gathering of 366 poems by 366 poets from across the globe and across time. The book travels through a calendar year. And so, in the spirit of this Guardian series, here are my top 10 Christmas poems. 1. ‘Ring out wild bells’, from In Memoriam AHH by Alfred, Lord Tennyson This Christmas will be painful for many faced with empty chairs around the dinner table. From 1849, In Memoriam captures the loss of one of Tennyson’s dear friends, including the now immortal line “’tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at all”. It articulates a stirring sense of resolve in the face of sadness, the speaker determined to leave the darkness of the world behind him, and instead face the light of the future. In the moment evoked by the poem, the bells ring with hope. 2. Talking Turkeys by Benjamin Zephaniah Christmas is not a merry time for turkeys either, as the British Jamaican Benjamin Zephaniah – one of our leading dub poets and children’s authors – illustrates here with characteristic humour and aplomb. This poem, and the book of the same name, enjoyed stratospheric success after publication in 1994. Born in the Birmingham suburb of Handsworth – which he called “the Jamaican capital of Europe” – Zephaniah was a local legend by the age of 15, known for his rousing, socially conscious poetry. This a perfect example of how Zephaniah takes on an important issue and introduces it to young people in a way that is hugely entertaining and fun. 3. A Visit from St Nicholas by Clement Clarke Moore This is another great family poem for Christmas, but it was written under a cloud of secrecy nearly two centuries ago. Published anonymously in a New York newspaper in 1823, it was not until 1837 that a poetry editor revealed that his friend Clement Clarke Moore – a highly esteemed scholar in classical languages – was the mysterious author. Moore had simply written it to entertain his children one Christmas Eve and never intended it to be published. Its popularity grew and grew, with the result that its depiction of the saint in a sleigh driven by reindeer – with all but Rudolph first named here – is credited with having the most influence on modern images of St Nicholas (or Santa Claus) across the English-speaking world. 4. The Oxen by Thomas Hardy Despite his reputation as the great novelist of Tess of the d’Urbervilles and Jude the Obscure, Thomas Hardy wrote more than 1,000 poems and considered himself to be first and foremost a poet. This Christmas poem is a subtle discussion of the nature of faith; it might be far-fetched to imagine oxen kneeling to the new-born baby Jesus, but the speaker still wants it to be true. 5. Christmas by John Betjeman Betjeman was a practising Anglican, and his faith is explored in some of his poems, particularly those inspired by Christmas. The poet’s repeated question of “is it true?”, seemingly aimed at the Christian message of the festival, moves the poem along from doubt towards a sense of divine wonder that puts the secular rituals of the season into a magnificent – albeit characteristically curmudgeonly – perspective. 6. Christmas Carol by Paul L Dunbar Dunbar was a writer who achieved international success against all the odds. Born in Kentucky in 1872 to former slaves, Dunbar attended high school in Dayton, Ohio where he was the only black pupil. Despite graduating with top grades and ambitions to be a writer, circumstances forced him to take work as an elevator operator. However, one schoolfriend, Orville Wright – of airplane-inventing fame – helped to provide the financial backing for Dunbar to publish his first collection of poems. Success ensued and from that point on Dunbar lived off his writing until his tragically early death from tuberculosis at the age of 33. Christina Rossetti’s In the Bleak Midwinter (which would be my No 11 here) might be the best-known poem sung as a carol, but Dunbar’s contains the direct exhortation to throw all our power into singing. It is a joyous Christian celebration. 7. The Christmas Rose by Cecil Day-Lewis This moving poem, showing the hope and light that is associated with Christmas, comes to us from the Anglo-Irish poet who was father of the Hollywood legend Daniel. In his early years, Day-Lewis was a Marxist who became a member of the British Communist party, and was influenced by his university friend WH Auden; but he became a much more traditional lyric writer, and an unlikely establishment figure who was awarded the role of poet laureate in 1968. 8. I Saw a Stable by Mary Coleridge This lyrical poem focuses, brilliantly and simply, on the original meaning of Christmas. The great grand-niece of Samuel Taylor Coleridge (if you were wondering), Mary did not achieve the same heights of fame as her forebear, but as many women poets were ignored or sidelined in this past, I am glad to be able to help redress the balance and celebrate her work. 9. Journey of the Magi by TS Eliot This takes place on Epiphany, the 12th day of Christmas. Here, Eliot tells the story of the nativity from the unusual perspective of one of three Magi (kings) themselves, emphasising the difficulty of their journey and their feelings of alienation when presented with the birth of Christ – and an entire new faith. 10. A Christmas Poem by Wendy Cope Christmas is not a merry time for all, as Wendy Cope makes clear in this perfectly executed poem, reproduced below. Comedic talent is as underrated in the world of poetry as it is in other art forms, but Cope is a virtuoso whose highly skilled work dazzles with irony, wit, and parody. She has been called “a jet-age Tennyson” for her pitch-perfect common touch: At Christmas little children sing and merry bells jingle, The cold winter air makes our hands and faces tingle And happy families go to church and cheerily they mingle And the whole business is unbelievably dreadful, if you’re single. From Christmas Poems by Wendy Cope. Reproduced by permission from Faber. A Poet for Every Day of the Year, edited by Allie Esiri, is published by Macmillan.There is a brisk trade in reboots right now, but it can be a tricky concept to master. The past few months alone have seen the return of Dexter, Sex and the City and Gossip Girl, while next year promises new True Blood, Fresh Prince of Bel Air and Frasier. But for every Doctor Who or Queer Eye, in which a reboot becomes a reimagining, there’s a Gilmore Girls or, and I shudder at the memory, Supermarket Sweep. To get attention for reviving a classic is easy; to do it well is very hard indeed. Happily, The Wonder Years (Disney+) has been done with care and innovation, and taps into the nostalgic appeal of the original late 80s/early 90s sitcom, while carving out a new path. The original Wonder Years began in 1988 with a character called Kevin looking back on his glorious 1960s youth. This time, the story centres on the Williams family, and their life in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1968. Don Cheadle narrates as the adult Dean; young Dean is played by Elisha Williams, who is so good that he makes me question whether my preconceptions about child actors might be unfair, after all. Several reviews in the US have pointed out that if this employed a similar timeline as the original, we would be watching Dean look back wistfully at the 00s. I love a low-rise bootcut jean and a belly button piercing as much as anyone, but the 60s setting is far more handsome, and provides a social and cultural backdrop that nudges this above the usual sitcom fare. The Williams are a black family, which makes the prospect of a series that leans heavily on nostalgia far more interesting; the rose-tinted glasses through which a 12-year-old white boy might look at his youth in suburban Anytown are clearly going to be different from those of a 12-year-old black child in Alabama. Within moments, older Dean has set his middle-class family’s life in context: his father had already given him “the police talk” about how to behave around cops, politicians are exploiting racial divisions on a national stage, and white flight is taking white families out of the city centres. Dean’s older sister, Kim, wears a Black Panthers T-shirt and references Bobby Seale, co-founder and activist. The school system has only recently been desegregated, and in the first episode Dean, or “Black Jesus”, as his friend teases, decides to be “the great unifier”, pushing for his baseball team to play a team of white kids. Dean is an awkward, precocious child who is shorter than his best friend and is ashamed to wear thick glasses. He goes through the trials and tribulations that most adolescents are forced to endure. This is about education, bullying, friendship, first love, family and riding a bike moodily around town – and for the most part, it is delightful. Dean is in love with Keisa (Milan Ray), a tough girl who borrows his comic books. His older brother, Bruce, is fighting in Vietnam; Kim is finding her own political identity. As the youngest, he says, “all the good parts have been handed out”. All that’s left for Dean is to work out where he fits in or, perhaps more accurately, where it’s OK not to fit in. He calls himself “sheep number three”. Crucially, it’s funny, and has a winning, easy charm. It feels like the kind of comedy that trusts its audience with smart jokes. The humour is divided between young Dean’s wide-eyed wonder and youthful sensitivities, and the older Dean’s knowledge, as narrator, that when you are 12, the trivial stuff can seem insurmountable, and the things that really matter might fade into the background. It realises that viewers can handle the big ideas with the smaller ones, often at the same time. The test for any reboot is whether there is a point to it. Has it done something new with the name, rather than coasting on brand recognition? The answer, in this case, is an emphatic yes. It would have been simpler to have made another nostalgia-loving period piece, which doesn’t examine the idea in any meaningful way; instead, it balances its plates with care. Fans of the original may also wish to keep an eye out for the director’s name in the credits.It happened overnight. Larry Ryerson, 78, woke up on a Sunday morning in late June in Medford, southern Oregon, to find thousands of seedlings on his 10-acre Christmas tree farm dying. Their bright green coloring had drained away after a day of triple digit temperatures. And over the next two days, as temperatures climbed as high as 115F, Ryerson watched the young trees, many just over a foot tall, turn brown and die. “It just kind of breaks your heart that you go out there and one day they’re nice fresh-looking trees, and the next day, they’re wilted and turning colors,” said Ryerson, who co-owns U Cut Christmas Tree Farm with his sister. “And there’s nothing you can do about it.” Ryerson estimated that he lost 4,500 trees and was only able to keep his u-cut open for three days this year because of the lack of inventory. His business, which has been around for almost four decades, typically opens around Thanksgiving and continues to sell all the way through Christmas Day. “I just feel so sorry that a lot of people come up here year after year to get their own tree and we’re one of the few tree farms left in the valley,” he said. Ryerson isn’t alone. Christmas tree farms across Oregon, the nation’s largest producer, have found themselves in a precarious position after a year of extreme weather. A deadly “heat dome” pummeled the Pacific northwest beginning in late June, shattering heat records in Oregon and the surrounding area, and a drought engulfed the state for months. The heat and drought are estimated to have wiped out millions of trees across the state, most of them seedlings, leaving farmers to navigate the fallout of what several described as the worst summer in memory. Some, like Ryerson’s farm, saw huge swaths of their crops destroyed, while others were left with rows and rows of trees with entire sides scalded or new growth withered. And with the changing climate, this will not be the last year of extreme weather. Now, some Christmas tree farmers across the state have started taking steps to prepare for a future in which the climate may be much less hospitable to their industry. Tom Norby, the president of the Oregon Christmas Tree Growers Association and owner of the Trout Creek Tree Farm, says such changes could include planting cover crops, or experimenting with growing types of trees more resistant to the heating climate. Norby’s own farm had minimal loss this past year, which he attributed to planting grass between each of his trees, which helped to keep moisture in the soil and block heat from radiating up to the trees. But some changes may have to be more dramatic, such as planting months earlier, or even relocating farms farther north. “Frankly,” said Norby, “in 100 years, it may be in British Columbia.” A devastating season This past summer, it was the timing of the heatwave that made it especially lethal. It struck early in the summer, mere months after seedlings were planted and right in the middle of the crop’s peak growth period. At the same time, prolonged dry periods, which have become increasingly common in the region, were already making seedling survival a challenge (Christmas tree farms typically don’t irrigate, due to their location and the fact that the trees normally haven’t needed it). Dana Furrow, co-owner of Furrow Farm in Hillsboro, Oregon, which includes an 80-acre Christmas tree farm, said when the temperatures pushed well past 100F in June, they had only planted their seedlings weeks before, when the climate was already dry. By the time the heatwave hit, her crops were in the midst of early growth – a very sensitive period. The result was the farm lost thousands of seedlings, along with virtually all of its harvestable, u-cut Noble fir trees. “It definitely hurts because you’ve already put the cost of the seedlings, the labor, the time, working the fields. I mean it’s a lot,” she said. “Christmas trees are a very labor-intensive crop. So, you lose all of that and you don’t get that back.” Noble Mountain Tree Farm, a wholesale grower in Salem with about 4,000 acres and more than half a million trees in sales every year, lost about 280,000 seedlings, according to Bob Schaefer, its general manager. At the same time, more than a quarter of its primary species, Noble fir trees, were rendered unsalable this year. He said that they’re looking at having to do a lot of replanting and additional fertilizing in an effort to help the new trees catch up to the other seedlings. For this season, they’ve had to give their retailers the option of either receiving fewer trees or taking other species. Full damage could ‘take years’ to be felt Overall, the impact on consumers has been fairly minor. Some businesses have priced their trees slightly higher, while others haven’t been able to offer the variety of species they have in years past. Norby estimated that inventory was down by 5% to 10% across the state, but clarified that there was no Christmas tree shortage. “You want a Christmas tree, they’re out there,” he said. “But, you know, here’s the thing, we should be embracing Christmas tree growers. And what you might get is a slightly damaged tree, you know, a tree that’s expressing some of the signs of this global warming event.” The real impact might not be felt for years to come, according to Chal Landgren, Oregon State University Extension Christmas tree specialist. He cited the fact that most of the damage was on seedlings (Christmas trees take six to 10 years to mature). “We’re going to just have to watch, you know, we’ll know when that date gets closer. But there’s gonna be this kind of gap from the damage from this year, in eight years,” he said. Ryerson has already started to make changes to his farm in Medford, after the heatwave. In October, they planted a fresh batch of seedlings – months earlier than normal – in hopes that the rain would help their root systems. He has also started looking around for additional nutrients that might help to protect his crops. But after this year’s devastation and watching his house and some of his trees burn down in 2019, those changes may simply not be enough. “If I have another year like this year, I probably have to go out of business,” he said, “just because you work so hard to get them grown and all of a sudden they die – well, what’s the point?”Voting rights are under assault by Republican state lawmakers, clearly afraid of the power of the Black electorate and empowered by the gutting of the landmark 1965 Voting Rights Act. The federal response, or lack thereof, will affect not only Black voters but the power of all Americans to shape our government with our votes. Endemic racism obscures the obvious: an attack on Black voters is an attack on the foundation of our democracy. With two voting rights bills held hostage in the US Senate by threat of a Republican filibuster, Democrats are not fighting back with the same vigor that Republicans have used to trample on the rights of voters. A failure of US Senate Democrats to move on the passage of voting rights will ultimately be a self-fulfilling prophecy. If they fail to secure rights for the voters who put them into office, their base for the midterm elections will shrink and open a path for a Republican takeover in 2022. However, Senator Raphael Warnock, a Democrat from Georgia, recently pointed out in a speech on the Senate floor that when the will is there, Congress changes its rules to allow legislation to pass. He noted that the Senate recently enabled a vote on raising the national debt ceiling to prevent a default on government financial obligations and uphold the full faith and credit of the US government. Warnock shone a light on the hypocrisy of changing Senate procedure for financial legislation but not to combat the suppression of Black voters. “We’ve decided we must do it for the economy, but not for the democracy,” he said, pointing out that Democrats are hiding behind technicalities to avoid an ugly confrontation. But racism cloaked in the relic of the filibuster cannot prevail over our hard-won right to shape our democracy. Since Black voters showed up in record numbers in the 2020 election, trying to save a democracy that has not always protected us, the political backlash from Republican state houses has echoed throughout 2021. The result is that Black voters have less protection today than we had at this time last year. Yet Joe Biden and a Democratic Congress have not used the power that Black voters secured for them to protect our rights. They have expended their political capital on the infrastructure and Build Back Better bills, when the basis of democracy should be their most urgent priority. The failure of the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act to pass in a Democratic Congress shows the lengths to which Republicans will go to keep Black voters away from the polls. Yet even without federal voting protection, in the 2021 “off-year” elections, Black people came out in strong numbers to prevail in local elections throughout the south. Black Voters Matter (BVM) has been in the streets, on the phones and connecting with our partners to mobilize for elections, showing that there is no off-year when it comes to voting. In the recent November races for city council, mayor and the statehouse of representatives throughout Georgia, where new state laws have taken direct aim at the Black electorate, we mobilized Black voters to make our voices heard. With on-the-ground canvassing and voter outreach caravans, we turned out Black voters in Warner Robins, Georgia, for a crucial city council race. Our texting and phone banking campaigns in Hinds County, Mississippi, helped to secure a major victory in a local judge’s race. And this summer, on our Freedom Ride for Voting Rights, we started mobilizing Black voters from New Orleans to Washington DC months before important local elections took shape. And our movement is still gaining momentum. Last week, as the president convened leaders from around the world for his Global Democracy Summit, BVM partnered with local and national advocacy organizations on coordinated voting rights actions across the country to point out the administration’s hypocrisy. Holding a global summit on democracy is a slap in the face to the millions of citizens in Biden’s own backyard who still face significant obstacles to the polls. In response, we held nearly a dozen events nationwide, including a student hunger strike led by Un-Pac Arizona, calling on Biden and the Senate to pass voting rights legislation before Congress goes into holiday recess. Actions also took place in California, Delaware, Georgia, Maine, New Hampshire, New York, Virginia and Washington DC. Basic civil rights do not take a holiday, so neither should those entrusted to safeguard those rights. We will continue to push and build a movement to demand #RightsBeforeRecess. Voting rights is not just about election day; it’s a 365-day mission. We have responded to attempts to block us from the ballot with more community organizing, more education, more outreach and even more energy. And it’s now time for congressional Democrats to respond by clearing the way to pass laws that protect not only Black voters but the rights and freedoms of all of us. Cliff Albright and LaTosha Brown are co-founders of Black Voters MatterThe cost of abating the carbon impact of a proposed third runway at Heathrow has doubled since parliament approved the idea of expansion, a report presented to MPs suggests. A study by the New Economics Foundation suggests the carbon value or cleanup cost of the runway has increased from £50bn to £100bn, twice the figure presented to ministers and parliamentarians by the Department for Transport in the Airports National Policy Statement (ANPS) in 2018. The “carbon value” of the expansion is the price of abatement required to offset the carbon emissions of the runway. This autumn, the government revised carbon values to bring them into line with new legally binding net zero obligations, passed in June 2019. The report – a draft of which was presented to members of the all-party parliamentary group on Heathrow expansion and regional connectivity – suggests these changes have a significant impact on the proposed runway expansion. “In a climate emergency, any project or policy which creates new greenhouse gas emissions comes at great cost to society. Either we suffer the consequences of deeper ecological collapse, or someone, somewhere, has to ‘clean up’ those gases,” the report said. When a country, as the UK does, has a legal commitment to cut carbon emissions to zero, most options for reducing emissions and removing carbon from the atmosphere are already being utilised, the report said. “The cost, therefore, of cleaning up, or ‘abating’, new emissions, gets higher as your climate ambition rises,” the report said. In September, a new set of costs of carbon abatement were released by the government. “Our calculations show that at Heathrow, the carbon cost of emissions resulting from the airport’s proposed expansion over the period 2025-2050 has doubled, from around £50bn, to over £100bn when considering the new government carbon values.” the report said. The carbon costs include that of both arriving and departing flights. The change in costs impacts all proposed airport expansion. Across eight airports planning projects all have had their climate cost dramatically underestimated, NEF says. The research suggested cumulatively the eight active airport expansion plans come with an emissions price tag of £73.6bn between 2025 and 2050. Only a fraction of this, £11.8bn, is likely to be reclaimed in taxes on the aviation industry. The remainder, £62bn, will be a cost to government and represent “a colossal subsidy to polluting industry, and significant cost – either economic, environmental, or both – to the rest of society”, the report said. David Simmonds MP, the co-chair of the APPG, said: “This report highlights the need to get the detail right when considering our future aviation picture and the government’s Jet Zero review. “We cannot afford to underestimate the implications for major projects such as Heathrow expansion and future generations will not thank us for creating complicated financial mechanisms which won’t do anything to actually help the environment.” Paul McGuinness, the chair of the No 3rd Runway Coalition, said: “As was perhaps inevitable, Heathrow expansion’s carbon costs have escalated exponentially, even before they’ve put more greenhouse gas emitting planes into our atmosphere. The ever-growing case for the government to cancel Heathrow expansion has become incontrovertible.” When MPs voted for the Airline National Policy Statement, which contained the expansion in principle in 2018, the net economic value of it was between £3bn and -£2.5bn, he said. Now the carbon abatement cost element of Heathrow expansion has increased exponentially, the total economic impact of the scheme can only come at a great cost to the UK economy, said McGuinness. Lord Deben, the chair of the Climate Change Committee, which advises government, said last month: “There is not any space for airport expansion”. The CCC recommends “no net expansion of UK airport capacity unless the sector is on track to sufficiently outperform its net emissions trajectory and can accommodate the additional demand”. A Heathrow spokesperson said: “Reducing carbon emissions from flying has always been a central consideration of our plans to expand Heathrow. “We have always known that we will have to prove that a new runway is compatible with the UK’s net zero target. While our current focus remains on responding to the pandemic, we remain confident that we can expand and meet stringent targets. “The UK aviation sector was the first in the world to commit to net zero and publish a detailed plan to get there. The recent commitment by the whole global aviation sector to net zero and the UK government’s ambition for 10% sustainable aviation fuel by 2030 are clear steps towards taking the carbon out of flying, even as we grow.”The Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich has settled his libel claim against the journalist Catherine Belton over her best-selling book Putin’s People, after an agreement was reached late on Tuesday. The text will now recognise that the allegation Abramovich bought Chelsea football club at the Russian president’s behest is not a statement of fact. It will include additional denials from the oligarch’s spokesperson and the club. It will also correct a claim that the late oligarch Boris Berezovsky co-owned the Russian oil company Sibneft with Abramovich. The amendment follows a 2011-12 high court legal battle between the two men, which Abramovich won. The book’s publisher, HarperCollins, has agreed to make a payment to charity “in recognition of this error”, it said. Abramovich sued over a number of claims, including that he bought Chelsea on Vladimir Putin’s orders. He was one of three Russian tycoons who initiated libel proceedings against Belton and HarperCollins, together with the Russian state oil company Rosneft. The other defendants subsequently settled or withdrew their claims. Abramovich ended his case after HarperCollins said on Wednesday some information concerning the oligarch was inaccurate. It agreed to make revisions to the book, widely acclaimed as the definitive work on the Putin era. HarperCollins hailed the overnight settlement as a fair agreement. There are no damages being paid to Abramovich himself. Both sides will pay their own costs. Had the libel trial gone ahead in the high court next year the legal bill was likely to have exceeded £10m, it is understood. The publisher said: “While the book always included a denial that Mr Abramovich was acting under anybody’s direction when he purchased Chelsea, the new edition will include a more detailed explanation of Mr Abramovich’s motivations for buying the club. “HarperCollins has also made clear in the book that there is no evidence, beyond the statements of the individuals themselves, supporting claims made to the author by [the former Kremlin insider] Sergei Pugachev and two other unnamed individuals about the purchase of Chelsea Football Club.” HarperCollins acknowledged that a high court judge described Berezovsky as an “inherently unreliable witness”. It added: “HarperCollins and the author apologise that these aspects of the book were not as clear as they would have liked them to have been and are happy to have now clarified the text.” Chelsea FC said it was pleased HarperCollins and Belton had “apologised to Mr Abramovich” and agreed to amend the book. Several false claims about him had been removed, it said, adding they “lacked evidence and were indeed false”. The club said the publisher had agreed to add or delete “over 1700 words”. The sole reason the oligarch had issued his claim was to “refute the false allegations” published about him, including over his purchase of Chelsea and its activities. The statement went on: “As the objectives of this legal claim have never been punitive, we have not asked for any damages to be paid. We have, however, asked that HarperCollins makes a donation in lieu of damages to a charitable organization, to which they have agreed”. Despite the revisions, the agreement is being seen overall as a victory for Belton, who has come under unprecedented legal assault from billionaires with Kremlin ties. Abramovich served for eight years as governor of Chukotka, a region in Russia’s far east. He has consistently denied being under the Russian government’s control. In a statement, she said “this last year has felt like a war of attrition” in which she had been “bombarded with lawsuits” from four Russian billionaires and Rosneft. Belton added: “Though the claimants have denied it was coordinated, it has seemed to me similar to the Kremlin’s multi-pronged campaign against Ukraine in which it has sought to exhaust the west into making security concessions over Nato’s expansion.” She continued: “Throughout, HarperCollins has staunchly defended the book. I could not have wished for a better or braver publisher more committed to public interest journalism.” Campaigners have described the case against Belton as an abuse of the UK’s libel system. Abramovich sued the former Financial Times journalist personally as well as her publisher. The settlement was made following an approach by Abramovich, it is understood. HarperCollins said Belton had always been willing to include the oligarch’s comments on the allegations, and recognised that books on controversial contemporary themes needed updating as new information emerged. At a preliminary hearing in November, Mrs Justice Tipples ruled that several passages in the book that Abramovich said conveyed untrue statements about him were defamatory of him. One such claim was the suggestion that Abramovich was “under the control of Putin” and that the oligarch was obliged “to make the fortune from his business empire available for the use of President Putin and his regime”, Tipples wrote, in a 34-page ruling. But she ruled three out of four sections complained of by Rosneft were not defamatory, with the oil firm subsequently shelving its case. Tipples emphasised that the court was only, at that point, adjudicating on meaning. It was not deciding whether the allegations made about Abramovich or anyone else were true or false. Following Wednesday’s settlement the claims will not be tested in court. At the initial hearing, Abramovich’s lawyer said the book repeated “lazy inaccuracies about Abramovich’s role in various events” and made false and damaging statements about him which were “completely without foundation”. Belton spent seven years writing Putin’s People and was based in Moscow as the bureau chief for the FT. Last month, she was named the 2021 outstanding investigative journalist in awards named after Sergei Magnitsky, a Russian anti-corruption lawyer who died in jail.Considering how many parties they are alleged to have held, Boris Johnson and his government have recently seemed to be very short of friends. A national shortage of Downing Street defenders reached its nadir on 8 December, the morning after a video emerged of No 10 staff laughing and joking about “cheese and wine” at a “business meeting”. Even Sajid Javid, the health secretary, pulled out of a morning media round. Most people would understand Javid’s reticence. Still, there was one man Johnson could count on even at his lowest ebb, never mind that he had called that person “totally fucking hopeless” in a WhatsApp message last year: Matt Hancock. A couple of weeks later, Hancock would find himself dragged into the conflagration over possible parties and social gatherings in Downing Street when the Guardian published a picture of a No 10 garden gathering in May 2020. He admitted he had been in the garden on the evening in question but said it was “not clear” whether a man in the photo seen from behind, with close cropped hair, a dark blue suit and a familiar stance, was him. On 8 December, though, he was riding to the government’s rescue on Good Morning Britain. It was not an easy appearance for Hancock, who faced hostile questioning comparing the alleged party to his own breach of Covid regulations – the notorious kiss with his aide Gina Coladangelo, now his partner, that was captured on CCTV and led to his swift resignation in June. “I wish I could help you more but I can’t,” he said. “The prime minister wasn’t there, as far as we understand, if there was a party.” Whatever Johnson said about Hancock’s performance as a minister, you might imagine he now seemed very useful as a human shield. After such a nightmarish year, Hancock could be forgiven for lying low – and, indeed, has repeatedly been encouraged to do so. So what lies behind his decision to return to the fray? Some view his re-emergence as a kind of penance, indicating his determination to reinvent himself as a backbench heavyweight. Among those he has convinced of his seriousness is Labour’s Rupa Huq, who noted on Twitter that “one can disapprove of @MattHancock’s breaking of the rules” but cited his work with her on efforts to curb the abuse of politicians, and his dyslexia campaign. “I know he looks up to Theresa May,” the former Conservative MP Ben Howlett said. “He said to me that looking at what she’s doing, holding the government to account and using her years of experience, is very inspiring to him.” But while May pulls no punches, Hancock’s parliamentary interventions have largely been to congratulate the government on its competence, leaving others less persuaded that he has entirely abandoned his ministerial ambitions. “Doing the media round when the government is keeping ministers off the airwaves – it’s definitely something people in Downing Street will notice,” said Henry Hill, a news editor for the ConservativeHome website. “It’s perfectly possible to have a meaningful career on the backbenches, but that’s never been the route he’s chosen. I would put good money on his goal being a return to government.” * * * Hancock has always seemed to be a man in a hurry. Those who knew him in his days as a Cambridge master’s student remember a fairly flashy Jaguar and a tendency to drop friends in his hurry to climb the greasy pole. Now, too, he appears to be operating on fast-forward. His period of quiet reflection after his 27 June resignation ended on 7 September when he popped up in the House of Commons with a question in praise of the government’s furlough scheme. Rishi Sunak thought he was “absolutely right”. Hancock’s re-emergence into the full glare of media attention took a little longer – and then proceeded with an almost masochistic intensity. On 1 December he gave his first broadcast interview since his resignation, telling ITV’s Robert Peston: “I’d blown up every part of my life … I let a lot of people down.” The next week, the day before his appearance on Good Morning Britain, he gave an interview to Holly Willoughby and Phillip Schofield on This Morning. While he might have expected that an elevenses sofa chat about his campaign to improve dyslexia screening at primary schools was safe enough territory – non-ideological, unimpeachably positive and underpinned by his own experience of the condition – he endured a jarring change of pace from Schofield: “Was it your dyslexia that meant you misread the social distancing rules?” On air, Hancock appeared ashen, pensive, humble. Off air, ITV staffers suggest, he was in a better mood, enthusiastically bumping elbows with anyone in range and hanging around after filming to chat, when as a minister he would have swiftly departed. “He almost seemed euphoric,” said one. “He didn’t seem to mind being the butt of the joke.” Another said he came across as “nervous, but bouncy … There was a sense of – he’d got the difficult stuff out of the way, and now he’s back.” After the brutal realities of responsibility for the nation’s health during a once-in-a-generation pandemic, and a humiliating personal crisis that led to the end of his marriage, Hancock seemed to feel “now, suddenly, you’re free … I didn’t have the impression that he was wishing he was health secretary at all.” Whatever else, nobody could accuse Hancock of lacking the optimism to overcome experience. In August he announced that he would run the London marathon, only for his sponsorship page to be swamped by punters willing to give a minimum donation of £2 to St Nicholas Hospice Care to insult him. (“I hope your charity vest gives you nipple chafe,” wrote Alan Hamburgers, who gift-aided his contribution.) Still, Hancock got in shape, raised nearly £8,000 and came home in under four hours despite heckles from what he called a “small but noisy group of anti-vaxxers”. In September he posted a comeback video from Haverhill, Suffolk, in which he smiled sadly through a series of observations that might have applied equally to the global pandemic or his own defenestration. “We’ve got through it, haven’t we? And now we’re coming out the other side,” he told one constituent, before leaning on a fast-food counter like the last barfly at closing time and telling a man trying to cook burgers: “It’s nice to be out and about.” After a predictable quantity of internet derision, he deleted it. There was the surreal sight of him posing in stonewash jeans and rollneck on the red carpet of the Capital Jingle Bell Ball. There was the Daily Mail story in which he said “I have been approached to write a book”, only for the supposed publisher, HarperCollins, to issue an emphatic denial. A book summary leaked later gave the provisional title of The Race and explained that Hancock had led the UK to develop a vaccine “beating every country in the world”. Most painful, perhaps, was his announcement on 12 October that he had been offered a job at the UN Economic Commission for Africa (Uneca) as a special representative on financial innovation and climate change. The appointment was reportedly the result of representations made by the campaigner and government adviser Nimco Ali, a close friend of Carrie Johnson, to Uneca. Hancock retweeted congratulatory messages from her and 11 others before the offer was withdrawn on 16 October. While the reversal was ostensibly forced by a sudden realisation that Hancock was ineligible as a sitting MP, it came about after at least 64 NGO leaders and scholars expressed their displeasure, according to a list provided by Tian Johnson, the founder of the African Alliance for HIV Prevention. Johnson said he saw Hancock as “a disgraced politician whose competence has been questioned in his own country and who knows little about Africa”. Nick Dearden, the director of Global Justice Now, said he had been dismayed by the appointment. “People told me, we’ve lost this one, no way is it going to be withdrawn,” he said. “So the uproar must have been much more significant than people in the UN expected.” Through it all, even some of Hancock’s critics admit a certain grudging admiration. “I think there’s something wrong with him,” a bemused Labour MP said. “He just keeps coming back for more. He’s got what boxers would call a very good chin.” His allies, meanwhile, view his re-emergence as a story of redemption. “He’s still the same person,” said Rachel Hood, the chair of the West Suffolk Conservative Association. “Life’s not an exact science. Suffolk people are very nice – of course there are always dissenters, but when [the local party] looked at it all, we took the view that we would support him.” He had been a model constituency MP since then, she added, visiting a local prison literacy project and supporting a campaign to bring a cinema to Newmarket. If such efforts lack the epic scale of The Race, Hancock is unwilling to say that he yearns for the bigger stage. “He’s not in a rush,” said someone who worked with him in government. “He’s enjoying backbench life more than he expected.” Whatever the future holds, they added, he has significant support on the backbenches, particularly among the 2019 intake. MPs praised his responsiveness during the Covid crisis, and noted his keenness to be liked and respected by colleagues. But they were not always complimentary about his competence. And Tory strategists poured cold water on the idea of a cabinet return. One branded him a “total fantasist”. A second said while he had built up some credibility during the pandemic, Hancock was now seen as “a joke figure”. “There is currently no way back for him,” a veteran observer of the Conservative party said. “He has no real friends in parliament. No one owes him anything … A period of silence on his part would be welcomed by most of his colleagues.” If so, it appears they are unlikely to get their wish.Zak Crawley is poised for a recall on Boxing Day as England ponder up to four changes for the third Test in a bid to halt their faltering Ashes campaign. The 23-year-old shot to prominence with a six-and-a-half hour 267 against Pakistan in Southampton in 2020, only to be dropped in the summer after an alarming dose of second season syndrome that has returned a Test average of just 11 in 2021. England renewed Crawley’s central contract in September, however, and have noted the 6ft 5in right-hander’s apparent enjoyment of Australian pitches in the nets and when making 45 for the Lions in the warm-up game. One of Rory Burns or Haseeb Hameed could now make way at the top of the order. Speaking earlier in the tour, Crawley said: “I feel in a really good place with my batting and if I get the chance I’m fairly confident that I could have a good time over here.” While both openers have struggled, Hameed initially shaping up well for scores of 25 and 27 in Brisbane only to fail twice in Adelaide, and Burns tormented until a fourth innings 34 in the second Test, another option for Crawley’s deployment would be to replace Ollie Pope and potentially reshuffle the batting order. However Jonny Bairstow is close to a return in the No 6 position, having been nudged out by Pope on the eve of the series only for the Surrey man to follow an initial 34 at the Gabba with single figures scores amid a troubling struggle against Nathan Lyon. As well as an expected return for Mark Wood in the bowling attack, the surface at the MCG may demand a spinner and thus a recall for Jack Leach. Chris Silverwood, the head coach, was unrepentant about the lack of a spinner in Adelaide, despite five wickets and plenty of turn for Lyon over the course of his 67 overs. Who makes way is not straightforward either, with Chris Woakes struggling for impact with the ball yet the only viable No 8 in the squad, as well as England’s third highest run-scorer in the series. If two bowling changes are made, it would mean two of Woakes, Ollie Robinson, Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad dropping out. Australia, meanwhile, are considering a debut for 32-year-old Scott Boland on his home ground in a selection that would see the Victoria right-armer become the country’s second Indigenous Australian men’s Test cricketer after Jason Gillespie. Though captain Pat Cummins returns, Josh Hazlewood is unlikely to be ready after missing the second Test with a side strain. The fitness levels of fellow seamers Mitchell Starc, Jhye Richardson and Michael Neser are all being assessed after the match went deep into the fifth day. Boland, viewed as an MCG specialist, would offer fresh legs here.It’s beginning to feel a lot like last Christmas. Case numbers of a new Covid variant are exploding across the UK, and the prime minister is cautioning that restrictions may be called for. But while the threat of Omicron likely surpasses that of previous variants, our tools to track and combat the virus have also advanced since last year. The world was alerted to Omicron by the Botswanan and South African scientists who first sequenced the novel variant on 24 November, and it was designated as a variant of concern by the World Health Organization two days later. It was immediately obvious to them that they had something alarming on their hands when they saw the large number of mutations in the Omicron genome. More than 20 mutations differentiate Omicron from Delta, the variant that has dominated the pandemic since the summer of 2021. And many of those mutations are in sites that change the way the virus interacts with our immune system or that increase transmissibility. Those scientists realised the mutations meant the new variant would be likely to infect people who had been vaccinated and might even reinfect people who’d already had Covid-19. And Covid-19 cases were rising rapidly in the Gauteng province of South Africa. Because of all these mutations, Omicron sits at the end of a long branch in the Covid-19 family tree – like a rather strange-looking cousin who doesn’t seem to fit in with the rest of the family. There are three possible explanations as to where this variant might have come from and how it has managed to accumulate so many mutations while remaining hidden. It might have evolved in a part of the world that does little virus sequencing – sequencing inequity means that we are missing early opportunities to detect new variants from many places. Or it might have arisen after a human infected an animal population, allowing the virus to mutate in a new environment unmonitored, and then be transmitted back to us. Or, most likely, the variant may have come from a chronically infected Covid-19 patient with a suppressed immune system – a person living with HIV, for example, or a patient undergoing cancer treatment. Such a situation would allow the virus to accumulate mutations without being challenged by a normal immune response. The Alpha variant that ravaged the UK last Christmas is thought to have evolved within a chronically infected patient. The first Omicron infection in the UK was reported on 27 November, just a few days after the variant was first identified in Africa. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) and the Covid-19 Genomics UK (Cog-UK) consortium have been tracking Covid-19 genomes since the beginning of the pandemic. A regular PCR test doesn’t read the entire genetic sequence of the virus, so a proportion of all Covid-19 diagnoses are fully sequenced so as to spot worrying mutations and identify variants of concern, allowing us to track how the virus is spreading and evolving, in order to inform policy. This has served us well throughout the pandemic. As soon as Alpha was identified in December 2020, analyses comparing its spread to previous variants showed it was far more transmissible. It was clear that the restrictions already in place against other variants were insufficient to stall the spread of Alpha, and this finding led to the third national lockdown in January 2021 and a huge drop in daily case numbers. In March 2021, when the Delta variant was detected in the UK, it had mutations in its genome that scientists suspected would make it far more transmissible than Alpha. Analysis coordinated by the UKHSA through its expert modelling group showed that although Delta was even more transmissible than Alpha, the vaccines were also working well against it. Because of this, the UK changed its vaccine policy, speeding up the delivery of second doses. By the end of June, Delta accounted for nearly all Covid-19 cases in the UK, and while the number of cases increased dramatically, deaths didn’t. The discovery of Omicron – and the finding that it is able to evade immunity in people with two vaccine doses – also resulted in a change in policy, this time with the acceleration of the booster programme. The current challenge is trying to determine whether the rapid spread of Omicron is due to the variant being more transmissible in general, or because it is able to infect people who have previously been vaccinated or infected. The balance of these two factors will determine how Omicron will spread in populations that do not have the immunity of South Africa and the UK. Researchers are also trying to gauge how severe Omicron infections are compared to Delta infections, but this will take time as those infected with Omicron this week will not be admitted to hospital for another week or more. These results will enable the UK and other countries to determine the scale and timing of hospital surges, so that we can be better prepared. Even though this pre-Christmas wave may feel similar to last year, we are in a much better position than 12 months ago. Crucially, we have vaccines that significantly reduce the severity of the disease. While case numbers are unprecedented and rising, vaccinated people are so far experiencing symptoms even milder than in previous waves. And Omicron was detected much faster than previous variants. We were able to quickly assess its risk based on our growing understanding of the virus’ mutations. Finally, we have streamlined processes to aggregate and analyse data, allowing us to make timely and realistic predictions of the impact of policies. Previous epidemics (such as polio, measles or the 1918 influenza) have only been studied retrospectively by epidemiologists. During this pandemic we are in a live arms race against the virus, adapting our tools against it in real time as we decode its genome. Nonetheless, it is a battle that cannot be fought solely by scientists, and it remains essential that we continue to deploy all our defences: by getting vaccinated, avoiding closed and crowded spaces, reducing contacts, testing when recommended, and continuing to wear masks. Dr Manon Ragonnet-Cronin is an MRC Fellow at Imperial College London and a member of the Imperial College Covid-19 response teamHere’s another puzzle in our American-style series, in digital and printable form. This year, I’ve been enjoying the puzzles constructed by American setter Tim Croce: they’re initially baffling and ambiguous, but yield in the face of an onslaught of hunches, guesses and what-ifs. This puzzle doesn’t go as far, but it’s not intended to be a quick solve. For those new to the style: Every square is part of an across as well as a down answer. The clues are straight, if at first ambiguous, and crossing letters are much more important than with UK crosswords. The entries contain fragments of phrases and abbreviations as well as “dictionary words”. .puz files can be opened in Across Lite or Crossword Solver – solvers who don’t fancy that should use the print version. Your own puzzles are very welcome. The answers to this puzzle can be seen in the digital version or in this pdf. And the previous crosswords are: And We’re Off! Cheers! PO … Store’s in what? Cryptic Currencies (miscellaneous) Money talks Shoot! Long shots [untitled] They’re not *always* rude Why do they suddenly appear? Barney and Virginia Let Him Go A safe Christmas to all, and see you next year. Here’s another in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to: • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop. • Crossword blog returns on 10 January.Mikel Arteta has urged the government not to put football back behind closed doors, saying it is a “different sport” when fans are not present and that the game’s essence gets lost. Matches in Wales will take place without spectators over the Christmas period and Scottish stadiums will be reduced to capacities of 500. As things stand, though, English venues can host full houses despite the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Arteta hopes it can stay that way, although his view on the situation is nuanced and he has serious concerns about the schedule clubs are being asked to undertake over the coming days. Asked what he would say about stadiums being closed to fans, the Arsenal manager responded: “Please don’t go back to that stage, because we have experienced that and it’s something we don’t like so hopefully it’s not what happens. It’s a different sport. Football is all about sharing it with people and having fans around the stadiums and when it is not, it is a completely different sport and the competition gets lost. “It is not the same … Obviously nobody wants to go back to where we were because we’ve already experienced it and it’s not something we enjoyed a lot, but if we have to carry on doing that, of course we will.” Arteta had been in favour of postponing a fixture from the Christmas schedule to give breathing space at a time when the pandemic has stretched some squads, not to mention the public health situation, to the limit. That idea was rejected at a Premier League meeting on Monday so Arsenal, who currently have Albert Sambi Lokonga, Pablo Marí and Calum Chambers unavailable after testing positive, will play Norwich, Wolves and Manchester City in the space of seven days. “The clubs have decided and that’s the decision that they’ve made, so we have to carry on,” Arteta said. “Obviously, we had a preference of what we wanted to do because of the schedule and because of the situation that we are in, but it didn’t stop so now we have to play, if we can, every single match with no recovery and with [fewer] numbers, but we will try to do our best.” Arteta was asked about comments from Jordan Henderson, the Liverpool captain, that “nobody really takes player welfare seriously” and said footballers’ views must count for more. “They’ve always tried to carry on and try to get this league to the highest standard, and when they start to say something like that, I think we have to really, really listen with open ears because we don’t want to damage the product and the incredible league that we have,” Arteta said.People with inflammatory bowel disease have 50% more microplastics in their faeces, a study has revealed. Previous research has shown that microplastics can cause intestinal inflammation and other gut problems in laboratory animals, but the research is the first to investigate potential effects on humans. The scientists found 42 microplastic pieces per gram in dried samples from people with IBD and 28 pieces in those from healthy people. The concentration of microplastics was also higher for those with more severe IBD, suggesting a connection between the two. However, the study does not prove a causal link, and the scientists said further research must be done. It may be that IBD causes people to retain more microplastics in their guts, for example. Microplastic pollution has contaminated the entire planet, from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest oceans. People were already known to consume the tiny particles via food and water as well as breathing them in. Microplastics are known to harm wildlife but very little is known about their impact on people’s health, although a study published earlier in December found they damaged human cells in the laboratory. The study, published in the journal Environmental Science &amp; Technology, analysed samples from 50 healthy people and 52 people with IBD, but otherwise healthy. The participants were from across China and also completed a questionnaire including information on their dietary and drinking habits in the previous year. As well as the link to IBD, the scientists found that people who tended to drink bottled water or eat takeaway food had about double the concentration of microplastics in their stools. In total, 15 different types of plastic were found among the microplastics. The most common were PET, used on water bottles and food containers and polyamide, which is also found in food packaging. The level of microplastics in the faeces was similar to those in the few previous studies conducted, once differences in methodology are taken into account. One study found infants had more microplastics than adults in their faeces. This may be due to infants chewing plastic items or use of milk bottles which are known to shed millions of microplastics. Diet and environmental factors can trigger or exacerbate IBD, which includes Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. “In recent years, the prevalence of IBD has sharply increased in developing countries in Asia,” said the researchers from Nanjing University in China. “It is estimated that there will be 1.5 million IBD patients in China by 2025 which will cause a serious disease burden.” “This study provides evidence that we are indeed ingesting microplastics,” said Evangelos Danopoulos at Hull York Medical school in the UK, who was not part of the study team. “It is an important study, as it widens the evidence base for human exposures. More data about possible confounding factors is needed to build a causal association to specific human health conditions.”10. Caroline Shaw – Narrow Sea So much new composition seems to make connections between contemporary minimalism and early music. Narrow Sea sees Pulitzer prize-winning composer Shaw create a very American variety of antique minimalism, featuring opera soprano Dawn Upshaw. The ancient folk song Wayfaring Stranger and other Sacred Harp hymns are placed in a disorientating sonic environment, with Gilbert Kalish providing discordant piano and the New York ensemble Sō Percussion switching between Steve Reich-ish marimbas and atmospheric effects on ceramic pots, water bowls and dulcimers. 9. Robert Ames – Change Ringing Robert Ames, founder of the London Contemporary Orchestra, is a crucial connector in modern music, the arranger and conductor linking Jonny Greenwood, Frank Ocean, Little Simz, Jónsi and Actress with contemporary minimalists. His solo debut Change Ringing features six meditative, drone-based pieces, but the highlights are Tympanum and Rounds, where Ames’s slow-motion, multilayered approach gets more microtonal and harmonically complex. 8. Spindle Ensemble – Inkling Bristol’s intriguing Spindle Ensemble feature composer and pianist Daniel Inzani backed by vibes, violin and cello. Their second LP showcases some compelling Philip Glass-style minimalism but also pushes into Morricone-esque exotica, Japanese-inflected country and western and Satie-ish romanticism. 7. KMRU – Logue The Bandcamp page of KMRU – a sound artist based between Berlin and Nairobi, AKA Joseph Kamaru – is always worth checking out for ambient textures. Logue, the third of five mini-albums he released this year, is an addictive mix of meditative electronica, slow-motion synth-pop and bucolic field recordings from east Africa. 6. Gazelle Twin &amp; NYX – Deep England Gazelle Twin’s 2018 album Pastoral was a febrile journey into the heart of middle England, mixing menacing folk chants, thuggish techno and satirical lyrics, with vocalist, composer and producer Elizabeth Bernholz serving as a retro-futurist court jester. Deep England sees her collaborating with the six-piece drone choir NYX to turn the album’s themes into drumless, paganistic a cappella soundscapes, filled with eerie pitch-shifted vocals, mouth percussion, microtonal harmonies and endless layers of reverb. Read the full review. 5. Ichiko Aoba – Windswept Adan This Japanese singer, songwriter and guitarist is best known for her wonderfully wayward take on bossa nova, but her first collaboration with pianist and composer Taro Umebayashi is a marked change in direction. Beautifully played and sung, it is a soundtrack to an imaginary film; a dreamlike conceptual voyage through the East China Sea; and a piece of orchestral music that slyly references Erik Satie, Philip Glass, Astrud Gilberto and Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan while maintaining a unique artistic vision. 4. Blank Gloss – Melt The latest by this Sacramento duo is a fascinating addition to the burgeoning genre of ambient Americana. It reassembles the defining sonic tropes of American roots music (woozy pedal steel, slurring fiddles, brushed drums and reverb-drenched electric guitar) as disembodied sounds put through an ambient filter. Where so much electronica conjures up concrete brutalism, this suggests huge skies and dust-dry roads; it’s the sound of Harold Budd, Dick Dale and Pat Metheny melting in the Mojave sun. Read the full review. 3. Space Afrika – Honest Labour The third proper album by the Manchester duo is a truly immersive voyage – 19 tracks of manipulated field recordings, synth drones, haunted bass lines and barely there breakbeats. The spoken-word tracks have a certain Mancunian swagger but most of the record comprises icy, futuristic instrumentals which seem to distil the most ominous sonic implications of dubstep and drill without using any beats at all. 2. Stick in the Wheel – Tonebeds for Poetry Best known for their punky, London-accented folk music, this LP sees the Walthamstow duo draw from their background in experimental electronica to provide a psychogeographic voyage through the capital. Anglo-Saxon poems are recast as sludge metal; ancient cockney nursery rhymes become sinister pieces of digital minimalism; urban field recordings are turned into terrifying pieces of musique concrète. This is music that draws from 1,000 years of history, fed through a portal into a dystopian future. 1. Floating Points/Pharoah Sanders/London Symphony Orchestra – Promises Promises is a remarkable three-way collaboration that is simultaneously an orchestral suite, a piece of free improvisation and a groundbreaking electronic masterpiece. Yet none of those definitions really do it justice: this is a haunting piece of sound art that slowly seduces you over its 47-minute duration, using drones, frictionless modal jazz improvisations and a constantly mutating baroque harpsichord riff, all the time slowing down your perceptions of time and space. Read the full review.Alan Bennett’s yearly diary excerpt sees the playwright dedicating Rudyard Kipling’s poem A Dead Statesman, in which the narrator proclaims that “all my lies are proved untrue / And I must face the men I slew”, to Boris Johnson. Bennett’s annual chronicling of his life, published on Wednesday by the London Review of Books, moves from his problems getting a haircut in February – his partner Rupert Thomas takes on the task in lockdown and “manages to make me look like a blond Hitler” – to politics. In March, he criticises how “with his customary foresight and good judgment, one of the first acts of the current prime minister was to hasten to the side of President Trump”, and how the former speaker John Bercow was the one to rule out Trump addressing parliament in 2017. “His reward was to be refused the customary peerage on retirement by the prime minister, who happily doled out peerages to umpteen millionaires, all of them donors to the Tory party. And so we go on,” writes Bennett. By 30 May, Bennett is reduced to simply writing out the whole of Kipling’s poignant A Dead Statesman, noting that it is “a poem for Boris”. “I could not dig: I dared not rob: / Therefore I lied to please the mob. / Now all my lies are proved untrue / And I must face the men I slew. / What tale shall serve me here among / Mine angry and defrauded young?” writes Kipling in the extract from Epitaphs of the War. Reading Rory Stewart’s account of his time in Iraq, Occupational Hazards, causes Bennett to note in September that “it is hard to imagine this man, however briefly, as MP for Penrith and a contender with Boris Johnson, but on this evidence alone he would have been a sounder dealer with our intractabilities and a more honest one”. Bennett also takes time to chronicle his reading habits – in particular Blake Bailey’s Philip Roth biography, which was later dropped by its publisher over allegations of sexual assault, denied by Bailey. “It’s a fucking big book, which I actually fell over yesterday on my birthday,” Bennett notes in May, also writing about his own unexpected mention in the biography, when he meets Roth at a dinner in the 1960s. Bennett’s own “recollections of the evening are more embarrassing”, he says. “Talking to Jonathan [Miller] beforehand, I had made a poor joke about Portnoy’s Complaint being The Gripes of Roth,” he remembers. “I’m sure I wasn’t the first to pick up on this, but it was new to Jonathan, so when Roth arrived he insisted on telling it to its subject. Maybe he even insisted on me repeating it myself. I’ve no memory of Roth’s response – unamused, I would have thought – but remember my own embarrassment, as fresh now with Roth dead as it was 50 years ago.” The diary is published in the London Review of Books’ 1,001st issue. Mary-Kay Wilmers, who had edited the magazine for almost 30 years, founding it in 1979 along with Karl Miller and Susannah Clapp, stepped down from her role in January. “In the early days I would get cross because Karl Miller tried to take out my jokes, often through not understanding them,” remarked Bennett of the LRB’s history. “He seldom gave a verdict on the piece, so you were never sure you’d come up to scratch.”Eddie Jones laughs when I ask him if he has ever tried therapy. Turns out I’m not the only one who has suggested it. Jones recently hired a forensic psychiatrist to work with his coaching team on their communication skills. “I don’t have therapy with her,” he says, “but I think sometimes she thinks I should.” I’m surprised he hasn’t tried. Jones’s new book, Leadership, shows how he roams through conversations with football, cricket, basketball and Australian rules football coaches, multinational chief executives, investment bankers, acting coaches and school teachers looking for every last little nugget that might make him a better coach. Jones is restlessly obsessive about it. If the book has a single line that seems to sum him up, it’s this: “The only reliable advantage we’ve got in life, in business or sport, is to learn faster than the opposition.” He spends a lot of time trying to find the edge that will help him do exactly that. Jones sits down to start work at 5am each morning. It has, he says, been a long time since he got his eight hours of decent sleep. “I normally get four or five, then, maybe, have a nap later in the day.” But early morning “is the best time of the day for thinking, mate, you’re uninterrupted, you don’t have things buzzing, or clicking”. Unless you’re working for him. Then you can expect to get dawn emails and WhatsApp messages. “Have a look at this? What do you think?” He says he’s got better at this. He doesn’t expect immediate responses any more. “In the old days I used to go around putting notes under people’s doors. “That’s a thing I’ve got to understand,” Jones goes on to say. “When I first started coaching I thought everyone should be as driven, and as obsessive, as I was. Now I understand that people have their own rhythms.” Not everyone who has worked with him will agree. England have churned through a lot of assistant coaches and support staff since Jones took over. He sounds like an exacting boss. One former employee, who moved on from his job in Jones’s first year, once described it as like working for Napoleon, only, he guessed, with more swearing. In Leadership, Jones mentions a lot of other coaches. He is good friends with Celtic’s Ange Postecoglou and the basketball coach Brian Goorjian, has regular conversations with Gareth Southgate, David Moyes and Dave Brailsford. It’s interesting that he doesn’t mention Trevor Bayliss since he and Jones took over English national teams at the same time, and in similar circumstances. They are similar ages and from the same part of the world, New South Wales. They even used to play Grade cricket against each other in the 1980s. “We caught up three or four times during his tenure,” says Jones, who already knows where I’m going with the question. For all their similarities, he and Bayliss couldn’t be more different in their approaches to coaching. Bayliss was so laidback as England head coach that when he left the post the English press gave him a Yucca plant, a scented candle and a CD of ambient music. “Trevor was one of those guys who sat back and smelled the environment, and then gave it whatever he thought it needed,” Jones says. The reason it worked so well, he reckons, was because of Bayliss’s partnership with his assistant, Paul Farbrace. “They were a great combination. Farbrace was energetic and direct with the team, while Trevor sat back and created a good environment.” So does Jones have a sidekick to work with? He goes back to Steve Borthwick. “He was a great right-hand man.” But Borthwick left England last year. “Recently?” he says, “the last four or five years, I’ve been lucky to have Neil Craig.” Craig is interesting. He is the Rugby Football Union’s head of high performance, has a background in Aussie rules and cycling. By his own admission, he doesn’t know a whole lot about rugby. In the book Jones says Craig’s role is “to tell the truth and also to help me coach the coaches”. Craig is the one who pulls Jones up on his behaviour. “Sometimes we’ll finish a meeting and he’ll say: ‘Maybe you went a bit hard there.’ And I listen to him, and I take advice from him.” At 61, Jones says, he’s still maturing as a coach. “And he’s helped me no end.” There is a fascinating little video interview with Matt Giteau on YouTube in which he talks about how Eddie is “still someone that scares me” 15 years after they last worked together. He talks about him with a mix of love, loyalty, fear and respect. Back when Jones was coaching Japan, he used to wonder why some of the players were so reluctant to speak up in meetings. It was only later that he realised, and after the team psychologist pointed it out, that it was because they were intimidated by him. If Jones has softened since, he’s still hard enough. If you want to understand Jones, the way he works and why he succeeds, you need to know where he comes from. He believes that himself. Listen to him describe the differences between him and Bayliss: “He was a country boy and I was from the city. He’s laconic and I’m much more aggressive. I want to run the show.” So how does Jones’s own upbringing shape him? “Mine’s probably pretty obvious. I was half-Japanese, half-Australian in a white Australian society where, if you weren’t good at sport, you weren’t considered to be worthy of the group, and I wanted to be part of the group,” he says. “I was little, and I looked different, but I wanted to be good at sport, so I had to find a way. I didn’t have any athletic gifts, so I became a competitor. I fought.” He is still fighting to prove himself now. It’s one of the reasons he took on the England job, and why he’s still tickled, six years later, by the idea of an Australian running the England team. “I think it is bloody fascinating, because this is the home of rugby and Australia is, or at least was, seen as an outpost.” It’s also why Jones says his favourite moments in coaching are the ones “when everyone thinks you’re an idiot, everyone thinks they know better than you”. It’s an interesting way of putting it. I’m not sure anyone who’s ever spoken to Jones would describe him as an idiot. “But we’re involved in something that everyone thinks they know,” he says. “One of the great examples, we had Roy Hodgson in the last Six Nations. He’s 74, he came into dinner and his first statement was: ‘Boys, I’m still trying to work out what a good coach is.’ And I think that’s so true. Everyone thinks they know, but the people who are really involved in this business, we know that we don’t. And I think that keeps driving me.” That, and the feeling he gets in those last few moments before kick-off. “That’s the elixir, that bit where you’re never quite sure what’s going to happen, it is the thing that keeps you in it.” He had it again before England played South Africa in the autumn. “We’ve got four young blokes on the bus and they don’t know what the game is going to be like, we’ve prepared, we’ve talked to them, the senior players have talked to them, but you actually don’t know how they’re going to handle it.” He is addicted to the bit that’s still beyond his control. *** The book comes at an interesting time, after England finished fifth in this year’s Six Nations. Jones has been preoccupied with figuring out what went wrong and how to put it right. His answer is characteristic. He thinks some of his squad started to feel entitled. It happens, he says. “You take over a team when they’re not doing well. You come in, you’ve got this great energy, and you find the other people who have the sort of same energy, same desire, same mentality, and if you say the right things, and get the right picture in their heads, then you create a winning team. And as soon as you win – and this has happened in every team I’ve had – then people don’t want to work as hard.” So the process starts again. Only second time around it’s harder “because you’ve got to get rid of those same players who have been successful for you. And they’re still really good players, but they don’t have that same mentality, that fight.” Jones dropped a number of senior players – George Ford, Mako and Billy Vunipola – from his squad for the autumn internationals. Will he pick them again? “We’ll just wait and see. Again, it’s about their mentality, if they want to keep improving, want to keep getting better, and are prepared to do those hard yards. They are the things we need to see.” Entitlement isn’t just an English problem, he says, “but I think maybe there are factors here that exacerbate it. If you’re an England rugby player here and you play a couple of Tests you’ll never have to worry about playing top-level rugby again. There’s 13 professional teams so you can find a spot somewhere and keep playing.” The great teams are the ones who keep winning year after year. “It’s rare because teams get comfortable. They want to settle. That’s the hardest thing to keep driving.” Jones believes conflict is healthy. “I think I understand that it’s the only way you keep winning,” he says. “Because whenever you’re comfortable, everyone wants to take a short cut, don’t they?” Again he goes back to his past. “My father left school when he was 15 to work in a coalmine, so I’ve had a much easier life than he’s had, and my daughter has had a much easier life than I’ve had. Every life gets easier, that’s how it is, because we want life to be comfortable. But to achieve things that take effort outside of that is uncomfortable.” Jones is always looking for the balance between supporting his players and staff, and challenging them, between making them feel at ease, and making them feel on edge. I know from my own small experience of his charity work that Jones can also be tremendously kind and thoughtful. One of the solutions to England’s entitlement problem, Jones says, was to change the leadership group, but he has stayed loyal to his captain, Owen Farrell, who he describes as a “glue player” in the squad. Jones says he had to change the leadership group because of the salary-cap scandal at Saracens. He is now trying to build a smaller and more diverse leadership team but create more leadership in the squad outside that group too. “It’s almost like rugby used to be,” he says, “you had a group of leaders, the captain, and vice-captain, but basically most of the leadership was done by the team. And that’s where I see ourselves evolving.” Jones has a soft spot for players who he feels have similar backgrounds to his own. “I like the guys that have come up the tougher way, who maybe don’t fit the stereotype, who have got to keep battling, have got to keep proving themselves, because they’re the loyal players. They’re doing it because they want to be good, not for someone else.” And of course he sees some of that in Farrell. The book makes it clear he’s invested in him as a captain, but also that he has room for improvement. He describes Farrell as a “developing” captain, even though he has already led England in 34 Tests, and says he needs to get better at managing relationships with referees. “When you grow up in a tough environment those softer skills aren’t so appreciated, so you don’t tend to develop them. I think the big thing that’s changed in society and in sport is the way you talk to people. That ability to be robust but also to be empathetic is so important in today’s society.” Can you teach empathy? “You can learn it, definitely,” Jones says. And here he is talking from experience. “The one thing we know is that unless as coaches we model that it is going to be hard for the players to have it. There’s no doubt it’s such a more important skill to have now. Whether you call it emotional intelligence or empathy, you need to have it – you can’t be that blunt bloke who comes in and doesn’t worry about people’s feelings, that just doesn’t work. You need to learn to be in other people’s shoes, and to understand what they’re thinking much more. You can definitely learn that. “But I don’t know whether I’m a good teacher of it or not mate.” And he cackles again. Leadership by Eddie Jones is out now (Pan Macmillan, £20), and was co-written with the Guardian’s Donald McRaeSouth Africa has reported data on Covid cases driven by the Omicron variant that appears to give added impetus to claims the country is experiencing a lower severity of disease. “In South Africa, this is the epidemiology: Omicron is behaving in a way that is less severe,” said Prof Cheryl Cohen of the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), one of the authors of the study. “Compellingly, together our data really suggest a positive story of a reduced severity of Omicron compared to other variants,” she said during a news conference by a group of NICD scientists on Wednesday. Scientists, however, cautioned that the reasons less severe cases were being seen was not fully understood and that South Africa’s experience – with a young population – might not translate into how other countries experience Omicron. In South Africa the median age is 27.6 years in comparison with the UK where it is 40.5 years and Italy – hard hit by the first wave of the pandemic – where it is 47.3. Omicron cases around the world “The lower risk or lower proportions of severe disease we’re seeing in the fourth wave could be due to a number of factors including the level of prior immunity from people who’ve already gotten vaccinated or had natural infection, or it could also be due to the intrinsic virulence of Omicron,” said Dr Waasila Jassat, of the NICD. “But we need more studies to be able to unpack these things,” she said. The question of immunity from vaccination or prior infection was flagged as a potential contributory factor last week by researchers at the University of Cape Town in a symposium of the World Health Organization after work that suggested that some of the body’s defences against Omicron – in particular so-called killer T-cells – may remain robust. While evidence from South Africa about the virulence of the Omicron variant is being studied around the world – including in the UK – the NICD’s Michelle Groome warned that the South African data could not necessarily be extrapolated to other countries with different population profiles. Much of the interest in the past fortnight in the experience of South Africa, where Omicron was first identified, has been driven by reports from public and private hospitals and health providers that has suggested lower levels of hospitalisation, admission to ICUs and use of oxygen for patients. Against the more optimistic claims that the fourth wave of Covid in South Africa might be less severe, in the past week there has been an uptick, so far small, in hospitalisations and deaths in South Africa’s hospitals. The claims about virulence came as some South African experts were claiming a “sustained drop” of new Covid cases. From nearly 27,000 new cases nationwide on Thursday, the numbers dropped to about 15,424 on Tuesday, although those claims may still be premature and also influenced by other statistical factors. Marta Nunes, a senior researcher at the vaccines and infectious diseases analytics department of the University of Witwatersrand, told the Associated Press: “The drop in new cases nationally combined with the sustained drop in new cases seen here in Gauteng province, which for weeks has been the centre of this wave, indicates that we are past the peak.” “It was a short wave … and the good news is that it was not very severe in terms of hospitalisations and deaths,” she said. It was “not unexpected in epidemiology that a very steep increase, like what we saw in November, is followed by a steep decrease”.In a year where travel has been difficult to organise and our escapes have been fleeting, more than ever our holiday photographs have become an important keepsake – something we can look back at to remember sunnier climes, intrepid adventures or exciting city breaks with friends. We would like you to share your favourite travel photograph, and also the story behind it. We will be judging both the photo and your accompanying words. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons, you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 4 January at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Libya’s chief electoral body has announced a plan to delay elections set for 24 December by a month, but it is unclear if the rival bodies jostling for power will accept the proposal. With Libya’s political transition in crisis, the proposed new date, set out by the High National Elections Commission (HNEC), is the first attempt to draw up a new roadmap. Bitter unresolved disputes over the legal basis for the elections and who was eligible to stand have been crushing the international community’s hopes that elections would mark a reset after a decade of war and infighting, largely between the east and west of Libya. As it became obvious a postponement would be inevitable, on Tuesday the militia set up roadblocks in the capital, Tripoli, and the US ambassador, Richard Norland, warned of “armed deployments that risk escalation and unintended consequences”. The HNEC said Libya had been close to achieving stability through a peaceful change in power, but the moment when candidates were entitled to appeal against rulings on their entitlement to stand proved “a dangerous turning point”. It said the House of Representatives, Libya’s parliament based in the east, should set the new date of 24 January for the first round of the elections so long as it clarified the law on the qualification of candidates. It is claimed the house had manipulated the rules to exclude certain candidates. “The inadequacy of electoral legislation with regard to the judiciary’s role in electoral appeals and disputes had damaged the right of the commission to defend its decisions about the disqualification of a number of candidates,” the HNEC said. The HNEC defended its failure to finalise the list of presidential candidates, complaining of “campaigns of confusion and misrepresentation aimed at undermining the reputation of the commission and obstructing the qualification process”. It called on legislative and judicial authorities to ensure there was no repeat of the clash of political and judicial rulings that had left it unclear who was entitled to stand for the presidency, a new post in Libyan politics. Supporters of the elections, both for the presidency and a new parliament, had hoped they would usher in a new, less corrupt and tired, political class, and legitimise democratic bodies surviving off outdated or near nonexistent mandates. Instead, controversial candidates have come forward, such as Khalifa Haftar, the head of the Libyan National Army based in the east, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the son of the former Libyan dictator, and Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, the interim prime minister. The first two have been accused of war crimes and Dbeibah has broken a promise not to stand, a requirement of taking office as interim prime minister in February. All three won appeals in the courts overturning disqualifications either by the HNEC or other courts. The House of Representatives is due to meet on 27 December, the day after Stephanie Williams, the special adviser on Libya to the UN secretary general, will hold a video meeting of the 75-strong Libyan Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF), a body she established nearly a year ago to elect an interim government. The house has also declared the existing interim government must be replaced since its mandate expired on 24 December, the planned date of the elections. No consensus exists on how a new interim government will be formed and the re-emergence of the LPDF may be a way of pressing the house. Controversy has surrounded the decision of some presidential candidates to gather in Benghazi to meet Haftar to recommit to salvaging the electoral process. Some in the west of Libya regarded the visit by the former interior minister Fathi Bashagha as a betrayal, since Haftar had spent 16 months shelling Tripoli in an attempt to seize control of Libya. Others said that without acts of reconciliation Libya would never progress.“Cancel culture” risks wiping out comedy altogether, the actor Dame Maureen Lipman has claimed. The Coronation Street star warned that some comedians were being prevented from ever working again for having offended people, though she offered no example. A new YouGov poll suggests more than half of people would avoid expressing a political or social view in case they encounter criticism, with those holding the most regressive views – such as opposition to people coming from abroad to live in the UK – more likely to do so. However, the same survey suggested two-thirds of people do not know what “cancel culture” is, with half of respondents having never heard of it. “I think it’s a revolution, I think it’s in the balance whether we’re ever going to be funny again,” Lipman told the BBC. “It’s a bit like laughter in church, something has to be forbidden to make you really laugh, to make you really belly laugh. It’s when you shouldn’t be laughing. And so, therefore, all the things that are being cancelled out are, I’m afraid, the things that have always made people laugh. “This cancel culture, this punishment, it’s everywhere. You know, an eye for an eye. ‘You said that, therefore, you must never work again.’ We’re on the cusp of wiping out comedy.” During the interview, broadcast on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Lipman offered no examples of this happening. She has been approached for comment. However, the comedian Russell Kane told the BBC it was “complete nonsense” to suggest comedians were self-censoring. “I don’t think anyone is saying you can’t be offended, nobody is saying that. What we’re saying is you can’t use hate speech that would prompt a gender-related crime, a sex-related crime or a race-related crime,” he said. “There’s been a massive, much needed shift in the conversation around gender, around men’s attitudes to women, around consent. Society has moved on.” Nevertheless, he said he did regularly delete his tweets in case anything came back to haunt him in future. Cancel culture has become a key issue for conservatives in recent years, including government ministers, who have sought to push the concept as part of what some perceive as a culture war. They have portrayed it as a coordinated campaign against them and as a more insidious chilling effect on freedom of expression. They have often cited opposition to speaking appearances or performers encountering a lack of success in their careers as examples. Their opponents have dismissed this, saying the response is more commonly just legitimate criticism by people who are calling for views they see as divisive not to be amplified. For example, critics have pointed out that many of those claiming to have been silenced have done so via major broadcast, online and print platforms that have granted them privileged access to huge audiences.Michael Flynn, a longtime adviser to Donald Trump, has sued the congressional committee investigating the deadly 6 January attack on the US Capitol in hopes of blocking it from obtaining his phone records. Flynn alleged in a lawsuit, filed in federal court in Florida, that a subpoena issued to him by the House of Representatives select committee was too broad in scope and punishes him for constitutionally protected speech as a private citizen. Flynn also alleged in the lawsuit that the committee “has no authority to conduct business because it is not a duly constituted select committee”. An appeals court has rejected that argument, ruling on 9 December that the committee was valid and entitled to see White House records Trump has tried to shield. The committee issued a subpoena to Flynn, Trump’s short-lived former national security adviser, in November, seeking testimony and documents about a “command center” at Washington’s Willard Hotel set up to steer efforts to deny Joe Biden his November 2020 election victory. After the election Flynn urged Trump to deploy the military to overturn the results and gave speeches sowing doubts about the vote. The select committee did not comment. Flynn’s lawsuit is the latest in a flood of litigation by targets of the committee, seeking to prevent it from enforcing its subpoenas. Alex Jones, the conspiracy theorist and founder of the rightwing website Infowars, filed a similar case on Monday. Trump has similarly sought to block the committee from obtaining his White House records from 6 January and the preceding days, asserting they are protected by a legal doctrine called executive privilege. An appeals court rejected Trump’s arguments last week. He is expected to appeal to the supreme court. Flynn was previously charged as part of former special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian influence on the 2016 presidential election won by Trump. Flynn, a retired Army general, pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about interactions he had with Russia’s ambassador to the US in January 2017. Trump later pardoned him.Sara Hector ended a drought of nearly five years for the Swedish women’s ski team by beating Mikaela Shiffrin in both runs of a World Cup giant slalom in Courchevel on Wednesday. No Swedish skier had triumphed on the women’s World Cup circuit since Frida Hansdotter won a night slalom in Austria in January 2017. Hector led Shiffrin by .34 seconds after the opening run and added one-hundredth of a second in the final run for her second career victory, and first since December 2014. “It’s amazing. It’s incredible, and I’m so surprised, too,” Hector said. “It was such a big fight and I didn’t think I was so fast. I feel so awesome. It’s crazy. I’m so proud.” The result came a day after she had finished runner-up to Shiffrin in another GS on the same hill in the French Alps for her first podium result in a year. “I fought so well. It was really a battle, also mentally. I did it and that makes me proud,” Hector said. “(Shiffrin) is a super skier, but there are a lot of good skiers here.” World Cup giant slalom champion Marta Bassino finished six-tenths of a second behind in third place after failing to score points in the first two GS races of the season. Tessa Worley of France, who was second after the opening run, dropped to fourth, followed by defending overall champion Petra Vlhova in fifth. A day after dominating Tuesday’s race, Shiffrin was satisfied despite missing what would have been her 73rd career victory. “Compared with yesterday, today had a lot more like scrappy skiing, some recoveries. It was just a tough day. It’s amazing to have second place,” said Shiffrin, who gave Hector a long hug in the finish area after the race. “Sara’s skiing was just really incredible, and so strong, so much power the whole way in both runs. It’s been years (since her last win) and she deserves it.” Shiffrin’s main challenger in the overall standings, Sofia Goggia, failed to score World Cup points for a second straight day. The American now leads her by 115 points. Goggia slid off the course after she lost her balance in a left turn halfway through her opening run. The Italian skied out in the second leg of Tuesday’s race. Federica Brignone, the 2020 overall champion, also failed to finish her second run. Paula Moltzan of the United States finished 13th after gaining 15 spots with a strong second run, having only just made the flip in 28th after the opening run. World champion Lara Gut-Behrami, slalom World Cup winner Katharina Liensberger, and Alice Robinson sat out the event following positive Covid-19 tests. The race replaced the GS that was canceled in Killington, Vermont, in November because of strong winds. The women’s World Cup continues with another GS and a slalom in Lienz, Austria, next week.Israel is set to become the first country in the world to offer a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccines in an effort to protect against the Omicron variant. People over the age of 60 and healthcare workers will be eligible for a second booster shot, the prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Tuesday night, following a recommendation made by Israel’s panel of pandemic experts. The rollout, aimed at people who had a third shot at least four months ago, is pending approval by the health ministry but is expected to go ahead in the next few days. “The citizens of Israel were the first in the world to receive the third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine and we are continuing to pioneer with the fourth dose as well,” Bennett said in remarks relayed by his office, calling on those who meet the criteria to “go and get vaccinated”. A year ago, Israel embarked on a world-leading vaccination campaign thanks to a special deal with drugmakers Pfizer/BioNTech, in which the country received early supplies in exchange for sharing health data on the vaccines’ impact. Since then, however, progress has slowed: only about 63% of the 9.3 million-strong population has received two doses, partly owing to the fact that the population skews young, and due to high levels of vaccine hesitancy within the ultra-Orthodox and Arab communities. Israel was also fiercely criticised for not doing more to facilitate a faster rollout for the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which is under Israeli blockade. Vaccines became more widely available in the summer, but to date only about 34% of Palestinians have had two doses, despite the use of carrot-and-stick incentives by both the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah and Hamas in Gaza. The decision to begin giving a second booster shot comes as Israel braces for a fifth wave of infection caused by the fast-spreading Omicron variant. According to the health ministry, there are at least 340 known cases of Omicron in Israel, accounting for 10-15% of all coronavirus infections, and authorities anticipate Omicron will overtake Delta to become the dominant strain of the virus in Israel within two weeks. The country’s first suspected death from Omicron was announced by a Beersheba hospital on Tuesday, but was later amended after a final laboratory investigation determined the patient, a man in his 60s with serious pre-existing conditions, had been infected with the Delta variant. Bennett’s coalition government moved quickly against Omicron, barring foreigners from entering Israel on 25 November and expanding a list of high-risk countries to which its citizens should not travel to include the US this week. Amid fierce debate, his cabinet has so far resisted major new internal restrictions such as limiting public gatherings or school closures.Manuela Lopes dates her misfortune from the moment her Lisbon neighbourhood began attracting comparisons with Brooklyn. It was the mid 2010s: former warehouses in the old working-class parish of Marvila were giving way to co-working spaces, art galleries, artisan breweries, creative hubs and tech startups. In 2018, average property prices in the neighbourhood were up 79.8% on the previous year. A short walk from Lopes’ home, a 12-building luxury residential project designed by the world-famous architect Renzo Piano is now rising from Marvila’s old industrial waterfront. Prices for apartments, some with balconies overlooking the Tagus, range from €500,000 to €925,000 (£425,000 to £786,000) and many have been sold off-plan. Promotional material for Prata Riverside Village promises a “new way of living Lisbon” for “young families, students, digital nomads and retired people” in a district “distinguished by its true neighbourhood atmosphere; quiet but full of life” . Lopes, 77, was born in the more modest architectural setting of the Santos Lima, a two-storey 19th-century apartment building, where her mother and grandmother before her raised their families. The “true neighbourhood atmosphere” was indeed here in the early 1970s, according to former tenants, when dissidents of the Salazar dictatorship would gather for their clandestine meetings at the Santos Lima. For years, Lopes assumed her tenancy was protected by a Portuguese law that prevents anyone over 65 years old from eviction if their lease dated from before 1990. What she didn’t know was that an offer to move flats within the building, which she had accepted, had voided the terms of her previous lease and in 2017, she was given notice to quit. Across Lisbon, property prices were soaring, tourism was booming and many tenants were finding themselves in a similar predicament. Lopes and her neighbours discovered after receiving eviction notices that the Santos Lima had been sold for €2.7m, even though 17 families were sitting tenants. Just a few months later the building was on the market for €7.2m, advertised as having potential for conversion to private condominiums or a hotel: perfect for a rapidly gentrifying area of the capital on the riverfront. And empty. Lopes has lost count of the strange encounters she has had in the building since then. Unnamed people started showing up in the corridors, telling tenants to leave. Doors to vacant flats were pulled out, before being re-attached months later, and construction work began without notice. With most elderly residents protected from eviction, some landlords resorted to bullying to be able to cash in on the boom, says Rita Silva, who heads housing rights organisation Habita. Lopes and her neighbours say what they have experienced is closer to intimidation. People again speak in hushed, fearful voices; suspicious not of the Salazar regime, but of the faceless owners and property agents. Manuela Lopes (above and below right) was born in the Santos Lima building (right) in the Marvila neighbourhood of Lisbon. She has lived with the threat of eviction since 2017. Photographs: Goncalo Fonseca/The Guardian The building itself is becoming more dilapidated by the day. Inside Lopes’ flat, the walls have dark patches from damp and mould. On the door of one of the many empty flats, decorations are still up from a previous Christmas. “There is no use in painting my place now, I don’t know when I’ll have to leave. I barely have any energy left,” she says. Some of the remaining families are holding out, but Lopes, who lives on a pension of less than €400 a month, €147 of which goes on rent, has begun to pack up her things. “I’m scared of the day someone shows up and I’ll just have to go.” “My doctor says I’m halfway into a depression,” she adds. “All of this just makes me feel small.” * * * Portugal’s property market is now what analysts call one of Europe’s most “dynamic”. Foreign investment is credited with powering Portugal’s economic recovery, but the “collateral damage” inflicted on the social fabric of Lisbon, Porto and other cities has been profound, says geographer and housing activist Luís Mendes. Unaffordable rents and evictions are hitting not just those on subsistence wages or pensions, but ordinary workers and their families. Their plight can be traced to the 2008 European debt crisis. To entice foreign investment, Portugal was required to deregulate as a condition of its international bailout. A “golden visa” programme was ushered in offering residency permits in exchange for real-estate acquisitions worth €500,000 or more. Those investing were not required to move to Portugal – just to spend two weeks a year in the country. A separate “non-habitual residency scheme” was also brought in, which gave foreign citizens who spent half the year in Portugal a 10-year tax break on income earned elsewhere. The Renzo Piano-designed Prata Riverside Village development on the former industrial waterfront by the Tagus. Photographs: Goncalo Fonseca/The Guardian To say these schemes proved popular is an understatement: 10,000 golden visas have been issued to non-EU buyers since 2012 in exchange for more than €5bn of investment, most of it flooding into property. The new property owners come predominantly from China, Brazil, Turkey, South Africa and Russia. Earlier this year, Luís Lima, the then president of the Portuguese association for professionals and companies in real-estate mediation (Apemip), said he had no doubt that the perks gave Portugal an important “escape” from the worst effects of the financial crisis. “Everything that is good for tourism is good for us,” Lima told the Guardian. He was among the first to begin scouting foreign investment abroad after the crisis in 2008, and recalled: “Some of the maps didn’t even have Portugal on them, they just had ‘Iberia’ – now everybody knows our name.” The Sunday market at the LX Factory complex, a former industrial site now home to bars, cafes, restaurants and shops. Photograph: Brannon Gerling/Alamy While the Algarve had formerly drawn international real-estate buyers, Lisbon, Porto and some of the coastal regions in between now became a honeypot for developers and speculators. “We changed the paradigm,” says Lima, adding that the scheme has been good for employment, indirectly creating “thousands of jobs”. But Mendes, who is on the board of the Lisbon tenants’ association, says that by turning so much of the capital’s housing into wealth-generating assets the scheme has been “disastrous” for many Lisbon-dwellers. Countless people saw their need for homes sidelined as prices soared and the safety net for renters was swept away. A 2012 austerity measure designed to address “rigidities” in the urban rental market became known as the “law of evictions”. Suddenly a tenant could face a dramatic rent hike at the end of a lease or be evicted if a landlord wanted to renovate a flat, which was previously unheard of. By 2017, eviction rates had doubled on 2013 rates, to the equivalent of approximately five families losing their homes a day. Historically a residential centre, Lisbon rents had been cheap by the standards of other capital cities in Europe but they were in line with Portugal’s lower average incomes. As interest from abroad began to grow, demand outstripped supply, pushing prices up and pushing people out. That supply shortage narrative is only the “tip of the iceberg”, as Mendes puts it. Lisbon also had an unusually high number of vacant houses until around 2010. At least a third of buildings in the historical centre were vacant, many in a state of degradation, Mendes says. It was a golden opportunity for investors. In the frenzy that followed, buildings were changing hands for €1m one night and selling the next morning for €1.7m. “Sometimes with only mild renovations, properties bought for €60,000 or €70,000 six years ago are now worth €400,000 or €500,000,” Mendes says. The Bairro Alto district has become a popular nightlife destination with many bars and restaurants. Photograph: Martin Thomas/Alamy Central Lisbon. Photograph: Edson De Souza/Zuma Wire/Rex/Shutterstock Tourism, meanwhile, introduced Lisbon to Airbnb-style short-term rentals. “Anyone could have a room or a sofa they would rent,” explains Mendes. Short lets, he says, began to “eat” into the affordable housing market. Once full of decrepit buildings, faded masonry and crumbling facades, the old town was made over at breakneck speed. Tuk-tuks filled with tourists climbed up and down the narrow cobblestoned streets and restaurants flourished. It was not long before Lisbon began topping international league tables as a tourism destination and one of the most “liveable” cities in Europe. Trams in the hilly Bairro Alto district. Photograph: Danita Delimont/Getty Images/Gallo Images By 2019, Lisbon was averaging 4.5 million tourists annually, in a city of 500,000 residents, more than eight tourists for every resident. By 2020 a third of houses in Lisbon’s historical centre were listed on short letting websites such as Airbnb, despite curbs introduced in 2019. The warning issued by Leilani Farha, the UN special rapporteur on housing, in 2016 was coming to pass. Farha had said that “unbridled touristification” in Portugal could exacerbate evictions and bring about the emergence of “a new poor”. Anyone on Portugal’s minimum wage of €665 a month was certainly priced out. Today the average rent in Lisbon, for a family, averages €700-€900 a month depending on the district, but average earnings in the city are about €950. “A lot of people are excluded,” Mendes says. In 2020, house prices across Portugal increased by 8.4%, according to the national statistics institute (INE). “It is not just vulnerable groups that can’t access housing, for the past three years the middle class has had a noose around its neck – they can’t find housing in Lisbon,” says Silva. “When you look at incomes in Portugal house prices are absurd.” * * * ‘I just want to live with dignity’ Dulce Dengue and her children were woken early one morning in March 2021 by men yelling at them and rummaging through the furniture of their rented flat in Loures, a town in the Greater Lisbon area, 13km north-east of the city centre. “I didn’t even have time to wake my children properly, within minutes two men were changing the locks and told me I had to leave,” she says. She was served with a court order to vacate the premises. Dengue had lost her jobs as a cleaner and a seamstress at the start of the pandemic. She admits she had not been able to keep up with her rent. The circumstances of the case are still the subject of legal proceedings. But the single mother, her own three children – the youngest just 18 months old at the time – and two nieces found themselves without a roof over their heads. Four other families who had been living in the same block also ended up homeless. “We had to stay outside in the cold, it was awful, I had to feed my children on the street,” she says. Property inflation has now rippled out from Lisbon to outlying municipalities such as Loures, say campaigners. “It is almost like aftershocks of an earthquake,” says Silva. Mendes agrees: “It has moved from the epicentre … out through the city peripheries and suburbs.” Dulce Dengue, her three children and two nieces were removed from a block in Loures, a town in the Greater Lisbon area. Photographs: Goncalo Fonseca/The Guardian The difficulty for people like Dengue is that Portugal also has one of the lowest rates of social housing provision in Europe, with only 2% of all housing publicly owned, compared with 17% in the UK, 16% in France and 24% in Austria. She was initially placed in a hostel paid for by the local authority. Her children were exhausted, as it took an hour to get to school, she says. “They kept asking me when we could go home.” The courts eventually revoked Dengue’s notice to quit, a decision that is being appealed. In the meantime, the family have been shuffled between hostels and temporary shelters. “I ask for assistance,” Dengue wrote in an open letter to the housing minister earlier this year. “I don’t know how to deal with the tears of my children who don’t know when they will return home. I don’t know how to deal with the uncertainty of life, with the coming and going, sometimes I feel myself losing strength to keep fighting. I just want to give a dignified life to my children. I just want to live with dignity.” “Dulce’s case is an example of many things that are boiling in this country – people losing their income in the pandemic, particularly people who were already in a precarious situation,” says Silva. The “build to rent” market, meanwhile, has taken off on the capital’s margins. Loures is attracting a steady stream of buyers of what the Portuguese branch of JLL, an international real estate company, calls “multifamily assets” – residential buildings entirely for rental purposes. Gonçalo Santos, the head of capital markets at JLL, is adamant that the golden visa programme has played a positive role in consolidating Lisbon as an investment destination in the global marketplace. That, he says, is entirely compatible with the creation of affordable housing. Taking Lisbon out of the golden visa scheme, as the government plans to do next year, will not just be “terrible for business”, it will reduce the supply of homes, he says. * * * 11,000 families in shacks Homeless people living in tents on a Lisbon street. Photograph: Edson De Souza/Zuma Press Wire/Rex/Shutterstock Tourists at a hillside cafe in the Alfama district. Photograph: Dov Makabaw/Alamy Faced with mounting public pressure the Portuguese government established a housing secretariat in 2017, and in answer to a growing protest movement a law giving effect to the constitutional right to adequate housing dating from 1976, was finally approved in September 2019. The first comprehensive government inquiry into housing, published in response to the findings of the UN special rapporteur on housing revealed that 25,762 families were living in “grave housing poverty”, nearly 50% of them in Lisbon. These are people in what Silva calls “situations of degradation often without access to running water”. More than 11,000 families live in shacks and self-built dwellings clustered in shantytowns or other “informal settlements”. Astonishingly these figures do not include overcrowded homes or households at risk of eviction. The housing secretary, Marina Gonçalves, says the government’s priority is to increase social housing’s share from 2% to 5%. But she acknowledges “this will take time”. For decades, she says, housing in Portugal was left to market forces. Public housing was not prioritised. “We have to find the answers, we can create market incentives, but we can’t think the responsibility lies with the market, the responsibility lies with the state to promote public housing policies.” When the pandemic struck, the government suspended evictions and introduced a temporary moratorium for people in mortgage arrears. But in the absence of a massive programme of public investment in housing, Mendes believes, the pandemic is storing up a wave of future evictions and a potentially explosive crisis. “It was already grave and will become aggravated as people’s economic and social situation becomes more precarious,” Silva agrees. “The price of housing did not decrease with the pandemic – housing remains inaccessible in Lisbon.” * * * The cleaners and carers who live in squats Dam works as a security guard in a supermarket, where she is on the minimum wage doing nightshifts. Despite being in paid employment, the single mother lives in a squat in a vacant, vandalised council flat on Lisbon’s outskirts. She moved here when conditions in the flat she had been renting became so unsanitary that staying was not an option. In the squat, the windows are broken so she keeps the blinds down to keep out the cold. “When I got here, the rubbish was higher than me, the walls were filthy.” Dam lives in a squatted local authority block of flats with her children; her disabled mother, whom she was also caring for (right), died in November from pneumonia. Photographs: Goncalo Fonseca/The Guardian Dam, 40, supports two of her children and until recently was also the main carer of her disabled mother, who has since died from pneumonia. The family has been on a waiting list for public housing for almost a decade, living in the squat for the last three years. Although the fear of eviction hangs over them daily, Dam feels she has little choice. She has tried hard to turn the place into a home, fixing up the bathroom and painting the walls. “I’ve done what I can with my means. Everybody knows I’m here; everybody knows my situation. I took photos of when I arrived, of the work I’ve done to the house, I have sent letters out everywhere,” she explains. Dam is far from unique. Increasing numbers, many of them single mothers, who struggle to pay rent in the city despite having jobs, are resorting to unlawful occupation. Many of those living in informal settlements or occupying empty buildings work as cleaners and carers, and during the pandemic have been on the frontlines of the capital’s public health emergency. Dam got her hopes up recently after being offered an appointment to discuss her social housing application – but was told there were still no vacancies. She is beginning to lose faith, saying: “There are thousands of people waiting like me. “I don’t know what else to do, I can’t live in anguish for the rest of my life, this is not how I want my children to grow up.” * * * Portugal’s luxury housing market isn’t just defying the pandemic, it is thriving. According to Portuguese databank Confidencial Imobiliário, foreign investment made up 40% of housing investment in Lisbon in 2020, while Knight Frank’s 2021 wealth report places Lisbon among the few cities in the world where the luxury segment has scarcely been touched by Covid uncertainty, with prices up by 4%. Lima says this has no bearing on the lack of housing for people at the bottom of the income scale. “People were surprised to see prices rising in a pandemic, it’s the market functioning.” Looking back at the impact of deregulating the housing market and the golden visa programme, he admits the pace of Lisbon’s transformation has been startling. “It surprised many specialists, myself included – how fast we recovered from that crisis – and the cherry on top of the cake was foreign investment.” The lack of affordable houses is, he says, a political failure. “There is a view that foreign investment takes homes away from the Portuguese, but this has nothing to do with it – these are completely different sectors.” A homeless person sleeps in Figueira Square, Lisbon. Photograph: Patrícia de Melo Moreira/AFP/Getty Images The days of the golden visa as it currently operates appear to be numbered. António Costa’s socialist government promised to remove residential properties in Lisbon, Porto and the Algarve from its scope but put off the reform until January 2022 to cushion the impact of the pandemic. Applications were up 13% in 2021. From next year, overseas buyers will still be able to put their money into Portuguese property for a tax advantage, but in regions of lower population density. Even Lima concedes that for low-paid workers the options remain scarce. “It’s not enough to have the right to housing in the constitution,” he says. “I don’t know how any young person with a reasonable job can pay for a house in Lisbon today. Even if you earn €1,000 a month, you shouldn’t have to pay more than €300 [rent] – and this isn’t the reality in the city. “Some people say our prices are only a fraction of those in Madrid, London or Paris – of course, but our standard of living is not that of the Spanish, British or French.” • This article was amended on 28 December 2021. An earlier version referred to Luís Lima as the president of Apemip; he is the association’s former president and spoke to the Guardian before his presidency ended in May 2021.The collapse of Joe Biden’s Build Back Better legislation would have disastrous consequences for the global climate crisis, making it almost impossible for the US to comply with its greenhouse gas reduction pledges made under the Paris accords. The US president’s sweeping economic recovery and social welfare bill is in serious trouble after the Democratic senator Joe Manchin announced his opposition to the $1.75tn spending package that includes the country’s largest ever climate crisis investment. The shock move by the fossil fuel-friendly West Virginia lawmaker came after a year of record-breaking fires, floods, hurricanes and droughts devastated families across America, and amid warnings that such deadly extreme weather events will intensify unless there is radical action to curb greenhouse gases. The Build Back Better (BBB) legislation earmarks $555bn to tackle the US’s largest sources of global heating gasses – energy and transportation – through a variety of grants, tax incentives and other policies to boost jobs and technologies in renewable energy, as well as major investments in sustainable vehicles and public transit services. It is by far the largest chunk of federal funding for Biden’s climate crisis initiatives, without which experts say it will be impossible to meet the administration’s target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% below 2005 levels by 2030. Globally, the US is the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases after China, and scientists warn that even halving emissions by 2030 may not be enough to avoid a catastrophic rise in atmospheric and oceanic temperatures. But BBB would be a major step forward towards the US meeting the goals laid out by Biden at last month’s UN climate talks in Glasgow, with no time to waste given the regression during the Trump administration. Without it, the Biden administration would be forced to rely on a web of new regulations and standards which could be overturned by future presidents. Lawmakers, climate experts and labor groups have voiced intense anger and frustration over Manchin’s refusal to support the bill, which would leave the Democrats without the necessary votes to get it through the Senate. Raúl Grijalva, chair of the House natural resources committee, said the concentration of political power in a few hands had caused nothing but “gridlock and frustration”. “Our country has serious economic and environmental problems that demand government action. If we don’t take that action, we’ll look back at this moment as a decisive wrong turn in the life of our country,” Grijalva said in a statement. “Who died and made Joe Manchin king, how is this a democracy?” said Mary Annaïse Heglar, climate writer and co-host of the podcast Hot Take. “There’s been a dereliction of duty by politicians for decades who’ve failed to make the case for climate action … climate math won’t reset just because the political math did.” Writing on Twitter, Jesse Jenkins, an energy professor at Princeton University who leads a group analysing the potential of BBB, said Manchin’s decision was “devastating” given the high stakes. “Passing #BuildBackBetter would lower energy costs and secure both the US’s climate goals and its global competitiveness in some of the most important industries of the 21st century. Failure would cost Americans dearly.” BBB would build on a bipartisan infrastructure bill, signed into law last month, which contains important steps towards transforming America’s fossil fuel fired transport system by incentivizing zero emission public transit, a national network of electric vehicle chargers and a renewables energy grid. But BBB goes much further. For instance, homeowners would get incentives to install rooftop solar systems and insulate their homes. It also provides significant funding to address a range of environmental injustices which have led to Black, Latino, Indigenous and other marginalized Americans being disproportionately exposed to the harmful effects of fossil fuel pollution, ageing infrastructure like lead pipes, emerging toxins and the climate crisis. The bill includes billions of dollars in grants and other schemes to clean up pollution and create toxic-free communities, healthy ports and climate-resilient affordable housing, as well as research and development infrastructure at historically Black colleges and universities. So if Manchin move finally scuppers the BBB act – as is widely feared – frontline communities in the US, and across the world, would bear the brunt of the inaction. “Build Back Better is our once-in-a-generation opportunity to combat the climate crisis and advance environmental justice through transformative investments that only the government can provide,” said Abigail Dillen, president of the legal non-profit Earthjustice. “The urgency couldn’t be greater. As communities across our country are displaced by weather disasters and others breathe polluted air and drink poisoned water, political leaders like Senator Manchin cannot continue denying the crisis before us.” The climate crisis is undeniably causing havoc and misery across the world, with 2021 one of the deadliest ever years for weather disasters in the US. This year’s death toll includes at least 200 people killed by extreme heat in the Pacific north-west over the summer and 125 deaths caused by the extreme freeze in Texas in February. After years of scepticism, the majority of Americans now want government action to tackle the climate crisis but the majority of republicans – and a handful of democrats – continue to obstruct meaningful policy initiatives. Manchin, whose family profits from the coal industry in West Virginia, has already pushed out key climate policies during the BBB negotiations including a program to incentivize electricity utilities to use renewable power sources. Yet even some of Manchin’s core supporters are urging him to reconsider his opposition to the current bill, which includes several policies that would directly benefit large numbers of West Virginians including the state’s struggling coal miners. In a statement, the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA), which named Manchin as an honorary member last year, warned that benefits to coalminers suffering from black lung disease will expire at the end of this year unless BBB is passed. The union also supports the bill’s tax incentives that encourage manufacturers to build facilities on abandoned coalfields that would employ thousands of unemployed miners. Cecil Roberts, the union’s president, said: “We urge Senator Manchin to revisit his opposition to this legislation and work with his colleagues to pass something that will help keep coalminers working, and have a meaningful impact on our members, their families, and their communities.”Father Christmas is a very real person to so many children. Obviously with Santa being so occupied at this time of year, many impersonators go out to entertain and help with all of the excitement leading up to Christmas. I’ve just finished a 27-show run as a Father Christmas impersonator, at a four-day event run by Dudley metropolitan borough council. The council team presented an outdoor, big-screen Father Christmas experience. With the trees and the hall expertly illuminated and the audience sitting in marquees with two walls taken out, children watched a short story concluding with its characters finding a “magic portal”. The screen blitzed and Father Christmas appeared. Not all Father Christmas gigs are like this – and I’ve been doing them for 18 years. One year, I worked in a grotto that was actually more “grotty”: a garden shed plonked in the middle of an indoor shopping centre, with some plastic gnomes and penguins dotted around it. A funless elf wheeled the children through at a rate of knots. The hours were long and the pay was poor. Most of the children were too young to understand what was happening; the parents were eager only for that picture with Santa, never mind that their child was bawling their head off. Having an argument in your allocated two minutes is not a very festive option. As with any close contact with children, you need to make sure your reflexes are quick to save your beard. Unless you are a “real-beard Santa” – then it just hurts. I’ve been reading that there’s a shortage of Father Christmas impersonators, with a glut of job listings generally leading to a possible declining interest in seasonal roles. Poor pay and job insecurity are certainly issues. I once worked a company day where I handed out selection boxes and made balloon animals – I never really understood the thinking behind it, but I charged them lots of money. Jobs like that are rarities though. As the part is played by men “of a certain age” there might also be concern this year about close contact with families, in what are usually pretty hot and confined spaces. When I am not Father Christmas, I’m a magician, family entertainer and Punch and Judy puppeteer. . In lockdown last year, myself and another entertainer wrote a short Santa show which ran on a stage in a tent with three walls taken out, and the audience socially distanced in their own sleighs. Complete with magic, Santa appearing from the chimney and a snowstorm, it complied with the lockdown regulations at the time; with 10 shows a day, about 9,000 people saw it over nine days. Obviously many of my fellow Santas have been hit very hard with the events of the past two years. I have been lucky, while many in the entertainment industry have had a difficult time. We read a great deal about the West End theatres, with their millionaire owners and theatres across the country, suffering financially. I have read very little about the individual artistes who are at the really sharp end. Times are very tough for people in the entertainment business – many of whom did not qualify for government assistance – and who, even before the pandemic, were low earners. Fortunately for the UK government, Father Christmas has not got a vote: I feel his message of goodwill would be strained to the limit seeing officials partying as normal last December, while families sat at different dinner tables, divided, while loved ones died alone in isolation. Merry Christmas, Boris. Alec Powell is a children’s entertainer, magician and Father Christmas impersonator. He is a member of EquityThe parliamentary commissioner for standards has cleared Jacob Rees-Mogg of any wrongdoing in failing to declare he received £6m in cheap loans from one of his companies, concluding that they could not be seen as having influenced his behaviour. Linking to the commissioner’s report in a tweet, the Commons leader used a quote from Othello to indicate he believed his reputation had been unfairly maligned by the complaint from Labour. The office of the commissioner, Kathryn Stone, began an investigation at the start of this month into claims Rees-Mogg had breached rules for MPs connected to the declaration of employment and earnings. The Tory MP for North East Somerset received director’s loans totalling £6m between 2018 and 2020 from Saliston, which he owns and was a director of until 2019. Accounts for Saliston show the loans – £2.94m in 2018, £2.3m the following year and £701,513 in 2019-20 – attracted interest paid at the equivalent of about 0.8%, which was below the market rate. Rees-Mogg argued that the loans were used mainly as “temporary cashflow measures” to pay for a property purchase and refurbishment, and did not need to be declared because they were an entirely personal matter, with no outside interests accrued. The commissioner’s report into the matter, released on Wednesday, notes that at the time of the loans, Rees-Mogg was the sole owner of Saliston: “As a result, it is my decision that these loans were connected solely to your private and personal life. “I am also not satisfied that these loans could reasonably be thought by others to influence your actions, speeches or votes in parliament, or your actions taken in your capacity as a member of parliament; as such, it is my conclusion that these loans do not fit with the spirit or purpose of registration.” In his letter to Stone, Rees-Mogg wrote that his 100% ownership of Saliston meant that its assets were available to him “but that it cannot influence me by any payments because no action of mine could persuade the company to give me a higher or lower reward that that of full ownership, which is fully declared”. The MPs’ code of conduct does not specifically cover director’s loans, but it states: “Members shall fulfil conscientiously the requirements of the house in respect of the registration of interests in the register of members’ financial interests. “They shall always be open and frank in drawing attention to any relevant interest in any proceeding of the house or its committees, and in any communications with ministers, members, public officials or public office holders.”I’m about halfway through my interview with Noddy Holder – as in Slade’s “It’s Chrissstmass” Noddy Holder – and I really need to ask him that question. Except, isn’t it a bit rude? A man’s finances are his own personal kingdom … “I bet I know what you’re going to ask,” laughs Holder. “You’re going to ask me … how much money do I make each year? Everybody wants to know how much money we make!” A day doesn’t go by without someone shouting ‘It’s Chrisssstmass!’ at me at the top of their voice It’s certainly a valid question. Merry Xmas Everybody was released in 1973 (Slade’s third No 1 of the year after Cum On Feel The Noize and Skweeze Me, Pleeze Me) and has charted eight times in the 80s, twice in the 90s and every year since 2006. It’s currently number 30 in the charts, has been streamed 88m times on Spotify and has been released for the first time this year with a video, an animation that has had more than 150,000 views and counting. Surely the royalties must keep Holder rolling in top hats, platform shoes and luxury sideburn shampoo? “Well, I can’t put a figure on, because it’s just different every year,” says Holder, cryptically. “Some years it’s used in an advert or movie. There’s been all sorts of cover versions, from the Spice Girls, Tony Christie and Oasis” – Noel Gallagher recorded an acoustic version for The Royle Family’s 2000 Christmas special. “I’ll get my annual PRS [Performing Right Society] statement and the cross-section of artists who perform it on their Christmas tours is amazing. All four of the original Slade share performing rights but it just happens that Jim [Lea] and me were the main writers, so we earn more.” Oh, go on, give me a figure, I plead. “It’s like having a hit record every year. So it’s a nice pension plan, I’ll say that,” Holder smiles. The PRS has quoted £512,000 annually, but the Daily Mail reckons it’s more like a cool £1m. Merry Xmas Everybody came about after a challenge from one of Jim Lea’s elderly relatives, and was written in one sitting after a night down the pub. “Jim’s mother-in-law said: ‘How come that you’ve never written a song that could played every year for a birthday, Christmas or Valentine’s Day?’ The first song I’d ever written, in 1967, was this hippy, psychedelic song called Buy Me a Rocking Chair to Watch the World Go By, but the rest of the band said it was rubbish. Jim had this melody knocking around, so he put my hook and chorus into his verse and played it to me round his house. That night, I was drinking with the locals and my best mate, our tour manager, Graham Swinnerton – Swinny – at this jazz pub called the Trumpet in Wolverhampton. I went back to my old bedroom at my mum and dad’s, rather merry, and wrote the lyrics in one go.” Slade had just finished a big European tour in July 1973; the first ever band to play Earl’s Court. Four days later, Slade’s drummer, Don Powell, was in a car crash, killing his girlfriend and putting him on life support for six weeks. “The doctors said if he’s ever going to play the drums again, he needs to get behind a drumkit as soon as possible,” says Holder. “Our manager, Chas Chandler, decided we should head to New York, out of the limelight, to record Merry Xmas Everybody. The studio was within an office complex, so we went out on to the staircases to add echo to the choruses. People were going about their business with these four mad Englishmen screaming at the top of our voices about Christmas. It was a boiling hot New York summer in August, so hardly Christmassy. Plus Don couldn’t remember the drum part, so we had to record it in tiny pieces.” With pre-orders of 600,000, Merry Xmas Everyone went straight to No 1 for six weeks, selling over a million all over Europe. “So we did TV shows in Scandinavia, Germany, France and Belgium,” continues Holder. “The big one was Christmas Day Top Of The Pops 1973. We beat Wizzard’s I Wish It Could Be Christmas Everyday to Christmas No 1 – fellow Brummies and good mates – so they snuck into the audience and pelted me with custard pies. So that’s the performance I remember.” So is Holder surprised that Merry Xmas Everybody is still as loved nearly 50 years later? “We never dreamt that it would still be so popular. I came up with the line ‘Look to the future now, it’s only just begun,’ because the country at the time was in a terrible state with electricians, bakers, miners and gravediggers all on strike. It’s just as valid today because of the state the country. Look the future, it really has only just begun. “People associate me with Christmas, like I’m Santa’s little helper. I’m sure they half expect to see me walking down the street in platform shoes and a top hat shouting “It’s Chrissstmass!” They forget we had about 40 other hit singles. A day doesn’t go by without someone shouting “It’s Chrissstmass!” at me at the top of their voice. When I’m doing my Christmas shopping, I probably get it 40 times a day. But after 50 years, it still makes me smile.” • Watch the official video for Merry Xmas Everybody here.The NHS may set up “field hospitals” in the car parks of existing hospitals staffed partly by army medical personnel to help cope with a potential Omicron-driven surge in Covid patients. Hospital canteens, offices and meeting rooms could also be turned into makeshift wards if the new variant leaves so many people seriously ill that the health service may be overwhelmed. NHS England has told hospital bosses to make plans to take both steps in the coming weeks as part of a series measures to give the service “super-surge” extra capacity. However, it will only order the implementation of such dramatic and unprecedented moves if Omicron leads to even greater numbers of patients with Covid needing treatment than during the last peak in January. The plans, first reported by the Health Service Journal (HSJ), come amid deepening fears that the numbers of health staff off work sick with Covid could hamper the NHS’s response to Omicron. One in 10 doctors are off work in the UK, figures revealed on Wednesday, as medical leaders warned the highly transmissible new variant was fuelling the worst absence rates in the NHS since the start of the pandemic. A survey conducted by the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) found 10.5% of doctors were absent. The picture is worse in London, where one in seven doctors are off work (13.9%). The number of absences is growing, the RCP said, leaving “exhausted and demoralised” staff on wards struggling to cope with the pressure of more cases coupled with mounting winter pressures. The high absence rate among doctors is likely to be due to the high community levels of infection and rapid transmission of the Omicron variant, the RCP said. “Absence is the worst we have seen during the pandemic other than at the end of March 2020,” said Dr Andrew Goddard, the president of the RCP. “Today, we have a tired and demoralised workforce that has been managing the impact of the pandemic for almost two years, we are trying to deliver as much non-Covid care as possible and we have the usual winter rise in other respiratory conditions.” NHS England has told hospitals to be ready to create “major incident capacity” in January as it braces for a potential major wave of Covid cases needing inpatient care then. The new facilities would be in effect large tents, where up to 100 patients would be cared for, HSJ said. It quotes one NHS leader describing the new facilities as “lots of little Nightingales”, a reference to the seven field hospitals set up last year in England to give the health service extra capacity when the first wave of Covid hit in March. However, they were little used and have since been mothballed. It is likely that they would be used for the least sick, with existing hospitals looking after the most seriously unwell, including those needing oxygen to support their breathing. They will be staffed by a combination of both clinically trained personnel and also administrative staff who have no medical background, one official with knowledge of the plans said. NHS England disclosed the plans to hospital bosses on a series of regional conference calls on Tuesday. It expects that Army medical staff will be involved, though the HSJ said that no formal request for such help had been made yet. Staff both with and without a clinical background working for clinical commissioning groups, the local NHS bodies that commission and pay for health services in an area, will also be asked to help out. An executive at one hospital said that it was already sounding out staff who usually work in a purely administrative capacity about what roles they could take on if Omicron wreaks havoc. NHS leaders are keen to sort out which staff will undertake what work in existing and field hospitals given that the Nightingales set up last year were hobbled by hospitals having too few staff to be able to send all but a handful on secondment to the newly created facilities. Medical leaders on Wednesday issued a fresh plea to the public to exercise extreme caution over the festive period, warning that if infection levels continued to rise, the NHS could see the number of staff working plunge to “very dangerous” levels. Goddard added: “NHS colleagues will always be ready to do what is needed, but we needn’t be in this situation. If we had proper NHS workforce planning, taking into account current and likely future demand, I predict we would have many more thousand doctors, nurses and other clinicians. “As we don’t have that capacity, we urge everyone to arrange to have their vaccinations and boosters as soon as possible. And while we are all looking forward to time with loved ones this year, we need to think very carefully about the number of people we mix with over the next couple of weeks. That’s not a message people want to hear and not one it’s easy to deliver, but if we aren’t cautious, we risk the number of available health and care staff falling to very dangerous levels.” The government has cut the self-isolation period for people who have coronavirus from 10 days to a week, but ministers accept the move might only relieve some of the pressure around staff shortages.Book now Crucial to the success of any business is brand strategy. It’s a plan that directly addresses the needs of your customer, and positions your brand to beat your competitors. It can feel complicated and many people often get stuck. With expert guidance from award-winning writer and editor Andy Pemberton, and Andy Cowles, former creative director of Rolling Stone, you will nail your brand strategy. During the masterclass, you will learn how to identify your core customer and your most threatening competitor. You will discover how to write a unique and impactful positioning statement and be able to express the core benefit of your product or service. At the end of this hands-on masterclass, you will have a strong positioning statement and a clear direction for your brand. This course is for … Anyone running an SME or start-up who wants to learn how to position their brand and show it to the world Those looking for a fresh perspective and focused guidance for fast-tracking their brand development Course content Who is your core customer and what do they want? Your most threatening competitor: how do they identify themselves, and what are they doing differently? Write your unique positioning statement Create the core benefit of your product or service Q&amp;A You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 3pm (GMT). Tutor profiles Andy Pemberton is an award-winning writer and editor in both London and New York; he is the editorial director of his own agency, Furthr. Andy is a sought-after trainer, running international workshops on data visualization and writing for business for Guardian Masterclasses, the European commission, E-consultancy, and the Home Office. Andy Cowles is an accomplished creative director and content specialist. He is the founder of Cowles Media, delivers bespoke design training workshops, and is the winner of the British Society of Magazine Editors Mark Boxer Award. Previous roles include editorial and creative director for Time Inc, creative director of Rolling Stone, and creative director of Mademoiselle for Condé Nast in New York. Details Book now Date: Thursday 3 March 2022 Times: 3pm-5pm GMT Price £89 (plus £4.07 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 3pm GMT | 4pm CEST | 7am PDT | 10am EDT Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.An hour before kickoff Tuesday, a pair of seats under cover at rainy Lincoln Financial Field for the Philadelphia Eagles’ must-win NFL game against Washington could be snapped up on Ticketmaster.com for $50 each. That is a savings of 75%, sports fans. Someone bought those tickets for $190 each some months ago in the hopes of sitting in them, or selling them for even more money, but the coronavirus wrecks a lot of plans now. The game was postponed for two days after the virus hit the Washington roster especially hard. It was not freezing in South Philly, and incentive to go came hours earlier, when the Flyers-Capitals NHL game next door at the same time was postponed by the virus, meaning less traffic to battle. Still, resale tickets to a game that shaped the NFC playoff field dove to $41. Just because a game is slapped with the NFL seal of approval does not mean people need to pay anything close to face value for tickets to go watch at the last minute. It might be like this for a while. Welcome to the sports world as tested by the tenacious Omicron variant. We shall see if it drives the monolithic National Football League to its knees. Hockey, basketball and even baseball are much more nimble, in that rosters are much smaller and games draw smaller crowds. Some 28 of 32 NFL teams average 60,000 per home game. The NFL was somewhat fortunate in that it had just entered the offseason when Covid first swept through the US in 2020, and later would subside in time for the NFL to contest, very carefully, an entire season, albeit in mostly empty stadiums. The end came with a giant sigh. Tuesday was another odd day in sports. The NHL said it was taking a longer holiday break than planned because of the effects of the virus – before the news broke that its players won’t go to the Beijing Olympics. The league now needs that time to make up postponements. NBA commissioner Adam Silver told ESPN later in the day that the league’s big annual Christmas Day slate of five games would go on despite the postponements of several regular season games. But the league had told the 10 teams involved that that schedule could change. Several college basketball games were either postponed or canceled outright, though no one has dared broach the possibility that the almighty March Madness would be affected, delayed or even wiped out, as it was in 2020. Besides, that is more than two full months away. Meanwhile, the NFL squeezed in two games on what is usually an off-day for players. Philadelphia (7-7) beat the Football Team (6-8), 27-17, and the Rams (10-4) beat Seattle (5-9), 20-10. Just getting them in was great news, because teams don’t have to give money back. Both crowds were near capacities: 69,796 in Philadelphia, 71,192 in L.A. Another postponed game was made up Monday at rush hour in Cleveland, where a $55 front-row seat in the upper deck could be purchased on the resale market for $16. The Las Vegas Raiders kept their slim playoff hopes alive with a last-second game-winning field goal, but that game had an announced paid crowd of 67,431, a sellout. Whether the game was as good as it could have been in the old days, before Covid, is another question. Cleveland coach Kevin Stefanski missed the game because he tested positive, and so did the Browns’ top two quarterbacks, Baker Mayfield and Case Keenum. Nick Mullens, who did play QB, was hardly embarrassing, but hardly Bernie Kosar, either. That also describes the Washington QB: Garrett Gilbert, a 30-year-old journeyman who was signed by the Football Team off the New England Patriots practice squad last week in case Washington’s first two QBs could not lick Covid in time. Gilbert, who has played in games for four different teams in the last four years, did just fine against the Eagles, throwing for 194 yards. But the Eagles all but handed him a touchdown on a goofy pass that was dropped, kicked and intercepted, and he could get only one more. Not that he used it as an excuse, Gilbert said it had been challenging to blend in, because his new teammates wore masks most of the time. “It is tough to see anyone’s face to be honest with you and to put faces with names. It is not ideal, but it is what it is. There is nothing we can do about that.” Nevertheless, the Eagles and their fans were furious when the postponement was announced, because the Football Team, to them, had been less keen on avoiding the virus. As a result of the postponement, the Eagles would have just four days to prepare for another game. That Gilbert was so capable in a remarkable pinch reflects well on him – but also to just how amazingly deep the reservoir is of pro football players in reserve. This is why new pro football leagues spin off all the time; there are a lot of good players we don’t know about. And yet, even the NFL can’t go on a whole lot longer if it keeps draining its stock. The schedule is brutal even without a pandemic, with 17 regular-season games instead of 16 this year, made more important because of a playoff bracket expanded last year to 14 teams. Following the two games Tuesday, each NFL team has somehow played 14 games, before crowds as big as they were before the pandemic. They still need to each get through three more before the playoffs, 13 more games, can even start. A lot can still go haywire. More games might be held on weird days and times when fans won’t be able to attend, let alone tailgate. Some teams might have fill-in head coaches and rosters filled with less-than-name players rescued from the practice squad, or unemployment. But, still. When the Eagles scored their final touchdown to put Washington too far behind, the home fans appeared to celebrate just as heartily as they would have if Sonny Jurgensen or even Taylor Heinecke had been the losing quarterback. Maybe their team’s turn in the Omicron barrel comes next week. Maybe not. Stay tuned.Gyms, swimming pools and leisure centres in the UK have appealed for a government rethink after being excluded from the £1bn Omicron business support package. Huw Edwards, the chief executive of the industry body UKactive, said the government’s decision to leave out sports facilities from grants of up to £6,000 and rebates on sick pay was shameful, and would “lead to businesses that support the health and wellbeing of communities going to the wall”. “This is a health crisis, so to dismiss calls for support from these essential organisations that improve people’s health is inexcusable and will lead to our nation’s physical activity levels – which are already in a lamentable state – becoming even worse,” he said. “We urge the government to think again.” Sports facilities had initially thought they were included in the support package, which the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said applied to the “hospitality and leisure sectors”. However, it emerged overnight that pools, gyms and leisure centres would not be eligible. Mark Sesnan, the chief executive of Better, which runs more than 200 leisure centres, largely for local authorities, said the company had spent nine months rebuilding its business to 80% of pre-pandemic attendance, only to see a 20% to 30% drop in recent weeks as the government advised the public to work from home and limit social contact because of Omicron. “The shift to working from home has been hard for city centre businesses including cafes, restaurants and gyms. We have the same problem so it is a bit bizarre we are left out of venue support. The government has to accept that if it is going to discourage people from doing things there is a financial consequence and support needs to go equally to all businesses [affected].” Sesnan said Better was continuing to keep its facilities open in the hope that the fall-off in business was short-term. But he said that without a rise in attendance or government support, it would be forced to cut jobs and reduce opening hours. The outcry comes after a group of independent gyms wrote to the prime minister, warning the sector was “on a knife-edge fighting for survival” and needed urgent support before its peak period in January and February, when they can book in as much as half of annual earnings. Several London-based operators, including Frame, which has seven sites, Triyoga, which has five, and 1Rebel, with nine gyms, called for the reintroduction of furlough payments, urgent financial support via grants and a reduction in VAT as the industry heads into the post-festive health kick. Sandy Macaskill, co-founder of Barry’s UK, which also backed the open letter, said: “It’s like dark comedy that we’re in a national health crisis and the very industry that keeps people fit and healthy is the one that continues to be ignored. I read somewhere that the latest support package is like a dud Christmas cracker. We don’t even get one of those.” Rebecca Passmore, the UK managing director of PureGym, which is the largest gym chain in the UK, said: “We echo calls on the government to reconsider its latest support measures, which exclude gyms, pools, and leisure centres. Recent government action has impacted gym-goers behaviour, particularly the guidance to work from home, and as a result city centre and boutique gym operators face real financial difficulty. “Gyms are a critical sector for the health and wellbeing of the nation and the decision to exclude gyms from any financial support in the current environment is therefore disappointing. Unless the government takes action now to help these operators they may well not survive the coming months, which would have a direct impact on the nation’s ability to improve its health.”Spain’s Christmas lottery, a lucrative and much-loved annual tradition that often ends in the joyous detonation of cava corks and the hatching of big plans, took place on Wednesday amid soaring Covid infections and the first ever strike by ticket vendors. After the country recorded a record 49,823 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday night, many Spaniards welcomed the chance to focus instead on El Gordo (the Fat One) and its €2.4bn in prizes. As tradition dictates, the draw for the lottery, which dates back to 1812, was held at the Teatro Real opera house in Madrid, with children from the city’s San Ildefonso school calling out the winning numbers. For the December draw, many Spaniards club together to buy tickets, or fractions of them. But as the celebrations began across Spain, dozens of lottery ticket vendors assembled outside the opera house to demand an increased share of the sales revenues. The vendors, who had shut up shop for the day, say they deserve more than the 4% of the ticket price they currently get, arguing that 80 cents on a €20 ticket is not enough. They point out that their commission rate has been frozen for the past 17 years despite huge rises in living costs – not least Spain’s skyrocketing electricity prices. “Prices go up, taxes go up and the commissions remain the same,” Natalia de la Fuente, the daughter of a lottery seller, told Reuters. “We have to pay our bills … This is impossible.” Another protester, Álvaro de Miguel, said he and his fellow vendors would do “whatever it takes to get people to listen to us”. This year’s winning number, 86148, paid out a €400,000 prize. A stall at Madrid’s Atocha train station reportedly sold tickets that won their buyers – who probably come from all round Spain – a total of €516m. “I’m super excited,” said the stallholder, 56-year-old Javier Moñino. “Most of the people who bought them were people who passed by my window on their way through the station.”It was spring, and human excrement was pumping into our garden. I watched through the window as a perplexed young plumber with a long metal pole excavated the dark, gurgling drain. As if lockdown hadn’t been bad enough, our kitchen was now heavy with the stench of a thousand flushes. No one knew how to stop it. There was only one thing to do: brew weapons-grade black coffee and switch on the radio. That’s how I discovered Huey Morgan’s Saturday morning breakfast show on BBC 6 Music. It made everything feel a little more right in the world. What started as a way to distract from the tide of hot, liquid excrement on our patio quickly became the highlight of the week for my girlfriend and me. Huey – of Fun Lovin’ Criminals fame – thumbing you through his records: early 90s rap, early 80s disco, and early 70s soul to blow away the cobwebs, with choice modern selections marbling the retro soundscape. As the pandemic wrecked his live music opportunities, ex-marine turned platinum-selling artist Morgan swapped the remnants of his old rockstar lifestyle for a wholesome three-hour set in Britain’s coveted hungover fry-up slot. Morgan admits he has had “essentially the same record collection for 35 years”, and yet the show never feels formulaic. “I’m proud of my music,” he says. His enthusiasm for his own taste is infectious and it’s hard not to follow that confidence. He doesn’t ask you to trust his choices; you just do. When we speak, it’s Monday afternoon, a significant point in the weekly creation of the Huey Show. The process is always the same “I start compiling my show on Monday afternoon, writing down ideas in my Moleskine [notebook]. And then – and this is very important for me – I put together a playlist and drive to Costco in Avonmouth. I’m American, and they have all my American shit, so I drive there and get my hotdogs and listen to the music.” On Tuesday, he sends the playlist to his producer, T-Bone. He records the show in the basement of his home in Bath on Wednesday, then sends it to the BBC for vetting on Thursday. (“They wanna make sure I don’t say fuck,” he says.) Then, if the show is profanity-free, it rolls out on Saturday, 10am-1pm. It is soothing to realise the person putting together the perfect soundtrack for the inane-but-important Saturday mornings of young coupledom – scrubbing ovens, vacuuming stairs, splitting your kittens’ worming tablets in half, prying open their little jaws – is going about his own inane, but important, routine. “I need something to look forward to every week,” says Morgan of his 2021. “I have my family, and they’re lovely. But I need discipline.” So Morgan pieces together his show, while hunting for frankfurters in a Greater Bristol industrial park. Every single Monday. His presence on the Huey Show is that of a pithy tour guide, never outstaying his welcome. “When I was younger,” he says, “and I’d DJ in New York nightclubs, they didn’t even give me a microphone. Nobody wanted to hear what I had to say. I try to keep that humility.” He plays you a little Arlo Parks or A Tribe Called Quest, some Joe Bataan if you’re lucky, and throws down some dad-joke wordplay, and a raspy half-laugh, then it’s back to the music. “I started the show in 2008,” says Morgan, “and I’ve never been the kind of DJ, where – well, you hear ’em. You know who they are. They just love talking, man. And they talk so much, you don’t even know what the fuck they’re talking about by the time they play the record. That’s what I try to avoid.” Routines that stick have been hard to come by in the pandemic. After 2020’s attempts at regularly scheduled spiritual nourishment didn’t take – quizzes, jogging and YouTube yoga are now a long distant memory – I had given up trying. Monday and Tuesday might have always been crap, but, without the opportunity for football on a Wednesday, cinema on a Thursday and post-work pints on a Friday, my calendar’s arrhythmia left me jaded. But, each Saturday morning, the Huey Show injected something vital. Ever since that effluent February morning, I’ve come to cherish Morgan’s calming sonic antidote to the apocalyptic news cycle, his warm Noo Yawk accent cradling us till lunch. Through the week, I count down the days to each show, wondering what will be ringing around our kitchen. The vibe he creates, I tell him over the phone, makes a Saturday morning feel like an easy Sunday – only without the dread. His show is a mood that transports me away from the molten faecal hellscape bubbling up on society’s block paving. More than a show, it’s become an idealised soundtrack to my new pandemic reality. “I’m flattered people include me in moments in their lives,” he tells me, Costco beckoning. “Getting married, people passing away, babies being born, anniversaries, milestones. They genuinely wanna share them with me because I share what I have with them, man. And people can tell when it’s real. This is a bullshit-free zone. I’m not a presenter. I’m not a comedian. You don’t need me telling you my opinion on all the bad shit happening in the world. And I’m not curing cancer here, but if I can keep people away from bullshit for a couple hours and play good music for ’em, then that’s my lane. And I like it.”The photography book that I returned to more than any other this year was Encampment Wyoming by Lora Webb Nichols, an extraordinary record of life in a US frontier community in the early 20th century. Comprised of photographs by Nichols and other local amateur photographers, it emanates a powerful sense of place. Domestic interiors and still lifes punctuate the portraits, which range from the spectral – a blurred and ghostly adult plaiting the hair of a young girl – to the stylish – a dapper, besuited woman peering through a window. An intimate, quietly compelling portrait of a time, a place and a nascent community. Perhaps because of the strangely suspended nature of our times, I was also drawn to contemporary books that dealt in quiet reflection. Donavon Smallwood’s Languor was created during the lockdown spring and summer of 2020, as he wandered through the woods in the relatively secluded north-west corner of New York’s Central Park. Smallwood’s images of glades, streams and ravines suggest stillness amid the clamour of the city and are punctuated by his deftly composed portraits of the individuals who were regularly drawn there during the pandemic. The book’s subtext deals with the fraught history of Central Park, a space that has often echoed the city’s racial tensions. “What’s it like to be a black person in nature?” asks Smallwood in this quietly powerful debut. Russian-born photographer Irina Rozovsky’s In Plain Air trained her acute outsider’s eye on another bucolic New York landscape, Brooklyn’s Prospect Park, which, in summer, is a microcosm of the city’s multicultural dynamic. Again, the pandemic is the looming backdrop for these studies of people in human-made nature: walking, resting, working, playing and interacting with each other and their surroundings. A masterfully sustained study in mood, atmosphere and landscape. A much more otherworldly landscape is the setting for another impressive debut, Speak the Wind, by the Iranian-born photographer, Hoda Afshar. She was drawn to the islands of Qeshm, Hormuz and Hengam in the strait of Hormuz in the Persian Gulf by an age-old local belief that the wind that has shaped the dramatic terrain is also the source of sickness and possession by spirits. Her vividly atmospheric portraits and landscapes evoke the otherness of the islands, but also suggest the invisible and intangible forces, historical and communal, that have shaped this in-between place, and helped form its customs and beliefs. An ambitious, multilayered narrative that repays close attention in its glancing approach to myth, ritual, landscape and the long shadow of colonial history. Originally self-published in a now sought-after limited edition, Tereza Zelenkova’s The Essential Solitude is an altogether different imaginative response to a mysterious place. In this instance, the setting is the gloomy interior of a Grade II listed house in London’s East End, which belonged to the late Dennis Severs, an eccentric who styled it on his imagined idea of what an 18th-century Huguenot dwelling might look like. Influenced by often esoteric literature, from the Decadents to transgressive thinkers such as Maurice Blanchot and Georges Bataille, Zelenkova’s work is rich in symbolism and suggestion, her singular gaze capturing the disorienting atmosphere and fading grander of a house haunted by the extravagant imagination of its creator. A sense of foreboding also attends American photographer Carolyn Drake’s mysterious Knit Club, another ambitiously atmospheric meditation on place and community. Framed as a collaboration between the photographer and an anonymous group of women, part sisterhood, part secret cult, the book is a mischievous play on the southern gothic tradition that also contains a subversive feminist subtext. Drake’s shifting narrative is borrowed from William Faulkner’s novel, As I Lay Dying, while her deftly constructed images nod to clandestine rituals and the contested history of the US south. An often invisible US emerges powerfully from the pages of Matt Black’s epic American Geography, which was six years in the making, the photographer traversing the country by van and Greyhound bus to visit communities with a poverty rate above 20%. He was interested, he told me back in 2016, in “the psychology of poverty”, and he has succeeded in evoking that complex dynamic in monochrome images that are austere and haunting. The visual narrative is threaded though with his own observations, snatches of overheard conversation, and everyday ephemera encountered in bus stations, truck-stops and roadside cafes. A masterwork of contemporary documentary. Perhaps the photography book event of the year was the long-awaited publication of Whatever You Say, Say Nothing, by Gilles Peress, a two-volume epic of his photographs from the Troubles in Northern Ireland. Structured across 22 semi-fictional days, the book is probably the most visceral, and certainly the most ambitious evocation of what it was like to live though the tumult of those violent times. What impresses above all is Peress’s uncanny ability to capture single dramatic moments – of violence, mourning, resistance, brutality – that are repeated throughout like small variations on a bigger theme of tribal and political division. The narrative is overwhelming, as it should be, and an accompanying volume, Annals of the North, provides much needed context. An immensely important book, but a prohibitively pricey one aimed squarely at the photo-book collectors market. Two exhibition catalogues stood out for me this year: James Barnor’s Accra/London: a Retrospective, which accompanied the Ghanaian-born photographer’s exhibition at the Serpentine Gallery, and Coming Up for Air, which was published in tandem with Stephen Gill’s survey show at the Arnolfini Gallery in Bristol. The first showed how Barnor, who is 91, moved effortlessly between genres – portraiture, photojournalism, fashion – while also creating a vibrant record of the lives of ordinary Africans in his native Ghana and the diaspora in the UK. The second was a journey inside the restlessly inventive mind of one of Britain’s most original contemporary photographers that traces Gill’s mischievously subversive gaze from inner city Hackney to rural Sweden. Both are highly recommended. In a strong year for books by female photographers, I was also drawn to Nancy Floyd’s epic of self-portraiture, Weathering Time, which she describes as “my visual diary, personal archive, and record of my changing body and my environment over the past 30-plus years.” Since 1982, Floyd has tried to photograph herself every day, mostly standing impassively on her own, sometimes doing stuff with a dog or a family member in attendance. The book is edited from more than 2,500 images, all of which are pretty ordinary, but accrue a profound resonance when sequenced chronologically. Finally, perhaps the most quietly resonant photo-book I received this year was Odd Time by Mirjana Vrbaski, in which a selection of austerely beautiful portraits that nod to the Dutch old masters give way to almost ghostly images of the deep forest landscapes of the Dalmatian coast. There is a strange purity to both sequences, but it is the portraits of the young women that haunt the imagination with their poise and unreadable expressions. The silence emanating from Vrbaski’s portraits speaks of a deep engagement with her subjects and invests her images with an almost unsettling presence that is hard to pin down, but extraordinarily palpable. A small, perfectly formed book in which the images speak for themselves.The European Commission has begun legal action against Poland over rulings by the country’s constitutional court that challenged the supremacy of EU law, in an escalation of the long-running battle between Brussels and Warsaw. The EU executive said it had “serious concerns” about the Polish constitutional tribunal and its recent case law, citing rulings where the court had challenged the primacy of EU law. Striking at the heart of the EU legal order, Poland’s constitutional tribunal ruled in July that measures imposed by the European court of justice were unconstitutional, with warnings of a legal “Polexit”. Poland agreed on the supremacy of EU law when it became a member of the bloc in 2004, but the rightwing nationalist Law and Justice (Pis) government that came to power in 2015 has sought to challenge that principle, while bringing domestic courts under political control. The EU’s legal action is in response to the July ruling and a similar one from October. It follows years of legal wrangling over the independence of Polish courts. In a sign that patience is wearing thin in Brussels, the EU commissioner for justice, Didier Reynders, said: “We’ve tried to engage in a dialogue, but the situation is not improving. Fundamentals of the EU legal order, notably the primacy of EU law, must be respected.” The commission also said it had “serious doubts” about the independence and impartiality of the Polish constitutional tribunal, a body that now includes former PiS MPs on its bench. Retired judges of the tribunal have said the court has “ceased to perform its constitutional tasks and duties” since its membership was overhauled. Poland’s government claimed the legal action was an attack on its sovereignty. “The EC is initiating proceedings and wants to subordinate the constitutional tribunal in Poland to EU law,” tweeted the deputy justice minister, Sebastian Kaleta. “This is an attack on the Polish constitution and our sovereignty.” Beata Szydło, who was Poland’s prime minister from 2015 to 2017 and is now an MEP, tweeted: “This is not a legal dispute, but an attack on the Polish constitution [and] the foundations of Polish statehood. The EC aims to deprive Poland of its rights as a sovereign state.” Legal scholars said the action was important but overdue. “It’s great that this is happening and there’s no way the commission could retain any credibility in the rule of law field by letting the adventures of [the] Polish constitutional tribunal slide,” wrote Jakub Jaraczewski, a researcher at Democracy Reporting International. Poland’s government now has two months to respond to the commission’s “letter of formal notice”. The case could go to the European court of justice, leading to daily fines against Warsaw. It is only the latest in a blizzard of legal cases against Poland launched by the commission, which has also frozen Warsaw’s access to €35.6bn (£30.2bn) in coronavirus recovery funds because of concerns about the absence of independent courts.If the newly revised-down figures for Britain’s economic performance in the third quarter show anything, it is that consumers played the starring role in the recovery while the industrial sector struggled under the twin pressures of Brexit and global raw material shortages. This should not come as a surprise. Ever since 2016’s narrow vote to quit the EU, businesses, and especially manufacturers, have failed to move out of second gear. Disruptions to supply chains come and go – remember the chaos caused by Donald Trump’s trade battles with China – while Brexit is ever-present. Trade figures show a 8.8% fall in goods exports from July to the end of September, at a time when global trade was booming as coronavirus restrictions had eased. France, which has a similarly sized economy to the UK’s, was also experiencing supply chain issues holding back manufacturing. But the lack of computer chips and vital components for cars only prevented French firms from enjoying an even stronger surge in production and exports. British manufacturing, meanwhile, was, in addition, suffering from a decline in the workforce after thousands of people from abroad left or were deterred from coming by draconian visa rules and the UK’s handling of Covid-19. The staff shortages were made worse by what has become known as the great resignation, with almost one in four workers planning a job change. For manufacturers, the problem is less about families calling time on long commutes and more about the high levels of long Covid that have hit their older, skilled workers. Then there is the trend for early retirement, much of it related to health issues. France, meanwhile, has enjoyed a mass return to work that has pushed the participation rate above pre-pandemic levels. The official figures also point to another troubling UK trend that strips away the gloss provided by low unemployment and high levels of vacancies. The Office for National Statistics said revised data for business investment showed the money spent upgrading plant, machinery and IT fell by 2.5% in the third quarter – revised down from an increase of 0.4% when the ONS made its first stab at a figure. It means investment across businesses large and small remains a hefty 11.7% below that in the fourth quarter of 2019, despite the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, handing firms tax relief on investment worth 130% of profits to spur an revival. Low business investment is an indicator of poor economic health and probably the most telling indicator of UK firms’ reluctance to bet on a brighter future. There was better news from figures for consumer spending growth, which was 2.7% higher compared with its previous estimate of 2%, making it the largest contributor to headline GDP growth in the quarter by some margin. Much of the extra spending was on restaurants and leisure activities, as previously hibernating households ventured outside during the summer and autumn. Revised figures showed consumer spending was also more resilient during the previous lockdowns, going back to March 2020, indicating the cliff-edge drop in activity in the spring last year was less than first estimated and the momentum of spending going into 2021 was stronger. The ONS said the output loss during the initial phase in the pandemic was smaller than thought and GDP was just 1.5% below its pre-pandemic peak in 2019, rather than the 2.1% previously reported. That said, the reliance on consumer spending meant the momentum was weaker than first estimated and the third-quarter growth figure was just 1.1%, down from 1.3%. With manufacturers slipping from second gear into reverse during the autumn – output dropped back 0.7% in the third quarter – and construction output following the same negative trajectory – down 1% in the same period – consumer spending will need to soar in the new year to make up the difference. Omicron has probably put paid to that.In a video filmed shortly before the UK hosted the Cop26 climate conference, Boris Johnson strolls alongside Jo Bamford and his father, the JCB boss, Anthony Bamford. Behind them is a JCB digger, and a big green bus is parked just across from the Houses of Parliament for a photocall. The prime minister quizzes the men about the economics of switching engines from fossil fuel to hydrogen. “It’s the same cost as running it on diesel,” Jo Bamford replies. “It’s already the same.” The video, posted by Jo Bamford’s gas distribution company, Ryze Hydrogen, on its Instagram feed in October, shows the privileged access the businessman enjoyed while lobbying for hydrogen to take a central place in Britain’s transition from fossil fuels. The UK government this year said hydrogen, which releases only water when used as an energy source, could make up to 35% of the UK’s energy consumption by 2050 as part of its net zero plans. Bamford’s eldest son, who bears the same name as his grandfather, the JCB founder, Joseph Cyril Bamford, runs three businesses focused on hydrogen. He came to attention in 2019 by buying Wrightbus, the bankrupt maker of London buses, and plans to supply the capital with new hydrogen doubledeckers with gas provided by Ryze. More recently, he has started a fund that hopes to raise £1bn to invest in hydrogen. The Bamfords have described their vision of using hydrogen to power diggers, buses, and other parts of the economy – and they have used their political connections to promote that vision. Lord Bamford is 38th on the UK’s rich list with a net worth of £4.6bn, built up mainly through the family company, according to the Sunday Times. He is one of the big Conservative donors: the Bamfords and JCB have donated £8.7m to the party since 2002, while JCB gave various pro-Brexit groups a cumulative £670,000 before the EU referendum, according to Electoral Commission records. Jo Bamford, who like his father attended the Catholic boarding school Ampleforth, has himself donated £75,000 to the Conservatives. He also employed the MP and the former Northern Ireland secretary Julian Smith as an adviser until November, paying him £60,000 a year for 20 hours’ work – the equivalent of £3,000 an hour. Smith resigned shortly after the Guardian reported on his external jobs. It has been reported that the Bamfords have also provided other benefits to the prime minister. As Johnson recovered from Covid during the first lockdown, he received luxury ready meals worth £27,000 from Daylesford Organic, the company founded by Lord Bamford’s wife, Carole, according to the Daily Mail. Johnson has also reportedly used a helicopter and private jet registered to Lord Bamford to travel on official trips and campaign visits, while JCB paid him £10,000 before a speech in January 2019 in which Johnson praised the company, six months before he won the Conservative leadership. In a 2019 election stunt Johnson drove through a polystyrene wall using a JCB digger with “get Brexit done” emblazoned on its bucket. Wrightbus has won taxpayer-funded contracts for green transport worth nearly £80m in the past three years. These include a £12m contract from Transport for London (TfL), won before Bamford’s takeover, to build England’s first fleet of hydrogen-powered doubledeckers. In December 2020 it won a £66m contract from Northern Ireland’s government for zero-emission battery and hydrogen buses; it is also providing buses to Aberdeen, Birmingham and Brighton and Hove under various taxpayer-funded schemes. Beyond the contracts, Wrightbus has said it received £6m in state funding from TfL, £5m from EU bodies, and £1m from the UK government’s Office for Zero Emission Vehicles. • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. Jo Bamford is the founder and executive chair of Ryze Hydrogen; it is not his father Lord Bamford’s company as an early version said.The heir to the JCB digger empire, whose father Lord Bamford is one of Boris Johnson’s biggest financial backers, is locked in a legal battle with a former close friend that has shed fresh light on alleged tensions inside one of the UK’s most powerful industrial families. The case has also raised questions over the conduct of Jo Bamford, a 43-year-old self-styled “green entrepreneur” who is a director at a key JCB holding company and has now set himself up as an investor in bus manufacturing and hydrogen. His companies, which includes the doubledecker maker Wrightbus, have won taxpayer-funded contracts worth nearly £80m for zero-emission buses in England and Northern Ireland over the last three years. However, Bamford’s business dealings are now under scrutiny by a judge in civil proceedings in the US. US court filings and transcripts reveal he is in a bitter dispute over the ownership of a company based in Philadelphia. The documents make public for the first time Bamford’s investment in the Delaware Valley Regional Center (DVRC), one of hundreds of ventures set up to sell fast-track access to green cards under a controversial US government visa scheme known as EB-5. Bamford is suing Joseph Manheim, a former best friend, accusing him of “surreptitiously” seizing control of the joint venture and using that control to take $5.9m (£4.4m) from the business. Manheim has vigorously denied the allegations, and has brought his own counterclaim. As the dispute escalated, the two men have levelled a barrage of accusations against each other. The case went to trial in Delaware in June, giving an extraordinary insight into a world of extreme wealth and privilege within one of Britain’s most prominent industrial families. During the hearings, Bamford told the court that he raced classic Ferraris – while Manheim claimed he also collected rare pheasants. Under cross-examination, Bamford admitted to using a company email account to order cannabis and send unspecified “inappropriate, explicit photographs”. Bamford and a third founding director, who joined him as a plaintiff, have in turn accused Manheim of using company funds for outings to a strip club in Philadelphia, leasing a Porsche, and to cover the cost of playing in polo matches. In his court filings, Manheim alleged Bamford was intending to use the legal process to carry out a “bloodless coup” to seize control of the company. Both men deny any claims of wrongdoing. Manheim through his lawyers declined to comment on the cases. The final judgment on the claim and counterclaim is not expected until next year. Green cards ‘for sale’ Lawyers acting jointly for JCB, Lord Bamford and Jo Bamford said the US legal proceedings had no connection with either the digger firm or the peer. Anthony Bamford, 76, is one of the UK’s most successful industrialists, with a net worth estimated at £4.6bn. He was made a peer in 2013, campaigned for Brexit and has donated millions to the Conservative party. Jo Bamford, his eldest son, has donated £75,000 to the Tories. He may also – one day – take over the entire family business. Jo Bamford became friends with Manheim in about 2001, when the former investment banker was dating Bamford’s sister. The court hearings gave a glimpse into a once close relationship: the two men socialised and holidayed together and were godfathers to each other’s children. Bamford eventually gave Manheim access to his $2m Goldman Sachs investment account. When Manheim came up with the green card business idea in 2012, Bamford backed the venture. The equity in DVRC was split between the two friends and a third partner, all of whom would share profits equally, Bamford claimed. Through his lawyers, Bamford said he was not significantly involved in DVRC’s activities beyond attending board meetings. The company’s clients were mainly from China but also from Vietnam and South Korea, among other countries. In exchange for investments of $500,000 apiece in local road and public transport projects, and a fee paid to DVRC, they could apply for fast-track visas to live and work in the US. By January 2021, the fund holding DVRC client money had accumulated assets worth $623m from 1,246 investors, according to Manheim’s pre-trial brief. From the profits, Bamford received total distributions of $2.15m between 2016 and 2020. DVRC operated under the EB-5 programme, which allowed wealthy foreigners to effectively buy the right to live and work in the US. EB-5 is now suspended for new applicants after criticism from senators that – though legal – it presented a national security risk. Through his lawyers, Bamford said EB-5 had been reauthorised on several occasions and that DVRC was an entirely lawful business. Polo and a strip club The trial revealed allegations of unusual business practices at DVRC. Manheim and the third partner in the business visited a Philadelphia strip club called Delilah’s Den on several occasions, racking up expenses of $3,928, according to Bamford’s pre-trial brief. Manheim also allegedly took money out of the business to pay between $20,000 and $50,000 to cover the cost of playing in a polo match in Argentina, according to testimony of the third partner. According to court papers, the relationship between the business partners deteriorated in 2018. In August of that year, Manheim and the other directors agreed to dismiss Bamford from the board of a holding company. The circumstances surrounding his removal are highly contentious. Bamford claimed he was unlawfully removed. In his evidence, Manheim gave several alleged reasons for the dismissal and raised concerns about Bamford’s actions. He claimed that during a board meeting Bamford had put his interests as a shareholder ahead of his duties as a director, and not prioritised the needs of the firm and its 1,200 investors. Through his lawyers, Bamford denied the allegation. Bamford confirmed in court he had used company email accounts to order cannabis via the website Craigslist, and that he had also used his work email to send “inappropriate, explicit photographs”. A difficult conversation During the hearings, Manheim sought to highlight alleged tensions within the Bamford family. Bamford confirmed during his testimony he had “regretfully left the family firm” in 2016 after a “difficult and painful conversation” with his father. “In essence, my dad didn’t want to stop running the business, and I didn’t want him to stop running the business,” he told the court. “And I didn’t really want to be Prince Charles, I didn’t want to be waiting for the rest of my life. I wanted to go and run my own business.” In his evidence, Manheim claimed Bamford had asked him some years ago to carry out a DNA test on his younger brother, who serves alongside him on the board of one of JCB’s companies. He alleged Bamford had given him a bag containing samples for analysis. Manheim said he never carried out the test. He claimed Bamford was often “excitable” when discussing family matters and his approach was to “let it settle down”. Through his lawyers Bamford strongly denied this incident had ever taken place. During the trial, his lawyers tried to have the claim struck out on the basis of relevance and that the allegation dated from two years before the dispute covered in the trial. But the judge overruled the objection, saying it was pertinent because “past interactions with people contribute to how one views them”, according to the court transcript. In 2019, Bamford eventually sued Manheim, accusing him of “skimming profits” to allegedly award himself more than $5.9m without the knowledge or consent of his fellow shareholders, and of fraudulently taking control of the company. He is claiming damages and wants Manheim removed and replaced by a trustee. Manheim’s request to have the case thrown out and costs paid has been rejected. In a verbal ruling on some aspects of the case at the end of the trial, the judge said there had been “an awful lot of money leaving this company for Manheim and his affiliates, and that’s where the outcome really turns”.Although she never starred in any original productions of his shows on Broadway, Richard Rodgers described Sally Ann Howes, who has died aged 91, as “the greatest singer who ever sang on the American musical stage”. Best known for playing Truly Scrumptious opposite Dick Van Dyke as Caractacus Potts in the film Chitty Chitty Bang Bang (1968), Howes was a classic instance of the star who never really was, despite her talent and impeccable pedigree. She had dual nationality in Britain and the US, like Julie Andrews, in whose track she followed, first as a child star in British films before and after the second world war, then as Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady in 1958. The show marked her Broadway debut, and she played in it for a year, and for a higher salary than her predecessor. When Andrews declined the role of Truly Scrumptious, in she stepped. In 1973 the hills were alive again, not with the sound of Julie, but of Sally, as she led a US tour of The Sound of Music. The upside of this nearly star status was that Howes could make surprising and adventurous choices in her work, such as appearing in a West End thriller, Lover (also 1973) by Brian Clemens, with Max Wall, or a musical version of James Joyce’s The Dead (2000), with Blair Brown and Christopher Walken, off-Broadway and, briefly, on. Although she was six years older than Andrews, the parallel career landmarks of both were uncanny. Three years before Andrews made her name in New York in Sandy Wilson’s The Boy Friend (1954), Howes made her stage debut in a show for which Wilson had written the lyrics, Caprice (1951), a musical comedy of domestic confusion in the south of France, at the Alhambra theatre in Glasgow. Unfortunately, on her very first number on any stage, the conductor fumbled the score to the floor and Howes had to sing unaccompanied while the music sheets were noisily gathered, the instruments picked up their places one by one and, following them tentatively, she modulated gradually back into the correct key. The show never reached the West End. Howes did, however, get there later in 1951, in a revue, Fancy Free (not the Jerome Robbins ballet) at the Prince of Wales theatre in London. In 1953 she established herself fully in the West End when she played Jennifer Rumson in Paint Your Wagon (featuring the songs Wand’rin’ Star, and I Talk to the Trees) for 18 months at Her Majesty’s theatre. In playing opposite her father, the musical comedy star Bobby Howes (the original Mr Cinders), she was at least, and at last, fulfilling her destiny. Howes was the second child of Bobby and his wife, the actor and singer Patricia Malone. Her older brother, Peter, became a musician. Born in St John’s Wood, she grew up in London and Hertfordshire surrounded by her parents’ show-business friends (Cicely Courtneidge and Jack Hulbert were neighbours), and was educated at Queenswood school in Hatfield. Her first film was the title role in Thursday’s Child (1942), written by Rodney Ackland, co-starring Wilfrid Lawson and Stewart Granger. Her prodigious juvenile output in the subsequent decade included Dead of Night (1945), an anthology horror film with Michael Redgrave, Googie Withers and Frederick Valk, the first sound screen adaptation of Nicholas Nickleby (1947; she was Kate), Anna Karenina (1948) with Vivien Leigh, The History of Mr Polly (1949), with John Mills, and Honeymoon Deferred (1951) with Kieron Moore and Griffith Jones. She later said how unhappy she was with some of these films and she eventually managed to break a seven-year contract with Rank so that she could move on to the stage. She married the actor Maxwell Coker, who had been in the first London production of Oklahoma!, in 1950 (they divorced in 1953) and then Richard Adler, the lyricist of the Broadway hits The Pajama Game and Damn Yankees, in 1958. Adler wrote Kwamina (1961) for her, a Broadway musical set in a village in west Africa which, despite choreography by Agnes de Mille, proved a misfire in a heated time of civil rights protest. “Almost liked the play, loved the loincloths,” wrote one critic, and the show closed after just 32 performances. Still on Broadway, she had a popular success in a 1963 revival of Lerner and Loewe’s Brigadoon and broadened her appeal on television on both sides of the Atlantic, making appearances on game shows and variety specials, including six Sally Ann Howes shows for British television in 1960. Having become a US citizen, she was invited to sing at the White House by three US presidents, Dwight Eisenhower, John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. After Lover closed early in 1973, she played opposite Denis Quilley in George Bernard Shaw’s Man and Superman at the Yvonne Arnaud theatre, Guildford, and at the Adelphi theatre, London, opposite Peter Wyngarde in a sumptuous revival of The King and I, also at the Adelphi. In 1977 she joined Tommy Steele for 10 weeks in Hans Andersen at the Palladium and later played Gertrude in a touring production of Hamlet (Hilton McRae as the prince, Donald Pickering as Claudius) in 1983. Chitty Chitty Bang Bang was undoubtedly her major movie, although she was appreciably noted vying with Diane Cilento for the affections of Kenneth More’s well-mannered butler in Lewis Gilbert’s The Admirable Crichton (1957), with Cecil Parker and Martita Hunt. She also acquired a minor cult following for her part in Alvin Rakoff’s Death Ship (1980), a grisly horror movie in which she co-starred with Richard Crenna, George Kennedy and Kate Reid. By the time she appeared in the television miniseries of Judith Krantz’s Secrets in 1992, she was more often seen on stage in one-off concert appearances, such as A Little Night Music with New York City Opera in 1990, or in a Sunday charity performance such as the rarely seen Semi-Monde by Noël Coward at the Royalty theatre, London, in 1989. In 1990 she took a solo show, From This Moment On, for just three performances to the Edinburgh festival. In 1997 she sang Alice Blue Gown from the musical Irene at the Palladium in a memorial show for the critic Jack Tinker. That bizarre celebration – Tinker’s surviving critical colleagues danced chaotically through Sit Down You’re Rocking the Boat from Guys and Dolls – was produced by Cameron Mackintosh, who in 2007 persuaded her to return to My Fair Lady, this time as Mrs Higgins, on yet another US tour. After divorcing Adler in 1966, Howes married Andrew Maree in 1969. They divorced in 1970 and she married Douglas Rae in 1972. Rae died in September 2021. She is survived by Andrew, a son from her marriage to Adler. • Sally Ann Howes, actor and singer, born 20 July 1930; died 19 December 2021A small oil painting that avoided being sold at a Spanish auction for €1,500 earlier this year after experts suggested it could be the work of the Italian master Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio has been granted protected status as an item of cultural interest. The painting of the scourged Christ, which measures 111cm by 86cm, was withdrawn from sale in April after suspicions grew that it had been incorrectly attributed to the circle of the 17th-century Spanish artist José de Ribera. Experts at the Prado museum in Madrid, who raised the alarm, believe there is “sufficient stylistic and documentary evidence” to suggest it could be an original Caravaggio, meaning it could be worth as much as €50m (£42m). On Wednesday, six months after Spain’s culture ministry imposed a precautionary export ban on the painting, the regional government of Madrid formally declared the work a bien de interés cultural, or item of cultural interest. It described the painting as “an example of the excellence and pictorial mastery of the Italian naturalism” that had a great influence on the Madrid school of painting in the 17th century. “Elements such as the psychological depictions of the characters, the realism of the faces, the luminous force that illuminates the body of Christ, the interplay of the three characters and the communication it establishes with the viewer make this a work of great artistic interest,” the regional government said in a statement. It said the work deserved protection whoever its painter was, but that the evidence pointed towards the Italian genius. “The information that has appeared over the past few months, together with the studies undertaken by experts, reinforces the theory that it is the work of Caravaggio,” the statement said. The painting’s protected status means that its owners – the three children of Antonio Pérez de Castro, the founder of Madrid’s IADE design school, and the artist Mercedes Méndez Atard – must inform the authorities if they decided to sell it to allow the regional government to decide if it wishes to make an offer.The Environment Agency has launched an investigation into alleged illegal waste activities at a landfill in Staffordshire which has plagued residents with noxious fumes for months. People living next to Walleys Quarry landfill in Silverdale, Newcastle-under-Lyme, are facing misery from strong smells caused by high levels of hydrogen sulphide on the site. The EA said it had launched a formal investigation into the landfill operators, Red Industries, after receiving new information in October. The company denies breaking any regulations. Campaigners hailed the news as an “early Christmas present” and a milestone in their fight for better air quality, although many said they felt an investigation was long overdue. “All we want is the truth. But we won’t take the pressure off the EA yet because we actually need to see the results, we won’t just accept platitudes,” said Dr Mick Salt, a resident and radiation physicist. The Newcastle-under-Lyme MP, Aaron Bell, said: “I welcome this formal investigation and I would like to thank all the sources that have come forward over the past year. This is just one step, and it is important for legal reasons not to prejudice or prejudge this investigation. However, I know the community will welcome this development.” Campaigners were dealt a blow last week when the EA won an appeal over a high court case that found it was not doing enough to control the landfill emissions that were shortening the life expectancy of a five-year-old, Mathew Richards. Mathew’s mother, Rebecca Currie, said she was “heartbroken” by the ruling and would take the case to the supreme court. “It felt like we’d put up all that fight for nothing. But my legal team are not letting it drop,” she said. “And the news of the EA’s investigation has put a smile on my face, it’s given us a big boost in the fight.” The family live half a mile from the landfill, and Currie said the fumes were still having a major impact. “We ring up [the EA] and complain about it but it doesn’t feel like it’s getting us anywhere. Mathew is coughing so bad to the extent he’s choking,” she said. The EA said it welcomed the court’s decision but added it “will not affect our determination to tackle the problems at Walleys Quarry”. It said that after the EA’s interventions, “there has been a clear downward trend in hydrogen sulphide levels recorded at our air quality monitoring stations in recent months”. Walleys Quarry Ltd, an associated company of Red Industries, said: “Walleys Quarry Ltd has never received or disposed of hazardous waste in contravention of any regulations. Any allegations that it has ever done so are baseless and wrong. “There are no grounds whatsoever for this investigation or the unprofessional way it has been publicised by the EA as a supposedly responsible regulator. Despite this, the company will cooperate fully with the EA investigation so the true facts can be established and made known at the earliest opportunity.”Did you rush to the advent calendar as soon as you woke up today? The British Board of Film Classification advent calendar, that is, which has been running on Twitter throughout this month. We’ve already learned so much. There was the revelation that past examiners considered Ron Howard’s How the Grinch Stole Christmas to be “educational” (always a big deal for the BBFC, which values few things more highly than a teachable moment) and believed the star of Rumble Fish and Angel Heart to be one “M O’Rourke”. It was no surprise to discover that a scene of Santa Claus wielding candy-striped chain-sticks was originally snipped from the 1996 comedy Jingle All the Way. The martial arts weapon, also known as nunchaku, was the special bugbear of James Ferman, the board’s director at the time, who seemed convinced that it posed a threat to the country’s wellbeing. How quaint. The scene was restored when the film was submitted again four years later. Times and tastes change, after all. That happens to be the BBFC’s justification for recent adjustments made to the ratings of a crop of blockbusters. A certificate is fixed at the time of a movie’s release, and is only amended when that title is resubmitted. One festive example: the 1988 Bill Murray comedy Scrooged earned a 12-certificate (for “moderate language and soft drug use”) when it was last submitted for home entertainment purposes in 2012, whereas its cinema rating remains PG, since it hasn’t been reassessed since its original release. Recent rereleases of films such as Raiders of the Lost Ark, The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring and Jaws have led the board to reconsider those titles in the light of what they vaguely call “changing attitudes”. In most cases, there has been a tightening of restrictions, though any parents who would have let their child watch The Empire Strikes Back when it was a U-certificate but draw the line now that it has been upgraded to a PG could be said to have too much time on their hands. Talking of hands, it is the loss of Luke Skywalker’s right one, severed by Darth Vader’s lightsaber, that earned that movie its PG rating. Raiders of the Lost Ark has its previous A-rating (the pre-1982 equivalent of the PG) swapped for a 12, not on account of abundant racial stereotyping but rather its gleeful violence: melty-faced Nazis are now a no-no. Sexual content is another concern. A BBFC examiner who passed the original Ghostbusters as a PG back in 1984 wrote at the time that “a lot of kids are going to be scared out of their pants, but they will love it”. Today it is a different sort of scare involving pants – namely a scene which suggests Dan Aykroyd’s character is receiving oral sex from a ghost – which has prompted examiners to raise the rating to a 12. There was always a risque edge to that film’s humour, but what plays weirdly now is the schoolboy tittering (menstruation – tee-hee!) or the demonising of the Environmental Protection Agency (those rotters!) The BBFC has explained that its adjustments are the result of consultation and outreach work, and it is an organisation keen to “hear from” and “listen to” audiences. This latest endeavour, though, serves as a reminder that an antiquated classification board desperate to prove its relevance in the age of streaming, social media and parental locks is likely to crave being heard as much as anyone else. Perhaps the feelings of its staff were hurt this year by the British horror movie Censor, set in the 1980s in the claustrophobic offices of a BBFC-esque classification body, where a prim examiner sanctimoniously insists that she does her job “to protect people”. With every new tweet, amendment and press release (such as last month’s announcement about new rules surrounding material that involves racist language), the BBFC is reminding us that it is still out there: “Yoo-hoo! Don’t forget about us! We still matter!” The public is always encouraged during the festive period to spare a thought for those who might be feeling isolated or overlooked, and the BBFC is no exception. Please do keep them in mind during the excitement of opening your new chain-sticks on Christmas Day, or when you’re rallying the family, young and old, to watch Robert Shaw get chomped in half by a shark.Do you believe in miracles? The NHL and its players’ union apparently do not. They’ve decided to take away the opportunity to put their sport on a grand stage, taking the rash, short-sighted decision to keep their players home while lower-tier journeymen and youngsters skate for Olympic gold in Beijing. The decision, formalized on Wednesday, was made because of Covid-19 concerns, specifically: 1 The NHL has already postponed many games due to the recent surge in numbers, and they now see the Olympic fortnight as a window in which those games can be played. 2 Beijing’s quarantine rules may be stricter than they like, keeping players out of the country and out of action longer than necessary. The latter is a legitimate concern, but it’s one that can still be discussed with the IOC and Beijing organizers. The deadline for declaring whether NHL players would go to Beijing is 10 January. So why make the decision on 21 December? The former is a misunderstanding of hockey’s place in the sports landscape. The NHL miscalculated in 2018, keeping players out of the Games – that time, to the consternation of the players’ association, which pointedly reminded the league of the opportunity it was missing: “A unique opportunity lies ahead with the 2018 and 2022 Olympics in Asia. The NHL may believe it is penalizing the IOC or the players, or both, for not giving the owners some meaningful concessions in order to induce them to agree to go to Pyeongchang. Instead this impedes the growth of our great game by walking away from an opportunity to reach sports fans worldwide.” Some sports are bigger than the Olympics. Tennis and golf have grand slams. Basketball has the NBA. Men’s soccer has the World Cup. (Women’s soccer does as well, but the World Cup and Olympics are roughly equivalent in the public eye in that case.) Hockey is not one of these sports. In North America, it has a grand tradition and the coolest trophy in sports, the Stanley Cup. In the rest of the world, it has much less. The annual world championship runs during the Stanley Cup playoffs and therefore struggles to attract the best players. A “World Cup” in 2016 was a merely an NHL preseason gimmick. It’s not that the NHL is in terrible shape. The league has expanded to Las Vegas and Seattle, and it has made lucrative long-term deals with ESPN and Turner Sports. But the low ratings for late games on TNT, the four-digit attendance figures in Buffalo and even a dip in attendance in hockey-obsessed Canada are stark reminders that hockey’s place in an increasingly crowded sports landscape is far from guaranteed. The NHL has long been considered one of the ‘“Big Four” US sports leagues. Today, the Premier League and other soccer broadcasts compete quite comfortably with the NHL for ratings. Major League Soccer’s average attendance is higher, though the venues are larger and weeknight games are rare. Women’s basketball and soccer are surging. Factor in MMA and all of the other sports, even cornhole, fracturing the viewing audience, and the “Big Four” could easily become a “Big Three and a Half” or even a “Big Three and Everything Else.” So the NHL can ill afford to squander good will. And yet it’s doing so. NHL leaders are forgetting Olympic hockey’s rich history. The Miracle on Ice, in which a ragtag bunch of US amateurs beat the mighty Soviet Union team in 1980, captured the public’s attention and spawned a major movie. The stakes are so high that Russian fans protested in Moscow after a controversial call helped the US beat Russia in a lengthy penalty shootout. And that was in the preliminary round, with no medals at stake. And the players jump at the opportunity. Olympic basketball teams don’t always draw the best NBA players for a variety of reasons, but Olympic hockey from 1998 to 2014 has been a glittering showcase of the world’s top players. Do we really want to see perennial All-Stars like Seth Jones go through their peak years without having a chance to play in the Games? It’s also a treat for viewers to see hockey on a larger rink, giving skilled players more room to operate. The game is faster and sharper. Viewers don’t seem to miss the fights that are still a part of the game in the NHL. Viewers also respond to rivalries, an aspect of the game the NHL cherishes. Any game featuring any two out of Canada, Russia and the US is must-see TV. A February game between the Arizona Coyotes and Los Angeles Kings is not. To get a sense of what the NHL is throwing away, consider the 2010 gold medal showdown between host Canada and the US. Zach Parise scored with 24 seconds to give the US a tie, only to see Canada’s favorite son, Sidney Crosby, net the winner in overtime. That game drew 27.6m viewers in the US alone. In Canada, roughly half of the population watched. This event wasn’t just a North American phenomenon. Check this video of broadcasts all over the world capturing the drama of Crosby’s winner. Would anyone want to deny players the opportunity to play in such a game? Would anyone want to deny viewers the opportunity to watch such a game? Would anyone want to deny their own sport the opportunity to reach a global audience? Wouldn’t any sports executive move heaven and earth to make sure this opportunity exists? The window might eventually close on its own, given the unpredictable path Covid-19 is taking. But the smart course of action was clearly to keep that window pried open as long as possible rather than slamming it shut so soon.The UK government’s vaccine advisers have issued new guidance on Covid vaccinations for young people in light of the rapidly spreading Omicron variant. The advice opens up Covid vaccinations for children as young as five and extends the booster programme to more teenagers. What has been decided? Covid vaccination has been approved for children aged five to 11 after a safety and effectiveness review by the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. The approval has paved the way for the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) to recommend Covid jabs for about 330,000 at-risk children in the age group. Who is eligible? Children aged five to 11 who are in a clinical risk group or who are a household contact of someone who is immunosuppressed are now eligible to receive a Covid jab. Which vaccine will they receive? Eligible at-risk five- to 11-year-olds will be offered the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine at one-third of the dose (10 micrograms) used for adults. The recommendation is for a primary course of two doses given eight weeks apart. What about the booster programme? The JCVI also recommended an extension of the booster programme, with a full 30 microgram Pfizer/BioNTech booster now recommended for three specific groups: 16- to 17-year-olds; 12- to 15-year-olds who are in a clinical risk group, or who live in a house with someone who is immunosuppressed; and 12- to 15-year-olds who are severely immunocompromised and have already had a third primary dose of vaccine. The boosters should be given no sooner than three months after the last shot of their primary course. What will the vaccines achieve? While the majority of children aged five to 11 are at very low risk of severe Covid, some children with underlying health conditions have a higher risk that can be reduced with vaccination. For those who have already had a primary course of Covid vaccine, the booster will provide added protection against Omicron. What about healthy children? The JCVI, which advises on how vaccines should be used once they are approved, expects to issue further advice on Covid vaccines for healthy five- to 11-year-olds in due course. The group wants to review more data before making a recommendation, including evidence of how much protection children acquire against Omicron after a Covid infection. Are the vaccines safe in children? More than 5m doses of the Pfizer vaccine have already been given to five- to 11-year-olds in the US alone. Based on that rollout and evidence from around the world, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has concluded that the benefits of vaccination outweigh the known and potential risks of Covid. The CDC has recorded nearly 2m cases of Covid among the 28 million children aged five to 11 in the country. The virus generally causes mild disease in young people, but Covid remains one of the top 10 causes of death among five- to 11-year-olds. In November, the European Medicines Agency came out in favour of using the Pfizer vaccine for those in the same age group after a randomised clinical trial children. Are the side-effects the same in children as in adults? They tend to be. The most common side-effects in children are a sore arm from the injection, tiredness, headache, achy muscles and joints, and sometimes fever, but these typically clear up within a couple of days. When will the vaccines be available? The NHS will announce when it can offer the shots, potentially in the next few days, but its primary focus at the moment getting more booster shots into adults. What are other countries doing? The US medical regulator approved the Pfizer/BioNTech shot for five- to 11-year-olds in November, clearing the way for millions of healthy children to receive a Covid vaccine. The children are given a third of the dose used for adults. Europe has also pressed ahead with vaccinating children in the age group. France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Greece and Hungary are all offering the jabs in the hope of reducing the spread of the virus while keeping schools open.Skiers heading for Austria will face increased restrictions this season as after it was announced that all tourists, including those from the UK, will have to show proof of a Covid booster dose. The country’s government met on Wednesday morning to discuss what measures needed to be taken in anticipation of a surge in infections from the Omicron variant when the ski season peaks in January. The variant has already reached Austria, but fewer than 1,000 cases have been confirmed. The country was open to those who were either fully vaccinated or had proof of recovery from Covid, but this extra restriction – requiring travellers to show proof of a booster vaccine – takes effect immediately. Anyone who has had their booster will also need to have proof of full vaccination status and a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours before arrival . A statement on Austria’s official tourism site states: “Austria is reacting to the expansion of the Omicron variant with new entry regulations … this new regulation applies to entry from all countries (including day trips) with the exception of the virus variant areas. Entry without vaccination or convalescence is de facto not possible for vacation purposes.” Responding to the announcement, Crystal Ski Holidays said: “We’re aware that the Austrian government has announced that anyone aged 12 and over will now be required to take a PCR test within 72 hours before their flight arrival time (and show) they’ve had a booster jab. We’ll be in touch with customers directly to discuss their options.” Elsewhere, Malaysia and Singapore became the latest Asian countries to tighten travel restrictions. Singapore temporarily stopped selling tickets for its quarantine-free “travel lanes” system, which allows vaccinated people from 24 countries to enter, while Malaysia froze sales of bus and flight tickets to Singapore – its only travel corridor. On Monday, Indonesia added people travelling from Britain, Norway and Denmark to its list of those banned from entering the country, and on Tuesday Thailand announced that it will reinstate mandatory Covid quarantine for foreign visitors and scrap a quarantine waiver. The Thai government said the action was being taken because of concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. However, Switzerland moved in the opposite direction and relaxed some restrictions: fully vaccinated arrivals are now permitted to use cheaper lateral flow, rather than PCR, tests to enter the country. Visitors can now enter Switzerland if they are fully vaccinated and have proof of a negative PCR test (not older than 72 hours) or a lateral flow test (not older than 24 hours) when boarding.Throughout Britain’s Covid emergency, the public have overwhelmingly supported drastic but necessary measures to combat the virus – even at the cost of their personal freedom. As the Alpha variant threatened to cripple the NHS in January, 85% of people supported lockdown – as near universal as you are likely to achieve in a democratic society – with only 11% opposed, and of those just over half opposed strongly. From the beginning, the prevailing criticism among the electorate has been that Boris Johnson’s administration has been too slow and soft in reacting: in the first weeks of the crisis, two-thirds believed it should have acted faster. Yet since Omicron revived the Covid threat, that consensus has collapsed. Last week, just 23% of adults in England supported closing pubs and restaurants, 26% backed not allowing people to meet indoors with people outside their household, and there was an even split on large sporting and entertainment events. Those numbers may shift more in favour of restrictions as cases continue to rise, but the difference from last year is stark. The public’s often militant support for authoritarian measures has disintegrated. This is not to say we should succumb to fatalism and let disillusionment with Covid measures veto any response at all. The core dilemmas of the pandemic remain. How do we keep cases as low as possible, above all else to prevent the NHS from being so overwhelmed by Covid patients that it cannot perform its basic function? There is obviously a point where restrictions would be unavoidable, and the lag between infections and later hospitalisation and death makes determining that point and selling the public on it difficult. But we must acknowledge that the waning support of the wider public cannot simply be dismissed as Covid denialism. Or as conspiratorial delusion and heartless contempt for human life, precisely the sort of perverse crankery epitomised by Piers Corbyn. Indeed, to do so risks abandoning the growing ranks of the disenchanted to conspiracy-mongers who claim drastic measures to preserve public health and human life were always as unnecessary as they were malign in intent. Their exhaustion is understandable. It is no surprise that polling shows young people generally most opposed to new restrictions. They have acted as a cordon sanitaire to protect old and medically vulnerable people. While the threat of long Covid to young people should not be dismissed, the risk to their lives has been very low. Yet the ability to socialise or establish relationships in their best years has been criminalised; their educations have been injured; their mental health more damaged than that of older generations. On top of more than a decade of austerity policies that disproportionately targeted the young – and a government which believes there is little to be gained electorally from policies that alleviate their distress – they quite rationally believe they have been abandoned. More widely, consider the 8 million people who live alone, condemned to often painful solitude; the low-paid who, unlike middle-class professionals, were compelled to travel to often unsafe workplaces; or the families in overcrowded flats with no gardens where their children can play. The severity of lockdown always depended on your generation and your class. The trouble isn’t that the public no longer want to stop Covid, rather that the social contract underpinning the pandemic has been shredded. Overwhelming support for lockdown persisted for so long because there seemed to be a stable exit route: that mass vaccination of the population would protect the NHS from the menace of Covid-related collapse. Now that certainty has evaporated an endgame no longer seems sure and the prospect of open-ended restrictions looms. That those responsible for designing the rules and demanding public acquiescence did not abide by the rules themselves – while homeless people were being unlawfully prosecuted for breaking lockdown – further damaged the contract. The true threat posed by Omicron isn’t yet understood, and measures to protect the basic functions of the NHS may need to be taken. But whether the public’s overwhelming obedience to restrictions will endure this time round is now an open question, particularly among younger and poorer Britons who have suffered the worst excesses of the pandemic response. That means emphasising approaches to combat Covid that don’t simply rely on universally restricting freedom. Hiking statutory sick pay and other forms of economic support so workers can afford to self-isolate would improve currently dismal compliance rates, for example. There should also be more support for those who want to work from home, and an emergency programme to improve ventilation in schools and workplaces. As well as helping to contain infections, this would send a powerful message that the government isn’t simply waiting for a new crisis point to be reached before once again abruptly curtailing our freedoms in panicked response. More broadly, there needs to be a focus on permanently and dramatically expanding the capacity of the NHS. In “normal” times this would be of great benefit – people could enjoy a much-improved, less-pressured service – but crucially, the NHS would be protected from shocks such as Covid overwhelming it. This isn’t an instant, straightforward solution – training more medical staff takes time – but a public debate on expanding capacity must surely be the focus. One medical consultant suggests that increasing NHS bed capacity by 10% – back to pre-austerity levels – would allow the service to cope with 200,000 Omicron cases a day, noting it would need to be complemented with improved pay and conditions to retain and recruit staff. If yet another dangerous variant emerges, more restrictions might still be needed – but at least the public would be assured that the government has pursued every possible avenue first. Lockdowns were always understood to come with dire social and educational consequences: but they were a lesser evil than allowing a virus to kill hundreds of thousands, and cause the collapse of the NHS. A sizeable minority are content with indefinite suspensions of freedom – a poll earlier this year found nearly a fifth supported a 10pm curfew, and a quarter the closure of all nightclubs and casinos – but most are rightly not. The false dichotomy between harsh authoritarian measures or mass death must be abandoned for good. But that will require the government to fund and support more targeted measures. A new consensus must be built around such an approach because the public are beginning to snap, and nearly two years on from the outbreaks of mysterious pneumonia-like cases in Wuhan, our suffocated reality is no longer sustainable. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistDaily cases of Covid-19 have passed 100,000 as the Omicron variant sweeps across the UK, according to government figures – the highest number recorded since the pandemic began. More than 106,122 new infections were reported in the 24 hours to 9am on Wednesday, up from 90,629 on Tuesday, dashing hopes that cases could be beginning to plateau. The unprecedented figure will only intensify concerns about the likely impact of the Omicron variant on hospitalisations in the new year. The government has also provided a second metric showing the number of positive cases for the day the specimen was taken, which peaked at 103,281 on 15 December. Confirmed cases of Omicron in England have risen by 13,106 to 69,147, the UK Health Security Agency said. Scotland’s cases rose by 174 to 1,652, while in Wales they increased by 301 to 941. There were no updated numbers available for Northern Ireland because of data flow complications. The prime minister has announced that no new restrictions will be put in place for England before Christmas – but made clear fresh measures might be required afterwards. Wales and Scotland have already set out new curbs to come into force after Christmas, with Cardiff reimposing the rule of six and 2-metre social distancing in hospitality venues from Boxing Day. Stormont ministers have agreed that nightclubs in Northern Ireland will close from Boxing Day. The move was agreed at a virtual meeting of the power-sharing executive on Wednesday and came as the region recorded its highest daily increase in case numbers of the virus. As well as case numbers, ministers are monitoring hospital admissions, particularly in London, where the Omicron wave is most advanced. NHS England has said that a total of 301 Covid-19 admissions were recorded by hospitals in London on 20 December, up 78% week on week and the highest number for a single day since 7 February. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, rejected reports on Wednesday that ministers had already been shown data suggesting Omicron produces less severe health outcomes than the previous Delta variant. He said the analysis by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) was not yet complete. With fears growing about mass staff absences across key sectors in January, Javid has also announced that mandatory self-isolation for those suffering from Covid-19 will be reduced from 10 days to seven, as long as patients take two negative lateral flow tests on days six and seven of their spell at home. Those leaving self-isolation early are still strongly advised to minimise contact with others in crowded or poorly ventilated spaces. Boris Johnson’s cabinet held a lengthy meeting earlier on Tuesday at which it was briefed by scientific experts, but opted not to impose any new restrictions immediately. The cabinet is divided, with some ministers, including Liz Truss and Jacob Rees-Mogg, more sceptical about the need for controls, while Javid has been warning against waiting too long for more data to become available.An analysis of DNA from a 5,700-year-old tomb has revealed the world’s oldest family tree, shedding “extraordinary” light on the importance of family and descent among people who were some of Britain’s first farmers. A research team has examined the bones and teeth of 35 people in one of Britain’s best preserved neolithic tombs, near the village of Hazleton in the Cotswolds. The results, said Dr Chris Fowler of Newcastle University, are nothing short of “astounding”. The researchers have discovered that 27 were biological relatives from five continuous generations of a single extended family. The majority were descended from four women who all had children with the same man. “It tells us that descent was important,” said Fowler. “When they were building these tombs and deciding who to include in them, certainly in this case, they were selecting people who were close relatives of the people who were first buried there. They have this close connection to their immediate ancestors and that extends over several generations. “Family was important and you can see that with the inclusion of some very young children in the tomb as well.” The tomb, known as the Hazleton North long cairn, is divided into two L-shaped chambered areas and fresh research also shows that the dead were buried according to the women they were descended from. That shows, the study concludes, “that these first-generation women were socially significant in the memories of this community”. The prehistoric group of people in question lived around 3700–3600BC and were some of Britain’s first farmers, with the tomb constructed about 100 years after cattle and cereal cultivation had been introduced from continental Europe. It would be another 700 years before construction started on the most famous neolithic legacy, Stonehenge. Archaeologists know that the people moved around the landscape and were probably herding animals as they did so. They consumed dairy products and had a protein-rich diet and they made pots for storing and cooking food. The latest research shows that family ties also mattered to them. The research is a collaboration between archaeologists from the universities of Newcastle, Central Lancashire, Exeter and York, and geneticists from the universities of Harvard, Vienna and the Basque country. The conclusions – the first study to reveal in such detail how prehistoric families were structured – are published in the journal Nature. “This research is really important because it allows us to see what’s going on in neolithic society,” said Fowler. “They are carrying out these burial practices that are tracing lines of descent … they are projecting their community forward into the future. The DNA analysis has revealed ages, genders and family ties. “We have built up a much more detailed biographical picture of those individuals which makes them much more relatable to us as people,” he said. Fowler said similar studies of tombs in Ireland had concluded that remains were not biologically related, which makes the Hazleton North discovery “quite an extraordinary result”. Researchers also found that males who today we would call stepsons were adopted into the lineage, suggesting “blended” families can’t be considered just a modern phenomenon. Iñigo Olalde, the lead geneticist on the study, said using the latest technologies in ancient DNA recovery had allowed the team “to uncover the oldest family tree ever reconstructed and analyse it to understand something profound about the social structure of these ancient groups”. Fowler said the task now was to look at other neolithic tombs to see if a similar pattern existed. Ron Pinhasi, of the University of Vienna, said: “It was difficult to imagine just a few years ago that we would ever know about neolithic kinship structures. But this is just the beginning and no doubt there is a lot more to be discovered from other sites in Britain, Atlantic France, and other regions.”It was early August 2021 and Leighanne was having yet another conversation with her aunt, Samantha Murray, about the Covid vaccine. The former scientist in her 50s was adamant her niece should not get jabbed due to the unknown risks. “She kept saying these vaccines were different and can get into your DNA,” Leighanne remembers. “She was also worried it would affect my fertility.” Almost a month later, on 6 September, Murray, known as Sammie, died at Queen Alexandra hospital, Portsmouth, surrounded by loved ones. Murray, who had refused to get vaccinated, caught Covid-19 in the hotter summer months. She was unable to speak in her final days and induced into a coma. Leighanne’s final interactions with her aunt included video calls where she watched as Murray struggled to speak due to oxygen deprivation. Her death is among thousands that have taken place since so-called freedom day on 19 July. In the summer, the public awaited what had been billed as a return to normality after more than a year of coronavirus restrictions. Nightclubs reopened as restrictions on large events and social distancing ended. Since then, more than 18,000 people have died from coronavirus and behind those numbers are losses that have left gaping holes in families. Murray was never worried about getting seriously unwell with Covid, Leighanne says. Her aunt was very healthy and although she had asthma she was a vegan who was a keen crossfit fan, she adds. The 53-year-old believed if she did succumb her symptoms would be mild. Leighanne also wants to make it clear that her aunt was not a “crazy anti-vaxxer” and had a history working in clinical trials. She says her aunt wanted more information about the long-term effects. Much of her fears around risks to fertility have been debunked and answered in scientific papers since her death, her niece says. Murray, a former University of Portsmouth PhD student, contracted coronavirus alongside her husband, Silvan Chafiie, and their 15-year-old son. “It was immediate [Murray getting sick]. She was in bed for a few days and could not breathe,” Leighanne says. “I think she had a period feeling better and then she took a turn for the worse and they decided to put her on a ventilator and induced her into a coma.” Leighanne travelled from her home in Barcelona to see her aunt before she died. “She was a very fiercely loyal and very present person who was always on my side,” Leighanne says, remembering her as someone who always enjoyed cooking for her family. Speaking in her eulogy, Leighanne said she had been a nervous child but her aunt was always there to help her stand up for herself. “If something was unjust and someone bullied me she would be outraged and thought it was not right ... She was like a mother and sisterly figure,” she says. Denise Osman lost her friend and ex-partner Christopher Adedeji, 53, in the months after freedom day. The football agent and father of six died on 29 September. Adedeji had a kidney transplant in 2019 so was immunocompromised. He had been vaccinated. Osman was in hospital at the same time, suffering from Covid, so got to spend time with Adedeji before he died. “I had recovered enough to get out and about, although I was very ill myself with it. But as I had contracted it they allowed me on to the ward as I was less of a risk,” she says. She says she had opposed vaccinations before getting sick. “I was prepared to lose my job rather than get the vaccine but seeing people on the ward … it was really scary,” she adds, noting she is now vaccinated. Osman says she found it difficult to recover, while watching her friend deteriorate. “When they decided to put him on a ventilator he knew that he was not going to come back around from that.” She says it was “highly emotional” as her friend realised how ill he was. “He was a massively inspiring person.” Adedeji was a keen footballer as a young man. He moved from Nigeria to Antwerp, Belgium, to play for a team, before being signed to another team in Europe. He later moved to the UK and lived in Levenshulme, Manchester. When he stopped playing he started coaching. Osman says that was his passion and he enjoyed helping young players overcome hurdles to get into the game. “He had six children, and his death is a massive loss for them,” she says. Adedeji was in hospital for a long time and had limited visitors but luckily Osman could be there for him, spending his last few hours by his side. Despite being there, she says, she still finds it hard to acknowledge her friend is gone. “He was such a strong character, such a strong man – such a big character. He is so seriously missed.”Most New York stories ultimately revolve around property, but one TikTok user has shown the world just how crushing the city’s rental apartment situation has become despite the Covid-19 pandemic. In a 46-second viral clip, AJ Webber offered a tour of his minute, 75 sq ft, low-ceiling West Village dwelling that just barely contains a sink, a microwave, and a loft bed. The short video has now had more than 26m views on the platform. Webber showed his small shelf space for food with one bowl, one plate and a window. “Here is what it’s like living in the smallest apartment in New York,” Webber, a musician, said. “Whatever your expectations are, lower them.” Webber did not reveal the monthly cost of his apartment, though the New York Post estimated that a similar dorm-like room would be priced at $1,600. Amid the many indignities of New York life, property is among the most contentious. In recent years, landlords have touted the charms of micro-apartments, and the efficiencies of enforcing a no-clutter life. Two years ago, a 242-sq-ft studio on West 12th Street went on the market for $550,000 while developers were rushing to build micro-apartment complexes across the city with dozens of tiny dwellings. Many of Webber’s TikTok correspondents noticed that something was missing from his hidey-hole – namely a bathroom. “Did you not see the window,” he replied to one. In truth, there is a shared bathroom in the building. If he forgets toilet paper, he said, “you have to do a little waddle back to your room”. Responding to Webber’s post, one TikToker wrote simply: “Whatever you’re paying is too much.”As we hurtle towards the end of the year, it’s always a time for reflection. Getting through the festive period will be a challenge: after a couple of hours of chatting with friends at dinner, I had to go and lie down to rest, to switch my body and brain off and allow them to recharge. It’s an improvement from last year, when I wouldn’t have got there to begin with, let alone managed a glass of fizz and engaged in conversation. I caught Covid in March 2020, and was by definition a “mild” case: not admitted to hospital and no risk factors for severe disease, but how it has affected me and my family is anything but mild. Having been fit and active, I now find that on bad days I still struggle with everyday chores, and my usually quick-firing brain remains in slo-mo (“brain fog”), a far cry from the way it used to function when I was still working as a consultant in infectious diseases. Days become a hierarchy of lists: on bad days I have to prioritise only that which is essential, and on good days I have to be careful not to overdo it. Pacing has become vital, and the joy of spontaneity has been vanquished. Everything has to be planned, to allow for time and rest between each activity, be it physical or mental. As I write this, I am aware I am not following that mantra, and there will probably be payback tomorrow. For many months, it has felt as though long Covid has not been on the political agenda, but many people are still struggling with their everyday lives, and struggling to get the help they need. Why is long Covid not included in the daily statistics, or as one of the main incentives to avoid Omicron, and to get a vaccine and booster jab? It’s never mentioned, and it often feels as if sufferers don’t exist. Long Covid did return to the news last week, with the publication of data from a multi-centre study suggesting that fewer than 30% of patients hospitalised with acute Covid had fully recovered a year later. It’s a stark statistic – yet this study did not account for the significant number of us who were never admitted to hospital, and have still not fully recovered. The most recent ONS data from October reports that 1.2 million people are living with long Covid (in hospitalised and non-hospitalised patients); 36% of those have had it for more than a year, with greatest prevalence in health and social care workers, and people living in more deprived areas. Even if the new variant results in milder disease than previous ones, could more people still end up like me? And how will an already stretched NHS cope if there are new cases of long Covid after this current viral surge? There’s a lot we still don’t know about Omicron; a fuller picture will become evident over the coming weeks and months. Experience from previous variants suggests that vaccination gives some protection against symptoms, even if it doesn’t prevent infection altogether. Long Covid is a complicated, multi-system disease, whose pathological processes have yet to be fully understood, making treatment difficult. This is further compounded by the diverse range of symptoms, so there is no “one size fits all” treatment. Health professionals have been extrapolating treatment strategies from other diseases, but management is not consistent between clinics. A current study aims to address this lack of standardisation by producing a “gold standard” for care, and Nice recently updated its guidance to include individualised treatment plans for those with long Covid. Research into the disease received significant funding in the UK after it was officially recognised in October 2020, with £18.5m in February, at the same time the World Health Organization was emphasising the need for recognition, research and rehabilitation. A further £19.5m was awarded in July this year. It will be a while before we get conclusive data to guide management of the disease, but trials are under way. We’ve come a long way since June 2020, when people with prolonged and unusual symptoms after Covid infection were being dismissed as neurotic. Increasingly vocal individuals and groups posted on social media and found that they weren’t alone in the symptoms that they were experiencing. Primary and secondary care physicians had to take notice, and, once long Covid was officially recognised as a disease, £10m was announced to fund dedicated clinics. This finally opened up care to those who had not been hospitalised. There are now 60 clinics in England to be referred to, and 90 assessment services for triaging patients but availability of care remains a postcode lottery. Northern Ireland has only recently launched its first clinics, but Wales and Scotland still have none. However, even where there are clinics, waiting lists are long, and funding remains insufficient in many places. Additionally, a lack of dedicated physicians and physiotherapists presents a major problem. To improve access, in June this year NHS England announced a further £100m for the expansion of care for long Covid services, including 15 hubs for children and young people, but the lack of a consistent workforce is an ongoing problem. With nowhere to turn to last May, and as a yoga teacher, I set up a group for others I knew who were similarly affected, focusing on exercises to help us improve our breathing. Finally, after a year of illness, I got the support of a physiotherapist, which has been essential for my improvement. I also joined a programme run by the English National Opera that focuses on breathing retraining via singing, where the camaraderie was as helpful as the singing itself. We’ve been on the same physical and emotional rollercoaster of long Covid, sharing health concerns, coping strategies, employment issues and rejoicing in our baby steps of improvements. We laugh, we cry and every fortnight we sing together. Our dream is to meet in person and sing on the stage of the Colosseum. Long Covid isn’t going away soon. Post-viral syndromes are not new, but we have never seen anything on such a scale. I dread the thought of getting the Omicron variant. Who knows how my body would react this time? I first wrote about long Covid a year ago, and I could never have imagined that I would still be unable to work at this point. It seems so strange that, as a consultant in infectious diseases, I’ve had to sit out the entire pandemic from the sidelines, when I should have been playing a vital role. When fit to work, Joanna Herman is a consultant in infectious diseases in London, and teaches at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical MedicineWhen Ryan King was called about reports of a saw-scaled viper found in a brickyard he was doubtful. They are among the world’s deadliest snakes and they don’t tend to live in Salford. The RSPCA inspector, however, quickly realised he was wrong. It was indeed a saw-scaled viper, and it had apparently survived a 4,000-mile trip from Pakistan in a shipment of bricks. “I was a bit sceptical,” King said. “Sometimes we go to jobs like this and it turns out to be a harmless grass snake. We have even attended snake reports which turn out to be plastic toys.” A forklift truck driver at Manchester Brick Specialists in Salford spotted the viper last Friday in a container of bricks that had come in about a month ago. Workers researched what it could be and concluded it looked like a saw-scaled viper, but were unaware of how dangerous it could be. The firm’s logistics manager, Michael Regan, put a cardboard box over it and called the RSPCA. “I knew to keep a safe distance but obviously had no idea how deadly this snake was,” he said, recalling the moment he was told. “It was pretty shocking.” Saw-scaled vipers are quite small but have a venomous bite. In India, where around half of the world’s snake-bite deaths are thought to take place, they are feared for their high-speed strikes. There are four species which together account for the highest number of human fatalities. King said he quickly realised it was a dangerous snake when he saw it. In full protective clothing he was able to pop it in a snake bag and transport it to a new home, an establishment licensed to care for venomous reptiles. “I just think it was so lucky that they had spotted the snake,” he said. “They are very small and it could have easily bitten someone. “Anti-venom is available in the countries where the viper originates from, but the snake is so venomous even then it does not always save the victim. “It was quite an honour to deal with this snake and I am pleased he has a home where he will be looked after.” The RSPCA recommends that anyone who sees a stray exotic snake should keep a safe distance and call its helpline on 0300 1234 999.During 2020’s first lockdown, Guardian Australia launched The funniest things on the internet, a weekly column to bring joy to readers who very much needed it. For each column, a famously funny person picks out the links, videos and tweets that have made them laugh the hardest. We thought it would be short-lived, but as the pandemic kept going, so too did our need for levity – and now the Thursday spot has become a mainstay. And we’d like our readers to take part as well. Please join us in the comments with a link to the funniest thing you’ve seen online in the past year: it can be a tweet, an Instagram, a TikTok, a video, a headline, an article ... anything that isn’t offensive, defamatory or mean-spirited, really. To get you started, Guardian staff have picked theirs. 2021 in a nutshell Although the news report is about a very serious dangerous driving charge being overturned, there’s just something about the dull thunk as face meets glass, followed by the Wilhelm scream-esque yelp, timed perfectly in between the Seven News reporter’s narration. This clip felt like 2021 in a nutshell. – Josh Taylor This is what the ideal man looks like As a person of pickle experience (often buys oversized novelty pickles from local convenience store and eats them wildly on the street to the chagrin of passersby), I would like to thank the resurfacing of this 2013 image of Adam Sandler for its brave and necessary act of representation. – Michael Sun ‘I deserve pee-pee touches’ This has to be one of the best mini movies of 2021. No one could write anything this good. A man, at work, flies buzzing around his head, unbothered by anything other than his … personal domestic concerns. The nonchalance, the confidence, the indignation. And then the kicker. She left him on read. All in under five seconds. – Amy Remeikis ‘There’s a fucking goat outside’ In this truly perfect Tiktok, a New Zealand toddler, standing on a toy oven, simply wants to tell her mum about an unusual visitor in the garden. Her mother, trying not to laugh, suggests that the animal is in fact just a goat. She gets corrected. The child is right of course. It’s a fucking goat. – Bonnie Malkin The big stuck boat Ben Jenkins has already written the definitive piece about the Ever Given, the big boat that got stuck in the Suez Canal and held our undivided attention for a full week. “It wasn’t just the simplicity of the problem, it was its precious literality,” he wrote. “Big Boat Stuck was not emblematic of a deeper, thornier issue that We Really Ought Be Talking About … It was an unfathomably Big Boat, and it was Stuck, and there was nothing that anyone outside of 11 tugboats and a handful of excavators could do about it.” – Steph Harmon My husband accidentally going viral In the depths of lockdown, just when it seemed like nothing new could ever happen again, my husband went viral on TikTok – fritzing out over a student’s dirty joke in a Zoom lecture. You probably shouldn’t harvest your lecturers for content, but in this case the student did the right thing, reached out and offered to delete the clip. My husband told him to keep it up; the world needed daddy more. – Alyx Gorman Pat Buetow’s Roman Roy impression Like Succession’s charming Roman Roy, I also find it near-on impossible to sit on a chair the way furniture designers intended. (I also – inexplicably! – suffer from back pain.) So this TikTok hits so close to home, it hurts. – Janine Israel Nicki Minaj’s cousin’s friend’s swollen testicles The ongoing discussion of Nicki Minaj’s cousin’s friend’s swollen testicles was the best thing to happen on the internet since the Ecce Homo restoration. The government of Trinidad and Tobago assures us no one’s testicles became swollen after receiving a Covid vaccine, and Nicki Minaj denies being an anti-vaxxer – but reports that the cousin’s friend’s wedding was called off remain unconfirmed. – Gabrielle Jackson This TikTok remix of Gladys’s Covid pressers Dance remixes of political press conferences have become something of a thing in the Covid years – Victorian premier Daniel Andrews even made Triple J’s Hottest 100 – but it’s the choreography from TikToker Bronte Crawley that make this EDM compilation of Gladys Berejiklian’s daily Covid press conferences so wonderful. Particularly the dance move for “crystal ball”. – Calla Wahlquist The dad who can’t use QR codes There is nothing more 2021 than a frozen beer and an iPhone full of QR codes. Pour one out for this man who tried his best to be a diligent, Covid-safe citizen and just didn’t quite get there. – Caitlin Cassidy Have you checked your butthole? I only started seeing Tom Cardy in my TikTok feed around March this year as he started to go viral. He’s now racked up almost 14m likes on TikTok and 7m Spotify streams, and released a full album of his self-described dumb songs. From the all-too-relatable big breakfast regret, contemplating anxiety, repressing your feelings or a terrifying date with Australia’s 2021 Eurovision entrant Montaigne, I have to agree with many of Cardy’s commenters – some of these songs are absolute bangers and exactly the chaotic energy I needed today/this week/this year. – Dave Earley The parrot that sings along The best thing I have seen on the internet this year is this parrot that sings along to classic rock and metal and makes the songs even cooler than they originally were. I can never stop seeing it because earlier this year I quote-tweeted a tweet about it, and that quote-tweet got cropped and went viral on Instagram, and now it’s part of the internet ecosystem, and every couple of weeks or so someone messages me saying, “Are you the girl who posted about the parrot?” – Stephanie Convery ‘I’m not a cat’ Long after “you’re on mute” became a commonplace phrase, a Zoom faux pas saw Texas attorney Rod Ponton masked by a kitten filter he couldn’t shake while in virtual court. The viral video brought 40 seconds of joy to anyone who has fallen prey to technology, with the lawyer insisting “I’m here live, I’m not a cat”, while his whiskers twitched and eyes darted anxiously from side to side. – Maddie Thomas Tumblr joy-miners Every once in a while a thread of Tumblr posts appears on Twitter, delivering a series of rapid-fire expresso shots of bizarre, extremely esoteric humour straight into my brain. I have no idea if these scan as funny, or even halfway comprehensible, to people who haven’t been terminally internet-poisoned like myself, but hey – a laugh’s a laugh. – Patrick Lum ABC’s accidental satanic ritual Amidst the endless Covid updates, political announcements and your daily dose of crime, ABC News threw in something special one August evening. While some conspiracy theorists claimed it had something to do with their crackpot ideas, it was, according to presenter Yvonee Yong, a mix-up involving footage from another story about the church of Satan in Noosa. – Rosemary Bolger Erm This tweet during the Olympics was extremely stupid and childish, and it no doubt reflects poorly on me that I couldn’t stop laughing at it. Johannes came 11th in the decathlon, so he definitely deserved better. – Mike Ticher Why mammoths went extinct Adrian Bliss creates a range of hilarious one-person sketches. My favourites are the one that provide a fresh take on your favourite Sunday school stories – like this one going behind the scenes on Noah’s Ark. – Ellen Leabeater Francis Bourgeois spots trains Trainspotter Francis Bourgeois may be the most delightful person on TikTok. One day I hope to love something as much he loves a visit from his old friend Gordon. – Joe Koning What’s the funniest thing you’ve seen on the internet this year? Join us in the comments; we’ll compile the top responses in a follow-up piece soonAustralia’s peak doctors body has criticised an “unethical” proposal to charge unvaccinated people for their medical care that is being considered by the New South Wales government. The state’s health minister, Brad Hazzard, confirmed the government was looking at forcing people who had not received the jab to pay for their medical bills if they required hospital treatment for Covid. “This is an option under consideration by the NSW government,” Hazzard said in a statement on Wednesday evening after it was first reported by Sydney radio station 2GB. The health minister did not provide any further details about how such a plan would work and did not respond to further questions. The idea represents a radical departure from Australia’s system of universal healthcare and has attracted fierce criticism. The Australian Medical Association president, Dr Omar Khorshid, labelled the proposal “unethical”. “The big issue from a medical point of view is that it’s really not ethical or the right thing to do to limit access to healthcare based on people’s previous health choices,” he told Guardian Australia. “If you follow that same logic, are you going to ask smokers to pay for their healthcare? “I think it would be a real shame if through this pandemic we lose our compassion, we lose our humanity, and our care for fellow Australians, even if they’ve made choices we think are unwise or incorrect or even completely antisocial.” Khorshid said he was unsure whether such a proposal would be legal or if it would violate the National Health Reform Agreement, struck between the states and the commonwealth, through which public hospital funding flows. “Any change to that would be a very substantial change to our public hospitals,” he said. He also questioned how it could be enforced given the cost of an ICU admission for Covid-19 was “astronomical” and there was “no way” the average Australian would have any way of paying the bill. In NSW, 93.4% of residents aged 16 and over are fully vaccinated, but the majority of people in intensive care are unvaccinated. The number of Covid patients in hospital in NSW has nearly doubled over the past week. On Wednesday, there were 302 people in hospital with the virus, including 40 in the ICU, and 12 who required ventilation. In November, former NSW premier Bob Carr called for Australia to follow Singapore’s example after its government announced it would start charging people who were “unvaccinated by choice” for their medical bills. At the time, Scott Morrison said it was a “heavy-handed approach” that he did not support. “We don’t have a mandatory vaccination policy as a federal government, that’s not something that we’ve done,” he told 7News. “We live in a country where we’re not going around demonising those who want to make their own choices, I think that’s very important.”It was a moment I had observed a thousand times before. The moment of unrelenting pressure – the 85th minute of a football match with the scores level, the final kilometre of a gruelling road cycling stage, the last lap of a tight 400m swimming race. As a sports writer, it is my great privilege is to watch the world’s top athletes in the cauldron of intensity that is elite sport. These are moments of truth. Suddenly it was my turn. On a sunny Sunday last month, I was in the waves at Malua Bay, New South Wales. Over the top of my wetsuit was a bright yellow rash-vest, distinguishing me from other competitors. Yellow, green, red, blue – blobs of colour for a beachside panel of judges to score as we battled it out in the two-metre chop. Ever since I was a child, growing up on Canberra’s outskirts, I have been entranced by the south coast’s waves. Quarterly beach holidays saw me in the water, inevitably falling off a surfboard. But the calm lakes of the national capital are not a natural breeding ground for professional surfers. Stints in Washington DC and London, neither ocean-adjacent, did little to improve my prowess on the board. That changed in March last year, when the pandemic saw me flee for my homeland. Two weeks in self-isolation at a family beach house turned into 18 months of morning surfs, and, eventually, the start of my competitive surfing career. Having reported on the Malua Boardriders, a surf club reborn to help the local community heal from the black summer bushfires, I was gently encouraged to enter the monthly surf-off. By May I had plucked up the courage, only for my confidence to be shattered on debut by a lacklustre score of 3.14 (surfers are rated out for 10 for each wave). In the pressure of the moment, I had exhausted myself paddling for every possible wave – and failed to do anything notable on those I caught. As I trudged up the beach dejected, an onlooker offered some advice: “Only two waves count.” My wounded pride, the pandemic and a trip to cover the Olympics delayed my return to competition. But in November, inspired by Australia’s heroics at the Tokyo Games (including Owen Wright’s surfing bronze medal), I was back and determined to show some improvement. The conditions were tricky – large, shifting peaks and a powerful cross-beach rip. I managed to take off on a couple, but found myself caught in close-outs. Without the benefit of a high-tech communication system, the Boardriders were deploying coloured flags in the sand to mark the progress of time. When the green flag was replaced by yellow, I knew I had five minutes left – and nothing much on the scoreboard. This was it: my moment of consequence. After a decade of judging athletes in these moments, alternatively praising and criticising from the safety of the press box, it was my turn. I might not have had to face a media inquisition afterwards, and the hopes of a nation were most definitely not on my wetsuit-clad shoulders, but as the clock ticked down the pressure felt real enough. A peak formed in the distance, heading straight for me. I launched myself into it, taking off on my final wave of the heat. Either way it would be decisive – a fall would end my hopes of improvement and consign me to another walk of shame. As I came down the wave’s steep face and angled to the right, I realised that a small barrel was forming – the holy grail of surfing. I lurched inwards, pushing my head, then my body and eventually my board into the wave itself. It would have been ugly to watch from the beach, crude and inelegant. But it worked. At least momentarily, I was in the heart of the wave. Minutes later I walked up the beach, head held a little higher than last time. It was not until I reached the car park, and checked the live scoring app, that I was greeted with the good news. My final effort had been awarded 4.97 – the best wave of the heat. My combined score of 8.14 was enough to secure a spot in the semi-final. My run faltered later in the day, finishing last with a measly score. But I was elated all the same. Trying and largely failing at something new offers a potent dose of humility. And in those final minutes of the heat, as I waited for nature to test my limited surfing ability, I felt deeper empathy for those I analyse at Olympics, World Cups and world championships. It was a rush to be in that moment, needing to perform under acute time pressure. But most of all I felt proud that I had willingly put myself in that environment, where failure was all-but assured and any success guaranteed to be fleeting at best. It recalled something an Olympian had once said to me, about being unable to control the performances of competitors and the need, therefore, to take heart from personal effort – win, lose or draw. At the time I thought it was a mundane observation – now I appreciate its profoundness. Whether on the world stage or in the waves of Malua Bay, all any athlete can do is try. In the moments that matter, it is the trying, rather than the winning, that count. My 4.97 wave was just the cherry on top.Sometimes I’m slow to learn life’s lessons. Never take an antibiotic on an empty stomach. Alternate water with wine if you don’t want a hangover. Keep a spare battery in my guitar case. But I’ve finally learned that I am wasting my precious, and now limited, time making a Christmas pudding. Somehow at this time of the year, we all become overwhelmed with the urge to buy 10 kilos of mixed fruit, a gallon of strong drink and start going all Nigella Lawson or, so help me … Ottolenghi! Some background. For years I had the honour of making the family Christmas pudding. It was a beauty too. You know the one – masses of mixed fruit, slivered almonds, lemon rind, stout, brandy – the works. This pudding was rock solid. If you had the misfortune of being shipwrecked on a desert island with no provisions, this dense pudding would sustain you for years. It had the heft of a medicine ball, and the richness of caviar, and I was always inordinately proud to turn it out of its calico cloth at Christmas lunch. It was usually accompanied by custard, cream and ice-cream of course. So I’m not sure why I never noticed that no one ever ate it. Well, I did (because I loved it). And usually that year’s random guest at Christmas lunch (niece’s long-forgotten boyfriend, stranded business associate, homeless person) ate it out of gratitude and obligation. Oh, they all dutifully “oohed” and “aahed”, but that was the extent of it. Like when someone parachutes out of a plane. You can appreciate it, but you don’t want to do it. I think in the early years, the only reason family members ate the pudding was to find the shiny threepences secreted within. In recent years thought the pudding (sans two portions) would then sit in my fridge till around August, when I would sorrowfully consign it to the bin with a thud. A few years ago, I took an unofficial poll of my family to discover that none of them actually liked the traditional Christmas pudding. Thanks for telling me, people. I worked it out – all up that’s about 11 years, eight months, two days and six and a half hours of my life I’ll never get back. Not to mention I would routinely spend the equivalent of the GDP of the federation of St Christopher and Nevis on the ingredients. So I asked them what they would like instead. The unanimous answer came back: Nana’s custard slice. This is a family favourite my lovely Mum used to make. And maybe my chocolate pie. Got it. So this Christmas there will be no randoms at the Wighton Christmas lunch. (Am I allowed to be secretly glad?) And there will be no traditional Christmas pudding either. I’m seriously thinking about dropping the obligatory Christmas cake too (the Wightons don’t seem to do “fruit”). My daughter is now living close by so we’ve devised a special Christmas menu that would satisfy the Grinch himself. Be assured, we’ll have lots of Christmas fare – ham, chicken, turkey (stuffed of course), maybe prawns, “special” salads, chocolates and lollies. There’ll be bonbons of course (my daughter and I make them out of toilet rolls. This is a shared activity we discovered a couple of years ago when we forgot to buy bonbons. Such fun!), secret Santa, lashings of wine and merriment. And I must admit, Ottolenghi’s spiced nuts are looking pretty tasty. But at the end of the lunch when people are clutching their straining stomachs and groaning with satisfaction, instead of the plum pudding, I’ll proudly produce my chocolate pie and Nana’s custard slice. No more slaving over a pudding no one eats. I’ve finally learned my lesson. • Sue Wighton is a writer based in Brisbane. She blogs at Accidental WriterI sent a mass invitation for our family Christmas party for Christmas Day. The next day my aunt invited everyone over to her house for our family Christmas party, the day after Christmas. I cannot find one person outside my family that thinks that wasn’t completely rude. I see this as toxic behaviour on her part and support of bad behaviour from the rest of the crew. I took a week to get some perspective and see if others thought I was being oversensitive. Am I off-base or is this just not acceptable behaviour from my family? I feel as though we have all lived with this bad behaviour for so long we can’t even identify it any more. Eleanor says: I can’t definitively answer whether this aunt’s behaviour was unacceptable. On one natural interpretation, if it’s “the” Christmas party, then yes – she’s plainly insulted your hospitality and competence. On the other, if it’s “a” Christmas party, she may just be continuing the celebration; lots of people have a second gathering on Boxing Day if there are two sides of the family, or too many leftovers, or just more fun to be had. So I can’t rule for you on your questions about being “toxic”; “just not acceptable”; or “bad behaviour”. But I can ask why branding her behaviour with those terms feels important to you. Sometimes we want to hear that behaviour is Objectively Bad, because we want the associated ruling that our feelings are Objectively Valid. The challenge with this – especially in decades-long relationships like the ones we have with family – is that the scale and complexity of our feelings doesn’t always match the mendacity of the actions that caused them. Instead, our feelings match the whole history that led up to this one moment – and that’s a lot harder to talk about and resolve. If you feel insulted by what this aunt did, I’ll bet it’s not just because of the particulars of this invite. I’ll bet there’s a long backdrop of past behaviour and infinitesimally small gestures and inflections between you that serve as a kind of meaning decoder. For you, this action it isn’t just this action, it’s a symbol; an instance of a pattern. It’s just one small visible protrusion of a whole subterranean network of roots. But if that subterranean network isn’t common knowledge – if she doesn’t see it, and the rest of the family doesn’t either – then this particular incident just won’t look the same to them. You’ll see the whole – every other time you’ve been disregarded or minimised or just not thought of; and they’ll see the part – a minor logistical question. I think this is why family arguments escalate so quickly; we often talk past each other about whether we’re objecting to the particulars of an incident, or what it’s an instance of. When there’s that kind of perceptual mismatch going on, it’s hard to get other people to agree that what so-and-so did was as Objectively Wrong as it has made us feel. That doesn’t mean we have to forfeit the judgment that our feelings are Objectively Valid. It just means we have to source it elsewhere. We have to recognise that we feel the way we do because of the trend, not because of this one instance. Once we do that, it feels a lot less important to win the dispute over this or that moment. We know the trend; we were there; whatever our relatives think of what’s happening now. In time, if you choose to challenge this aunt directly, it will be clear what the terms of the dispute are. In the meantime, throw a better party, and toast to your ability to validate your feelings on your own. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereOn the main street of Newcastle, the Happy Wombat pub has become an oasis in the desert. “I feel like I’m running the last waterhole, and everyone’s coming here to drink the muddy water,” publican Luke Tilse tells Guardian Australia. “Not that I’m saying my customers are animals.” Located on Hunter Street, the city’s main drag, it’s one of the only hotels that has not closed its doors during what was, pre-pandemic, the busiest trading week of the year. “It’s like the apocalypse out there,” Tilse says. “Everyone is staying away, either out of fear of getting Covid or having to isolate over Christmas, or because they have it. It’s a ghost town.” Newcastle, the second-largest city in New South Wales, is the centre of the largest Covid-19 outbreak in Australia. On Wednesday local health authorities said there were 5,728 total active cases in the Hunter region, of which Newcastle is the capital. The vast majority have come in the past seven days, a surge prompted by an outbreak of the Omicron variant at a popular nightclub, Argyle House, known locally as Fanny’s. The 1970s-themed prom night event at the club led to more than 200 people catching the virus, a super-spreader event local health official Dr David Durrheim said may be one of the largest recorded during the pandemic. That outbreak led to a series of similar clusters at nightclubs throughout the city. By 16 December the NSW health department issued advice urging the city’s residents to “seriously consider deferring any social events in Newcastle until after Christmas in order to help keep family Christmas gatherings safe, and to help protect their loved ones, the vulnerable and our essential workers”. The outbreak has left the city reeling. Events such as the Lunar Electric music festival were cancelled following an order by the NSW health minister, while on Wednesday the local A-League franchise, the Newcastle Jets, announced their Boxing Day match would be played behind closed doors, the first major sporting event to do so since the Omicron outbreak. Because the largest exposure sites have been nightclubs, many of those infected in Newcastle are younger, leading to crippling staff shortages which have forced many of the city’s hotels and restaurants to close. Tilse says that three of his staff members were at the Argyle House event, and later tested positive. That led to other employees having to isolate until they recorded negative tests. At the two pubs he owns, he expected to do more than $160,000 in trade over the week leading up to Christmas. Instead he has earned a little over $30,000. “And I’m one of the lucky ones because I can still be open on a skeleton staff,” he said. “But if you’ve got no customers and no staff why would you stay open?” The situation has prompted the city’s lord mayor, Nuatali Nelmes, to write to the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, to call for the jobsaver payment for small businesses to be reinstated, and to extend the pandemic leave disaster payment to workers whose business have closed due to staff shortages. “The flow-on effects from the sharp rise in case numbers and household contacts has been widespread devastation for local businesses, particularly for tourism, hospitality and retail businesses,” she wrote. “Thousands of businesses are facing severe staff shortages, meaning that many have made the difficult decision to cease trading until the New Year. This is in stark contrast to expectations, even a week ago, of the best trading week of the year.” At the same time, surging demand for booster vaccinations has prompted pharmacists to beg the federal government for increased supplies, citing a substantial shortfall of jabs. Anthony Piggott, who owns a chain of pharmacies in the Hunter, said he ordered extra doses immediately after the federal government announced it had shortened the eligibility time period for booster shots to five months on 12 December. They still haven’t arrived. “We’re now expecting to get them on Christmas Eve,” he said. “We’re getting literally hundreds of calls a day about this, and I can only vaccinate a fraction of them. “The demand has gone up by at least 10 times since then. We’re completely over-subscribed.” Luke Kelly, the president of the Newcastle and Hunter Valley Pharmacists Association, says chemists across the region are experiencing the same thing. “Delivery and the 14-day wait between placing an order and having it delivered is just crazy,” he said. “It’s putting everyone under a lot of pressure. People are trying to do the right thing to get their boosters and we have to send them away. There’s one single state-run hub in Belmont [a suburb about half-an-hour’s drive from the centre of Newcastle] and we don’t have the world’s greatest public transport. “It’s extraordinary. A combination of the outbreak and the change in the eligibility for boosters has just dramatically increased the demand.” So far the federal government has not moved to increase supply to the region. When the local Labor MP, Sharon Claydon, wrote to the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, about the “unacceptable shortage” of boosters in Newcastle, she was told there was no issue. “Supply is not an issue and there are sufficient doses to ensure everyone in Australia who is eligible for a booster dose can receive it over the festive period,” Hunt’s chief of staff wrote in a response seen by the Guardian.‘National consistency would be helpful’ With the advent of Omicron, we have a little more national accord in aspects of our public health strategy; we need to slow Omicron down as it moves through the population, and we should aim to do so while avoiding lockdown. The national vaccine program – especially boosters – is central to containing Omicron, and will be boosted itself with better funding incentives from the commonwealth to GPs, and pharmacies and the states ramping up hubs once again. But the other two areas of control focus may continue to be inconsistent across jurisdictions – partly due to different infection pressures, but also down to differences in risk tolerance that Omicron has not nudged aside. The package of proven strategies that help contain spread, whether the virus is already circulating in the community or to reduce impact if it is reintroduced, are one and the same; masks, physical distancing, hygiene and managing gatherings safely. These were recognised today as a critical pillar in disease control, but the management of these resides with our states and territories, and there wasn’t agreement on how these should be implemented. What is critical is how well the advice is adhered to, and whether measures already in place need to be tightened. National consistency would be helpful to convey a clear message on the importance of these measures. If there is high compliance in New South Wales already with reportedly 85% mask wearing in retail settings, then introducing a mask rule is not really an impost. Conversely, if rules in other jurisdictions are not achieving high compliance, then that needs to be looked at too. We are moving to greater consistency in case and contact follow-up, but priorities change as resources are spread more thinly when case infection rates grow, and states with low case numbers want to continue more aggressive case follow-up while they can. QR codes still have a role, whether as an outbreak investigation tool in low infection settings or allowing automatic notification of contact with an exposure site or as a memory prompt of your movements in high transmission areas. Small steps on Wednesday, but at least this may be a platform for greater national consistency as the coronavirus progressively moves through our community and both our goals and our case load become more uniform. • Catherine Bennett is chair in epidemiology at Deakin University ‘Australians are relying on our leaders to act responsibly’ It seems it is still not a race. There is a clear need to mandate minimally intrusive but highly protective measures such as masks and QR codes anywhere that Omicron is spreading in the community. The lack of action after the national cabinet meeting held on Wednesday is difficult to understand. We need leadership in making mask-wearing indoors mandatory – leaving this to “personal responsibility” is frankly irresponsible. Wearing a mask to prevent Covid is not analogous to putting on sunscreen to prevent skin cancer. No amount of sunscreen I slap on will protect you from skin cancer. In contrast, Covid is an airborne transmissible virus so if you wear a mask it protects me and vice versa. And all of us wearing masks consistently will protect the health system. We need to ensure high testing and tracing capacity – for the latter, QR codes are the only way to keep up when case numbers are high. We have invested in the infrastructure for digital tracing so it makes no sense to throw it all away. The 3,763 cases in New South Wales on Wednesday will have up to 80,000 contacts, and the contacts are the most likely to become the next cases. If we don’t alert the contacts, the epidemic will explode, health systems will collapse and we may be forced into the lockdown that we never wanted after all. Magical thinking will not stop this – only a smart, layered strategy will do that. For NSW to abandon everything as cases surge during the time of maximal gatherings, will result in avoidable illness and death. But it seems that any national strategy for TTQI can wait another two weeks for the next cabinet meeting. We learned on Wednesday there are 20m doses of mRNA vaccine in Australia. It is fantastic that we have the supply but vaccine in the fridge won’t help manage the Omicron surge. Maintaining the delivery of boosters over the Christmas holidays will save lives but that won’t happen without a plan. Other countries have called in the army. We are giving a $10 a dose incentive. With surging cases, NSW Health is already preparing us to turn our homes into hospitals – they advise if you are under 50, manage your Covid at home, and call your GP if you need help. Most GP practices are operating on skeleton staff over the holidays, so good luck with that. There will be preventable deaths of people at home who were unable to access care. We all need to take responsibility for avoiding the worst-case scenario of the Omicron wave. Our leaders are relying on Australians to act responsibly. Australians are relying on our leaders to act responsibly as well. • Nancy Baxter is head of the school of population and global health at the University of Melbourne. Raina MacIntyre is head of the biosecurity research program at the University of New South Wales’ Kirby InstituteCovid-19 testing clinics are cutting their openings hours over the Christmas period despite “unprecedented demand” for testing and reports of hours-long wait times in several states. Guardian Australia analysis shows 77% of the 490 testing sites listed on the New South Wales Health website on Wednesday will either close or operate on reduced hours through the Christmas and new year period. It comes amid record Covid cases in NSW and the highest testing numbers in Victoria since the beginning of the pandemic. Victoria reported 92,262 Covid test results on Wednesday, the most processed in a 24-hour period. In Melbourne, overwhelming demand for testing forced at least 14 testing sites across the city to shut from 9.45am after reaching capacity. They span from the east at Golfers Drive in Chadstone, south-east at Peninsula Health in Frankston and north at Heidelberg Repatriation hospital. Victoria’s acting premier, James Merlino, who has attributed the surging demand in Victoria to people needing a test to travel interstate for Christmas, urged people to be patient and said for most sites the wait was 40 minutes on average. Some walk-in clinics, such as St Vincent’s hospital Melbourne, have listed wait times of three hours. Scott Morrison said on Wednesday travel testing restrictions were placing the heath system under greater pressure. “We’ve all seen the terrible queues and the long waits people have had,” the prime minister said. “Some 20 to 25% – one in five, one in four – people waiting in those queues are not symptomatic. They’re not a close contact, they’re not even a casual contact, they just want to travel to another state. “This is putting unnecessary pressure on the testing system and it is redirecting resources away from where there is a better use of in particular in re-establishing the vaccine hubs run by the states and territories.” Morrison said PCR tests should be used for close contacts and the symptomatic, rather than people wanting to “get on a plane”. Victorian Covid-19 commander, Jeroen Weimar, made similar comments on Wednesday, saying travel testing requirements were a “bureaucratic reason” for delays. “It is not a highly productive way to use a PCR testing system,” he said. Queensland, Tasmania, South Australia and the Northern Territory all require fully vaccinated people from several states to provide a negative test result to enter. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said “tourism testing” was putting clinics under extreme pressure and has asked other states to reconsider their testing requirements. But at a press conference, the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said interstate travel only accounted for 10% of the tests being undertaken in NSW. “Ten per cent of the lineups are for people who want to get their PCR tests to travel all around Australia, not just Queensland – 90% of people are concerned they have the Omicron variant and want to get tested,” she said. NSW reported a record 3,763 new Covid cases in the 24 hours to 8pm on Tuesday from 151,443 tests. Daily testing figures last exceeded 150,000 in the state during the Delta wave of infections in mid-September. Due to “unprecedented demand”, St Vincent’s hospital Sydney announced it was reducing opening hours at three testing sites from Wednesday. “This will help us to maintain our capacity capability,” it said in a tweet. Of 490 testing sites listed on the NSW Health website, 378 clinics will either close or operate on reduced hours during the end-of-year period. Lines for Covid testing clinics led to heavy traffic on Wednesday morning in Macquarie Park, Stanmore, Rockdale and West Pennant Hills, according to Live Traffic Sydney. – with Australian Associated PressThe federal government will pay a traditional owners corporation representing some of the poorest communities in Australia more than $2m after settling a class action that argued the remote “work for the dole” program was racist. The Community Development Program (CDP) has required about 30,000 jobseekers in remote communities to work up to 25 hours a week to receive the dole. Participants, 80% of whom were Aboriginal, were said to have faced tougher welfare penalties than those in other parts of Australia. After sustained criticism from Indigenous leaders who claimed the program was racist and even “modern-day slavery”, Western Australia’s Shire of Ngaanyatjarraku and the Ngaanyatjarra council launched a class action in 2019 on behalf of 680 CDP participants. Following a year of confidential mediation, orders issued this month by the federal court Justice Richard White officially approved the settlement, revealing the government will pay $2m to the Ngaanyatjarra council. The court said the council “represents the interests of around 2,000 Ngaanyatjarra, Pintupi and Pitjantjatjara Traditional Owners (Yarnangu) who reside in the Ngaanyatjarra Communities”. It said it intended to use the money for an infrastructure program and an arts project at Warburton, the largest community in the area. The government also agreed to redesign the CDP scheme for jobseekers in the 10 communities covered by the class action. Without referencing the case, the Indigenous affairs minister, Ken Wyatt, announced in the May budget that the government would overhaul the entire CDP. The government made no admission or concession of legal liability, while the class action members waived the right to recoup lost welfare payments or damages. The government will also pay the applicants’ costs, worth $278,897.19. Families and lives ‘upended’ The Shire of Ngaanyatjarraku president, Damien McLean, who led the action, said the government’s decision to overhaul the program was very welcome. He said the CDP program had been “just terrible”. “For communities with high costs of living and high levels of poverty, it was very difficult, very stressful,” McLean said. “That’s why we’re glad the commonwealth has had a good look at it and seen the problems it is causing.” He said the CDP required people to be “punished”, which “upended their families and their lives”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The class action represented 10 remote Aboriginal communities who told the court their residents’ per capita income was the lowest on mainland Australia. They alleged the CDP breached sections 9, 10 and 13 of the Racial Discrimination Act. The class action argued it was tougher for those in the Ngaanyatjarra communities to meet their obligations due to “remoteness of their communities, their low levels of education and literacy, and other aspects of their socio-economic status”. The communities, based in sparsely populated land near the Northern Territory and South Australia borders, first raised concerns about the program to the Australian Human Rights Commission in 2016. They filed a lawsuit when mediation at the commission failed. It is the second time in 12 months the Morrison government has settled a class action over claims its welfare programs were unlawful, after it reached a $1.8bn deal over the robodebt scandal in June. The CDP followed a similar trajectory to that scandal, with the government steadfast for years despite sustained criticism from Aboriginal leaders, the Australian National Audit Office, a former Liberal Aboriginal affairs minister and even the government’s own review, which found 36% of participants said their communities were worse off under the scheme. Northern Territory Labor MP Chansey Paech labelled the CDP “modern-day slavery” in 2018, while John Paterson of the Aboriginal Peak Organisations Northern Territory called in 2019 for the CDP to be abandoned and replaced with a “positive Aboriginal-led model”. No guarantee of recouping individual payments The CDP was introduced in 2015 by the Coalition government and contracted organisations, including the Ngaanyatjarra council, to run employment services for jobseekers in remote areas under the scheme. It soon sparked outrage, with analysis showing a 740% increase in financial penalties for jobseekers compared to the previous remote job and communities program. CDP participants who failed to meet their mutual obligations requirements – such as work for the dole activities, job search or meetings with an employment services provider – had their payments docked by $50 a day. Repeated “non-compliance” could result in eight weeks without any payments. Crucially, analysis by Australian National University researchers found people in remote areas were 25 times more likely to face these penalties than those in non-remote areas. In its orders handed down this month, the federal court noted that the 680 CDP participants involved in the class action had lost $1,291,438 in welfare income, or an average of $1,793.29 a person. Taking into account the class action group definition of the lawsuit, however, the court said “the probable total” that group members could have tried to claim back was $534,628.77, an average of $786.22. Explaining his decision to approve the settlement, White said “the potential recovery for each group member … would, while no doubt significant for that group member, be modest”. There were also “risks” or “even the probability” many would not be able to make out the case they should be paid back by the government, he added. White said there was “extensive community engagement in the mediation process” which gave him confidence of “wide community support” for the settlement. McLean told Guardian Australia recouping lost welfare payments for the class action members “wasn’t on the table”. “That would have required the commonwealth to agree that the program had been discriminatory, which they insisted it hadn’t been,” he said. “Recovering individual payments … would have required a very long court action … And there would be no guarantee of success anyway.” Indigenous affairs minister, Ken Wyatt, said in May the program would be replaced by a new remote jobs program in 2023 following a re-design. The Shire of Ngaanyatjarraku is among the sites hosting a trial of the new program, which is voluntary and will see people in work-like placements receive supplementary payments of up to $190. Wyatt’s office was approached for comment.The reality of the pandemic didn’t fully sink in for India Wells until midway through Sydney’s Delta outbreak. “Within five minutes of each other there were two patients under 20, very sick, put into our most serious bays in the isolation area,” she says. “I think anyone that was questioning whether this was real … two patients under 18 really struggling to breathe, needing high-level care, on high amounts of oxygen … That was a moment I realised that this is serious.” Wells has been a registered nurse at St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney for seven years and has worked in the emergency department for six. While she had been prepared for the pandemic, she hadn’t expected to be on the frontline of what was then the largest Covid cluster to hit New South Wales. “When the pandemic began, our emergency department split into two sections: the green zone, and we classified our isolation zone as the red zone … In July, when the Delta variant started right around the corner in Bondi, that really ramped up our Covid presentations,” Wells says. Less than two weeks after an airport limousine driver from the eastern suburbs tested positive to Delta on 16 June, cases linked to the cluster had swelled, and the greater Sydney region was locked down. Then the NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, described it as the “scariest time since the pandemic started” and warned the city to prepare for rising case numbers. Expected to last seven days, the lockdown dragged out until mid-October and more than 500 people lost their lives. Wells says the experience of Delta was “extremely stressful”. “It was quite difficult separating family members from patients, their loved ones,” she says. Working in the Covid zone and the ever-evolving hygiene and sanitary practices to follow have been particularly stressful, she says. “You’re a little more isolated from the main staff department but we were constantly given education, constantly updated with the forever-changing criteria – even down to which gowns and what masks you have to wear in triage. “The nurses worked really hard keeping family members updated on the patient’s journey: whether they were confirmed Covid-positive, if they needed to stay in hospital or whether they could go home and isolate.” Wells says one key difference for health workers this year compared with 2020 was the arrival of vaccines. They rolled out the vaccination for staff members, allied health, cleaners, everyone involved in patient care,” she says. “I think I was fully vaccinated by April so we had that protection … which gave us that safety. “We have been fatigued but we’ve got great staff; the cleaners were fabulous during this time – they really held the fort for us. “We put them through extreme stress and we were so grateful for them [and] the security team for Covid transfers from our isolation zone up to the Covid wards.” It took “a whole team” to ride the Delta wave, Wells says. “Security would have to block off the hallways and the elevators, then we’d have to clean those areas,” she says. “So while everyone was stressed, this is ED, this is what we do … we all banded together and I was really proud of our team.”Trying to do the right thing can be difficult. Even if your moral compass is fine-tuned, doing right by some people can mean doing wrong by others. This can make it harder to be a responsible investor. There are many grey areas and trade-offs. Take electric vehicles. Investing in them will be better for your investment portfolio’s carbon emissions, but many electric vehicle (EV) batteries require cobalt. The mining of this precious metal is mired in controversy given the poor labour conditions in many large cobalt mines, particularly in the DRC. Being a responsible investor means being mindful of these kinds of grey areas and unintended consequences. “The essential issue for us is that climate change is as much a socioeconomic problem as an environmental problem,” says Ashley Hamilton Claxton, head of responsible investment at Royal London Asset Management, part of the Royal London Group. The issues involved are often nuanced. And while seemingly-simple green actions might look good, they may not always be terribly effective. “I’m Canadian, by birth,” she says. “I have family who work in the tar sands industry in Alberta.” The Canadian tar sands lie under vast swathes of boreal forest. Extracting petroleum from them requires huge amounts of energy and the removal of the (often virgin) forest before you even consider the CO2 the oil will emit when burned. They are a bete noire for environmentalists, but they provide employment in remote areas. “The way that you don’t solve climate change – or get people on board to help you solve climate change – is to put them out of a job,” says Hamilton Claxton. “You will lose hearts and minds.” This is the thinking behind ideas such as “a just transition”, which many companies and investors are now proponents of. A just transition was developed by the trade unions movement, and the idea is that it provides a framework to help countries and industries (such as coal and oil) move to a sustainable, net zero, biodiverse economy, but in a way that protects jobs and livelihoods. It brings together sustainability and social justice. “We’ve been asking companies in our portfolios to come up with a just transition plan,” says Hamilton Claxton. “We want people to make a behavioural change plan, not just reallocate their capital. You might look at what you’re doing about training and repurposing sites if you close one down. What happens to local jobs? Could you transition that site to be doing something different and retain some of those jobs? How can you work with local partners, if you do have to close facilities down? The idea is to bring people along with you.” A number of companies have recently published commitments to a just transition. Scottish Power is one. Its plan takes in not just green energy but also working with customers to ensure bills do not become too onerous, and with communities to safeguard jobs. Scottish and Southern Energy is another. When its just transition plan was published last year, the company’s chief sustainability officer, Rachel McEwen, said: “The rapid move towards net zero brings a risk that some people are left behind. We are clear that it is in everyone’s interests that fairness is baked into net zero transition plans.” This type of joined-up approach is the next iteration of the move to value companies against environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria. It also answers one of the biggest criticisms of the environmental and social justice movement – that its ideals are what the commentator Rob Henderson has termed “luxury beliefs”. These, he explains in a YouTube video, are “ideas and opinions which confer status on the upper class while often inflicting costs on the lower classes”. The just transition approach is therefore more equitable and, often, more effective as it encourages communities who could lose out to the decarbonisation agenda to back measures that protect the environment, even if those measures will initially affect their primary occupation. The governance side of ESG can also throw up surprising considerations, such as the importance a company places on cybersecurity, which is essential for safeguarding their customers’ digital assets. Hamilton Claxton says: “We’ve been trying to proactively engage with companies about what they’re doing around cybersecurity and making sure they’ve got the correct sort of board-level oversight of it.” The good news for retail investors is that much of the complex thinking around ESG is done by fund managers, who decide where to allocate money, and present their research in an easy-to-understand way to consumers. However, the world of ESG investing is changing fast and will continue to do so. “I was reading something about the metaverse recently and thinking about everything from privacy to gambling addiction in a virtual world,” says Hamilton Claxton. “It’s going to be incredibly intellectually challenging from a responsible investing perspective.” Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationConsidering that they manage trillions of pounds, including our retirement savings, it’s surprising how little the average investor knows about asset managers. We may be vaguely aware that asset managers – sometimes referred to as fund managers – are the people at financial institutions who invest money on our behalf. But they typically stay out of the spotlight as they go about overseeing the different investment funds into which our money is pooled. However, amid talk about a more responsible form of capitalism and a growing demand for more sustainable and ethical products generally, the role of many asset managers – and the criteria they use for investing – is shifting. As well as focusing on financial returns, asset managers are also having to consider the wider social and environmental impact of the companies included in their investment funds. Investment funds are basically baskets of financial assets such as shares and bonds. “The changing role of asset managers has been one of the most important changes in the [finance] industry during my career,” says Piers Hillier, chief investment officer at Royal London Asset Management, part of the Royal London Group. He says that, increasingly, part of the asset manager’s role is to act as an “ethical guardian” – for instance, when it comes to assessing a company’s actions to address climate change and achieve net zero carbon emissions. New kinds of investment strategies and practices seek to “deliver the returns in a more responsible way” and “help [industry] get towards net zero”, he adds. Moreover, asset managers aren’t just having to assess the environmental and social impact of the companies they invest in: there is also growing pressure on them to use their position and influence as sizeable shareholders to ensure that companies are run more ethically and transparently. That pressure comes from a variety of actors, including individual investors and pension holders, pressure groups, governments and financial regulators. Some of the pressure is also self-imposed: asset managers increasingly realise that the damage wrought by climate change or boycotts by ethically-minded consumers can pose very real financial risks. The upshot is that asset managers are now having to play a significant role in making the world a better place. That role is becoming more and more important as the fight against climate change becomes a global effort to reallocate resources and capital, and as governments take further regulatory steps to encourage the shift to a carbon-free economy. “The whole investment landscape will change,” says Julia Dreblow, founder of both SRI Services and Fund EcoMarket, which provide information on sustainable investment. “Fund managers will have to show [that] they are playing a role in helping companies reduce carbon emissions.” So how are asset managers achieving this – and providing proof of this to investors? One method is known as shareholder engagement. It’s a broad term for action ranging from informal and low-key discussions with companies to persuade them to improve their performance on environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters, to more confrontational measures, including tabling shareholder votes on ESG issues at annual company meetings. “While we prefer the ‘carrot’ of engaging with companies to facilitate change, we also have the fairly large ‘stick’ of divestment,” says Hillier. That stick can often be most effective when wielded collectively by asset managers who combine forces with other investment firms and shareholder activist groups to pressure companies into acting on ESG matters. Of course, these new roles and priorities have also meant new kinds of challenges. For instance, asset managers have typically relied on robust and comparable financial data and accounting standards when measuring companies’ financial performance. But a current lack of universal standards and metrics for measuring and comparing companies’ performance on ESG issues means that asset managers have a much harder job when assessing a company’s carbon emissions and other ESG claims. It can involve more qualitative judgement than quantitative analysis – which might mean they have to spend more time visiting companies and interrogating management. Asset managers might also struggle to gauge the motivation behind a company’s ESG policies and actions, or the impact of those actions on profits. In addition, when it comes to questions of ethics and responsible behaviour, asset managers need to decide what should disqualify a particular company from being included in a responsible investment fund. For instance, what happens if a particular company is investing heavily in making a transition to cleaner and more ethical ways of operating but hasn’t quite got there yet? And which companies should you compare it with? In short, asset managers now face a raft of new and difficult dilemmas. Stepping back from these specific dilemmas, asset managers also face a more fundamental shift in how they operate. Until recently, the two basic types of investment strategy have remained broadly unchanged. They are known as “passive” and “active”. A passive investment strategy seeks to minimise buying and selling by essentially tracking a stock market index, such as the UK’s FTSE 100 or the S&amp;P 500 index in the US. In doing so, a passive investment fund tries to match the returns of the index it tracks. The amount of money a fund invests in each company will usually be in proportion to the company’s stock market value. By contrast, an active investment strategy requires more work, judgment and action from the asset manager. Their investments, which may be more eclectic and take slightly more risks than passive funds, aim to provide better returns than passive funds that track the main share indexes. However, this broad distinction between two types of investment strategy may be becoming outdated as asset managers increasingly use shareholder engagement both to assess companies’ environmental and social impacts and also to push for improvements. In short, it requires a more “active” investment approach, even for fund managers overseeing passive funds. Effectively, they become “active passive” fund managers. “Research is showing that active passive managers are outperforming passive managers, even including the fees,” says Hillier. Going forward, the efforts of governments and financial regulators to standardise measurements should help to make the ESG performance of different companies more easily comparable. For example, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates the UK financial services industry, recently announced plans to classify and label investment products based on their sustainability characteristics. It aims to agree standards for ethical investments to make it easier for investors to understand, while helping companies transition to a more sustainable future. The FCA has also said that it expects asset managers to play their part and give their views on the plans during a consultation. As well as adhering to better regulations and improved standards, asset managers will also need to get better at communicating to investors what they are doing on ethical investment and what they want companies to do, says Dreblow. They will also need to collaborate more. “Fund managers are deeply competitive by nature, but the seriousness of climate change … means that they have to work together,” says Dreblow. “If we are going to hit net zero we can’t have some fund managers saying [that] we don’t care what companies do [about ESG].” Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationTo invest or divest? It’s become an existential question for our times as the global effort to tackle the climate emergency increasingly involves an urgent reallocation of financial resources. As well as being asked by large corporations and governments, it’s a question faced by individual investors and pension holders who are deciding how best to invest their savings. It’s also a question that confronts the fund managers whose job it is to invest and manage investment funds on individual investors’ behalf. The growth of responsible investing means fund managers increasingly have to factor in a company’s performance against environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria when deciding whether to invest in a business, or divest from it by selling its shares. For instance, is the company taking sufficient action to reduce its carbon emissions or other types of pollution? Are the workers in its supply chain exploited? Is it doing enough to increase diversity? These considerations are also becoming more and more closely linked with fund managers’ assessments of a company’s expected financial returns, given the economic risks posed by the climate emergency and other social crises. However, the decision about whether to invest or divest is far from simple. “You could simply exclude companies based on criteria like their carbon footprint,” explains Paola Binns, head of sterling credit at Royal London Asset Management, part of Royal London Group. “But I would argue that’s not necessarily a very useful thing to do.” Binns says the question you need to ask yourself is whether it is better to stay invested and engage with the company in order to improve its behaviour, or to sell your stake – which might make your portfolio look better, but deprives you of any ongoing influence. “We believe it’s very rarely black and white,” she continues. “If we’re talking about a utility that has polluted a waterway, we might assess what went wrong and get an explanation. We could speak to the management of the company and ask what measures they are putting in place to ensure that nothing similar happens in the future. And then we would monitor it to make sure the promised improvements take place.” Walk away from the company and you can do none of these things. In addition, other investors with fewer environmental or ethical scruples will often be happy to take your place. Engagement is, in a sense, the carrot. But there is also the question of sticks. And investors are using these too. For instance, if engagement doesn’t deliver the desired improvements on, say, carbon reductions, fund managers may decide to threaten to divest – with all the negative publicity that can entail. Indeed, some experts say that shareholder engagement is more effective with this threat. “Divestment campaigns – along with other efforts, such as political efforts to tax carbon – are crucial,” says Emilio Marti, assistant professor in the Business-Society Management Department at the Rotterdam School of Management. “They create the threats that make fossil fuel companies more open to listening to engaged shareholders.” Of course, when it comes to deciding whether to engage or divest, there are some companies that are unlikely to ever make the ESG cut. Binns says she has “one or two hard exclusions” – these comprise arms businesses and tobacco companies. However, her decisions are rarely so clear cut. “They’re never straightforward. The fact that money is diverted into greener projects is very beneficial. But then I have to weigh that into consideration with the fiduciary responsibilities that I have for my clients as well.” Another issue for fund managers is the need to properly interrogate a company’s climate actions and plans. “I’m all for green projects, but you just have to be worried about greenwashing,” says Binns. If the thinking behind “in or out” is nuanced on the ethical side, it is also complex on the financial side. Many companies could find themselves excluded on financial grounds, regardless of ethical considerations – for instance, because carbon-intensive operations also expose investors to the financial risk of regulatory clampdowns and future carbon taxes. Indeed, the value of some assets, such as certain coal mines and oil and gas fields, might therefore end up being written off entirely – becoming what investors refer to as “stranded assets”. Binns works in bonds, which means lending capital to businesses rather than buying shares. “We do systematic research on which areas of the market are lending to where the environment might be a risk to your investments. So your risk of stranded assets, for example, is really important.” Similar thinking underpinned the Norwegian Sovereign Wealth fund’s 2019 announcement that it would divest from pure play oil exploration companies to shield itself from price falls. It will, however, retain stakes in energy companies such as Shell and BP that have some renewable operations. Fund managers, such as Royal London Asset Management, often pursue both strategies at once. They might, for example, divest from oil in some of their funds that are aimed at investors who want a totally green portfolio, but retain oil assets in others. This is not a cop-out; more a recognition that there are multiple ways to achieve the same goal. “Rather than exclude companies, we want to ask them how they plan to be better in the future – and then ask ourselves if those plans are credible,” says Binns. “I think you need to take the halo off and be pragmatic – it’s about the direction of travel.” Additional reporting by Duncan Jefferies Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationHow do you persuade a company to stop polluting rivers, reduce its carbon footprint or tackle the mistreatment of workers in its supply chain? If you’re a consumer, you might choose to vote with your wallet and boycott the company in question. However, if you’re a shareholder, selling your shares in protest may not be quite as effective. You might end up simply passing the problem on to other shareholders, while also forgoing the chance to pressure the company into addressing the underlying issues. An alternative approach is to use dialogue and other forms of soft and not-so-soft persuasion to alter a company’s practices and behaviour. This tactic is known in the investment industry as “engagement”, and it has become the favoured method among fund managers – who invest and manage investment funds on behalf of individual investors. Fund managers and other large shareholders have long used engagement tactics when it comes to disputes about, for instance, executive pay. However, shareholder engagement has become more prominent in recent years as investors increasingly focus on the social and environmental impacts of the companies they invest in. “Companies are not … perfect,” says Julia Dreblow, founder of SRI Services and Fund EcoMarket, which both provide information on sustainable investment. “Investors need to send them very clear signals to redirect their R&amp;D [research and development] projects and change what they are doing to steer themselves on to a sustainable course.” Engagement is a broad term for tactics ranging from the relatively informal and understated – such as fund managers having regular background discussions with a company – to more high-profile and confrontational measures, such as tabling shareholder votes on environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues at annual company meetings. For example, last year, Royal London Asset Management, part of the Royal London Group, sent 141 letters to companies to explain why it was voting against or abstaining on proposals at annual general meetings (AGMs). Common concerns included executive pay, energy use and climate change, and corporate governance. Engagement can take months, or even years of detailed discussions. “You need to provide evidence for your view of the world [to persuade companies to change]” says Carlota Garcia-Manas, head of engagement within the Responsible Investing team at Royal London Asset Management. “This could be a like-for-like comparison of company performances, showing that companies with more diverse boards do better.” The process often involves compromise, on both sides. More dramatically, shareholders might publicly criticise companies and agitate for change, which can make media headlines and increase pressure on a company to act. These kind of public campaigns also illustrate how investor pressure on poorly behaving companies often coincides with consumer pressure. Indeed, this is one reason why the financial case for responsible investment and the moral case have become so closely linked. For example, if a fashion retailer is using child labour in its supply chain to manufacture clothes and this is reported by the media, it may damage the company’s reputation, trigger a consumer boycott and cause a fall in the company’s share price. Similarly, investors pushing for more robust climate action might be concerned about the financial risks posed by companies that aren’t doing enough to clean up their operations, but those financial concerns are now increasingly aligned with the concerns of both ethically-minded consumers and climate-conscious governments. Whatever the impetus behind shareholder engagement, and whatever form it takes, the tactic illustrates how, by keeping a seat at the table and pushing for change, investors can wield financial power and an influential voice. Collective action If a company doesn’t make the suggested changes after one-on-one discussions, and the environmental or ethical matter is considered serious enough, asset management companies may cooperate with their peers and shareholder activist groups to lobby a company. Climate Action 100+ is a group representing investors that collectively manage assets worth about $60tn. It is in discussions with the world’s largest corporate greenhouse gas emitters to encourage them to take necessary action on the climate emergency. It and similar groups − including UN-convened Net Zero Asset Owner Alliance, an international group of asset managers representing $10tn of assets under management and committed to supporting the goal of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 − also lobby policymakers and regulators to encourage responsible investment. Collective shareholder engagement is making media headlines and sometimes leading to major changes at companies. Perhaps most dramatically, a group of shareholders teamed with the activist hedge fund Engine No1 earlier this year to oust three board members at ExxonMobil over the oil company’s progress on climate issues. However, such headline-grabbing, confrontational campaigns can require a considerable amount of time, effort and money. Most of the engagement undertaken by asset managers takes a softer, more slow-burn approach. Indeed, it is often conducted informally and not always made public. And that can make it hard to know exactly how effective shareholder engagement is, in, for example, persuading companies to adopt more ambitious plans to reduce carbon emissions. However, most investment experts believe that it’s a practical and effective tactic to make the world a better place while also improving value for shareholders who are increasingly concerned with ethics rather than just financial returns. Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationWhether you’re a citizen, consumer or investor, the ability to call out greenwashing is fast becoming a key life skill. Misleading or unsubstantiated claims about climate credentials can make it harder for people to make informed decisions. They can also undermine genuine efforts by companies to clean up their act and tackle the climate crisis. The basic problem is a lack of clarity. Indeed, when it comes to spotting greenwashing, it can actually be more helpful to focus on the colour grey – because it’s the many grey areas that have helped make greenwashing so endemic. These grey areas might be around measurements, definitions, best practice, standards or regulations. Even the language we use is very imprecise, leaving lots of room for vagueness, obfuscation or outright deception. For instance, what do words such as “green”, “sustainable” and “eco” even mean? These problems are increasingly important when it comes to the greenwashing of investment products, such as pensions and investment funds. In recent years, there has been a sharp rise in consumer demand for funds that invest according to environmental, social and governance criteria, often referred to as ESG funds. According to the financial data provider Morningstar, the value of assets held in UK funds that invest according to stringent environmental and social principles grew from £29bn at the beginning of 2017 to £71bn by the end of 2020. With that much money at stake, misleading claims can effectively hamper the flow of money and resources into genuinely green initiatives and businesses – thwarting global efforts to tackle the climate emergency. Part of the problem is the relative nascency of the responsible investment industry. “There have been a lot of new entrants into the market and a lot of innovation,” says Ashley Hamilton Claxton, head of Responsible Investment at Royal London Asset Management, part of the Royal London Group. “I describe it as the ‘teenage years’ of responsible investing, with a lot of experimentation and boundary testing, and a lot of people trying out new things.” The name game As with the “green” labels so often stamped on supermarket products, language and definitions are crucial when it comes to responsible investment products. Hamilton Claxton says it’s important to understand a fund’s actual objectives. Is it aiming to invest in companies with good ESG credentials, or in companies that offer solutions to the world’s biggest challenges? A fund with a climate theme may not invest solely in green companies – it may invest in companies that don’t necessarily have strong green credentials today, but have the intention and the plans to improve their environmental profile. “Investors should be really conscious of fund names, because the name doesn’t always explain what the fund is doing,” says Hamilton Claxton. “You need to look under the hood at the fund’s holdings and ESG characteristics. Don’t just rely on the fund name, because you can be misled, as different asset managers will use the same name or label in very different ways.” As well as launching new products, some existing funds have been rebadged as sustainable; effectively marking a change to the fund’s name or description without the investments changing. “There is a lot of rebadging of existing investment funds,” says Hamilton Claxton. “You need to look at the list of companies the fund is investing in – the top 10 holdings are normally available publicly on the company’s website – and this will enable you to see whether the fund’s name has changed, but the holdings haven’t.” Bad faith, hypocrisy or inconsistency? It’s worth noting that fund managers themselves have to be on guard against greenwashing when they examine which companies a fund should invest in. The lack of agreed ESG standards with metrics and comparable data means asset managers have to rely a lot more on their judgment and expertise rather than on audited numbers and financial analysis. Sometimes it’s relatively easy to know when a company is acting in bad faith – for instance, when it pays lip service to sustainability with a particular product or marketing campaign while deliberately dragging its heels on the carbon emissions from the bulk of its operations. But things aren’t always so clear-cut. A company’s inconsistent behaviour might not necessarily mean hypocrisy. For instance, the transition to clean energy may simply be easier and therefore faster in one area of its businesses than in others. Asset managers have to determine whether or not such inconsistencies constitute greenwashing. Other variables to consider might include, for example, the actual timeframe for a company’s net zero targets, or whether it takes into account the emissions in its wider supply chain – which can often account for the bulk of a company’s actual emissions. Likewise, do its emission-reduction ambitions involve an excessive use of carbon offsets? These refer to projects that reduce or remove emissions, such as planting new forests. Carbon offsets are necessary for some sectors such as the airline industry, whose core business involves emitting carbon – thereby making it impossible for them to reach net-zero without offsets. But offsets can be controversial when businesses use them as shortcuts to avoid making their operations more sustainable. Check the voting record For individual investors who are trying to assess the ESG credentials of investment products marketed as responsible or ethical investment funds, Hamilton Claxton advises checking the voting record of the asset manager who oversees the fund. Voting at annual shareholder meetings is one of the most visible ways that asset managers engage with the companies they invest in – whether it’s on climate-related resolutions, or other proposals involving an environmental or social issue. “The first step is to find out whether the fund manager is actually disclosing how they vote,” she says. “At Royal London we disclose our voting record.” Royal London is a mutual company owned by its members. “The second [step] is to look at how they have actually been voting, and whether that is in line with your expectation as a client.” Investors should also be paying attention to what asset managers themselves are doing and saying about their own business, and whether they are walking the talk. Are they taking a sticking plaster approach to key ESG issues, or is it authentically embedded in the running of the business, and in the investment beliefs and philosophy of the asset managers? Choosing a fund management company that has a solid track record can provide reassurance to investors. “My advice to investors would be to work with partners and fund management brands that you trust, that have been doing this for a long time, and therefore have that authenticity,” says Hamilton Claxton, Regulate the grey Although the responsible investment industry is still in a phase of experimentation when it comes to standards, rules and practices, the potential for misleading claims and substandard funds should decrease as grey areas become more black and white. With financial watchdogs around the world introducing new rules on environmental reporting, attempts to greenwash investment products will become much more difficult. For instance, under new standards announced by the UK government in October, asset managers, investment providers, and pension schemes will have to disclose the environmental impact of the activities they finance, and justify any sustainability claims they make to investors. “The lack of common definitions around environmental sustainability is leading to greenwashing, misleading investors and consumers about how green a product really is,” the Treasury stated when it announced the new rules. “The new Sustainability Disclosure Requirements (SDR) will ensure investors have the information they need to make informed decisions about where to put their money.” Likewise, efforts to standardise the carbon offset market should help investors judge when offsets are used for greenwashing purposes. The introduction of new rules such as these gives Hamilton Claxton cause for hope on the scourge of greenwashing. “Implementing the new regulations will present challenges for asset managers, however, the industry associations are already coming together to create more consistent language and standards,” she says. “The next 18 months or so will continue to be tricky in terms of greenwashing, but beyond that I think we will start to see more standardisation in the industry and as the market becomes a bit more mature things will start to settle down.” Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationFrontline doctors have issued desperate pleas for more people to get vaccinated after reporting that in some hospitals all new intensive care Covid patients have not had jabs. An estimated 5 million people, or 10% of the eligible population, have not had been inoculated, and it is this group who are seemingly draining the most resources from overstretched hospitals, experts say. The problem is worst in parts of London, but Cambridge’s Royal Papworth hospital said more than 80% of its Covid patients requiring the most care were unjabbed. Will Ricketts, a consultant chest physician at the Royal London hospital, tweeted on Wednesday: “Every new respiratory admission with Covid since Friday has been unvaccinated.” On Sunday he had said nearly every patient on the Covid wards and every patient he had referred to intensive care was unvaccinated. He pleaded: “We’re not here to judge (my day job is lung cancer), but please help us to help you please #GetVaccinatedNow.” A source for Barts health trust said: “The number of unvaccinated people admitted to ICU has fluctuated between 80% and 90% across the north-east London patch over the past few weeks. For our trust that includes Royal London, Barts, Whipps Cross and Newham.” On Tuesday a respiratory registrar at a west London hospital tweeted: “Every single patient in our respiratory support unit is unvaccinated … #vaccines work”. He later deleted the tweet after some accused him of breaching patient confidentiality. Prof Rupert Pearse, an intensive care doctor at the Royal London and Barts, confirmed to the BBC that up to 90% of his patients were unvaccinated. He said: “It’s very sad that people are vaccine-hesitant, but we understand the reasons, and we are happy to talk about people’s fears about getting vaccinated. There is absolutely no doubt that it’s protecting the population.” Jo-anne Fowles, a nurse consultant in extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) – a procedure for providing prolonged cardiac and respiratory support – at the Royal Papworth told ITV Anglia: “82% of the patients we have treated for Covid-19 since February have been unvaccinated.” On Sunday the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said about nine out of 10 Covid patients needing the most care in hospital had not been jabbed. This figure is believed to refer to those requiring ECMO, according to Anthony Masters, an ambassador for the Royal Statistical Society. He said information provided by NHS England showed that of the 154 Covid patients receiving ECMO between July to November, 141 , or 92%, were unvaccinated. The UK Health Security Agency’s latest vaccine surveillance showed that of the 3,087 people who died of Covid in England in the three weeks before 6 December, 718 were unvaccinated, or about 23%. Prof Jim McManus, the president of the Association of Directors of Public Health, cautioned against more regular publication of data on the health outcomes for unvaccinated people – as seen in the US – unless it could be put in context. He said: “I’m not sure those figures would prod a lot of people to get vaccinated, because it could get accidentally or deliberately misinterpreted. Some will seize on the fact that vaccinated people are in hospital to suggest the vaccines don’t work.” He added: “There will be vaccinated people in hospital as a matter of basic arithmetic. Before Omicron, the vaccines were around 96% effective at protecting against hospitalisation. But 4% of 1 million people represents 40,000 people. So if you look at the sheer numbers without looking at the proportions involved, it can look like the vaccine isn’t having an effect. But there is a much higher proportion of those who are unvaccinated ending up in hospital. If the statistics were put in context, it could really help.” The chief executive of NHS Providers, Chris Hopson, said: “We would strongly encourage everyone who is eligible to get jabbed or boosted, and to think about how they can reduce the risk of infection. “Trust leaders consistently tell us that most of the Covid-19 patients they are seeing are unvaccinated. We don’t hold data on that, but it’s a recurring theme and a source of frustration, not least because of the potential impact on other patients whose treatment may be delayed as a result.”Police investigating the disappearance of a 20-year-old man after he visited a nightclub in central London last week have begun searching the River Thames after reviewing CCTV footage. Scotland Yard said the search for Harvey Parker was ordered after officers found footage suggesting he may have “entered the water” near the Golden Jubilee pedestrian bridge that links Embankment to Waterloo. In a statement, it added: “At this stage of the investigation there is nothing to suggest that there is any third-party involvement.” Parker, from Lambeth in south London, was seen leaving Heaven Nightclub alone near Charing Cross Railway Station in Westminster at about 2.15am last Friday. DCI Lucy O’Connor, of the central south safeguarding unit, said: “We are doing all we can to find Harvey, and working closely with our colleagues in the marine policing unit.” She added: “We are keeping Harvey’s family fully informed of any developments; and the thoughts of my colleagues and I are with them at this distressing time. We would also ask that media avoid any speculation while the inquiry continues.” On Tuesday police released CCTV images of Parker after he left the nightclub. They showed him then entering Craven Street and walking south towards the Embankment. He has not been seen since. DS Dick Nation, also of the central south safeguarding unit, said: “This is a terrible ordeal for Harvey’s family and friends and I would urge anyone who saw him or has any information to contact police immediately.” The Theatre Royal Stratford East tweeted that Parker was a front-of-house member of staff and issued an appeal for help to find him. A friend said the University of York music student had been to a Little Simz concert in Brixton, south London, before going on to Heaven nightclub. Parker’s relatives have also taken to social media to ask for help in locating him.The world will have enough doses of Covid vaccines early next year to inoculate all of the global adult population – if western countries do not hoard those vaccines to use in blanket booster programmes, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has said. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Wednesday there would be sufficient vaccine supplies in global circulation in the first quarter of 2022. “Blanket booster programmes are likely to prolong the Covid-19 pandemic, rather than ending it, by diverting supply to countries that already have high levels of vaccination coverage, giving the virus more opportunity to spread and mutate,” Tedros said, adding: “No country can boost its way out of the pandemic.” His remarks follow predictions by officials with the WHO’s Africa region earlier this month that African countries should receive almost a billion doses within the same timeframe. Tedros’s comments came as the WHO epidemiologist Maria Van Kerkhove said the organisation was considering reclassifying earlier variants of Covid-19 – including the Alpha, Beta and Gamma variants – as they appeared to be no longer in circulation. However, Kerkhove cautioned against recent reports – including from South Africa – that suggested the Omicron variant spreading around the world may be less severe than previous variants, saying there was still insufficient data to make a judgment. “We have not seen this variant circulate for long enough in populations around the world, certainly in vulnerable populations,” Kerkhove said. She said the data on Omicron, first identified in southern Africa and Hong Kong in November, was still “messy” as countries reported its arrival and spread. The projections on global vaccine supply come as new vaccines and treatments have been authorised for use against Covid and the focus has moved to ensuring the world’s poorer countries are supported with materials and vaccine commodities such as syringes, which are in short supply, to accelerate rollouts. With Omicron spreading at unprecedented speed and already detected in 106 countries, Tedros said on Wednesday the existing vaccines continued to provide significant protection against severe disease. “It’s important to remember that the vast majority of hospitalisations and deaths are in unvaccinated people, not unboosted people,” he said. He also stressed people should take necessary precautions to halt the spread of Covid heading into the Christmas period. “Boosters cannot be seen as a ticket to go ahead with planned celebrations,” he said. Tedros’s comments on increasing global vaccination follows the publication earlier on Wednesday of a report by the WHO’s strategic advisory group of experts on immunisation that said at least 126 countries around the world had already issued recommendations on boosters or additional vaccine doses, and 120 had started implementing those programmes. “No low-income country has yet introduced a booster vaccination programme,” it said in a statement. “In view of the continued supply uncertainties in global vaccine access and equity, individual country vaccine booster dose policy decisions need to balance the public health benefits to their population with support for global equity in vaccine access necessary to address the virus evolution and pandemic impact. “Of concern are broad-based booster programmes, including the booster vaccination of population sub-groups at lower risk of severe disease. “Global supply is increasing significantly and is projected to be sufficient for vaccination of the entire adult population globally, and boosters of high-risk populations (as defined in the roadmap, in particular older adults and immunocompromised persons), by the first quarter of 2022. “However, projections show that only later in 2022 supply will be sufficient for extensive use of boosters in all adults, and beyond, should they be broadly needed.”Wordsearch setters (17 December) should pay more attention to Feast. Then they would probably know that a spice is a substance made from a plant, used to give a special flavour to food (Cambridge Dictionary definition). Salt is but a humble mineral, sodium chloride. Onions and garlic are vegetables, though the latter can just about pass muster as a spice. Alan Lehmann Lewes, East Sussex • I know it’s traditional to wait until late winter or early spring before launching into correspondence heralding the first sight, hearing or smell of nature’s re-emergence, but one of my roses has started blooming. In Yorkshire. In mid-December. Good thing or bad? John Richardson South Cave, East Yorkshire • I can understand why the government would like retired teachers to help out at schools. Might it also be interested in retired prime ministers helping out the current one? Why didn’t we appreciate sufficiently, when he was in office, the qualities of Gordon Brown, so clearly on display in his article (A bold plan saved the world economy in 2009. With this new plan, we can control Covid, 20 December)? Richard Webb Penistone, South Yorkshire • It was wonderful to see the prime minister blaming the media for the disillusionment with his government in North Shropshire (Report, 17 December). Boris Johnson denouncing irresponsible journalism: that’s poetic justice. William Wallace Liberal Democrat, House of Lords • Come on Tories! Take back control. Get Boris done. Dick Tuckey Ipswich • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I keep reading statistics that vaccine take-up in the 12- to 15-year-old age group is low. Take-up implies that there is a choice, but low rates are surely the result of several factors? First, it is extremely difficult to get a local vaccination appointment for a teenager. I’ve found one – but it involves a 44-mile round trip by car. Second, since Covid rates have been so high in the unvaccinated, unmasked teenagers attending school, take-up will be lower because, according to what my GP surgery told me, children still aren’t allowed the vaccination for 90 days after a positive test. Third, over the autumn term we were assured that children aged 13 would receive them in school, so parents didn’t attempt to arrange vaccinations. Unfortunately, the mass Covid vaccinations didn’t take place in many schools for this age group. My friends on the other side of the country have had similar experiences. Take-up is low among children aged 12-15 because they cannot “take” what hasn’t actually been made available to them. It is not necessarily because their parents and carers are hesitant. Joanna Fletcher Dorchester, Dorset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Although Henrietta Heald (Letters, 19 December) is correct in saying that girls by and large are not admitted to Eton, that is not to say that being female necessarily spares you from the trammels of the independent boarding school system. In the 1970s, I spent six years at Wycombe Abbey, a girls’ public school in Buckinghamshire. My parents thought that by buying a “good” education for me, they were acting in my best interests. Homesick, useless both at lacrosse and tennis, anarchic – “Why shouldn’t I go shopping in my free time? It’s what every normal 16-year-old does,” I once argued to my dismayed housemistress – and endlessly at war with the totalitarian regime of the place, I was an unhappy square peg in a round hole. At university, I lost my way badly – I scraped a third-class degree and seem to have spent the rest of my life trying to recover. Admittedly, only a minute percentage of the population attends residential schools. Some may even claim to enjoy the boarding experience. But for many – girls as well as boys – the boarding environment can be a source of lifelong insecurity and depression. Let us hope that Richard Beard’s Sad Little Men makes its mark, and that well-to-do parents find something less damaging on which to spend their money. Victoria Owens Long Ashton, Somerset • While I agree with Henrietta Heald’s view, not everyone who was sent away to school – in my case at eight – turns out to be the Sad Little Men described in Richard Beard’s book. I do not defend the system – there is much wrong with it and I endured some very unpleasant experiences. However, contrary to expectation, I don’t find connection and real empathy a challenge. That would have severely hampered me in my work as a psychologist, a psychotherapist and an employee of a charity working for 30 years with disadvantaged people from a wide range of backgrounds. How did I manage this? Partly, I suspect, because there were some teachers prepared to provide a correcting perspective on our situation. They introduced those like me, who were interested, to analyses that challenged the establishment of which we were meant to be a part. Nick Barton Templecombe, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Gary Younge’s typically thoughtful and informative article (What Covid taugh us about racism – and what we need to do now, 16 December) makes the excellent proposal that local meetings could address the issue of systemic racism. I do hope this can be taken forward. If such a scheme took off, it could go a long way in changing attitudes and might lead to consistent pressure on any government to do much more to tackle racism. He also makes the point that one of the reasons for racial disadvantage is inequality, because many ethnic minority people are in the worst jobs and living in the poorest conditions. While it is clear that reducing inequality would not automatically eliminate racism, it would undoubtedly be a great help. As made clear in the research by Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett, inequality increases so many problems in society, not least the distrust between different communities. Reducing inequality would not only improve the conditions of non-white people, it would also reduce the incentive for white people to blame ethnic minorities –unfairly – for their own difficulties. Younge makes the point that even the Labour party does little more than pay lip service to the need to tackle racism. This is also true of its approach to inequality. While Jeremy Corbyn was leader, there seemed a prospect that we might have a Labour government that would seriously tackle these issues. Unfortunately, with Keir Starmer in charge, this seems an unlikely prospect. Martin Wright Otley, West Yorkshire • In a characteristically insightful contribution, Gary Younge highlights the systematic nature of racism, the spontaneity of the mass protests in the light of the George Floyd murder and the backlash to this movement. The government’s response to the protests was to set up a commission on race and ethnic disparities that produced a report that was remarkably consonant with the position of the Conservative government and played down the significance of racism. It should be added that the government’s cynicism has no bounds, since nine months after publication, it has yet to respond to the recommendations in the study it commissioned, let alone implement them. Prof Andrew Pilkington University of Northampton • I’ve just read Gary Younge’s sobering piece about systemic racism in the UK. It’s depressing that this is still such a live issue, but I do think that it seems to miss one vital angle. It should be linked explicitly to the legacy of colonialism – or perhaps more aptly named neocolonialism – that sees people in the UK buy products from the global south, where all too often pay and conditions are appalling. There are campaigning groups that address such vital issues, of course, such as Labour Behind the Label, Fashion Revolution, Traidcraft Exchange and Global Justice Now. However, a broader, unifying perspective could prove powerful in getting to the roots of the exploitation of people of colour in the UK and globally. Mobile phones are a product that starkly illustrates a key aspect of the rampant injustice. Black lives matter everywhere. Mary Robertson Canterbury • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Almost a third of all children on free school meals in England benefited from government-sponsored activities and free meals over the summer holidays, according to figures from the Department for Education (DfE). More than 495,000 children from deprived backgrounds took part in the holiday activity and food clubs funded by the government and councils. Figures collated for the DfE show that 600,000 children in total took part, including those not eligible for free school meals who were considered to be in need of extra support by their local authorities. Annual funding for the programme was boosted to £220m this year, in the wake of campaigns by the Manchester United and England footballer Marcus Rashford, who highlighted holiday food poverty among deprived families during the pandemic. In January this year, more than 1.7 million children were eligible for free school meals during term time, a sharp rise on the figure of 1.4 million eligible before the Covid outbreak. Independent evaluation of the holiday programme’s impact is to be published next year. The DfE said that feedback from families who took part this summer included parents of children in Birmingham reporting less stress, with nearly three-quarters saying their children were “less likely to engage in antisocial behaviour”. This year, councils are running the activity and food clubs over Christmas for the first time, and the programme is to continue over the Easter and summer holidays for the next three years. Simon Clarke, the Conservative MP for Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland and chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “I have seen for myself the difference this support makes to children’s holiday experiences and to their getting a proper nutritious meal, and it’s really powerful.” James Bowen, director of policy for the National Association of Head Teachers, said while the positive impact and funding was good news, school leaders were seeing more families struggling and more children living in poverty. “Coronavirus has only exacerbated this and has shown just how vulnerable many families really are. We’d like to see more done to tackle the root causes of poverty to eliminate the problem,” Bowen said. A separate report on the government’s national school breakfast programme found evidence that free, healthy breakfasts aimed at children from low-income families had a positive impact on behaviour, attainment and eating habits. The breakfast programme began in 2018, for schools with at least half of their pupils from the most deprived households. The schools received free food, advice and a £500 grant, and 325,000 pupils took part at the scheme’s peak.Hundreds of thousands of clinically vulnerable five- to 11-year-olds are to be offered Covid vaccines for the first time, with some scientists calling for the programme to be extended to the whole age group before the new UK school term. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has recommended vaccinations for about 330,000 younger children at clinical risk, and also those living with someone who is immunosuppressed. They will be offered two doses of the Pfizer vaccine – in 10-microgram amounts, a third of the quantity used for adults – with a gap of eight weeks. A parallel announcement will expand the booster programme to more teenagers, including 16 and 17-year-olds. The JCVI’s decision on five- to 11-year-olds came after the UK’s medicine watchdog, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine for them. “Parents and carers can be reassured that no new vaccine for children would have been approved unless the expected standards of safety, quality and effectiveness have been met,” said Dr June Raine, the MHRA’s chief executive. While the MHRA’s green light covers the entire age group, the JCVI is unlikely to approve a mass vaccine rollout among primary age children for another month or longer, a move that could frustrate ministers, aware that the US and a number of EU countries are already doing this. Christina Pagel, a professor of operational research at University College London, and a member of Independent Sage, said the delay was “setting children up for another term of educational disruption and potential illness”, and would also place parents and school staff at greater risk. She said: “The US has successfully and safely given over 7 million doses to children. Many EU countries are now vaccinating primary school children before the next term. To say that there are logistical difficulties in administering a smaller dose is simply not credible and not good enough.” While teaching unions argue it is up to scientists and parents to decide on such matters, Julie McCulloch, head of policy at the Association of School and College Leaders, said the option of extending the rollout remained open, “and we hope that decision will be made in a timely manner”. However, some medical experts have raised concerns about the legitimacy of vaccinating children – who tend to experience Covid as a very mild illness – in order to protect the wider population. The JCVI’s role is to balance any impact of vaccination against these notably lower risks faced from Covid by healthy younger children. In September, the watchdog referred the decision on mass vaccination for 12- to 15-year-olds to the UK’s chief medical officers, saying the net health benefit even for this age group was too small. With the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, the JCVI also has to consider how much protection two vaccine doses will give, and whether the natural immunity seen in the estimated 40% of younger children already exposed to Covid helps repel the variant or not. The JCVI could only act on vaccines for younger children when the MHRA approved the Pfizer vaccine for this use. Some officials have said the delay in this was caused by Pfizer only applying to the MHRA after the EU’s European Medicines Agency (EMA) completed its process for the age group. In a parallel announcement, the JCVI recommended the rollout of booster vaccinations to those aged 16 and 17; children aged 12-15 who are in a clinical risk group or in a household with someone immunosuppressed; and 12- to 15-year-olds who are severely immunocompromised and who have already had a third primary dose, the same as happens now for immunocompromised adults. This should happen, again as with adults, no less than three months after the main doses. All the JCVI’s recommendations are UK-wide, though it is then up to the governments of each UK nation to decide whether to accept them. The chief medical officer for Wales, Dr Frank Atherton, immediately said he would. The definition of clinically vulnerable children will be the same as used for adults, as set out in the section of the government’s so-called Covid green book detailing vaccines policy.Judy Murray has won an eight-year planning battle to build a £40m tennis and golf complex on the outskirts of Dunblane that she says will stand as a fitting legacy for her sons, tennis stars Andy and Jamie. But local campaigners and community councillors have vowed to continue their fight to prevent building on the green belt land, Park of Keir. Earlier this week the Scottish government overturned a previous ruling by Stirling council, which had rejected the plans after more than 1,000 objections. Opponents argued that the complex – which will include 19 luxury homes, an 18-hole golf course and a four-star hotel – would destroy the rolling landscape and native woodland of Park of Keir. Following an appeal and public local inquiry, Scottish ministers called the application in for review by the government-appointed reporter Timothy Brian. The ministers’ decision notice stated the benefits of the proposed scheme were sufficient to outweigh the loss of green belt land, concluding the tennis and golf centre in particular “would make an important contribution to the aim of increasing participation in both sports while providing facilities for the community. There will also be economic benefits, to the local area and more widely.” Murray welcomed the decision. “We passionately believe that what we will create will not only serve as a legacy to the achievements of Jamie and Andy, but will be an important community asset that allows people of all ages, abilities and backgrounds to enjoy for generations to come,” she said. But the Scottish Green MSP for Mid Scotland and Fife, Mark Ruskell, said the decision had left him feeling “gutted”. “This is a decision that will destroy the historic landscape of Park of Keir that has existed for centuries,” he said. Ruskell believes the developers’ vision has little to do with the Murray tennis legacy. “It’s about securing an exclusive development of rural mansions for the property developer who is hiding behind celebrities,” he said. The partnership, which includes Murray, golfer Colin Montgomerie and local developers the King Group, argue the park is the ideal location to create “grassroots facilities which will make tennis, golf and many other sports accessible to all”. As well as creating a Sir Andy Murray Museum, the site will include a 61-hectare (150-acre) community park with woodland walks, a children’s adventure playground and an all-weather pitch for five-a-side football. In a statement, Dunblane community council said the decision “ignores widespread local concerns and makes a mockery of the planning process”. Its chair, David Prescott, added: “This has taken eight years to get to the grant of planning in principle, which is only a step along the way. This has a long way to go yet.” • This article was amended on 24 December 2021 to correct the surname of Timothy Brian (not Bain), and to clarify his position in relation to the decision.Barcelona have agreed an initial €55m (£46.7m) deal to sign Ferran Torres from Manchester City, with additional clauses that could take the fee to €65m. The La Liga club are expected to offer the Spain international a lucrative five-year contract, despite their widely reported financial issues. Torres could travel to Spain in the next 24 hours to finalise contract arrangements and undergo a medical, with Barcelona already working on a statement to announce his signing. The 21-year-old has not featured for City since late September after injuring a foot on international duty but has resumed training and his condition is not expected to be a barrier to a move. Before his injury the forward had been in excellent form, scoring seven in 11 appearances for club and country. Torres has been seen as a priority target for Barcelona’s manager, Xavi Hernández, particularly with the premature retirement of Sergio Agüero, who moved to the Camp Nou from City in the summer but managed only 339 minutes before suffering chest pains against Alavés in late October. Agüero confirmed his retirement this month due to a heart problem. Barcelona are seventh in La Liga, two points off a top-four berth. Lowered expectations, the arrival of Xavi, the emergence of Gavi and the new long-term contracts for Pedri and Ansu Fati have improved the club’s outlook after a miserable summer during which Lionel Messi left against a backdrop mounting debt. Pep Guardiola values Torres’s contribution at City this season but the potential fee is seen as a good return for a player who cost the club €27m (£24.5m) in August 2020.The EU has taken a first step in setting a 15% minimum corporate tax for multinationals, in line with a global agreement struck earlier this year, as the White House has hit a hurdle in its efforts to turn the pact into law. Announcing the launch of a new EU tax directive, Paolo Gentiloni, commissioner for the economy, said he expected the 27 member states to agree on the fine details within six months despite concerns held in some European capitals. The draft directive, which sets an effective corporate tax rate of 15% for multinationals and other large businesses with a turnover in excess of €750m, enacts an agreement signed by 136 countries and jurisdictions earlier this year. The US president, Joe Biden, drove that agreement forward among members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and elsewhere, but is facing difficulties in enacting domestic legislation. The tax rate change has been bundled into his Build Back Better Act, which includes funding for social security and battling the climate emergency. Hungary and Estonia have raised concerns about the minimum rate in recent months. But Gentiloni, a former Italian prime minister, said he was convinced that the directive would secure the necessary EU unanimity and that the White House would overcome its obstacles. “I don’t think that the discussion ongoing in the US is concentrated on this issue of corporate taxation, and the contact that we have constantly with the administration shows that the chance to go on with the legislation is absolutely there,” he said. Hungary has a corporate tax rate of 9% and is at odds with the European Commission over its failure to sign off plans for spending billions of euros in recovery funds. The Estonian government has raised concerns about the impact of the minimum rate on its attractiveness to foreign direct investment. Gentiloni said: “We are not abolishing tax competition. We will still have very different levels of corporate taxation in different countries. What we are introducing is a ceiling, a limit, to the race to the bottom.” The draft directive includes a number of exemptions. Companies will be able to exclude an amount of income equal to 5% of the value of tangible assets and 5% of payroll when calculating tax due. For a transition period of 10 years, the exclusions will be higher, starting at 8% of tangible assets and 10% of payroll. Tove Maria Ryding, from the European Network on Debt and Development, representing 53 NGOs that work on the issue, said: “We are in the midst of a global crisis, but unfortunately neither the EU nor the OECD has had the courage to propose a really ambitious reform of the corporate tax rules, which could have mobilised the billions needed to fill gaps in the budgets. “Today’s EU tax package is a Christmas present to all the multinational corporations that will be able to continue paying very low taxes.”The Wasps head coach, Lee Blackett, has called on the Premiership to consider pausing the season if matches are forced behind closed doors by the continued spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. Matches in Wales and Scotland will be played in effectively spectator-free stadiums from Boxing Day and Blackett believes calling a temporary halt to fixtures would be in the best financial interest of the clubs if the government introduces similar measures in England. He has also suggested the postponed games could be played in midweeks later in the season given there are no free weekends in the calendar. Clubs are hopeful their festive fixtures will go ahead with bumper crowds as planned – Wasps are due to host London Irish on Boxing Day – but on Wednesday the health secretary, Sajid Javid, reiterated the government’s position that tighter restrictions could not be ruled out after Christmas as more than 100,000 daily Covid cases were recorded in the UK for the first time. This week Bristol’s director of rugby, Pat Lam, warned clubs would struggle to survive another lockdown after some were driven to the brink of bankruptcy by having to play so many matches in empty stadiums when rugby union resumed last August. Exeter were at one stage losing £1m a month and the clubs’ plight was aggravated by a swingeing cut to central funding from the Rugby Football Union. Blackett said: “I don’t think anyone wants three or four weeks without supporters. If that is the case, we’ll have to look at a circuit-break. From my perspective that’s where I’d want to go as everyone needs supporters in from a player/coaching side as players play better with them in. It is proven that the intensity of games is higher. “So if we can have that little break, and then we might have to play midweek, it would be for the best interests of the club financially, definitely, and for the players as well. Everyone wants to play with supporters – that’s the selfish perspective. Everyone sees that, as it’s a better spectacle for sport and for TV.” Playing midweek matches would be a controversial move on player welfare grounds but, when the 2019‑20 season resumed last August, they were considered a necessary evil to ensure the fixture list was completed in full. Blackett said: “[A circuit-breaker] is my personal view, I just think it’s the best thing for the game. I can’t imagine clubs are going to say: ‘Let’s play three weeks with no fans.’ If we had to take a three-week break without fans I’m pretty sure everyone would be on the same page.”Academics have published research based on a study of Omicron cases in England suggesting people infected with it are less likely to end up in hospital than people infected with the Delta variant. The MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis at Imperial College London has tweeted a link to the full report here. And here is a news report from Imperial College London summarising the findings. It says: Estimates suggest Omicron cases are 15% less likely to attend hospital, and 40% less likely to be hospitalised for a night or more, compared to Delta. The researchers stress that these reductions in severity must be balanced against the larger risk of infection with Omicron, due to the reduction in protection provided by both vaccination and natural infection. For example, at a population level, large numbers of infections could still lead to large numbers of hospitalisations. They say the estimates provided in this paper will assist in refining mathematical models of potential healthcare demand associated with the unfolding European Omicron wave. And this is from Prof Neil Ferguson, the Imperial College epidemiologist, summarising the findings. He said: Our analysis shows evidence of a moderate reduction in the risk of hospitalisation associated with the Omicron variant compared with the Delta variant. However, this appears to be offset by the reduced efficacy of vaccines against infection with the Omicron variant. Given the high transmissibility of the Omicron virus, there remains the potential for health services to face increasing demand if Omicron cases continue to grow at the rate that has been seen in recent weeks. Daily cases of Covid-19 have passed 100,000 as the Omicron variant sweeps across the UK, according to government figures – the highest number since the pandemic began. The first minister of Wales, Mark Drakeford, has announced stringent restrictions that will come into force at 6am on Boxing Day in an effort to curb the spread of the Omicron variant, including the return of the rule of six and 2-metre social distancing in pubs, theatres and cinemas. Hundreds of thousands of clinically vulnerable five to 11-year-olds are to be offered Covid vaccines for the first time, with some scientists calling for the programme to be extended to the whole age group before the new school term. The NHS may set up “field hospitals” in the car parks of existing hospitals staffed partly by army medical personnel to help cope with a potential Omicron-driven surge in Covid patients. That is all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. The Independent Office for Police Conduct has released a statement this afternoon saying it will not consider a complaint from the Green party peer Jenny Jones about officers on duty at No 10 ignoring possible lockdown-breaking partying because it is outside its terms of reference. Instead it has referred the matter back to the Metropolitan police service (MPS). In a statement it explained: Having fully assessed the referral we have decided it is invalid and we have returned it to the MPS to handle as it determines would be appropriate. Under the relevant legislation, a valid complaint can only be made where an individual, or someone acting on their behalf, has been adversely affected by the alleged conduct or its effects. There was nothing within the referral to indicate the complainant was physically present or nearby when officers stationed at Downing Street allegedly failed to enforce Covid rules. Nor is there a suggestion that they were physically present or sufficiently nearby when the effects of the officers’ alleged actions occurred. If evidence were to come to light that anyone serving with the police may have breached standards of professional behaviour or committed a criminal offence, linked to the alleged party, we have reminded the Metropolitan police of its obligations to refer relevant matters to us, irrespective of whether or not a valid complaint has been made. In the i today Jane Merrick suggests that, if Covid hospital admissions in London remain below 400 by the end of the week, the government may decide not to impose fresh restrictions in England next week. (See 11.56am.) She wrote the article when the most recent figure for London admissions was 245, for Sunday. According to today’s dashboard, the most recent daily figure (for Monday) is now 301. The previous Monday the figure was 169. The daily Covid hospital admission figure for London has not been this high since early February. And the total number of Covid patients in hospital in London has now passed 2,000 for the first time this winter. It is 2,036 today. It has not been this high since the start of March. Until the first week of December the average daily figure was near the 1,000 mark, but in the last three weeks it has doubled. London is being closely watched because the Omicron spike took off first here, and so it is assumd that what is happening in the capital will be replicated in other parts of the country. But London also has a population with unusually low rates of vaccination. More than 30% of Londoners over the age of 12 have not yet had a first jab. Nationally the equivalent figure is 10%. That suggests London may turn out to be more of an outlier than a reliable indicator for how Omicron will drive up hospitalisation rates in the rest of the UK. The number of new Covid cases recorded on the government’s dashboard has passed 100,000 for the first time in this pandemic, today’s figures show. The new daily total is 106,122. This is more than 13,000 higher than the previous record - 93,045 on Friday last week. This is higher than any daily total for new cases last winter, or in the autumn - and also in the first wave last spring, although because so little testing took place at that point recorded cases were very low, and totally unreliable as a guide to the real number of cases in the community. (The recorded figures published these days are also a considerable understatement, because so many people do not display symptoms, or get a test, but it is assumed that the trend with recorded new cases does now track the trend with actual new cases.) Today’s dashboard also shows that the total number of new cases over the past week is up 58.9% on the total for the previous week. There have also been 140 further deaths. The Northern Ireland executive has decided that nightclubs in Northern Ireland will have to close from 27 December, the BBC is reporting. This is from the BBC’s Jayne McCormack. More than 30m extra doses of Covid-19 vaccine have now been given in the UK, PA Media reports. PA says: A record 968,665 booster and third doses were reported for the UK on Tuesday. The previous record was 940,606 doses on Saturday. It means a total of 30.8m booster and third doses have now been delivered, with 6.1m in the past seven days. The figures have been published by the UK’s four health agencies. Around 58% of all adults in the UK have now had a booster or third dose of Covid-19 vaccine, according to analysis by the PA news agency. This is up from 46% a week ago. The government has said all eligible adults in the UK will be offered the chance to get a booster jab before the end of the month. In a statement to the Senedd (Welsh parliament), Mark Drakeford, the first minister, rejected the suggestion that Wales was on an “unstoppable journey to lockdown”. He told members of the Senedd (MSs): We’re not on an unstoppable journey to lockdown. If we act together do all the things we’re able to do in our own lives, we have a chance to make a difference. There are lots of things we don’t know about Omicron and how it will affect us, so I can’t rule things out. But the measures we’ve announced are designed to mitigate the risk that more serious interventions are needed. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has confirmed that the government has still not ruled out imposing new Covid restrictions in England after Christmas. Asked about plans for the new year on a visit to a hospital, he said: The best advice to everyone is continue to remain cautious and keep looking forward to Christmas. He also stressed that the government was keeping the situation under review. It is fast-changing, the situation, there’s more data not just here from home but from abroad - we keep an eye on all that data and discuss it with our expert advisers. As the prime minister has said, whilst there’s no need for any further restrictions before Christmas we will certainly keep the situation under review. Thousands of new road signs are to be installed to guide people to coronavirus vaccination centres following an agreement between the AA and the government, PA Media reports. PA says: This follows requests from smaller centres, which wanted to make it easier for road users to find them. The AA believes that, while the locations of hospitals, pharmacies and GP surgeries are often well known to local residents, temporary vaccination sites in non-medical locations can be harder to find for many people. The motoring services firm provided nearly 2,000 free signs to vaccination centres across the UK earlier this year when the widespread rollout of coronavirus jabs began. The polling company Savanta ComRes says Keir Starmer has overtaken Boris Johnson on the best prime minister rating for the first time since it launched its political tracker in May last year. YouGov has also released new polling today showing Starmer well ahead on this measure - although YouGov had Starmer leading on this question in the second half of last year. Both polls also give Labour a clear lead over the Conservatives. With Savanta ComRes, Labour is five points ahead (Lab 37%, -1; Con 32%, -2). And YouGov makes it six points (Lab 36%, -1; Con 30%, -2). Commenting on the findings, Chris Hopkins, political research director at Savanta ComRes, said: The winter of discontent goes on for Boris Johnson and the Conservatives. I make this the 19th consecutive poll lead for Labour among all pollsters, and we haven’t seen that number of consistent poll leads for years – even when Labour were regularly in the lead in the middle of 2019, there was always the odd level-pegging poll to break things up a bit. However, voting intention aside, analysts always look at other metrics to give a more nuanced assessment of which way the country may vote, and the fact that Boris Johnson has relinquished his Best PM lead for the first time in our tracker probably says more than consecutive Labour leads. But the fact remains that Conservative voters are not switching directly to Labour, and the opposition still need to do far more to convince voters that they have a credible alternative to the Johnson administration. A record 968,665 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported in the UK yesterday, PA Media reports. PA says: The previous record was 940,606 doses on Saturday. More than 30.8m booster and third doses have now been delivered in the UK, with 6.1m in the past seven days. The figures have been published by the UK’s four health agencies. Here are the main points from Mark Drakeford’s Q&amp;A with journalists. The main points from his opening statement are here. Drakeford, the Labour Welsh first minister, said that the UK government was “in a state of paralysis” over Covid. Asked why Boris Johnson was refusing to announce new restrictions, when the Welsh government was, Drakeford replied: I think that the UK government is in a state of paralysis about all of this. We see the reports of infighting within the cabinet. There are, as I would see it, sensible voices urging the prime minister to act to protect the NHS and to protect people’s lives as he has in previous waves. And there are others who I simply think take a different view of the balance of risk here and are prepared to allow those risks to run. I don’t believe it’s because they don’t see the data. They see the data but they’re not prepared to act on it. Drakeford dismissed claims that Wales was overreacting because the UK Health Security Agency has reportedly concluded that the Omicron variant causes less severe illness than Delta. (See 10.18am.) When this was put to him, he replied: It really is a misunderstanding of the position we are facing to think that, if Omicron is less severe than Delta, then that solves the problem. If Omicron was only half as severe as Delta, because of the extra speed at which it is transmitted, that would buy you 48 hours before you see those numbers, and numbers of people going to hospital, climb to the various steep levels that we have seen. Drakeford also suggested that the UKHSA findings might be more equivocal than some reports indicated. He went on: The detail that I have seen suggests that if you have already been infected by coronavirus, it may be that Omicron will not be as severe as the first time you were infected. If you’re getting it for the first time, there is no evidence that it is any less severe than any of the earlier variants. So I’m afraid, nice as it would be to think that that will solve the problem of January for us, just the sheer number of people who will fall ill, and the more nuanced information about severity, means that the protections that we have announced today are a necessary precaution. He said he expected Omicron cases to peak in January, implying the new restrictions could be reviewed soon after that. Asked how long they would be in place, he said they would be reviewed every week. He went on: The modelling that we see tells us that we have to expect a sharp rise of cases into January and then, compared to earlier variants, a relatively sharp decline in those numbers as well. He said claims that the Welsh government wanted to fine people for going into work were a “story without substance”. (See 12.42pm.) He said making going into work unnecessarily a finable offence would protect workers who were asked to do this by unscrupulous bosses, because it would give them a good reason to say no. And he said when this rule was previously in place, no fines were ever imposed. Tony Blair, the former Labour prime minister, has said that not introducing new Covid restrictions in England before Christmas is a “gamble”. But, in an interview with Times Radio, he implied it was a gamble that was justified, because he said the only intervention that would really work against Omicron was a full lockdown, and he said the public would not tolerate that. Asked if he would be introducing new rules before Christmas, he replied: No, but I think we’ve got to be very frank with people as to why not and I don’t think it’s really that there’s some great piece of data we’re waiting on. It’s really because the pain of going into a full lockdown, and with this variant that’s the only thing that would really work ... It is a gamble what the government’s doing, because if you look at this in purely public health terms - and I’ve spoken to many public health professionals in the last days - they’re pretty much of one view. If you were taking a purely precautionary view of this, you would impose further restrictions, probably quite draconian restrictions. But I think a) the public’s just been through too much, and b), you’ve got too many different categories of people for the blunt instrument of a lockdown really to work in the way that you want. Asked if he thought that meant a full lockdown would be impossible in the future too, he replied: I just think it’s incredibly difficult because of the massive collateral damage you’re going to do. Government advisers have decided against recommending that all five- to 11-year-olds be offered the Covid vaccine, with only the most vulnerable children expected to be eligible immediately, my colleagues Heather Stewart and Peter Walker report. Their full story is here. Q: Your approach is stricter than England’s. Will people in Wales feel hard done by? Drakeford says people in Wales will feel that they have a government doing everything it can to keep them safe. He says there is a real contrast with the “paralysis” displayed by the UK government. He says he heard Boris Johnson say this week the situation had never been more urgent. But Johnson also decided to take no action. Drakeford says that would not be acceptable to him. If the situation is urgent, the Welsh government will act, he says. Asked if he has seen evidence from the UK Health Security Agency suggesting the Omicron variant causes less severe illness than Delta (see 10.18am), Drakeford says the evidence he has seen is more equivocal. He says Omicron might be less severe for people who have had a previous infection. But for people who have not had Covid before, it is probably just as severe, he says. Here is the Welsh government’s summary of the new rules that will come into force from Boxing Day. And this is what it says about the new alert level two measures. A general requirement of 2m social distancing in all premises open to the public and workplaces, where reasonable. The rule of 6 will apply to gatherings in regulated premises, such as hospitality, cinemas and theatres. All licensed premises will need to take additional measures to protect customers and staff, including table service and collecting contact details. Face coverings will be required in hospitality settings at all times apart from when seated. Large events will not be allowed indoors or outdoors. The maximum number of people who can gather at an indoor event will be 30 and 50 outdoors. There will be an exception for team sports, up to 50 spectators will be able to gather, in addition to those taking part. There is also an exception for events involving children. Asked why the Welsh government is introducing a rule that could see people being fined for travelling to work when they could work from home, Drakeford says he wants to address this, because he thinks it has been misreported. He says the government is only reintroducing a rule that applied earlier in the pandemic. And he says no fines were issued when the original rule was in place. He says the regulations only include potential fines to protect workers. It means that, if an employer tells them to go into work when they think that is unnecessary, they can refuse on the grounds that they are being asked to break the law. UPDATE: Drakeford said: The rules that we are introducing are exactly the rules that we had earlier in the pandemic. They are not some new set of rules, they are designed to protect workers, not to penalise them. When these same rules were there earlier in the pandemic no fines are issued at all when these rules were previously in place. They are there to make sure that if a worker feels that an employer is unreasonably expecting them to be in the workplace when they could work from home, but they are able to point to the regulations and make it clear that they would be committing an offence were they to do so. It is to protect workers, not to penalise them. When these rules were in place earlier in the pandemic they worked very well. They will work very well, again, and I’m very grateful to the employer organisations, the CBI and to the Wales TUC for their help in making sure that correct message about what the regulations mean is being communicated in workplaces and to employees as well. Drakeford says the Welsh government has already set out some new rules for after Christmas. But it is going further, he says. He says a new alert level 2 will be introduced for hospitality businesses, cinemas, theatres and public gatherings. These will come into force at 6am on Boxing Day. This means 2-metre social distancing will apply, and the rule of six will apply in these venues and hospitality premises will have to offer table service, and collect contact details. The maximum number of people allowed to gather at an indoor event will be 30, he says. But 50 people will be allowed to meet outdoors. He says for weddings and funerals the number of people allowed will depend on whether the venue can manage social distancing. But guests will have to take lateral flow tests, he says. He says the Welsh cabinet has decided not to impose new rules stopping people mixing in each other’s homes or gardens. But he says guidance will be issued. But he says the government will reinstate a rule preventing people from holding large gatherings in their homes. He says these rules will have an impact on business. The government will allocate £120m to help firms affected, he says. Mark Drakeford is giving his briefing now. He says the number of confirmed Omicron cases has risen sharply in Wales. And overall Covid cases are rising too, he says. He says they expect this trend to “continue and accelerate”. Omicron has a doubling time of two days, which means by Boxing Day we can expect many thousands of new cases every day. He says the government has to prepare for the situation to worsen. And here are the latest daily figures for Covid cases and deaths in Wales. Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, is about to hold a briefing on Covid. Earlier he posted this on Twitter. This chart, from the Public Health Wales dashboard, sums up the Covid trends for cases and positivity (the proportion of tests turning out positive) in Wales. In an article for the i, Jane Merrick suggests that whether or not new restrictions get imposed in England after Christmas could depend on whether Covid hospital admissions in London pass the 400-per-day mark. She explains: Fresh restrictions in England after Christmas could be avoided if hospital admissions in London stay below 400 a day by the end of this week, i understands. Ministers and scientific advisers are watching closely the number of Covid patients admitted to hospitals in the capital, as it is the leading edge of the Omicron wave and will provide some of the first real-world data on whether the variant is more severe in the UK ... The latest figure for London admissions, from last Sunday 19 December is 245, and while the daily figure is rising, it has not increased as rapidly as Covid cases in London in the past two weeks. While the figure of 400 is not a hard and fast threshold, it will provide a good guide of whether the huge scale of Omicron cases, above 80,000 in England for the past week, will translate into hospital admissions and put severe pressure on the NHS throughout January. Merrick also says that, even if Boris Johnson does not impose new legal restrictions after Christmas, he could issue revised guidance as a means of discouraging social mixing. Here are two contrasting responses to the new self-isolation rules announced by the government overnight. In an assessment for the Science Media Centre, Dr Richard Tedder, member of the Clinical Virology Network, says that it is “probably correct” to say that someone who tests negative on two lateral flow tests is unlikely to be infectious and that requiring two LFTs is a “good compromise”. But Dr Deepti Gurdasani, an epidemiologist at Queen Mary University of London, has criticised the policy, and particularly how it is being promoted by ministers. Gurdasani also says the UK Health Security Agency advice for people who do exit self-isolation after seven days - that they should continue to be very cautious - is “not even remotely reassuring”. This is the advice she is referring to. UKHSA says: Those who leave self-isolation on or after day 7 are strongly advised to limit close contact with other people in crowded or poorly ventilated spaces, work from home and minimise contact with anyone who is at higher risk of severe illness if infected with Covid- 19. Gillian Keegan, the social care minister, said this morning that, under the new self-isolation rules, anyone who tested positive on Saturday last week (18th), or first got Covid symptoms then, might be able to get out of isolation in time for lunch on Christmas Day (this Saturday). (See 9.21am.) This has surprised some readers who point out that, under the rules, the quarantine timetable (10 days, or now seven days for some people), starts from the day after the day you first get symptoms, or test positive. So day one of quarantine would be Sunday 19, and day seven would be Christmas Day (Saturday 25). But, under the new rules, there is another change. The 10-day quarantine rule meant 10 days inclusive (up to 11.59pm on day 10). But under the lateral flow test release system, you are free on day seven as soon as you pass the second lateral flow test. This is how the UK Health Security Agency explains it: The new guidance is for people who have tested positive to take LFD tests on day 6 and day 7, where the day on which symptoms started or they had a positive test is defined as day 0. If, for instance, they take a test on the morning of day 6 and a second test 24 hours later on the morning of day 7 and both are negative – and provided they do not have a high temperature – they can leave self-isolation after the second negative test on day 7. So, for anyone doing both lateral flow tests early in the morning, the new seven-day quarantine would be more like six days. Demand for rail travel has plummeted since the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus strain, PA Media reports. PA says: Passenger numbers were at 53% of pre-pandemic levels on Monday, according to preliminary statistics from the Department for Transport. That is down from 61% a week earlier, and 68% on Monday 6 December. People in England have been advised to work from home since Monday 13 December, bringing the country in line with the rest of the UK. Rail travel has also been hit by hundreds of services being cancelled this week due to pandemic-related staff shortages. Bus use in Britain outside London was at 62% of pre-virus levels on Monday, down from 78% a week earlier. Road traffic has remained relatively stable in recent weeks. Here are some more lines from Gillian Keegan’s interviews this morning. Keegan, the social care minister, would not rule out the government imposing some form of “circuit breaker” lockdown in England after Christmas. The Sun today claims “New Year’s Eve looks doomed” because further restrictions are likely. Asked if there was any chance of avoiding a circuit-breaker lockdown, Keegan said: We are waiting for data on the severity, we’ll still have to wait to see where we land on that, but we can’t really say, you know. What we’ve said is up to Christmas we’re fine looking at the data, looking at the numbers we have at the moment, but, of course, we have to look at where this virus goes, where this variant goes, so we have to look at that data. I can’t tell you in advance of getting that data, but you should be cheerful because we’re doing a lot more than we could last year. We’re able to see our families. Keegan did not deny a report by Politico’s Alex Wickham saying UK Health Security Agency data suggests that the Omicron variant does produce a milder illness than Delta. This is implied by data from South Africa, but Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, said last week that because conditions in South Africa were so different, scientists could not be sure Omicron was intrinsically less severe until they had seen data from the UK. Asked about the Politico report about the UK data, Keegan said severity information was “one of the missing pieces of data that we’ve been waiting for”. She said ministers asked for this data every day. She went on: I’m looking forward to receiving it. But we haven’t received that officially yet. There’s a lot of uncertainty in the data and that’s one of the things we’ve been wanting to hear more on. She said that hospital doctors and care staff would be able to take advantage of the new rule saying self-isolation only has to last seven days, not 10, for people who test negative on a lateral flow test. She said hospital doctors were subject to strict testing regimes anyway, and she said care staff would keep doing lateral flow tests. But the new regime would “relieve some of the pressure” caused by staff absences in this sector, she claimed. The Department of Health and Social Care has this morning announced that it has signed contracts to buy another 4.25m courses of antivirals to protect patients from Covid. In a news release it says: The two new contracts are for 1.75m additional courses of Merck Sharp and Dohme’s (MSD) molnupiravir (Lagevrio®) and 2.5m additional courses of PF-07321332/ritonavir (Paxlovid™) from Pfizer, which will be available from early next year and are both expected to be effective against Omicron. The 4.25m courses are in addition to the procurement of 480,000 courses of molnupiravir and 250,000 courses of PF-07321332/ritonavir announced in October this year ... Molnupiravir has shown in clinical trials to reduce the risk of hospitalisation or death for at-risk, non-hospitalised adults with mild to moderate Covid-19 by 30%. PF-07321332/ritonavir reduced the relative risk of Covid-19-associated hospitalisation or death by 89% in those who received treatment within three days of symptoms appearing. DHSC is also encourage people over 50, or with an underlying health condition, who test positive for Covid to take part in a study to test the impact of these drugs. You can sign up here. Rail travellers have been advised to check services before they travel over Christmas because staff illness is causing cancellations. Seb Gordon, director of external communications at the Rail Delivery Group, told the Today programme this morning: We think that, at the moment, that in the Christmas week, when people are trying to get away - fewer people than in a normal year but lots of people still trying to get away - we think it’s important to prioritise running as many trains as we can even if that means there’s a few more of those frustrating short-notice cancellations. But obviously, as we get further into this wave of the pandemic - we hope will not materialise in the way that people are anticipating - it may be that we decide actually we need to prepare for a lower level of staffing over a longer period of time and we will reduce the timetable. Obviously the government’s announcement today of the reduced isolation period is going to really help. Good morning. In autumn last year Boris Johnson briefly started talking about how mass testing would be the “moonshot” that would provide a path back to normality. At a news conference he said this might help bring life “much closer to normal before Christmas” and a leaked document talked about mass testing delivering 6m tests per day. At the time this was seen as one of the wilder examples of Johnson’s boosterism, and some of his claims were well off the mark. (At the time Johnson was talking about avoiding a second lockdown; in the event, there were at least two more to come.) But more than a year on some aspects of this vision have materialised. The government is now sending out 900,000 lateral flow kits (with seven tests per kit) per day. They are being very widely used. And last night the government announced that people who test negative with a LFT can reduce their Covid self-isolation period from 10 days to seven. My colleague Andrew Gregory has the details here. Gillian Keegan, the social care minister, has been giving interviews this morning and she told Times Radio that the new rules would enable some people who would have been isolating on Christmas Day under the old system to spend it with loved ones instead. She explained: If you work it out, if you were confirmed as positive or first showed symptoms on Saturday, the 18th and now - assuming, you get a negative lateral flow test on day six and day seven - you’ll be able to enjoy your Christmas lunch. I will post more from her interviews shortly. Keegan had little to say one the key question for many people: will further restriction be imposed in England after Christmas? In UK terms, England is an outlier because Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have all either announced tighter Covid rules for the post-Christmas period, or are set to do so. We will be hearing more about what is happening in Wales and Northern Ireland today. Here is the agenda. 9.30am: The Department for Transport publishes weekly transport usage figures. 11am: The Northern Ireland executive is expected to meet to consider new Covid restrictions. Afterwards Paul Givan, the first minister, and Michelle O’Neill, the deputy first minister, are expected to hold a news conference. 12.15pm: Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, holds news conference to announce new Covid restrictions. 1.30pm: Drakeford makes a virtual statement to the Senedd about the new Covid rules for Wales. I will be mostly covering UK Covid developments here, but for global developments, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comAn online gambling firm that contacted older people and persuaded them to bet tens of thousands of pounds on lottery results is to escape sanctions, despite a damning regulatory investigation into its practices. IMME Ltd, which is based in the Isle of Man and trades as Lotteries.com and The Lottery Centre, committed extensive breaches of its gambling licence, according to the Gambling Commission. The firm’s sales agents, who used fake names on the phone, “disproportionately” targeted older people, it said, with 75% of customers aged 60 to 79 and 20% 80 or older. One customer, who was 100 when the commission began its review, bet £23,839 in just five months without IMME inquiring about his source of funds. The company knew two of its top depositors were retired postal workers but allowed one to bet £20,345 in five months and the other £16,207 in six months. According to the report, staff members appeared to have no access to customers’ records, meaning they could not carry out responsible gambling checks. The company held no records of its interactions with a 78-year-old customer who spent £63,951 in just over three months. The Gambling Commission’s review also found multiple failings in the way the company marketed its services. The Lotteries.com website is no longer active in the UK but an archived version displays logos for national lotteries around the world and refers to “record-breaking jackpots”. However, the company was not in fact offering the chance to enter lotteries, only the opportunity to bet on their outcome. This was not made clear, the review found. In addition, the website claimed that when customers were betting on a lottery, they were also contributing to underlying good causes. This was not the case. IMME drummed up business by repeatedly telephoning older people, the review found. One woman in her 90s was called several times a week, while another was called every 30-40 minutes until the phone was answered. IMME does not have a website and its two main brands are no longer accessible from the UK. Documents filed with the Isle of Man companies registry in September 2020 name Gloria Jean Evans, a Canadian, as its director, with an address in the island’s capital, Douglas. Its finance director was named as Paul Michael Whelan, an Irish national based in Hertfordshire. Both Evans and Whelan have surrendered personal licences to run a gambling business, according to Gambling Commission records. A spokesperson for IMME said the regulator had not acknowledged that many of the failings were “legacy issues” that had been addressed, including via investment in compliance. “IMME ensures that every player is telephoned as soon as they spend £160 and every player is assigned a customer care agent who monitored their play,” it said. “Additionally, all players over 70 years of age received a social interaction call after every sale regardless of size.” The company said it would return any customer funds it still held and had run an “extensive” effort to do so since September. It added that it had decided to withdraw from licensed gambling in the UK. IMME’s licence to operate was suspended in March 2020 and the Gambling Commission said it would have been revoked had the company not surrendered it, adding that the company had failed to cooperate with the investigation. Because IMME and its senior staff surrendered their licences, the Gambling Commission can take no further action against them. Matt Zarb-Cousin, the director of campaign group Clean Up Gambling, said the case underlined the regulator’s lack of resources, particularly since it took on responsibility for monitoring offshore-owned entities in 2014. “Wholly inadequate due diligence around that time has left the regulator playing catchup, while being under-resourced,” he said. “It should have the capacity to review every single licensee to ensure these practices are not repeated.” A review of gambling regulation will consider a possible significant increase in funding for the commission. Helen Venn, the executive director of the Gambling Commission, said: “There is no room in Britain’s gambling industry for operators who fail in the way IMME have.” The regulator said the company was still running a lottery ticket syndicate business, which it does not require a Gambling Commission licence to do.Greek authorities have said dozens of refugees are believed dead after a boat carrying as many as 50 people, according to one witness, sank off the island of Folegandros, in the second major loss of life in the Mediterranean within days. Almost 24 hours after the rescue operation was launched late on Tuesday, coastguard officials said it was unlikely survivors would be found. “Efforts will continue but in waters that are very cold and very deep the chances of finding anyone [alive] are decreasing by the hour,” said Nikos Kokkalas, the Hellenic coastguard’s spokesperson. “Our fear is that most simply didn’t manage to get off the boat and would have sunk with it to the bottom of the ocean.” By late on Wednesday rescuers had found the body of only one man, he said. The incident comes less than five days after UN migration officials said 164 people had drowned off the coast of Libya, now the dominant transit point for people fleeing war and poverty in Africa and the Middle East. Attempted crossings from the anarchic oil-rich country have surged in recent months amid an unprecedented crackdown on refugees in Tripoli, its capital. In two separate shipwrecks on Friday and Saturday rescuers retrieved the corpses of those who had drowned when wooden boats heading from Libya to Italy capsized in rough seas. The loss of life brought the death toll of those using the central Mediterranean route to about 1,500 since the start of the year, according to the International Organization for Migration. A growing number of migrant boats are also heading to Italy, via Greek territorial waters from Turkey, with almost 12,000 sailings recorded this year. “What we are seeing with ever greater intensity is that people are attempting such journeys in all seasons,” said Kokkalas. “It’s no longer a seasonal phenomenon that happens only in the spring and summer.” Greece’s shipping ministry said a naval frigate, four coastguard vessels, three Super Puma helicopters, a C-130 military transport plane, three passing ships and three private craft had participated in Wednesday’s search and rescue operation. All were seconded after the boat sank at about 8pm on Tuesday. Hellenic air force helicopters were expected to continue scouring the area throughout the night. Earlier, authorities found 12 people who had managed to escape in an inflatable dinghy that had been tethered to the ill-fated vessel. The survivors, who included a woman and four adolescents, were predominantly from Iraq although three Syrians and two Egyptians were also among them, according to officials. One survivor told the Greek coastguard that the boat had begun taking in water after running into engine trouble and that as many as 50 people could have been onboard. Giorgos Skordilis, a shipping ministry official, said witnesses described the boat sinking within minutes. “It was obviously totally unseaworthy and began to sink quickly,” he said. “From what we understand it was packed solid with people.” Although arrivals have dropped dramatically with the militarisation of its land and sea frontier – and, say rights groups, persistent “pushbacks” of boats carrying asylum seekers – Greece remains an initial destination for many attempting to enter the EU. On a regional tour earlier this month, Pope Francis described the Mediterranean as a “cemetery without tombstones” and castigated Europe for hardening its border policies with the sole aim of keeping asylum seekers out. “These [shipwrecks] are a strong reminder that people continue to risk their lives taking desperate journeys in search of safety,” said Stella Nanou, the Athens spokesperson for the United Nations refugee agency. “They underscore the need for more regular pathways to be created. If there were legal and safe routes, those seeking refuge would have a choice.” Currently, she said, people were faced with “the impossible dilemma” of having to decide whether to risk their lives by remaining in their home countries or embark on dangerous voyages with “the small chance” of making it to Europe. NGOs have increasingly voiced alarm at the intensity of the deterrence policies adopted at the EU external borders. In recent months Greece has erected a 25 mile-long (40km) steel wall along the land frontier it shares with Turkey and deployed sound cannon capable of firing bursts of deafening noise as part of a concerted EU strategy to deter migrants.Russia claims it has agreed to begin talks with the US early next year to discuss Moscow’s demands for “security guarantees” in Europe, including a ban on Ukraine’s entrance into the Nato military alliance. If confirmed, the talks would begin a contentious effort to avert a Russian offensive in Ukraine this winter, as Kyiv and eastern European governments have demanded not to be left out of any deal with Moscow that affects their interests as well. Moscow has moved tanks and artillery towards the border with Ukraine in an apparent invasion threat and issued a contentious list of security guarantees in a draft treaty with Nato that its leadership has called unacceptable. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, announced the talks during an interview with the RT television station on Wednesday, where he said negotiations would start “at the very beginning of next year”. “The first round will be held in the form of a bilateral contact between our and US negotiators, who have already been named and are acceptable for both sides,” Lavrov told the broadcaster, which is backed by the Russian state. The exact agenda and scope of the talks has not been made public and the Kremlin may be keen to exaggerate its diplomatic efforts as it positions itself for a potential attack against Ukraine. The White House pointed to a Monday statement from Emily Horne, a spokesperson for the national security council, regarding a call between national security adviser Jake Sullivan and Yuri Ushakov, foreign policy adviser to Putin. Sullivan “indicated US readiness to engage in diplomacy through multiple channels, including bilateral engagement, the Nato-Russia Council, and the OSCE,” Horne said. “He made clear that any dialogue must be based on reciprocity and address our concerns about Russia’s actions, and take place in full coordination with our European allies and partners. “He also noted that substantive progress can only occur in an environment of de-escalation rather than escalation.” Asked about the call, Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, told reporters: “That is consistent with our ongoing outreach and engagement with the Russians, with the Ukrainians, with the Europeans as well that happened through the course of last week.” Psaki added on Wednesday: “There is an open line of discussion and engagement that is happening and that we expect to continue, we hope to continue.” In his interview Lavrov said: “We do not want war. We do not need conflicts and, hopefully, everyone else does not view conflicts as a desirable course of action.” He also said similar talks would be held with Nato and with the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. Details of those talks were also not given. A Kremlin spokesperson also welcomed the talks, telling reporters: “The very fact that such preparedness [for talks] has been reaffirmed is good as it is.” He warned that Russia was wary of the discussions being dragged out and was not interested in participating in “a marathon”. Vladimir Putin had appeared frustrated on Tuesday as he railed against Nato expansion since the fall of the Soviet Union, telling his top military commanders that growing western influence in Ukraine left Russia “nowhere further to retreat to” and that he would not stand by and “watch idly”. Last week, Russia released a draft of a potential treaty with Nato that demanded the military alliance remove all troops and infrastructure installed from European countries that joined the alliance after 1997. That includes countries that were part of the Soviet Union or the Warsaw pact, whose officials say the Russian proposals undermine their sovereignty and security. Nato officials said Jens Stoltenberg, the organisation’s secretary general, had signalled on Tuesday that the military alliance would call for a meeting of the Nato-Russia council early next year, and that any talks with Moscow would have to involve all European members of the alliance and Ukraine. Nato pointed to remarks made by Stoltenberg in a press conference with Romania’s prime minister on Tuesday in which he had said: “Any dialogue with Russia needs to be based on the core principles of European security and to address Nato’s concerns about Russia’s actions. And it needs to take place in consultation with Nato’s European partners, including with Ukraine.” A Nato official said talks would have to be conducted on the basis of reciprocity and must address Nato concerns about the Russian military buildup and other actions, in line with a joint statement from the alliance’s North Atlantic Council agreed last week.Book now Athletes are some of the most fascinating people in the world. They understand what creates a winning performance by focusing squarely on high-performance behaviours of discipline, positive mindset and resilience. Despite this, many athletes experience countless knockbacks and are still able to find the mental strength to come back stronger to achieve their goals. Replace the word ‘athletes’ at the beginning of the previous paragraph with your job title or even your name and you would be setting intentions for the outcomes that you can achieve in this masterclass. Led by former athlete Michelle Moore, you will learn how to tap into the sports mindset to unlock and define your self-leadership potential and define your version of success to live with more intention, power and focus. Michelle will demonstrate how you can gain greater clarity on your values while harnessing your personal identity, and through practical mindset strategies you will learn how to embody a sports mindset for increased productivity - from how to manage fear, to the power of visualisation. This workshop includes key insights and techniques for transforming your response to failure, bolstering your resilience and bouncing back from hardship. The learnings from this masterclass will chart how we can all become more conscious leaders of ourselves, and how by increasing our levels of self-awareness we can identify the ways in which we can take a lead from athletes and find ways to challenge the status quo. This course is for … Those looking to strengthen their self-leadership skills to take responsibility for their actions and success Anyone with a desire to improve their personal impact, face their fears, and build a resilient mindset in their personal and professional lives Course content Self-leadership and success Sports mindset techniques to boost productivity Practical strategies for overcoming failure How to effectively challenge inequality Tutor profile Michelle Moore is an award-winning leadership coach, author, speaker and educator, who was voted as one of the UK’s 50 Most Influential Women in Sport. For the past 20 years she has been working in senior leadership roles across sport, government and education, and her pioneering work has transformed the lives of professionals, young people, athletes and the culture of many organisations. She is the recipient of the 2016 UK Precious Award as an Outstanding Woman in Sport, a Football Black List award, and a national Change Maker award. Michelle speaks, moderates and hosts events and keynotes for organisations including the University of Cambridge, the NBA and UNICEF UK. She has chaired events at the United Nations and presented to the House of Lords. Michelle also makes regular appearances on mainstream media including BBC Radio 4, Channel 4 and BBC World Service, and she has been featured in the Guardian, the Daily Telegraph, the Times and the Independent. Her book, Real Wins, was published in November 2021 by Hachette UK. Details Book now Date: Tuesday 5 April 2022 Times: 6.30pm-9pm BST Price £49 (plus £2.48 booking fee) or £64.50 (plus £3.10 booking fee) with a copy of Real Wins This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm BST | 7.30pm CEST | 10.30am PDT | 1.30pm EDT Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.The US has eased its restrictions on mainstream humanitarian aid reaching famine-stricken Afghanistan and backed a UN security council resolution exempting most aid from the threat of sanctions. The US Treasury followed up the UN resolution by broadening the definition of permitted humanitarian assistance to include education – including salary payments to teachers – and to permit a broader use of US funds received by aid organisations working inside Afghanistan. The US has been trying to use aid as a lever to force the Taliban, who seized power in August, not to suppress women’s rights, including access to education. But aid groups said in seeking to pressure the Taliban, the US was at risk of driving ordinary Afghans towards starvation. Aid agencies have for months complained the continued unqualified US sanctions on Taliban leaders and entities meant it was impossible to provide aid into Taliban-run Afghanistan through normal banking channels, but the US-backed UN resolution clarified that aid to relieve humanitarian needs would not need to be treated as money directed to the Taliban. The resolution’s careful wording has been the subject of lengthy negotiations in New York, and was in part resolved by an agreement that the mechanism will be reviewed after a year, and include tight reporting requirements. The resolution states humanitarian assistance and other activities that support basic human needs in Afghanistan are not in violation of sanctions but aid agencies are strongly advised to use reasonable efforts to minimise any benefits accruing to the sanctioned entities. It remains to be seen how the US Treasury will police the less stringent regime and how quickly money in the World Bank and UN trust fund set aside for Afghanistan can be released. The US is unlikely to release up to $9bn (£6.7bn) in frozen Afghan assets since this would be taken by the Taliban. Efforts by countries such as Qatar to persuade the Taliban to relax the ban on women working and girls going to school have been largely fruitless. Martin Griffiths, the UN under-secretary general for humanitarian affairs, welcomed the resolution, saying: “This milestone decision will enable urgently needed humanitarian action to save lives and livelihoods in Afghanistan. It is evidence of how seriously member states take the shocking levels of need and suffering in the country. “This humanitarian exception will allow organisations to implement the work we have planned, and it will give legal assurances to the financial institutions and commercial actors we rely on to engage with humanitarian operators. The road ahead in Afghanistan is neither easy nor straightforward.” In welcoming the resolution, the US highlighted the regular reporting requirements by the UN and the need for aid agencies to show due diligence that aid was not being diverted to those subject to sanctions. But the US also gave a broad definition of permitted aid including “shelter and settlement assistance, food security, education, livelihoods support, energy, water, sanitation, health including Covid-19-related assistance, nutrition, and hygiene”. Britain’s UN envoy, Barbara Woodward, said: “This resolution will help save lives, by ensuring that the 1988 sanctions regime (pdf) poses no obstacle to the provision of humanitarian assistance and other activities that support basic human needs in Afghanistan. This directly responds to what the humanitarian community told us they needed”. David Miliband, the president of the International Rescue Committee, said: “The humanitarian exception to sanctions on the Taliban is a critical step that will support humanitarian actors like the IRC to scale up and deliver lifesaving services to Afghans in need without fearing legal repercussions. This couldn’t come soon enough as 9 million people in Afghanistan are marching toward famine and Afghan families are bracing for an extremely tough winter.” He added: “The suspension of foreign development aid flows to Afghanistan– which previously propped up 75% of all government spending – has wiped out the government’s ability to pay public servants and deliver desperately needed public services, including basic healthcare, to millions of Afghans.The Boxing Day Test is a chance for England’s batters to show whether instructions about discipline outside off stump have permeated following a forthright team meeting that saw them forced to rewatch their dismissals during the 275-run defeat in Adelaide. After going 2-0 down in the Ashes series Joe Root used his post-match press conference to criticise the lengths bowled by his seam attack. However the Guardian understands it was the batting unit that drew much of the ire during a post-match debrief in which the usually mild-mannered head coach, Chris Silverwood, was angered. In scenes that sound mildly reminiscent of Australia’s response to their shock defeat at Headingley during the 2019 Ashes series – when Justin Langer replayed in full the entire fourth day meltdown suffered at the hands of Ben Stokes – Silverwood put 14 of the 20 English wickets to fall on the TV screen in the dressing room and highlighted failures to leave balls in the channel that didn’t need playing at. Stokes, the vice-captain, is said to have been a strong voice during these intense discussions, while Jos Buttler, who followed a first-innings edge to slip for a duck with a 207-ball rearguard on the final day, also spoke up to correct one individual who suggested the focus should be on the first 20 balls each batter faces in Australia. Buttler instead stressed the need for this discipline to be the focus throughout, citing the example of Marnus Labuschagne, who on Wednesday displaced Root at the top of the ICC Test batting rankings, after a first innings 103 from 305 balls that saw 83 deliveries left alone. Overall Australia’s batters left around a third of the deliveries they faced against the new ball – ie the first 30 overs – while for England this figure dropped to a quarter, despite both attacks operating similar lines and lengths. The frank nature of this all-in debrief is understood to have surprised a number of players present. But the response is said to have been positive, with England’s faltering top seven accepting a need to address a collective urge to feel bat on ball after eight of their 14 wickets fell to catches between wicketkeeper and gully off the seamers. Mark Wood, the fast bowler who was rested in Adelaide despite impressing at the Gabba, said: “We obviously review the game, things we could do better, things we’ve done well. But this was more a kick up the bum to say look we are 2-0 down now, the same mistakes keep on happening. It was a good discussion. “It could go one of two ways, but people having those brutally honest conversations and accepting that within the group is something I feel like the team are open to and respect – the fact we can speak to each other like that. I think we probably needed it.” Root’s public appraisal of the bowlers dropping too short, though not supported by the Hawk-Eye data and a source of criticism from former Australia captain Ricky Ponting regarding leadership, risked creating a rift given the second Test was ultimately lost during a collapse of eight for 86 in 38.3 overs on the third day. But Wood, set to return for the must-win third Test at the MCG, said: “If I’m brutally honest, it doesn’t feel in the dressing room that it’s a batters v bowlers thing, with all the batters in one corner giving snidey talk about the bowlers and all the bowlers in the other corner talking about the batters. It’s not like that. “I think as a bowling group we can always get better as well and that’s something we’re constantly reviewing and looking at. With the batting, as we discussed in the meeting, these heavy collapses that we keep having are what are costing us Test matches. “If you have a bad session or you lose a couple of wickets, that’s not ideal but fair enough. If we’re losing huge chunks of the game [to collapses], then that’s what is knocking us back. We’re all in it together. But we’re coming under a bit of fire at the minute for batting and bowling because we are getting soundly beaten.” Wood’s absence from the second Test represented a contentious decision from the England team management at 1-0 down, the 31-year-old having sent down 25 overs of searing pace at the Gabba and hurried up Steve Smith before his dismissal for only 12. Asked if he accepted the call, Wood replied: “I was ready to go if required, but the decision was made that I would be left out. I accept that. We’re all part of a team here that’s trying to win the Ashes. If that was the best decision for the team, that was fine.” On the prospect of a return in front of a projected crowd of 70,000 at the MCG, Wood added: “It’s a huge occasion. If I get selected, that’s something I can tell my son one day that I got up in front of that many people in a massive sporting occasion with everything on the line. I’ll give everything I’ve got, 100%, charging in, to try to get us the right result to get us back in the Ashes.”They have become an integral part of millions of people’s lives: lateral flow tests (LFTs) are taken daily by some for work or socialising, while new guidance means that anyone with Covid will be allowed to finish their isolation period after seven days rather than 10 if they have two negative results. Here’s all you need to know about the rapid tests, from what experts have to say on their reliability to why you may repeatedly test positive many days after an initial Covid infection. How do LFTs work and how reliable are they, including for Omicron? LFTs identify specific viral proteins that are present inside your nose when coronavirus is infecting you. If you have come into contact with an infected person, it could take a few days for a positive result to show up. “Please continue to test on a daily basis,” urges Irene Petersen, professor of epidemiology and health informatics at University College London. The reliability of LFTs depends in part on whether you follow the instructions carefully, which is why studies give varying estimates of their efficacy, from 40% to 90%. A recent paper demonstrated that LFTs, when used correctly, are likely to have a sensitivity above 80% and in many cases above 90%. After carrying out tests, the UK Health Security Agency said LFTs have a “comparable sensitivity” for Omicron as for other Covid variants such as Delta. The main benefit of LFTs is they can be carried out quickly and easily at home, with a result in under 30 minutes, and that they don’t need to be sent to a lab. However, the gold standard remains the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, which detects viral load and infectiousness at lower levels, including before and after the time range in which they are picked up by LFTs. How long before meeting family and friends should you take one? You could become infectious after you take the test, which is why scientists recommend taking it as close to your social plans as possible, ideally within an hour. “Omicron replicates very fast, so you may become very infectious within hours,” says Petersen. If you took one early in the morning and are going out in the evening, you might take another, provided there has been a gap of six to 12 hours. However, it’s worth bearing in mind that there is a test shortage at the moment, and they are urgently required for key workers, so use them strategically. Petersen emphasises that “no test offers 100% accuracy, so please consider the risk of getting severe illness among your friends and family”. Does the thickness of the line on an LFT tell you how infectious you are? Double lines appearing on an LFT – however faint – mean you have detectable virus in your nose and are therefore infectious. Azeem Majid, a professor of primary care and public health at Imperial College London, notes that the test is “not designed to estimate how infectious you may be”. However, David Matthews, a professor of virology at the University of Bristol, says that a thicker line could mean – in theory at least – there is more N protein. “That should mean more virus and therefore more infectivity in principle, but no one has tested that idea,” he says. If you are testing positive on an LFT at the end of the isolation period, are you still infectious and do you still need to isolate? NHS rules state that if you test positive your isolation period begins on the day that your symptoms developed or the day that you took the test if you don’t have symptoms, and ends 10 days later. You can cut this isolation period down to seven days if you receive negative LFTs on days six and seven, 24 hours apart. The new guidance applies to everyone who has tested positive, regardless of vaccination status. (A different rule applies if you are an unvaccinated person who has been in close contact with someone who has tested positive: you must self-isolate for 10 days.) Majid says there is no need to keep on testing repeatedly if you have had a positive LFT result confirmed by a PCR test. “Test results can sometimes remain positive for a period after your isolation ends, but this does not necessarily mean you are still infectious.” Petersen agrees that people are “unlikely” to remain infectious, though it is not impossible. It’s more likely that “there are some LFTs which seem to be able to detect a very small amount of viral protein for a long time”, she says. Matthews suggests getting a PCR test, and if that is also positive you could seek additional medical advice, as, although unlikely, in a very small number of cases it may mean you have an underlying medical condition. How does the seven-day isolation rule square with earlier guidance advising against taking LFTs for 90 days after a positive PCR test unless you exhibit new symptoms? This original guidance reflects the low rate of reinfection during this window, meaning false positives could force people to unnecessarily self-isolate. However, complete data is not yet available for Omicron reinfection rates, so it could change. Matthews says the new guidance does not negate the earlier advice. Instead, “What they are saying now is that if you are LFT-negative on two days then you are very likely no longer contagious and can go to work”. There is some suggestion that Omicron is taking an especially long time to show up on LFTs. What does this mean for how people should interpret LFTs? Petersen says there are two probable reasons for this. First, it’s likely that vaccinated people or those with immunity from prior infection have symptoms even before they become infectious, as these are immune responses. Second, it is possible – though uncertain – that transmission with Omicron occurs at lower viral loads. “If the latter is the case, it is important that people start to isolate as soon as they have any symptoms that suggest they may have Covid, even if the LFT is negative,” she says. If you’ve tested positive, including for Omicron, does that mean you won’t get Covid again any time soon? Reinfections can occur after a previous Covid-19 infection. This is especially common with Omicron, which according to a recent Imperial College London report is more than five times more likely to cause reinfection than the Delta variant. These reinfections are most likely to have been in those who were previously infected with an earlier variant, such as Delta or Alpha. This means you should continue to be careful, but it isn’t cause for excessive concern. Matthews says that any reinfection will “probably be a mild cold” as you will have built up “a bigger and better army of ‘memory’ T and B cells”, as long as you are otherwise healthy. • This article was amended on 5 January 2022. Self-isolation for those who test positive but are asymptomatic begins from the day they take the test, not the day they receive a positive result as stated in an earlier version.The Kremlin has denied using Russia’s gas resources to turn the screw on Europe, after gas in a pipeline to Germany switched direction to flow eastwards for a second day, keeping prices near record highs as midwinter approaches. Flows through the Yamal-Europe pipeline to Germany declined over the weekend before stopping on Tuesday and reversing, data from the network operator Gascade showed. Gazprom, the Russian state gas firm, said the supply was flowing to Russia instead because of cold weather and high demand there. The supply squeeze came as Mario Draghi, the Italian prime minister, called for urgent action to counter rocketing fuel costs. He said companies profiting from the crisis should contribute to efforts to curb higher bills for households and businesses. “There are big producers and sellers of energy that are having fantastic profits. They will need to participate to support the economy, they too need to help families,” Draghi said in Rome. The front-month wholesale Dutch gas price, the benchmark for European prices, rose more than 20% on Tuesday to close at a record high of €181 per megawatt hour (MWh). The equivalent British gas contract also jumped by about 20% on Tuesday, to hit a new peak at £4.51 per therm, up from around 51p a year ago. Prices dipped on Wednesday but remained high. The price of gas for delivery in Europe next month fell 3% to €175 per MWh, and the British front-month contract eased to £4.17 per therm. Some analysts and European politicians have suggested Moscow is deliberately suppressing gas deliveries to shore up its political position amid tensions over Ukraine and delays in European certification of another pipeline, Nord Stream 2. The Kremlin denied using such tactics. “There is absolutely no connection [to Nord Stream 2], this is a purely commercial situation,” a spokesperson said. The German power suppliers RWE and Uniper, both among the largest customers of Gazprom, said the state firm was meeting its delivery obligations. Gazprom has previously said it is meeting all long-term contracts with its European customers The pipeline reversal has added to other pressures that have kept gas prices high for much of 2021, with knock-on effects that have included a raft of UK energy suppliers going bust. In a sign of growing anxiety about the impact of soaring gas and electricity costs, Bulgaria’s government approved on Wednesday an $867m scheme to help businesses through the winter. The measures will include compensation for power distribution companies and heating utilities to try to head off a leap in household energy bills. Underlying factors fuelling the fresh spikes in gas prices include colder weather and strong power station demand, with some French nuclear plants closed to address safety concerns. Also, wind speeds have been slower than usual in Europe, meaning turbines have generated less electricity than hoped for. Ships carrying liquefied natural gas bound for Asia have been turning around to supply European consumers willing to pay a large premium amid price spikes, the Financial Times reported this week.The busy streets of central London are normally no place for the faint-hearted in the run-up to Christmas. Shoppers jostle with increasing urgency to secure last-minute gifts while revellers spill out from bars and restaurants to celebrate their final days in the office. But this is far from a normal Christmas. Shoppers and tourists have stayed away from the capital in large numbers, data – and haunting pictures – reveal. Images of near-empty streets in citiessuch as Manchester and Edinburgh tell a tale of shoppers and tourists alike staying away from city centres over fears about the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant and a mass return to working from home. Andrew Lloyd Webber has closed Cinderella until next year, and productions of Hamilton and The Lion King have been pulled. Data from the retail intelligence firm Springboard on Wednesday showed a 17.3% drop in footfall in central London compared with the same day last week, and regional cities have recorded a 3.4% drop. A central London “back-to-office benchmark”, which measures only areas in close proximity to offices, shows footfall down 21.8%. “In a week where you would have normally expected more people, figures are going down,” said Springboard’s insight director, Diane Wehrle. “People are heeding plan B and staying away from the office. Restaurants are closing early. London isn’t deserted exactly, but it is certainly a lot quieter than usual.” Things are likely to be worse for hospitality businesses than for shops, she said. Shops potentially experience a higher “conversion rate” with people ready to spend money saved during lockdowns rather than just browse. “This could definitely make it even worse for cafes and pubs, as visitors who were intending to go into high streets to eat and drink may well choose to do that elsewhere.” Footfall in London’s West End was down 27% on pre-pandemic levels on Tuesday, sparking further criticism that the chancellor is not doing enough to help hospitality. Rishi Sunak announced a £1bn bailout package on Tuesday consisting of business grants and help with sick pay, but he ruled out bringing back furlough for the hardest hit firms. Michael Kill, the head of the Night Time Industries Association, said the sector was facing its biggest challenge since the start of the pandemic but was not getting the help it desperately needed. “We’re being marshalled by a government which has no real understanding of proportionate support or the real cost implications, or even the sensitivities around the vital part the festive period plays in the survival of our sector,” he said. Pictures of closed restaurants and quiet shops in large city centres are, however, only part of the story. Local high streets have not been hit as hard. Springboard data shows that footfall is up 0.1% in UK market towns, and outdoor retail parks with high street stores recorded a rise of 22.6% on the same day last week. “There are parts of central London that feel like a ghost town,” said Patrick O’Brien, the UK research director at GlobalData Retail. “Closer to home it’s a different picture, but that is only relative to the worse picture in city centres. While for many retailers this might be a better Christmas than last year, it’s not a useful comparison. This will still be a very difficult Christmas for many.” Darker clouds were likely to be on the horizon for shops, he said: “The truth is, the longer restrictions – either voluntary or imposed – last, the more ingrained consumer behaviour such as the move online becomes.” In Hertford, a market town where many workers normally commute to London, a lot of people have been staying closer to home and supporting local businesses, said Muslum Kurnaz, the manager of Hertford Organic. “Business is really picking up this week. I think a lot of people don’t want to go into big supermarkets,” he said. “Lots of people work in London here, but I think they want to support local businesses this year. Chocolate sales have really gone up.” Will Walton and his wife Yellie, who own Love Flowers and The Shop in the town, said more customers from outer London suburbs had decided to drive north rather than take the tube into town. He also feels shoppers are ready to spend money despite an increase in the wholesale cost of flowers. A recent Christmas flower order from a Premier League footballer – he won’t say which one - resulted in a £3,500 sale. “We’ve met our targets for Christmas this year, so we’re just really happy about that,” he said. “Our regulars are really fantastic and we’re just trying to make sure they get everything they need. We can only do our best.” If there was a silver lining for retailers from the coronavirus pandemic, it could be found on smaller high streets and out-of-town retail parks, said Wehrle. “I hesitate to say there is an upside, but if there is upside, it is that it might actually have saved some high streets who were facing really challenging times.”Since her appointment as foreign secretary in September, Liz Truss has said little about the European Union. Her speeches exalt the UK as the broker of a global “network of liberty”, listing alliances with scarcely any reference to the club of democracies on Britain’s continental doorstep. That omission partly reflects the ideological temper of the Conservative party, to which Ms Truss is highly sensitised. It also expressed divisions of labour in the cabinet when David Frost was in charge of post-Brexit negotiations with Brussels. But since Lord Frost’s resignation, the European portfolio has returned to the Foreign Office. Silence on the subject is no longer an option for the secretary of state. Her first intervention has been to restate Britain’s readiness to trigger article 16 of the withdrawal agreement, suspending its operation, if grievances regarding the Northern Ireland protocol are not satisfied. The terms demanded by Lord Frost for a renegotiation still stand. The pugnacious tone disappointed those who had hoped that a change in personnel indicated a new willingness to compromise. That prospect is not entirely lost. Ms Truss had to signal continuity in the negotiating position. Anything else would have caused a commotion on the Tory benches and destabilised an already wobbly government. That does not rule out a pragmatic shift in the coming months. The foreign secretary will not want Brexit to consume all of her political bandwidth, and the most efficient way to avoid that is to take her finger off the article 16 trigger. There are two obstacles. One is Ms Truss’s ambition, scarcely veiled, to succeed Boris Johnson in Downing Street. That will involve pandering to Europhobic sentiment among Tory grassroots and backbench MPs, at the expense of sound diplomacy. The second is the disparate way that Brexit scatters its consequences across Whitehall, beyond the institutional reach of the Foreign Office. At the strategic level, that is the correct base for the development of European relations, but Mr Johnson’s Brexit was drafted in defiance of strategic thinking. He has explicitly ruled Britain out of institutionalised foreign policy cooperation with Brussels. Disentangling Britain from EU membership has huge ongoing consequences for border management, economic policy, trade, relations between Westminster government and the devolved administrations. There are problems yet to be resolved around the replacement of lost EU subsidies for agriculture and poorer regions. Fisheries will be a constant headache. Lord Frost’s portfolio also included questions of regulatory reform, exploring supposed benefits of Brexit by scrubbing the residue of Brussels form the statute book. Taken in the round, few cabinet ministers are unaffected, and it is unclear whether Ms Truss has the capacity or the will to coordinate the process. Much of the day-to-day engagement with Brussels will fall to her ministerial deputy, Chris Heaton-Harris, a hardliner who formerly chaired the perennially dissatisfied European Research Group of MPs. Even with an application of pragmatic will, the structural impediments to a more sensible European policy are great. The underlying reason is the longstanding failure in government to understand or even engage with the full implications of leaving the EU on the terms that Mr Johnson negotiated. Until that is fixed, the relationship will be unbalanced and uneasy. And fixing it is more a question of regime change than cabinet reshuffle.Energy firms that took on millions of customers from rivals that collapsed amid soaring gas prices have been granted an initial £1.83bn compensation by the regulator to help them absorb extra costs. The sum, which relates to the wave of failures among household energy suppliers during 2021, is likely to rise and will ultimately be funded by anyone who pays gas and electricity bills. Since August, 25 suppliers have fallen victim to surging prices, which left them paying far more for gas but selling it for far less because of an energy price cap that was intended to protect bill payers. The regulator, Ofgem, arranged for healthy competitors to take on the collapsed firms’ customers via its “supplier of last resort” scheme, which prevents disruption to household supply. But agreeing to serve so many extra customers meant the suppliers of last resort had to buy more energy on wholesale markets. They can charge that cost – £1.83bn, according to Ofgem disclosures – to local gas and electricity distribution networks from April. Those grid operators, in turn, will add the extra cost to what they charge suppliers for use of their systems. That means the money will eventually be added to household bills, which are already expected to soar next year to reflect the wider gas price surge. The £1.83bn approved by Ofgem covers buying energy on the wholesale markets but does not include other expenses such as staff and IT. These are yet to be calculated and will be added to the total later. The final bill related to energy supplier collapses could rise to £2.5bn, according to some estimates. The largest single compensation payment of £681m went to Octopus Energy for taking on Avro Energy’s 580,000 customers, while British Gas was granted £361m for taking on half a million customers from several smaller firms. Shell Energy was awarded £362m. “Ofgem’s safety net has protected more than 4 million customers through the unprecedented global gas prices this year, making sure they have an energy supplier and household credit balances are honoured,” a spokesperson for the regulator said. “This comes at a cost, which we always seek to minimise. As we announced last week, we’re also stabilising the retail market with robust stress tests for all suppliers.” The largest supplier to fail in 2021 was Bulb Energy, with 1.6 million customers. However, the size of the company meant its collapse activated a separate “special administration” scheme. Under this arrangement, Bulb is being run by the global advisory firm Teneo, with Treasury funds of £1.7bn set aside to fund it. This cost could also end up being added to household energy bills.It is not just the hospitality industry that is facing chaos in this moment of not-lockdown. The cultural sector, especially the performing arts, is similarly afflicted by the message that – quite rightly – extreme caution should be observed when it comes to attending crowded indoor events. What’s wholly unfair, though, is that the workers in the live arts – everyone from electricians to wigmakers, actors to folk musicians, front-of-house personnel to opera singers – are, once again, left flailing. On the one hand, shows are being cancelled because of illness and self-isolation as, especially in London, the Omicron variant of Covid-19 surges. (It is easier, at the present time, to count which West End shows remain open rather than those that have been forced into pre-Christmas closure.) On the other hand, bookings are plummeting. The scale of this is severe. Before the pandemic, the turnover of the arts and creative sector was £9.8bn – which nearly halved in 2020. Up to October 2021, the industries recorded revenues of just £4.7bn. There was a lot riding on the usually lucrative winter season. What this means on the ground is individuals having their work cancelled well into the new year: livelihoods are collapsing, again. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has announced a £30m top-up to the culture recovery fund. This is welcome, but it targets organisations in cashflow crisis, not individuals – and in the performing arts, 70% of the workforce are freelance. At the moment, there is no help for these people: the SEISS (self-employment income support scheme) was closed in September (and many cultural workers anyway found themselves ineligible under its frame of reference). The alternatives may be finding work outside the sector – or turning to universal credit. At previous moments during this pandemic, Mr Sunak has engaged with workers’ representatives and the Trades Union Congress. There are no signs of such engagement at the present time. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has been all but silent, and it is highly improbable that she is regarded as a significant figure at the cabinet table. Lucy Powell, the recently appointed shadow culture secretary, is a more serious proposition, and she has been commendably swift to listen to those who work in the arts. Wales and Scotland have announced limits on gatherings after Christmas. This is intensely difficult for the performing arts, but at least allows for producers to plan. No such clarity exists in England. Post-Christmas restrictions are hinted at, but so far not confirmed. Clarity is a tough thing to wish for in the throes of a highly unpredictable pandemic. But if one thing has been predictable over the past 20 months, it has been precisely that: unpredictability. What is needed is a regularised means to carry workers through brief, acute phases of difficulty. Mr Sunak should be formulating a permanent short-time work scheme – something like the German Kurzarbeit, or the French scheme for les intermittents du spectacle (intermittent workers in the performing arts) – through which workers, including freelancers, may be supported through times of economic turbulence. The TUC published a sensible report into the idea in August. Such a programme would not just be beneficial to individuals, but would help businesses and organisations retain valuable workers. Talented, highly skilled people should not be facing the terror of the cliff edge every time a fresh variant of the virus threatens the route out of the pandemic.That’s all for today. Here’s our main stories: Goodnight. GW The surge in energy prices is forcing industrial giants to cut production, threatening the economic recovery, points out Bloomberg tonight: With energy costs spiking to fresh records day after day, financial strain is mounting for industries including metals and fertilizers. Aluminium Dunkerque Industries France, Europe’s top smelter of the metal, curbed output in the past two weeks. Trafigura’s Nyrstar will pause zinc production in France in early January and Romanian fertilizer maker Azomures temporarily halted activity. Gas prices eased back from their record highs set yesterday, despite ongoing tensions between Russia and the West over Ukraine, and rising demand as the weather turns chillier. The UK next-day gas price slipped by 11% to end at 404p per therm - its second highest close ever, after yesterday, and still six times higher than back in January. The month-ahead price of European gas dropped too, down 8.5% to €165.5 per megawatt hour, again the second highest price on record. Back in the gas sector, Ukraine’s Naftogaz said today it has asked the EU competition watchdog to stop what it says is abuse by Russia’s Gazprom of its dominant position in the European gas market, Reuters reports. Europe’s gas prices hit an all-time high this week after a pipeline bringing Russian gas to Germany switched to flow east. Moscow said this had no political implications, but has said that its domestic market is a higher priority. Gazprom, which accounts for around a third of total gas supplies to Europe, did not respond to a request for comment on Ukrainian energy company’s move. A spokesperson for the European Commission said it had received the complaint which would be assessed based on its standard procedures. Naftogaz head Yuriy Vitrenko said Gazprom had stopped selling gas through its electronic platform, refused to fill gas storage facilities in the European Union or to use capacity in Ukraine’s pipeline system to supply larger volumes, despite Kyiv’s offer of a 50% tariff discount. Vitrenko said in a statement that Gazprom was also blocking exports of gas produced by private companies in Russia and the transit of gas from Central Asia to Europe. More here: Ukraine’s Naftogaz calls for EU anti-monopoly action against Gazprom After a late burst, the UK’s FTSE 100 index has ended the day up 44 points or 0.6% at 7341.6 points. That’s the blue-chip index’s highest level in almost two weeks, and its highest close in over a month. Risers included hotel groups InterContinental (+2.7%) and Whitbread (+2.4%) and conference organiser Informa (+2.36%). The more UK-focused FTSE 250 index of medium-sized companies jumped 1.1%, with travel catering group SSP (+4.7%) and shared office letting company IWG (+4%) gaining. The rally came as healthcare data from South Africa and Denmark showed that a lower share of people infected with the Omicron coronavirus variant are likely to require hospital treatment compared with cases of the Delta strain. The FT has more details here. However, a World Health Organization (WHO) official has said it is too soon to say whether the new variant is more transmissible than the Delta variant, almost a month after South Africa first raised the alarm about its emergence. WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, Maria van Kerkhove, said. “We do have some data suggesting that rates of hospitalisation are lower,” But she warned against drawing conclusions from early data because: “we have not seen this variant circulate long enough in populations around the world, certainly in vulnerable populations”. European markets hit their highest levels in nearly a week, with the Stoxx 600 ending at a two-week closing high. Here’s some expert reaction to Ryanair’s news, from Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst: Omicron is taking a toll and an update from Ryanair clearly shows the impact it’s having on the travel sector. The no-frills airline has slashed its January schedules and more than doubled its annual loss forecast. Passenger numbers will be down in December as many will have been forced to put plans on hold as countries like France re-introduced restrictions. But there is a glimmer of hope woven between the lines that time may yet bring a positive update from those clever scientist types that could flick the switch of consumer confidence back to on. ... and Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor: Airline stocks have had a torrid time during the pandemic, with no let up in the face of the latest Omicron variant. Ryanair has cut its full-year earnings guidance in yet another sign of pain for the embattled travel sector. The low-lost carrier itself admits that its fortunes are highly sensitive to any further negative Covid news flow. Nonetheless Ryanair is holding off from further schedule cutbacks for February or March for now until the extent of the fallout from the latest wave becomes clearer. Ryanair has revised its January passenger traffic guidance from 10 million to 6-7 million with a full-year net loss forecast for €250-450, more than double its prior estimate of between €100-200m. Ryanair, which delisted from the LSE last week amid increased costs and reduced volumes after Brexit, saw shares soar as much as 11% on Tuesday amid a rebound in travel and leisure on optimism towards Moderna’s booster vaccine. However the stock has been under pressure since the November peak, shedding 15% off the high, dampening a tepid year-to-date recovery. Here’s our news story on Ryanair’s forecast that Omicron, and the latest travel restrictions, leave it facing a much higher loss than previously hoped: Ryanair has more than doubled its forecast annual loss and cut its planned January schedule capacity by 33% due to the impact of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. The Irish budget airline has warned that Omicron and recent Government travel restrictions across Europe have “notably weakened” its bookings for Christmas &amp; New Year travel. Ryanair has cut its December passenger forecast to a range of 9 to 9.5 million, from 10 to 11 million before, saying: The impact of these recent Government travel restrictions, in particular last weekend’s ban on UK arrivals into France and Germany, and the suspension of all EU flights to/from Morocco has lowered Ryanair’s expected December traffic from between 10m-11m, to a lower range of between 9.0m-9.5m. Ryanair now expects to make a net loss of between €250m and €450m in the 12 months to the end of March, up from a previous forecast of a loss of between €100m and €200m. It now expects to carry between 6m and 7m passengers in January, down from approximately 10m before, due to its 33% reduction in flight capacity. In light of the current uncertainty about the Omicron variant, and intra Europe travel restrictions, no schedule cutbacks have yet been decided for February or March 2022, Ryanair adds, explaining: These schedules will be revisited in January as more scientific information becomes available on the Omicron variant, its impact on hospitalisations, European population and/or travel restrictions in February or March Ryanair said it now expects to fly just under 100 million passengers in the year to the end of March from an earlier forecast of just over 100 million. But this forecast, like its estimated loss, are “hugely sensitive to any further positive or negative Covid news flow”. Back in the US, consumer confidence has risen by more than expected this month as Americans’ outlook for employment and the economy improved, and concerns about inflation eased. The Conference Board’s index of consumer morale has increased to 115.8 from an upwardly revised 111.9 reading in November. Economists in a Bloomberg survey had forecast a reading of 111, so this suggests the recovery is resilient despite growing concerns about the omicron variant and elevated prices. Lynn Franco, senior director of economic indicators at The Conference Board, explains: “The Present Situation Index dipped slightly but remains very high, suggesting the economy has maintained its momentum in the final month of 2021. Expectations about short-term growth prospects improved, setting the stage for continued growth in early 2022. The proportion of consumers planning to purchase homes, automobiles, major appliances, and vacations over the next six months all increased.” “Meanwhile, concerns about inflation declined after hitting a 13-year high last month as did concerns about COVID-19, despite reports of continued price increases and the emergence of the Omicron variant. Looking ahead to 2022, both confidence and consumer spending will continue to face headwinds from rising prices and an expected winter surge of the pandemic.” The latest ONS consumer trends report shows UK household spending grew by 2.7% quarter-on-quarter in the July-September period. That’s a 5.3% rise year-on-year, thanks to a 38.1% jump in spending on restaurants and hotels, as interactive investor’s Victoria Scholar explains: However third quarter household spending was still 2.1% below the same period pre-pandemic. The staycation boom this summer supported demand for domestic holidays with many consumers able to spend their cash windfall saved in the previous year when there were reduced spending opportunities during the pandemic. Plus with interest rates at rock-bottom and inflation on the rise, the impetus to spend rather than save has increased. The Kremlin has denied using Russia’s gas resources to turn the screw on Europe, after gas in a pipeline to Germany switched direction to flow eastwards for a second day, keeping prices near record highs as midwinter approaches. Flows through the Yamal-Europe pipeline to Germany declined over the weekend before stopping on Tuesday and reversing, data from the network operator Gascade showed. Gazprom, the Russian state gas firm, said the supply was flowing to Russia instead because of cold weather and high demand there. The supply squeeze came as Mario Draghi, the Italian prime minister, called for urgent action to counter rocketing fuel costs. He said companies profiting from the crisis should contribute to efforts to curb higher bills for households and businesses. During his end of year press conference in Rome, Draghi said: “There are big producers and sellers of energy that are having fantastic profits. They will need to participate to support the economy, they too need to help families.” Here’s the full story: Over in Italy, premier Mario Draghi has said his government has accomplished most of what it set out do to in fighting the pandemic and restoring economic growth. It could be a signal that Draghi, the former head of the European Central Bank, is ready to run for the Italian presidency and return the running of the government back to political parties. Associated Press explains all: Italian media have been speculating for weeks about Draghi’s possible presidential ambitions, given that the seven-year mandate of President Sergio Mattarella expires in February and the broad-based support that Draghi had enjoyed as premier from Italy’s fractious political parties has begun to erode. The Italian presidency has limited powers and is largely ceremonial. But the president plays a key role in resolving political impasses, and having the internationally respected Draghi in the Quirinale Palace would send a signal of Italian stability and credibility for seven more years. Draghi, 74, didn’t respond directly Wednesday when asked repeatedly about his future at a year-end news conference. “My personal destiny matters absolutely not at all,” he said. “I don’t have particular aspirations of one type or another. I’m a man, a nonno (grandfather) if you like, at the service of institutions.” But he stressed that neither he nor his government were essential to Italy’s continued fight against the pandemic or its implementation of its 261 billion-euro ($294 billion) recovery plan, which envisages billions in investments in sustainable development, digital transformation and structural reforms. “We have created conditions so that work on the (plan) can continue,” he said. “The government has created these conditions, independent of who will be (in charge). People are always important, but the other aspect is that it’s also important that the government is supported by the majority” in parliament. Pawel Adrjan, economist at the global job site Indeed, has flagged that job opportunities at hospitality companies across Europe have slumped in recent weeks: The US economy grew a little faster than previously thought in the third quarter of the year, new figures show. US GDP grew at an an annualised rate of 2.3%, or nearly 0.6% on a quarter-on-quarter basis. That’s up from the previous estimate of 2.1%, but still slower than the 6.7% annualised growth in Q2. From the second quarter to the third quarter, spending for goods turned down (led by motor vehicles and parts) and services decelerated (led by food services and accommodations), the Commerce Department reports. Wall Street is set for a mixed start, with the futures market showing the Dow Jones industrial average slightly higher but Nasdaq futures a little lower. Investors continue to weigh up the likely impact of the fast-spreading Omicron variant which has led to new restrictions in parts of Europe: Rabobank macro strategists Bas van Geffen and Elwin de Groot told clients in a note that: Despite more reports that European governments are introducing new measures to curb the spread of COVID, market participants already seem to have made up their minds that the threat of the quick advancing Omicron variant is manageable, for now. The UK’s advertising regulator has banned two promotions for “fan tokens” from Arsenal Football Club, saying they were misleading supporters over the risks of investing in cryptocurrencies. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) said that the north London club was “taking advantage of consumers’ inexperience or credulity, trivialising investment in crypto assets, misleading consumers over the risk of investment and not making it clear the ‘token’ was a crypto asset”. Arsenal said it would seek an independent review of the ruling “to seek greater clarity on the ASA’s current position”. More here: In the US, mortgage applications have dipped for the second week running, despite a drop in borrowing costs. Applications to take out a new home loan fell 3% last week, the Mortgage Bankers Association reports, while refinancing applications were up 2%. Mortgage interest rates fell last week, which could encourage people to apply for loans. However, shortages of homes on the market is hitting mortgage demand, and also driving prices to record levels over the last year. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at Interactive Investor, has more details: Adam Parton, partner at accountancy network MHA, agrees that the £1bn support package for UK hospitality firms announced yesterday doesn’t go far enough. The sector also needs a reduction in VAT and a return of furlough as well as grants for the self-employed, he explains, with very little time to lose: Unlike government support in the earlier phases of COVID-19 we aren’t seeing the much-needed reduction in VAT (which should go back down to 5%) or furlough support for businesses and employees and grants for the self-employed. Without these measures, which proved effective last time, the sector will struggle. “It could be that yesterday’s initiative is only the first part of a new wave of support by the government. This will be what the sector is hoping for. Alternatively, yesterday’s measures might just be there to balance out the ‘bad news’ as more restrictions are introduced, with no intention of building on them in the coming months. “If there are more measures on the way the Chancellor needs to hurry up. In the next couple of weeks and in 2022 cash flow will be a major concern as many venues are now seeing a more than 50% cancellation in their bookings. This could prove a devastating and costly blow for businesses in terms of employee wage commitment in addition to wasted food stocks.” Back in the energy markets, gas prices have eased back from Tuesday’s record levels, but remain painfully high for users. The day-ahead UK gas price has dipped by 5% today to 434p per therm, from last night’s close of 457.5p. That’s still around 6 times higher than at the start of the year. The European month-ahead price has also dipped, down 3.6% at around €175 per megawatt hour, having surged 20% yesterday to close at a record €181/MWh. Kit Juckes, currency expert at Societe Generale, says such high prices could threaten the recovery: The natural gas price surge, and the threat of even higher prices if tensions on the Russian/Ukrainian border escalate, are another threat to European growth. While they make a rapid reversal in inflation even less likely, they will not help the euro. A £14 own-label champagne from Aldi has become a hit in the UK and is second only to Moët &amp; Chandon in sales as shoppers seek luxury but without the hefty price tag. Veuve Monsigny, available only at the discounter, has overtaken Lanson, one of France’s most storied names, according to figures from the data firm IRI. Veuve Monsigny is made for Aldi by the French producer Philizot &amp; Fils. The company, run by the married couple Stéphane and Virginie Philizot, is based in Champagne’s Marne valley and has had to expand rapidly to keep up with demand. As well as soaring energy bills, almost 5 million families in social housing in England are facing the biggest rent hike for a decade from April. The move will add to the mounting cost of living squeeze, a new report from the Resolution Foundation thinktank shows. Resolution said 4.75 million families would see rent on their local authority or housing association home rise by up to 4.1%, adding to the pressure on living costs by an average £202 extra a year. It warned the increase would coincide with significant tax rises planned by the government to come in from April and a further jump in household utility bills when Ofgem’s consumer energy price cap is raised. The Bank of England also forecasts inflation will peak at about 6% the same month, the highest level since 1992. It warned: “Rising social rents on top of these increases will be very damaging for living standards indeed,” Britons are many times more likely to have experienced shortages of food and fuel than people in half a dozen EU member states, according to a poll, my colleague Jon Henley reports. Global supply chain problems prompted by the pandemic have disrupted the international trade network since the summer, with transport backlogs combining with labour shortages to create scarcities of various goods around the world. The government has argued that the shortages are part of a worldwide pattern and no worse in the UK than elsewhere, although logistics experts and other professionals – particularly in the food sector - have said the problems are amplified in Britain by a shortage of east European workers, including drivers, since Brexit. The YouGov poll showed residents of the UK were multiple times more likely to have experienced, or to know people who have experienced, shortages of food and fuel than people in France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Sweden and Denmark, and somewhat more likely to have experienced them than those in the US. Here’s the full story. Russian gas flows via the Yamal-Europe pipeline to Germany are continuing to flow in reverse mode for a second day on Wednesday, Reuters reports. This latest data from German network operator Gascade is keeping European gas prices high, although they have slipped back from their earlier record levels. Here’s the details: European gas prices hit a new record high on Tuesday after Yamal switched direction, a move the Kremlin said had no political implications, while two big German customers said Gazprom was meeting supply obligations. The flows at the Mallnow metering point on the German-Polish border were going east from Germany into Poland at an hourly volume of around 1,180,000 kilowatt hours (kWh/h) on Wednesday and are expected to stay at these levels for the rest of the day, the data shows. The news that some ships carrying natural gas are changing course from Asia to Europe could ease liquefied natural gas [LNG] prices. One European gas trader told Reuters: “The decline today is partly due to profit taking, but also people realized that too much LNG is heading to Europe in a very short time.” More here: Russian gas flows via Yamal pipeline reversed for second day Online food delivery company Just Eat Takeaway.com has struck a deal with One Stop, a British convenience store chain owned by Tesco to handle orders and deliveries on its platform. It’s their second deal in a week, after Just Eat entered the fast grocery delivery market by partnering with Asda in its first tie-up with a supermarket in the UK. Shares in Just Eat are up 4% this morning. The pound has nudged a little higher this morning, after Boris Johnson last night ruled out bringing in new Covid restrictions before Christmas. Sterling is up 0.3% against the US dollar to $1.33 for the first time this week, and also gained 0.3% against the euro to €1.178. The prospect of new curbs to contain omicron, and the drop in trading at hospitality firms and retailers, has weighed on the pound in recent weeks. Further restrictions could be introduced after Christmas. Gillian Keegan, the care minister, refused to rule out lockdown measures being introduced in England shortly after Christmas and said 129 people had been hospitalised and 14 had died with Omicron in the UK. She said: “There is uncertainty. So, if you can’t change your [New Year’s Eve] plans quickly, then maybe think about it. There is uncertainty. We can’t predict what the data is going to tell us before we’ve got the data.” The news that the UK economy grew slower than thought in the July-September quarter (1.1%, not the 1.3% first reported) has disappointed economists and investors. Bethany Beckett, UK economist at Capital Economics, told clients: Today’s release indicates the economy had a bit less momentum in Q3 than we had previously thought. And, with early signs the Omicron variant has hit activity, growth is sure to have slowed further in Q4. Martin Beck, chief economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, says supply chain problems hit growth, while consumer spending boosted the economy....before Omicron hit household confidence: The expenditure breakdown for the third quarter revealed a stronger contribution from consumer spending, but a greater drag from de-stocking, caused by supply chain disruption. “The savings ratio fell from 10.7% in Q2 to 8.6% in the third quarter. Although this was still some way above the 2010-2019 average of 7.3%, it was the lowest figure reported since the pandemic began and suggested that consumer behaviour was increasingly normalising prior to the emergence of Omicron. Given the squeeze on household finances from high inflation, the consumer recovery is becoming increasingly reliant on households spending some of their ‘excess’ savings. But high-frequency data points to a more cautious consumer mindset in recent weeks, particularly regarding social consumption activities, as they digest the implications of the new variant. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says the figures show the UK’s economy was struggling to find a higher gear in the summer, leaving the economy 1.5% smaller than before Covid. It’s not a huge gap but the fact there was still a gap before this latest hit will give policy makers pause. Other countries including many of our European neighbours have recovered faster. Trade is an issue and there will be many wondering exactly what part Brexit has played and whether the current volatility is an understandable blip or a worrying sign of things to come.” And there could be worse ahead, if omicron depresses the economy early next year: The surge in energy costs has driven up prices at the factory gate in Spain by a third in the last year. Spanish industrial production prices in November hit a record high for the second month in a row the Spanish National Statistics Institute (INE) reports. Prices jumped 33.1% year on year in November, the fastest annual pace since the data series began in January 1976, INE said, up from 31.9% in October. Soaring energy costs drove the increase, rising 88.3% per year in November, due to higher prices for gas production, distribution and oil refining. The Bank of England has fined Metro Bank nearly £5.4m for regulatory reporting failures, over an accounting blunder in which it misclassified the riskiness of some commercial loans. The BoE’s Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) imposed the penalty on Metro, for failing to report its capital position with due skill, care and diligence, and for failings in its regulatory reporting governance, controls and investment between May 2016 and January 2019. Metro admitted in January 2019 that it had made a major blunder in how it classifies its loan book. Hundreds of millions of pounds of commercial property loans and loans to commercial buy-to-let operators had been treated as less risky than they actually were. That admission wiped nearly 40% off Metro’s share price, at a time when it was trying to challenge the UK’s major lenders. Sam Woods, Deputy Governor for Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive Officer of the PRA said: “We expect firms to invest appropriate and adequate resources to ensure that they submit accurate regulatory returns. In this case, Metro Bank failed to meet the standards of governance and controls expected of it, resulting in today’s enforcement action.” Here’s some background: Britain’s competition regulator has delivered an early Christmas present for some Taylor Wimpey homeowners. Britain’s third-largest homebuilder has agreed to drop contract terms that locked leaseholders into ground rents that doubled every 10 years. Those contracts had left people facing painful increases in ground rents, and also made it very hard to sell their homes or to obtain a mortgage on them. After being ordered to take action by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) back in March, Taylor Wimpey has agreed that affected leaseholders’ ground rents will no longer increase and will remain at the amount charged when they first bought their home. Andrea Coscelli, chief executive of the CMA, said: This is a huge step forward for leaseholders with Taylor Wimpey, who will no longer be subject to doubling ground rents. These are totally unwarranted obligations that lead to people being trapped in their homes, struggling to sell or obtain a mortgage. I hope the news they will no longer be bound into these terms will bring them some cheer as we head into Christmas. In the City, the FTSE 100 index has dropped by 12 points, or 0.15% as mining companies and utilities dip. Rio Tinto (-1.4%) and BHP Group (-0.7%) are weaker, along with National Grid (-1.3%) and United Utilities (-1%). Overnight, Rio agreed to buy a lithium project in Argentina for $825m, increasing its supply of this vital ingredient in batteries for electric cars. British Airways owner IAG is also lower, down 1% as omicron continues to weigh on the travel industry. European markets are flattish too. Iain Hoskins, who runs Liverpool’s Ma Pub Group, has warned that yesterday’s £1bn hospitality bailout doesn’t go far enough, and is only a start. Further help will be needed from the chancellor after Christmas, Hoskins says: “Well it’s a start at least – our industry has been asking this question for weeks. So it appears without furlough for now the plan is to let us stay open but the reality remains that trade has dropped hugely at the busiest time of the year for hospitality. It’s devastating. “The point is that it costs me more to stay open than when we are closed and while I don’t think anyone is expecting to have all lost Christmas sales reimbursed by the government, the £6k grant is a drop in the ocean at this time of year. That’s not being ungrateful – that’s the truth. “But it’s a start if follow up packages are to come after Xmas. But it simply doesn’t go anywhere to address the issue of our staff as most rotas are being cut the bone to keep our overheads down as a means of survival. Unfortunately this doesn’t help our staff who like anyone else who work want the hours and the money, especially at this time of the year.” We have mixed economic news from the UK this morning. The UK economy grew more slowly than previously thought in the July-September period, suggesting growth was weakening even before the Omicron variant hit the country. UK GDP rose by 1.1% in the third quarter, weaker than a preliminary estimate of growth of 1.3%, the Office for National Statistics reports. That’s a slowdown on the 5.4% growth seen in Q2, after last winter’s coronavirus restrictions were lifted. Hospitality, and arts, entertainment and recreations provided the largest increase to output. Household consumption rose by an upwardly revised 2.7% as people returned to shops and ran down their lockdown savings. But net trade fell, with total exports falling by 3.5% and imports rising by 1.1%. That widened the UK’s trade deficit. We already know that growth almost fizzled out in October, with growth of just 0.1%, and omicron means the economy may shrink this quarter. But...the ONS now estimates that the economy shrank by 9.4% in 2020, not the 9.7% previously estimated - still the biggest fall since the crisis of 1921. That means the UK economy was 1.5% below its pre-pandemic level in Q3, not 2.1% smaller, as earlier thought. ONS director of economic statistics Darren Morgan explains:. Our revised figures show UK GDP recovered a little slower in the third quarter, with much weaker performances from health and hairdressers across the quarter, and the energy sector contracting more in September, than we previously estimated,” “However, stronger data for 2020 means the economy was closer to pre-pandemic levels in the third quarter.” Jeffrey Halley of OANDA says the jump in European gas prices is an ominous sign: Notably and ominously, natural gas prices hit record highs in Europe overnight as Russian gas stopped flowing through a major pipeline. Ironically, the US has natural gas coming out of its ears, with prices languishing. Europe may yet pay the price for its strategic ineptitude in Q1 if the winter turns brutal, and that’s without omicron. US natural gas prices tumbled earlier this month, as warm weather and higher production boosted supplies. The surge in Europe’s gas prices means that ships carrying liquefied natural gas destined for Asia are changing tack mid-voyage to supply European consumers willing to pay a large premium, the Financial Times reports. The FT also flags that gas buyers were spooked after gas flows from Russia to Europe on the Yamal-Europe pipeline stopped. In the UK, where more than two dozen energy suppliers have already gone bust this year, prices climbed 20 per cent on Tuesday to a record 450 pence per therm. “These are astounding moves,” said Tom Marzec-Manser, head of gas analytics, at consultancy ICIS, adding that traders were racing to close positions ahead of Christmas with “so many risks on the air”. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Europe’s gas price crunch is tightening, as the winter cold snap drives up demand and geopolitical tensions between Russia and the West heat up. Wholesale gas prices for the UK and continental Europe have rocketed to all-time highs, intensifying the squeeze on suppliers and energy users. The day-ahead price of UK gas hit 457p per therm on Tuesday, up 20% in a day, and around seven times higher than the start of this year. The front-month wholesale Dutch gas price, the European benchmark, rose more than 16% to a record high of 171.40 euros ($193.46) per megawatt hour on Tuesday, while the equivalent British gas contract also hit a new peak at 4.29 pounds ($5.68) per therm. These jumps came after the key Yamal-Europe pipeline that brings Russian gas to Germany switched to flow east, rather than west into Europe -- a move the Kremlin insisted had no political implications. Gas prices had already risen in recent weeks after Germany suspended the approval process for Russia’s controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline. The project could face US sanctions if Russia were to invade Ukraine, where tens of thousands of Russian troops are close to the border. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told a conference call on Tuesday, “There is absolutely no connection (to Nord Stream 2), this is a purely commercial situation.” James Waddell, head of European gas at Energy Aspects, explains why uncertainty over gas imports is a problem: “Europe has very little storage buffer this winter and Europe’s balance is therefore a lot more dependent on imports than in previous years,” “Additionally, Gazprom has traditionally shipped around 20% of its supply to Europe through Poland, but these flows have been inconsistent this year and driving up uncertainty about how much gas Europe will actually receive from Russia.” The temporary shutdown of two French atomic reactors, after faults were discovered in pipes in a safety system, has also driven up demand for gas. The surge in gas prices means UK household bills seem certain to jump sharply next April, when regulator Ofgem’s next review of the price cap comes in. Investec estimates that the cap could be lifted from £1,277 per household to around £2,000, meaning millions of British households could see their bills surge by more than 50%, unless the government takes action to cushion the blow. Also coming up today Rishi Sunak has been accused of failing to do enough to help embattled hospitality businesses through the Omicron wave after refusing to bring back furlough for the hardest-hit firms. Yesterday’s £1bn bailout package of business grants and help with sick pay has been dismissed as “dud cracker on Christmas Day”, and “too little too late,”. Unions warn that it didn’t provide enough support for workers; the TUC estimates 238,000 hospitality workers do not qualify for statutory sick pay. Michael Kill, the chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said a stuttering open/close approach to government restrictions was “crucifying business” during a pivotal period for trading before Christmas. “Every pound of help is much needed. But this package is far too little and borders on the insulting. European markets are set to open a little higher, after bouncing back from Monday’s selloff yesterday. The agenda 7am GMT: UK third-quarter GDP report (final estimate) Noon GMT: US weekly mortgage applications 1.30pm GMT: US third-quarter GDP report (final estimate) 3pm GMT: US existing home sales for November 3.30pm GMT: US weekly crude oil inventories figuresA deputy headteacher and her partner have been jailed for child sexual abuse offences after they filmed themselves abusing and raping a girl. Julie Morris, a teacher who was also head of safeguarding at a primary school in Wigan, was sentenced to 13 years and four months in prison after she pleaded guilty to 18 child sexual abuse offences, including two counts of rape. The 44-year-old teacher and her partner, David Morris, 52, filmed themselves abusing the girl, who was under 13, in a series of videos. Liverpool crown court heard the videos showed Julie Morris giggling as the abuse took place. On Wednesday she also admitted three counts of taking indecent images of a child, one of engaging in sexual communication with a child, and one of possessing indecent images of a child. Sentencing the couple, the judge, Andrew Menary, said: “Every now and again you see cases the circumstances of which are almost beyond belief. This is one of those cases. It demonstrates that human depravity really knows no depths.” David Morris was sentenced to 16 years for 34 offences, including seven counts of raping a child under 13, sexual activity with a child, engaging in sexual activity in the presence of a child, sexual communications with a child and taking, possessing and distributing indecent photographs of a child. The pair were also given indefinite sexual harm prevention orders and will sign the sex offender register for life. The offences are not related to Julie Morris’s employment at St George’s Central C of E primary school in Tyldesley, though police found that she had sent photographs of children at her school to David Morris. “These photographs were not indecent, or criminal in nature, and there is no evidence that any of the children were harmed,” said Merseyside police. John Wyn Williams, prosecuting, said the couple met on the dating app Plenty of Fish in 2016 after both had separated from their partners and the relationship “quickly became intensely sexual”. He said: “The communication between them became graphic and depraved, which led to some of their sexual fantasies becoming a reality.” David Morris was arrested on 2 September but cautioned and released and a number of devices were seized, which showed the recordings of rape and sexual abuse, the court heard. The couple were arrested the following day at an address in Hindley, Wigan. “The couple were found to be in possession of £10,000 in cash and their camper van was packed with their belongings, indicating that they were about to abscond,” said Merseyside police. Julie Morris was sacked shortly after her arrest. As well as videos and images on David Morris’s phone, officers trawled through 175,000 pages of messages between the couple, revealing sexually explicit communications. The pair also set up a group chat with the victim in which they would talk about how they would abuse her, the court heard. The police’s thorough analysis of 175,000 pages of chat logs, spanning three years, revealed the couple’s sexual interest in young children. DCI Bev Hyland said: “These extremely serious offences committed by Julie and David Morris have had a devastating impact on the victims and their families.” Thanking members of the public for their bravery in alerting police to the couple’s behaviour, Hyland added: “What makes this case even more concerning is the fact that Julie Morris held a position of trust as a teacher – she held the role of safeguarding lead – and yet she saw fit in her own personal life to completely disregard all of the responsibilities and the trust that her role held.”The actor Jack Hedley, who has died of a heart attack aged 92, had a solemn face and military bearing that often made him appear dour on screen, but he was well cast in television roles that made his face more familiar than his name. In his early small-screen career, he even attained heart-throb status as the undercover agent and anti-hero of the title in The World of Tim Frazer (1960-61), screened under the Francis Durbridge Presents banner. He appeared in three overlapping six-part thriller serials as the easygoing structural engineer recruited by a secret government department. The character conceived by Durbridge as “ordinary” – not “tough, trigger-happy or dame-slapping” – investigates his own business partner’s mysterious disappearance in England, drug smuggling in Amsterdam and the death of another undercover agent in Wales. “It’s refreshing to be given a part in which I can wear smart clothes, drive fast cars and have a mews house in London,” said Hedley at the time. “It certainly makes a change from the neurotics I’ve played in the past.” He later claimed to rue the fact that “this Frankenstein’s monster of an upper-crust Englishman was born”, but it served him well over the next few decades. Hedley’s services history in the Royal Marines informed his performance in Colditz (1972-74) as Lieutenant-Colonel John Preston, senior British officer at the Germans’ castle fortress whose escape-proof reputation is put to the test by allied prisoners of war. Preston is a strict, emotionless disciplinarian, but he is highly principled and respected by his fellow officers as he defends them – often using his encyclopedic knowledge of the Geneva conventions – while building up a relationship with the kommandant (played by Bernard Hepton). The stiff upper lip quivers only when he hears about his wife’s death. Later, Hedley played a former soldier in Who Pays the Ferryman? (1977), the widower Alan Haldane, who sells his boat business and returns to the Greek island of Crete, where he had once been a hero among resistance fighters. He hopes to see his wartime lover but discovers that she is dead – and that he had fathered a girl who is now a young woman. This Greek tragedy had real-life consequences for some of the cast and crew, including Hedley. Several blamed broken marriages on the four months they spent filming Who Pays the Ferryman? on Crete, and Hedley – who admitted to having affairs on filming trips abroad – said his own went downhill on his return home. “There is something strange and mysterious about these Greek islands,” he said. “When the cast arrived, they suddenly started acting strangely. They were no longer themselves. One man walked into the sea at midnight and said he was going to swim to Cyprus, 700 km away. Another man fell madly in love with a girl who did not return his feelings. As a result, he tried to take his own life.” Hedley married Jean Fraser in 1965, after meeting her in Ireland while filming The Very Edge (1963), in which he played a detective and she was the producer’s assistant. The couple divorced in 1984. The actor was born Jack Hawkins in London, and said he never knew his father. His mother, Dorothy Withill, had grown up in poverty but went on to make a fortune by founding Direct Mail, an office services business. Jack later took his cousin Hedley Hawkins’s forename as his own professional surname because the film star Jack Hawkins – another performer who attracted military roles on screen – was already registered with Equity, the actors’ union. On leaving Emanuel school in Battersea, south London, he became a cadet at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, then spent eight years as a marine commando on active service in Malaya, India, the East Indies, Australia and Korea. He rose from cadet to lieutenant but was eventually invalided out after being shot twice in the leg. He then worked in his mother’s business but, after 18 months, was losing interest in his job. On walking past Rada’s building on the way to the office one day, he decided to audition for an acting course and was accepted. While there, he played Doolittle, father of Glenda Jackson’s Eliza, in Pygmalion at St Pancras town hall. After graduating in 1957, he went straight into the West End as Daniels in It’s the Geography that Counts (St James’s theatre). Screen producers were quick to spot his talents and he made his film debut as Dr Galbraith in Behind the Mask (1958), following it with small parts as an architect in Room at the Top (1959) and a reporter in Lawrence of Arabia (1962). His military background came to the fore in movies such as The Longest Day (1962) and How I Won the War (1967). Films never fully exploited Hedley’s talents, although he had satisfying roles in Goodbye, Mr Chips (1969) as William Baxter, the housemaster who beats Peter O’Toole’s Chips to become headteacher, and the James Bond film For Your Eyes Only (1981), in which he not only played Sir Timothy Havelock, but also voiced the millionaire yacht owner’s parrot. Television gave him better opportunities. In the Alun Owen play No Trams to Lime Street (1959), he was cast as a merchant sailor on shore leave in Liverpool having an affair with Billie Whitelaw’s married woman. Then, he starred as the cockney seafaring wireless operator Corrigan Blake, caught up with revolutionaries in the Caribbean, in the 1962 pilot You Can’t Win ’em All, also written by Owen – but was replaced for the subsequent series, Corrigan Blake. Other TV roles included Donald Killearn (1970-71), a colleague of the agony aunt played by Phyllis Calvert, in Kate; Graham Jesson, husband of Sophia Loren’s tempted Anna, in the 1974 TV version of Brief Encounter; and the disappeared thriller writer Charles Latimer in A Quiet Conspiracy (1989). Hedley’s second marriage, to Elspeth (nee Daintry) in 1986, also ended in divorce. He is survived by his third wife, Alex (nee Westendarp), whom he married in 2001, and the two children of his first marriage, Jonathan and James. • Jack Hedley (Jack Snowdon Hawkins), actor, born 28 October 1929; died 11 December 2021 • This article was amended on 23 December 2021. Hedley played Doolittle, father of Eliza, in Pygmalion, rather than Dr Dolittle, as an earlier version stated.You can sense the sudden political alarm in Westminster. What, if anything, can be done to cushion the blow of higher energy bills that will hit consumers next April? It seemed until recently that ministers’ plan A was to pray that wholesale gas prices in Europe would fall after their surge in the early autumn, thereby limiting the increase in average annual household domestic energy bills to £250 or so. There is not even a remote chance of such a gentle outcome now. Gas prices have been setting new highs this week, coupled with mentions of the word “unprecedented”. The current wholesale price of 400p-ish a therm compares to 60p-ish at the start of the year. Five months of the latest six-month “observation window” for calculating the level of the next price cap have passed, meaning everybody can make a reasonable estimate of what the backward-looking formula will spit out in February. Energy consultancy Cornwall Insight says £1,865 per annum, versus £1,277 currently. Analysts at bank Investec think the figure will be closer to £2,000. Call it an average annual increase of about 50%, if the price-cap formula is applied mechanically. And, critically, future gas prices suggest no relief in sight. Russian and German wrangling over the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, French nuclear shutdowns and higher demand for gas as backup to renewables are not factors that will disappear overnight. Stop thinking about a price “spike”, cautions Investec, and consider “a high likelihood of both prolonged and even higher gas prices through winter with an impact that stretches out over the next two years”. Cornwall’s early estimate of the next-but-one adjustment to the price cap in October 2022 produces a figure of £2,240 per annum. Thus the belated scramble in government to explore a few fiddles to bills. Annual charges covering renewables incentives, one of the minor components, could be deferred. So, too, network charges, a bigger element. A similar smoothing process could be applied to the looming £2.5bn cost of absorbing the failure of 26 energy suppliers since August. Add it all up, though, and Investec reckons such “mitigations” only amount to £300. Sky-high gas prices dominate everything. And it would be bold to try to use all the deferral fudges in one go; the policy equivalent of maxing out on the credit card. Only waiving VAT, payable at 5% by households, looks straightforward. Current Westminster thinking seems to be edging towards bigger interventions to shield low-income households from the full blast. The winter warm homes discount scheme could be turned into an all-year affair. But again, unless the cost can be buried in general taxation and borrowing, it would mean other bill-payers picking up the difference and paying even more for their energy. That, in turn, raises deep questions of fair redistribution and who would qualify for a discount. There is no precedent to fall back upon. The numbers at stake are colossal. If nothing changes, the additional annual energy bill for households will come to £18bn – or 1.3% of total consumer spending – on Investec’s numbers, and an overnight switch to average bills of £2,000 would add 1.8 percentage points to headline inflation in April 2022. Covid aside, there will be few bigger running political headaches in early 2022. Doing nothing – in other words, letting the price increases rip under the standard formula – does not look politically feasible. But that’s as far as the thinking seems to have progressed. Ministers have about a month, that’s all, to find a strategy. Landsec reaffirms faith in prime retail estate The plan is to “reimagine retail”, says property giant Landsec, about half a decade into its confrontation with the growth of online shopping. It’s certainly having to reimagine what its shopping centres (thankfully not the largest part of its portfolio) are worth. In a doubling-down transaction, Landsec is buying a 25% stake in the Bluewater shopping centre in Kent for £172m, adding to the one-third holding it already has. The interesting bit is how Bluewater has fallen in value over the years: the decline is about two-thirds since 2014, when Landsec first bought in. That’s an enormous movement for a shopping centre that, even now, is almost the definition of prime retail estate. Landsec is punting, in effect, that the bottom has been reached. The thesis is reasonable since there is early evidence that rents in retail “destinations” are finally starting to stabilise. You have to wonder, though, what the group was thinking in 2014. Its acquisition timing back then was horrible.In the wake of the third New Caledonian referendum on independence from France, French president Emmanuel Macron declared that “France is more beautiful because New Caledonia decided to stay.” The vote in the 12 December referendum – supposedly the finale of a 30-year process of preparation and consultation – was an overwhelming 96.5% against independence. Macron’s centre-right Republican rival, Valérie Pécresse, has hailed the vote a “massive choice” to stay, while the emerging far-right candidate Eric Zemmour said the decision was final. But New Caledonia’s future as a French territory is anything but settled and a return to the violence that wracked New Caledonia a possibility. Only one side turned up to vote, and the result was entirely predictable. Only 43.9% of eligible voters cast their ballot as against nearly 86% in the previous referendum. The abstainers were mostly indigenous Kanaks, who have been agitating since the 1980s to follow their fellow Melanesians in Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu into independent statehood. Until recent months, the Kanaks were willing participants in the consultation process, then the Delta variant of Covid-19 arrived in early September, quickly infecting over 12,000 people and causing 280 deaths, about 60% among Kanaks, and other Pacific islanders. Many Kanak communities were plunged into traditional mourning rituals that can take up to a year. In addition, a lockdown restricted campaigns by Kanak parties, which typically rely on villages meetings and tours by leaders. The Kanak parties appealed to Macron to postpone the referendum but he refused. A last-minute court appeal for delay also failed. So the Kanak coalition called a boycott of the referendum. “This isn’t over, and people who are saying it’s over are misreading the strength of the boycott,” says Nic Maclellan, a veteran commentator on Pacific affairs in Australia. Not only did nearly all Kanaks heed their parties’ call for “non-participation” they did so peacefully. Paris had sent 2,000 extra gendarmes and 30 armoured cars to maintain security – they were not needed. A key question now is whether electoral rolls in any future referendum or local government elections will be thrown open to more recent arrivals to New Caledonia. Until now, only Kanaks and long-established settlers have been allowed to vote. To open the vote to all the residents of New Caledonia would be “recolonisation” and definitively end the Kanak dream of independence, said Mathias Chauchat, professor of public law at the University of New Caledonia in Noumea. “In essence, opening the electoral roll would give power to the whites. It would revert to the colony like before, with the French in power and the Kanaks like an aboriginal minority. They would be left with their customs on the margin, all the while saying that their identity was recognised. It would be a system of apartheid that doesn’t say its name.” “The situation is explosive because the Kanaks would never accept this recolonisation,” Chauchat added. “We are on a powder-keg. It needs only a spark for it to explode.” For their part, the seven pro-independence parties based among the Kanaks said dialogue had been broken by the “stubbornness” of the French government, which had been “unable to reconcile its geo-strategic interests in the Pacific with its obligation to decolonise New Caledonia.”. New Caledonia’s regional neighbours have dismissed the referendum result. The Melanesian Spearhead Group – representing Papua New Guinea, the Solomons, Vanuatu and Fiji – issued a statement proclaiming the results “null and void due to the ‘non-participation’ of the indigenous people of Kanaky.” The Pacific Islands Forum – a wider regional grouping – noted the boycott and said that “civic participation was an integral component of any democracy and critical to the interpretation and implications of Sunday’s poll.” While some strategists worry about France walking out, leaving a destitute mini-state open to Chinese influence, it is worth considering exactly what kind of independence is being proposed by the Kanaks. Chauchat said the Union Calédonienne, one of the main Kanak parties, has been considering the “free association” link of the Cook Islands to New Zealand, whereby Wellington looks after the islands’ defence and foreign policy in consultation with the Cook Islands government. The small nation has membership of many international agencies, though not a UN seat. Adrian Muckle, a historian at the Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand, said another Kanak party, UNI-Palika, had also evoked in its manifesto the idea of a partnership or association with France. “They have sought to discuss in advance of the final referendum what that might look like in more detail, but Paris and ‘loyalists’ have actively refused to engage, suggesting that such discussions could only take place after a vote for independence and that nothing can be discussed until then,” Muckle said. “Their concern, I think, is that any fleshed-out ideas on independence-in-association might make a ‘yes’ vote more attractive.” Since the vote, Sébastien Lecornu, France’s minister for overseas territories, has called for submissions on a permanent status for New Caledonia within France, to be finalised within 18 months. The Kanak parties have said they will wait until after next year’s French elections before resuming dialogue with Paris. They would have little traction until then anyway. With Macron now fighting for re-election from the centre against the right and far-right, electoral considerations will not allow much flexibility in thinking about New Caledonia’s future. Hamish McDonald is a former foreign editor of The Sydney Morning Herald and regional editor of the Far Eastern Economic Review, and is an Inaugural Fellow of the Australian Institute of International Affairs.The Scottish Professional Football League has confirmed its top flight will halt after the Boxing Day matches, with a planned winter break brought forward by two rounds of fixtures. The change means the season’s second Old Firm game, scheduled for 2 January, is due to take place on the evening of 2 February. SPFL clubs have been involved in talks after Nicola Sturgeon, the Scotland first minister, announced only 500 spectators could attend matches from 26 December inclusive. Ten Scottish Premiership clubs – Rangers and Ross County the exceptions – had indicated they would support the move announced on Wednesday night by the SPFL. It means neither the Old Firm match nor the Edinburgh derby will take their traditional new year slots but both will remain live on Sky Sports, with Hibs at home against Hearts on 1 February. Celtic, Hearts, Dundee United, Hibs, St Johnstone, Livingston, Motherwell, Dundee and Aberdeen had publicly called for games before the winter break to be rescheduled. St Mirren had a request rejected by the SPFL to postpone the match on Wednesdaylast night against Celtic because of Covid issues among players and staff. The league warned clubs during talks late on Tuesday that Sky places a value of about £500,000 on any “lost” fixtures. The SPFL hopes playing on Boxing Day – when Celtic’s visit to St Johnstone will be on Sky – affords it a little more date leeway, with the league restarting in the week commencing 17 January. Celtic will host Hibs on that date. Previously league games were due to end on 3 January and restart on 26 January. The dates situation was complicated by the ongoing involvement of Celtic and Rangers in European competition and that Uefa does not allow leagues to schedule top-flight television matches against its own tournaments. On Wednesday the league asked clubs to state their preference between carrying on to the planned break date, stopping games after Boxing Day or stopping immediately. Conscious of club sentiment but also the potential for serious fixture congestion into the new year, the SPFL executive recommended clubs choose the second option. The league’s board, which includes representatives of Rangers and Ross County, confirmed its decision in a statement. Rangers are yet to offer public comment but in front of fellow clubs they questioned the point in advancing a shutdown with the supposed peak of the Omicron variant’s impact a number of weeks away. As things stand Celtic and Rangers could be missing key players on 2 February because of international call-ups. The lower three Scottish divisions, which do not have a winter break, have voted to continue amid the crowd restrictions. Meanwhile, Hearts’ will hold their Boxing Day game against Ross County behind closed doors at Tynecastle rather than admitting 500 spectators.Good morning. Welcome to the final morning mail for 2021. No need to fret though, over the festive break we’ll bring you Five Great Reads, where Guardian Australia’s lifestyle editor, Alyx Gorman, will do the heavy lifting for you and find five of the most interesting, entertaining and thoughtful reads. Sign up here and receive it in your inbox from Monday to Friday. Here are today’s top stories. A proposal by the NSW government that hospitals charge unvaccinated patients for their medical care has been condemned as “unethical” by the nation’s peak doctors body. The state health minister, Brad Hazzard, told media it was an option “under consideration by the NSW government” but did not elaborate on how the proposal would be enacted. Opening hours at Covid-19 testing clinics will be heavily reduced during the Christmas period, despite “unprecedented demand” and hours-long wait times in multiple states. In NSW, three out of four of the state’s 490 testing sites will be partially closed for Christmas and New Year’s Day, with Scott Morrison and Victoria’s Covid-19 commander, Jeroen Weimar, criticising interstate travel testing requirements. Russia has claimed the US will hold talks early next year to consider its “security guarantees”, including a ban on Ukraine joining Nato. The Kremlin’s positioning of tanks and artillery along the Russia-Ukraine border has dramatically escalated tensions but the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, remains adamant a diplomatic solution will be reached. A White House spokesperson said any dialogue “must be based on reciprocity”. Russia has denied using gas as a negotiating chip after it redirected supplies away from Europe and towards Russia for a second day running, despite record demand in the west during the height of midwinter. Data from South Africa appears to add weight to claims the Omicron variant is less severe than previous strains but scientists have cautioned against extrapolating the findings globally. Countries such as Italy, that were notably struck during the first wave, have a median population age nearly 20 years higher than South Africa, suggesting it could yet disproportionately experience the virus. The World Health Organization has warned that booster drives in western countries could prolong the pandemic if they come at the cost of ensuring that the entire global adult population has sufficient access to vaccine supply. Australia The federal government will pay a traditional owners corporation more than $2m after settling a class action over a “work for the dole” program described as “modern-day slavery”. After a year of confidential mediation, a federal court judge approved the settlement, awarded to 10 of the nation’s poorest communities. A sexual abuse victim in Tasmania has received a record payout of more than $5m in damages, with the state’s supreme court saying the figure recognises “the lifelong impact of child sexual abuse”. The world A memorial to the victims of the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre appears set to be removed from Hong Kong’s oldest university, with security guards blocking media access to the sectioned-off area where the sculpture stands. The EU claims to have taken a step closer to agreeing a 15% minimum corporate tax rate for multinational companies, despite Joe Biden facing challenges enacting the agreement. Israeli archaeologists have unearthed a sunken treasure trove containing hundreds of Roman and medieval coins near the ancient city of Caesarea, including “exceptional” items of jewellery and gemstones. Recommended reads It’s the second-largest city in NSW but, after a Covid-19 outbreak, local business owners are describing Newcastle as “a ghost town”. “It’s like the apocalypse out there,” publican Luke Tilse tells Michael McGowan. “I feel like I’m running the last waterhole, and everyone’s coming here to drink the muddy water.” After more than 200 people contracted the coronavirus at a 1970s-themed nightclub event, the Hunter region is now home to more than 5,000 active cases: prompting the cancellation of football games, music festivals and a spate of restaurant and hotel closures. A traditional Australian Christmas spread can be a daunting prospect if you’re vegan. But not eating meat shouldn’t mean the end to tasty and sumptuous festive fare – with a little imagination, you can conjure up “beet Wellington” or “faux gras” that rises to the occasion but caters for every palate, as the Vegan Butcher, Zacchary Bird, shows with these five recipes. Organising Christmas can be stressful at the best of times, but what to do when a family member tries to one-up you? That’s the dilemma posed to advice columnist Eleanor Gordon-Smith: “If you feel insulted by what this aunt did, I’ll bet it’s not just because of the particulars of this invite. I’ll bet there’s a long backdrop of past behaviour and infinitesimally small gestures and inflections between you that serve as a kind of meaning decoder.” Guardian Australia’s 10 funniest things on the internet series was launched as a short-term lockdown distraction. But while Covid-19 has long overstayed its welcome, it seems the appetite for some fun during these trying times remains insatiable. And now we want to know – what are your favourite online funnies from 2021? This week our staff get the ball rolling with theirs. Listen The best and worst of 2021: the internet. From senator Jacqui Lambie dancing on a table to Instagram accounts that brought a sense of community during lockdown – on today’s episode of Full Story, Michael Sun helps chart the highs and lows on online content. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport As a sports writer, Kieran Pender has spent his fair share of time critically analysing the performances of professional athletes. Now an 18-month Covid-related seachange has afforded the scribe the chance to try his hand at competitive sport as he dips his toes into the world of surfing. “Some sports are bigger than the Olympics.” But, as Beau Dure writes, ice hockey “is not one of those sports”. And the decision by the NHL and its players’ union to pull their participation at the Beijing Olympics due to Covid concerns could have inadvertently hastened the sport’s global decline. Media roundup Victoria could move today to expand its indoor mask mandate, the Age reports, with James Merlino set to outline any changes in coming hours. An elite Perth high school is under investigation by police after intimate images of a teenage girl, aged under 15, were shared via social media among students, the West Australian writes. And Peter Dutton has accused China of looking to militarise space, according to the Australian, claiming that Beijing is developing satellites that can attack other satellites. Coming up The first funeral of a child who died in the Tasmanian jumping castle tragedy will take place in Devonport. Former Test cricket star Michael Slater will appear in court in relation to reportedly breaching an apprehended violence order. And if you’ve read this far … The Big Apple is notorious for its crushing real estate market but a viral TikTok video tour of “the smallest apartment in New York” has laid bare just how tough things are, in a clip that bears the tagline: “Whatever your expectations are, lower them.”Although the price is not listed, this “charming micro-apartment” could probably be yours for a cool $1,600 a month. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.And so it is Merry Christmas ... Like many people, politicians have been sending cards to support their favourite charities, only MPs’ favourite charities invariably turn out to be themselves, as their cards are carefully chosen to convey a subtext that portrays them in the best possible light. So here are what their messages really mean. Boris Johnson Normally, prime ministers like to send cards of themselves surrounded by adoring members of their family. Unfortunately, Boris is unable to remember quite how many children he actually now has and the families he can name will only get together in a courtroom. A photo of Boris and Carrie on their own was rejected because the only pictures they could find were of the pair of them lying face down after yet another party while everyone around them is singing “Stand up if you hate Boris”. So in the end, the Johnsons ended up with a photo of Dilyn running through the Downing Street garden trying to avoid the empties, on the grounds that the dog was the only family member everyone liked. Keir Starmer The Labour leader doesn’t appear to have made a new card. So we can only assume he’s gone green and is recycling last year’s in which he and his wife, Victoria, were pictured outside a redbrick house that may even have been his own. In 2020 both were clapping the NHS. Now Keir is clapping himself. After two years lagging behind the Tories in the polls, Starmer’s smile looks genuine. He has finally assembled a shadow cabinet that looks both credible and electable and his ratings are above Johnson’s. ‘Tis the season to be jolly. Ed Davey The Lib Dem leader also toyed with a card of himself and his family – up until the point where the party focus-grouped the final three photos and nobody had a clue who Ed was. The best guess was “that supporting actor from the Hatton Garden heist” film. So instead, Davey organised a competition for schoolkids, with the winning entry a drawing of three elves serving at a soup kitchen. Unfortunately, no one has yet turned up for a free meal. Nicola Sturgeon A rather more subtle form of branding for the Scottish first minister. As well as Bute House, her official residence, the design also includes the Finnieston crane and SEC Armadillo venue in Glasgow, and the Scottish parliament building in Edinburgh, along with thistles and a Charles Rennie Mackintosh-style rose. The message is clear. Scotland is all hers and Westminster can do one. Another independence referendum is only a matter of time. Liz Truss Oh dear. Oh very dear. The foreign secretary just can’t conceal her ambitions and seems to have no idea that everyone in the country – as well as in Westminster – is laughing at her ridiculous vanity. From her card, it is evident she is not just eyeing up Boris Johnson’s job but also the Queen’s. Sitting on her throne, surrounded by a union flag and an imperial globe, one-third of which is sure to be painted red, the co-author of Britannia Unchained – the definitive go-to 2012 book for rightwing Tories who believe the problem with the UK is that its workers are innately lazy – is now positioning herself as a latter-day Britannia. The empress in waiting. I, for one, can’t wait. She will be a disaster for the country – her synapses only intermittently connect – but a gift for sketch writers. Rishi Sunak Much more sophisticated, yet still very much on brand for the other Tory leadership rival is the chancellor’s card showing his white-socked feet in a pair of sliders with “Merry” on the right foot and “Xmas” on the left. Plus a few baubles and a bit of tinsel. Here is a politician who knows how to laugh at himself while taking the piss out of the entire country. Look on the back of the card and there’s a link to his upmarket, luxury goods website – www.dishirishi.com – where you can buy the self-same sliders. A snip at $299.99. VAT deductible for residents of the Cayman Islands. Sajid Javid One for the connoisseurs. At first glance this drawing by a child from his Bromsgrove constituency looks like a Santa hat with radioactive eyes, but look closer and you will see it is the first artist’s impression of the Omicron variant. This is a card that says The Saj is on your side, is committed to slaying the mutant beast and can laugh in the face of adversity. Priti Patel Her original card featuring the baby Jesus in a capsized rubber dinghy being pushed back to France by a Border Force patrol is the subject of a dispute in the European court of human rights. In its place and in actual reality, the home secretary has chosen a reindeer drawn by a schoolchild in her constituency. Patel said: “The judges were impressed by the strong message that Christmas is the ideal time of year to take back control. The reindeer clearly represents Santa’s homeland, where we are currently building the world’s largest detention centre to house illegal migrants, such as the so-called ‘three wise men’ who are clearly just trying to get to the UK to scrounge benefits.” Sadly, due to so many postmen and women being off sick with Covid, some cards seem to have gone awol. So instead I will suggest the cards I would like them to have sent: a naked Dominic Raab doing press-ups , the grainy CCTV image of Matt Hancock snogging Gina Coladangelo with the title “Forget the Grinch, Feel the Clinch” and a Grant Shapps card of him standing next to Michael Green and Sebastian Fox, signed “With best wishes from the three of us”. These would all be collector’s items. • A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The police watchdog will not investigate a complaint that officers failed to properly look into an alleged party at Downing Street during lockdown in December last year, it has said. Jenny Jones, a Green party peer, asked the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) to investigate after reports that a gathering took place on 18 December 2020 that involved food, party games and drinking late into the night. In a letter to the IOPC this month, Jones said officers were on duty at Downing Street to protect the building and that part of their job involved controlling access. “If there was an unlawful gathering taking place at No 10 Downing Street, then the police must have known, and were highly likely to have played an active part in organising or facilitating the illegal gathering,” she wrote. Complaints first have to be considered by the relevant force, and the IOPC initially referred it to the Metropolitan police. The Met referred it back, and on Tuesday Jones posted a message on Twitter saying it was now being considered. On Wednesday the IOPC said that, having assessed the referral, it had returned it to the Metropolitan police. An IOPC spokesperson told PA Media: “We can confirm that on 17 December we received a referral from the Metropolitan police service [MPS] of a complaint about an alleged party at Downing Street in December 2020. “Having fully assessed the referral we have decided it is invalid and we have returned it to the MPS to handle as it determines would be appropriate. “Under the relevant legislation, a valid complaint can only be made where an individual, or someone acting on their behalf, has been adversely affected by the alleged conduct or its effects. “There was nothing within the referral to indicate the complainant was physically present or nearby when officers stationed at Downing Street allegedly failed to enforce Covid rules. Nor is there a suggestion that they were physically present or sufficiently nearby when the effects of the officers’ actions occurred.” A separate complaint by Jones, that the Met Commissioner, Cressida Dick, refused to investigate the allegations, has been referred to the Mayor’s Office for Policing And Crime (Mopac), which sets the direction and budget for the force. Mopac has said it is assessing the complaint to decide if further action is required. The event is also among those being investigated by the senior civil servant Sue Gray.• An article (PM rules out further curbs on Christmas socialising, 22 December, p1) said the Covid self-isolation period will be cut from 10 days to seven for vaccinated people if they record negative lateral flow tests on days six and seven. The UK Health Security Agency later clarified that this would also apply to unvaccinated people, although the 10-day period would still apply to those who were not fully vaccinated if they were a close contact of someone who had tested positive. A second article was also updated to add the UKHSA clarification. • Other recently amended articles include: Tributes paid to Spain rugby player Kawa Leauma, 32, after death from fall ‘We’re not backing down’: the Texas church fighting for abortion rights North Korea ‘bans laughing’ during mourning for anniversary of Kim Jong-il’s death – video Disabled woman to take DWP to court over ‘immoral’ automatic benefit deductions Sajid Javid hits out at unvaccinated for ‘taking up hospital beds’ Calls for rerun of selection process to find next head of Charity Commission Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.The House committee investigating the events around the 6 January attack on the US Capitol has asked the congressman and close Trump ally Jim Jordan to make an appearance before the panel. Jordan is a conservative Republican from Ohio who is seen as a close confidant of the former US president. “We write to seek your voluntary co-operation in advancing our investigation,” the committee said in a letter to Jordan, asking for an appearance early in January. The letter revealed that the panel was seeking to ask Jordan about the role Trump might have played as the attack unfolded. The mob of pro-Trump supporters had stormed the Capitol in a bid to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election. “We understand that you had at least one and possibly multiple communications with President Trump on January 6th. We would like to discuss each such communication with you in detail,” it said. The letter also revealed its interests were wider than the attack itself and included the activities of Trump allies and aides holed up in a Washington hotel. “We also wish to inquire about any communications you had on January 5th or 6th with those in the Willard War Room, the Trump legal team, White House personnel or others involved in organizing or planning the actions and strategies for January 6th,” the letter read. The request is the second by the nine-member panel this week to go after a sitting Republican congressman and launches a new phase for the panel. Scott Perry, a Pennsylvania Republican, has also been asked by the panel to provide documents and sit for an interview. But on Tuesday Perry said he would not comply with the panel. Perry’s refusal to appear set up a potentially fraught battle if the panel decides to subpoena him and he – like other Trump allies – decides to ignore that, too. Jordan is widely expected to decline to cooperate. Jordan, a staunch Trump ally, has been identified as the Republican lawmaker who sent a message to Trump’s chief of staff Mark Meadows the day before the Capitol attack outlining a plan to stop Biden from reaching the White House. The panel has been looking at numerous messages sent to Meadows, many of which were urging Trump to call off a mob of his supporters as they ransacked the Capitol building. Jordan forwarded a text message to Meadows on 5 January, one of the congressman’s aides has confirmed, containing details of the plot to block Biden. The message was sent to Jordan by Joseph Schmitz, a former US defense department inspector general, who outlined a “draft proposal” to pressure the then vice-president, Mike Pence, to refuse to certify audited election returns on 6 January. A portion of the message was revealed by the Democratic committee member and congressman Adam Schiff. It read: “On January 6, 2021, Vice-President Mike Pence, as president of the Senate, should call out all electoral votes that he believes are unconstitutional as no electoral votes at all.”For many Democrats, Joe Manchin has become an unshakeable problem. The centrist senator is at odds with other Democrats on everything from filibuster reform to climate policy, and he recently announced his opposition to the Build Back Better Act, the lynchpin of Joe Biden’s legislative agenda. But Republicans think Manchin now represents an opportunity to boost their numbers. As Democrats have leveled fierce criticism at the West Virginia senator in the past few days, Republicans have resurrected their campaign to recruit him to their party. The stakes of this charm offensive could not be higher. With the Senate split 50-50, Manchin’s party change would give Republicans the majority. If Republicans take control of the Senate, they would have the ability to block Biden’s nominees and quash Democratic bills. Speaking to the New York Times on Tuesday, the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, reiterated his invitiation to Manchin to join the Republican caucus. “Obviously we would love to have him on our team,” McConnell said. “I think he’d be more comfortable.” The Republican senator John Cornyn said he also texted Manchin on Tuesday to tell him: “Joe, if they don’t want you we do.” Cornyn told the NBC affiliate KXAN that he had not heard back from Manchin, but he said a change in Senate control would be “the greatest Christmas gift I can think of”. Manchin has not given any indication that he is seriously considering switching parties. In a Monday interview with West Virginia Radio, Manchin said he believed there was still room in the Democratic party for someone with his views. “I would like to hope that there are still Democrats that feel like I do,” Manchin said. “I’m socially – I’m fiscally responsible and socially compassionate.” He added: “Now, if there’s no Democrats like that, then they’ll have to push me wherever they want me.” Manchin has been even more pointed in the past when asked about his party identity. After a report emerged in October that he was seriously considering leaving the Democratic party, he dismissed the news as “bullshit”. But he acknowledged he had previously offered to change his party affiliation to “independent” if his views ever became an “embarrassment” for Biden or other Senate Democrats. “I said, me being a moderate centrist Democrat — if that causes you a problem, let me know and I’d switch to be independent,” Manchin said in October. At the time, none of Manchin’s Democratic colleagues took him up on the offer, although some may now be tempted to do so. When Manchin announced he would oppose Build Back Better, after he had already demanded major changes to the spending package to limit its size and scope, some congressional Democrats sounded ready to abandon their colleague. “It’s unfortunate that it seems we can’t trust Senator Manchin’s word,” Pramila Jayapal, the chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, said on Monday. “We’re not going to wait for one man to decide on one day that he’s with us, and on the other day that he’s not.” For McConnell, that is an opening to try to wrest back control of the Senate. “Why in the world would they want to call him a liar and try to hotbox him and embarrass him?” McConnell told the Times. “I think the message is, ‘We don’t want you around.’ Obviously that is up to Joe Manchin, but he is clearly not welcome on that side of the aisle.”Antonio Conte has had one route to cup glory unceremoniously closed off this week. The Tottenham manager was never going to allow another one to slip through his fingers. Conte remains furious at how his club’s Europa Conference League campaign ended on Monday – in the forfeiting of the final group phase tie against Rennes after Covid positives ripped through the dressing-room – and he wants a solution via the courts. Spurs got the job done in more conventional fashion here, responding to Conte’s urgings to secure a frantic derby victory. Roared on by 5,700 travelling fans, West Ham played a full part in a proper cup tie, Jarrod Bowen – who scored a fabulous equaliser – in fine form and the captain, Declan Rice, a remorseless driving presence. Neither deserved to be on the losing team and West Ham will wonder how they let this tie get away from them. They played on the front foot for long spells, particularly in the second half, and had 22 shots to Spurs’ 14. They had several big chances. Yet it is Tottenham who advance to a Carabao Cup semi-final with Chelsea, pitting Conte against his former club, and they had one of their forgotten men to thank – the lesser-spotted Steven Bergwijn. Starting his first game under Conte and his first for the club since 27 October, which was the 1-0 win at Burnley in the previous round of this competition, the winger came to life in the first half, scoring the opening goal and laying on what proved to be the winner for Lucas Moura. Bergwijn has struggled with injuries and largely flattered to deceive after joining Spurs from PSV Eindhoven in January of last year. He has been touted for another move next month and so his performance was timely – either to convince Conte to persist with him or to alert potential suitors. David Moyes had wondered whether it might be West Ham’s year in the competition, his team having beaten both Manchester clubs to set up this game, but he would be disabused of the notion, the sense it was not his night crystalising in stoppage time. The substitute Andriy Yarmolenko cut inside and saw his shot deflect, loop up and drop towards the far corner, with Hugo Lloris scrambling back. The ball skimmed the crossbar and went behind. For the corner Alphonse Areola came up and the ball would reach the goalkeeper but there would be no twist in the tale. West Ham have reached only three cup semi-finals in all competitions since 1991. The strange thing about Bergwijn’s evening was that it began badly; his touch heavy, his passing awry. He looked low on confidence and the crowd chuntered. Everything changed on 28 minutes when Pierre-Emile Højbjerg accepted a layoff from him and drove up the right-hand side of the area. The midfielder might have shot but, instead, he played a pass back inside with disguise for Bergwijn to finish from close range. Although Harry Kane worked Areola after a lovely Lucas through-ball, West Ham had been the brighter team at the outset, Bowen testing Lloris from a free-kick and seeing another effort blocked by Davinson Sánchez. His quick feet were a delight and the collective response to the concession was superb. Twice Tomas Soucek extended Lloris with headers while Craig Dawson blew a free header from a Bowen corner. The equaliser came at the end of what was a lengthy spell of West Ham pressure. Eric Dier, talked up pre-match by Conte as having the ability to be the best in the world in the middle of a back three, gave the ball away to Soucek and, when Nikola Vlasic hammered into the area, Bowen controlled before buying a yard from Dier with a brilliant piece of trickery. The finish was low and true. Back came Spurs, with Bergwijn exploding past Manuel Lanzini to spark the move. With no tackle from either Arthur Masuaku or Issa Diop, Bergwijn crossed and Lucas jabbed home. Was Sergio Reguilón offside in the eyeline of Areola, who got down too slowly? There was no VAR although, from a West Ham point of view, it was all too easy. “A couple of defensive lapses and we’ve given Tottenham easy goals,” said Moyes, who was without his entire first-choice back four – the suspended Vladimir Coufal; and the injured Angelo Ogbonna, Kurt Zouma and Aaron Cresswell – plus Michail Antonio. The key striker had tested positive for Covid. Antonio is double-vaccinated and symptom-free and, as such, Moyes suggested it might have been a false positive. “There is a good chance we may have him back for Boxing Day,” Moyes said. Bergwijn was denied a second goal by Dawson while the excellent Oliver Skipp had earlier stuck out a leg to thwart Soucek at the far post. Bowen continued to menace in the second half while the substitute, Saïd Benrahma, flickered. Spurs held firm.Perhaps Chelsea’s personnel problems have been overstated. After all, their complaints about the schedule felt slightly overblown when Thomas Tuchel, looking for a way to settle this Carabao Cup quarter-final, turned to his bench with 14 minutes left and told N’Golo Kanté to get ready. Was it more irresponsible behaviour from Tuchel? He had said he risked injuring Kanté by starting him when Chelsea were short of numbers against Wolves last Sunday and everything had pointed to him giving the midfielder a breather before the European champions attempt to revive their faltering Premier League challenge when they visit Aston Villa on Boxing Day. Yet it turns out that Tuchel, who had already introduced Jorginho, Christian Pulisic, Mason Mount and Reece James, was fibbing when he said that Kanté would play no part against Brentford. Or perhaps he had a late change of heart. Either way the gamble was worth it. Chelsea are a different team when Kanté is fit and he underlined his importance to Tuchel during his brief cameo here, taking control of midfield as soon as he came on and starting the move that culminated in Pontus Jansson’s game-changing own goal. Kanté, who has been badly missed since limping off against Juventus last month, had been on the pitch for only four minutes when Jansson inadvertently put Chelsea ahead. In truth, it was a deserved goal. Chelsea had called the shots after surviving a testing opening period and a semi-final against Tottenham was theirs once Jorginho had killed Brentford off with a late penalty. In the end Brentford were left to rue a missed opportunity. Thomas Frank’s side were wasteful in the opening period and they were outclassed when Tuchel’s changes upped the ante in the second half. “The first half, we should definitely have been in front,” Frank said. “The second half, we struggled to create. But we gave nothing away until the 80th minute. Two mistakes gave them their goals.” There was a callow feel to Chelsea at the start. Injuries and positive Covid tests left them without nine key players and forced Tuchel to hand debuts to three teenagers. The risks were clear and there is no doubt that Tuchel would have preferred to wait rather than use the kids here. Nonetheless this was an opportunity for Chelsea to show off their brilliant academy. The attack was led by Jude Soonsup-Bell, a 17-year-old forward, and there was excitement about seeing Harvey Vale playing off the front. Vale is tipped to be the next big star at Chelsea and the 18-year-old was involved when the visitors made their first chance, combining with Soonsup-Bell before Ross Barkley screwed a volley wide. Inevitably, though, Chelsea were vulnerable before the break. It was difficult for the youngsters given that the academy had been shut for a week because of Covid. Soonsup-Bell was unable to assert himself and Vale was wasteful with a free header. At right wing-back meanwhile, Xavier Simons often had his hands full with Rico Henry. Brentford, who also had selection issues after postponing their game against Southampton last weekend, should have led at half-time. Yoane Wissa and Mathias Jensen both saw easy headers saved by Kepa Arrizabalaga, who was also out quickly to deny Henry when the wing-back surged behind Simons. Those misses came back to haunt Brentford. They could not get at Chelsea’s back three of Malang Sarr, César Azpilicueta and Trevoh Chalobah after the break. Tuchel had acted, bringing on Pulisic for Soonsup-Bell, while Mateo Kovacic had made way for Jorginho after making his first start since October. “We did everything to be in the semi-final,” Tuchel said. “We deserve to be there. We had a brilliant performance.” Chelsea were more like themselves after Tuchel’s tweaks. Jorginho controlled midfield and the opening goal almost arrived when Saúl Ñíguez, making only his sixth start since joining on loan from Atlético Madrid, crossed from the left. Álvaro Fernández, who would also save well from Barkley, had to react quickly to stop Henry scoring an own goal. The pressure grew when Mount, James and Kanté replaced Vale, Simons and Barkley. Kanté was untouchable. He kept finding gaps and soon made the difference, driving into space and finding James, whose cross was diverted in by Jansson. Chelsea’s strength in depth was too much for Brentford. Soon the £58m Pulisic was running through before being fouled by Fernández. Jorginho, who finished third in this year’s Ballon d’Or standings, tucked the penalty away and Tuchel could turn his thoughts to taking on Villa.David Hytner was our man at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium tonight. His report has landed, and here it is. Thanks for reading this MBM. Stay safe and warm, everyone, and have a lovely Christmas. Nighty night! Semi-final draw Arsenal v Liverpool Chelsea v Tottenham Hotspur Antonio Conte, who will be returning to his former club in the semis, delivers his verdict to Sky. “It’s good for Tottenham to reach the semi-final of this competition. You can see the name of the teams that reach this semi, it means every club wants to try to lift this trophy. I remember in the past, this trophy was used to play with young players, but now I’m seeing to win a trophy in England is very difficult. West Ham have beaten United and City. In England it is very difficult to win something!” A disappointed David Moyes talks to Sky. “The players showed great determination and character. They put in a brilliant effort. In my mind, there was a couple of really poor bits of defending which gave them the opportunity to score. It was self-inflicted. We were unfortunate that a couple of big chances didn’t go in. It was a tough game and we let ourselves down on a couple of incidents in the first half, but overall the players did a great job.” Arsenal v Liverpool Chelsea v Tottenham Hotspur Ties to be played week commencing January 3, with the second leg coming a week later. The draw. Jamie Redknapp and Michael Dawson will make it. Hopefully they’ll be a lot quicker - and prove significantly less inept - than the light-entertainment legends at Uefa. Here we go, then! Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool and Tottenham Hotspur are the four semi-finalists, then. Draw coming up soon! Brentford 0-2 Chelsea (Jansson og 80, Jorginho 85 pen) Liverpool 3-3 Leicester City (Oxlade-Chamberlain 19, Jota 68, Minamino 90+5; Vardy 9 13, Maddison 33) - Liverpool win 5-4 on penalties Tottenham Hotspur 2-1 West Ham United (Bergwijn 29, Moura 34; Bowen 32) PENS: Liverpool 5-4 Leicester. Jota has a chance to win it for Liverpool. He takes his time before slotting calmly into the bottom left. Liverpool, having been 0-2 and 1-3 down, are through to the semis! Caoimhin Kelleher and, despite his penalty miss, Takumi Minamino the heroes! Liverpool 3-3 Leicester City; Liverpool win 5-4 on pens. PENS: Liverpool 4-4 Leicester. Bertrand has to wait an age for the ball. Eventually a new one arrives. Boos ring out around Anfield ... and they rock Bertrand, who rolls a poor effort towards the bottom right, Kelleher clawing away. PENS: Liverpool 4-4 Leicester. Minamino, who scored that last-gasp equaliser, blazes over! The ball twangs off the top of the crossbar and out! What drama here! PENS: Liverpool 4-4 Leicester. Iheanacho has to score to keep Leicester alive. He roofs a brilliant one. Can Schmeichel perform similar heroics? PENS: Liverpool 4-3 Leicester. Keita goes high and left, and Schmeichel has no chance. PENS: Liverpool 3-3 Leicester. Thomas goes for the bottom right, but doesn’t get enough pace on it. Kelleher guesses correctly and palms away from goal. Advantage Liverpool. PENS: Liverpool 3-3 Leicester. Oxlade-Chamberlain takes a while to sort himself out. He eventually places the ball and whacks one into the bottom left. Schmeichel guesses correctly again, but can’t get there. PENS: Liverpool 2-3 Leicester. Albrighton slams one down the middle, Kelleher diving out of the road. PENS: Liverpool 2-2 Leicester. Firmino stutters and slots into the bottom right. Schmeichel guesses correctly but can’t reach. PENS: Liverpool 1-2 Leicester. Maddison lashes one past Kelleher, high and down the middle. PENS: Liverpool 1-1 Leicester. Milner whistles Liverpool’s first penalty into the bottom right, sending Schmeichel the wrong way. PENS: Liverpool 0-1 Leicester. Tielemans whips an unstoppable one into the top left. It’s full time at Anfield. Liverpool and Leicester City, with 11 League Cup titles between them, will take penalty kicks for a place in the semi-finals. Who’ll join Arsenal, Chelsea and Tottenham Hotspur in the last four? We’ll find out in short order. Liverpool 3-3 Leicester City. Liverpool have equalised in the fifth minute of stoppage time at Anfield! Takumi Minamino gets on the end of James Milner’s hail-mary pass, and volleys into the corner. It looks as though it’ll be penalties, unless there’s even more drama coming up. Liverpool 3-3 Leicester City. Chelsea are the third team from London in the semi-final draw. They’ve beaten Brentford with a couple of late goals. Brentford 0-2 Chelsea. ... West Ham’s dreams fade and die. Areola comes up for the corner, and even wins a header, but Lloris snaffles it, and that is that. Spurs are through to the semi-finals! 90 min +3: Fornals jinks down the inside-right channel and takes a pop from just inside the box. The ball takes a deflection and loops hysterically over Lloris ... but onto the bar and out for a corner. From which ... 90 min +2: West Ham can’t get anything going, Spurs closing all the gaps. 90 min +1: The Spurs fans are giving it plenty. So close to the semis now. 90 min: David Moyes isn’t happy with Tottenham’s unwillingness to restart the game quickly, and complains to the fourth official. His team will only have three extra minutes to save themselves. 89 min: Hojbjerg has a little sit down for a while. Some sly clock management. 88 min: West Ham are knocking it around nicely, but there are no gaps emerging in the Spurs defence. After a while, the Spurs press pushes the Hammers all the way back to their own box. Time ticks on. 86 min: West Ham have enjoyed 89 percent possession in the last ten minutes. Spurs are unquestionably in hold-what-you’ve-got mode. 85 min: Out west, Jorginho makes it two for Chelsea from the spot, Alvaro Fernandez having taken down Christian Pulisic. Brentford 0-2 Chelsea. 84 min: Rice dribbles down the inside-left channel and forces a corner. Fornals takes. The ball breaks to Benrahma, whose shot is immediately blocked. Yarmolenko loops in a cross from the right. Spurs get it clear. The hosts are holding on a bit now. 83 min: Spurs swap Reguilon and Doherty for Royal and Tanganga. 81 min: Chelsea have taken the lead at Brentford, Pontus Jansson slicing Reece James’ low right-wing into his own net. Brentford 0-1 Chelsea. 80 min: Ashby, who has put in a decent shift down the right flank, is replaced by Yarmolenko, who immediately gets involved. He rolls a pass in from the right for Benrahma, who takes a touch to tee himself up and creams a low diagonal shot across Lloris and inches wide of the left-hand post. What a goal that would have been! 79 min: Soucek swings one in from the right. The ball flies through to Masuaku, who delivers from the left. Spurs half clear. Benrahma has another look from 25 yards, and sends one straight down Lloris’s throat. West Ham are edging a little closer, though. 77 min: Skipp is replaced by Alli. 76 min: West Ham push Spurs back a little, the home team not helping themselves by giving the ball away cheaply a couple of times. Spurs restrict Benrahma to a speculative drive, but this is better from the visitors. 74 min: Kane latches onto a loose ball, 40 yards from goal. He romps towards the West Ham box, with options either side and West Ham light at the back. He slips infield for Son, who is clear in the box! But he takes an uncharacteristically heavy touch, allowing the ball to run through to Areola. What a chance that was to effectively close this out. West Ham breathe again. 72 min: Liverpool have closed the gap at Anfield again. Takumi Minamino plays Diogo Jota into the box with a reverse pass down the inside-left channel, and the in-form Portuguese striker makes no mistake. Liverpool 2-3 Leicester City. 70 min: Dawson clips Kane’s heel. Kane sits on the grass and moans a lot, then takes an age to put his boot back on. A masterclass in running down the clock. 69 min: West Ham make a double change. Lanzini and Vlasic are replaced by Benrahma and Fornals. Benrahma is immediately in the thick of the action, taking down Ashby’s right-wing cross, swivelling, and hoicking over the bar from 12 yards. He probably should have laid off to Fornals, though you can’t really criticise a striker for taking that on. 67 min: Reguilon stands one up from the left. Skipp battles to get a head on the ball, six yards from goal, but is crowded out. Only just. Spurs so close to what would surely be a clincher. 66 min: Both teams take turns to pass the ball around in the centre of the park. Neither achieve much, though Spurs are 120 seconds closer to the semi-final draw. 64 min: Doherty, Son and Skipp combine crisply down the right. They don’t quite manage to open West Ham up, but they paint some pretty triangles, and the crowd enjoy the passage of play. It’s not taken Conte long to get a tune out of Spurs, has it. 62 min: Son’s first act is to slip a pass down the right for Doherty, whose cross is blocked at close range by Masuaku. Doherty wants the penalty, but he’s not getting one, the ball having clanked into Masuaku’s chest before skimming off his arm. There’s no way that’s a penalty, though Conte doesn’t share that opinion, and dances around the dugout in disgust. 61 min: A double change for Spurs, as Bergwijn and Moura are replaced by Son and Winks. 59 min: Ashby throws himself into the back of Reguilon, hoping to win a cheap penalty. All it leads to is Hojbjerg getting right up in his grille. The pair are pulled apart before things can properly escalate. 58 min: Lanzini launches long down the middle. Bowen latches onto it and enters the box, bursting between Dier and Davies. Lloris is out quickly, though, and spreads himself at his feet, tipping the ball off his toe, just in time. Great play all round. 56 min: Masuaku crosses from the left. Davies is forced to turn the ball behind under pressure from Bowen. Moura clears Lanzini’s corner. West Ham have enjoyed 65 percent of possession since the restart. Spurs seem happy enough to hold their shape, though, and they’re doing it well. 54 min: Doherty crosses low from the right. The ball balloons up onto Moura’s arm. Free kick. Shame for Spurs, because Moura was clear, ten yards out, had he managed to control properly. 53 min: Masuaku’s free kick is clanked clear by Davies. Lanzini floats a speculative ball back into the box. Easy for Lloris. A poor set piece by West Ham’s high standards. 52 min: Hojbjerg clips Lanzini, and it’s a free kick out on the left for West Ham. Everyone lines up on the edge of the Spurs box in anticipation. 50 min: Skipp has a whack from distance. The ball takes a huge deflection off Bergwijn and nearly flies into the bottom right, Areola rooted to the spot. But it flies wide. Spurs have launched themselves into this second half. 48 min: Bergwijn dribbles in from the left and nearly sends Kane clear again, but his dinked pass into the box is read by Rice, who intercepts and strides calmly away. 47 min: Soucek is caught late by Skipp, who is fairly lucky not to go into the book for his ungainly lunge. 46 min: Bergwijn’s shake and shimmy draws two defenders, and he nearly releases Kane down the middle. A bit too much on the pass forward, and Areola is able to claim. What a start to the half that could have been. West Ham get the second half underway. No changes. Half-time entertainment. The half-time scores in the other two quarter-finals. Brentford 0-0 Chelsea Liverpool 1-3 Leicester City (Oxlade-Chamberlain 19; Vardy 9 13, Maddison 33) This is a great cup tie, and while only one team will be pleased with the scoreline, both will be happy with their performance. More soon! 45 min +2: Kane bustles his way into the box down the right. He’s lightly clipped and considers going down, but stays on his feet and hits a low cross-cum-shot that Areola has to tip away from the lurking Bergwijn. 45 min: Some good work by Masuaku out on the left. He curls in a dangerous cross. Sanchez crashes a header clear under plenty of pressure. There will be two added minutes. 44 min: Spurs take a little heat out of the game with some sterile passing around the back. 42 min: There’s been a third goal for Leicester at Anfield. James Maddison has larruped one in from 25 yards at the Kop end. Liverpool 1-3 Leicester City. 40 min: Bergwijn races clear and flicks the ball over the stranded Areola. As he prepares to walk it into the net, the flag goes up for offside. Just for a second, Hammers hearts were in mouths there. 38 min: Bowen is booked for a cynical tug of the in-flight Reguilon’s shirt. Conte is furious. So is Moyes, because the referee only took action after being alerted by the fourth official. But what’s right is right. 36 min: This is preposterous, and marvellously so. Lanzini, to the left of the Spurs D, curls a delicious ball towards Soucek at the far post. Soucek is preparing to trundle home, but Skipp gets in the road, just in time. So close to a second equaliser. Nothing comes of the resulting corner. ... and now they’re behind again! Bergwijn, to the right of the D, jinks his way around Lanzini on the outside, reaches the byline, and rolls across for Moura, who forces the ball home, into the bottom right. What a game this is! 33 min: There were 197 seconds between the goals, during which West Ham could easily have scored three. Dier’s dismal pass upfield is snaffled by Soucek. The ball’s shuttled back towards the box by Rice. Vlasic has a dig. His poor shot drags straight to Bowen on the spot. He takes a touch, spins, sends Dier off to the shops for the Standard, and threads a shot into the bottom left! 31 min: From the set piece, Soucek is again denied by Lloris, tipping his header over te bar. And from the second corner, Dawson rises six yards out, but slams his header over the bar. Big miss. But no matter, because ... 30 min: West Ham nearly hit back immediately, Soucek sending a looper towards the top left from distance. Lloris does extremely well to tip out for a corner. Hojbjerg picks the ball up deep. He pings a pass down the inside-right channel for Bergwijn, just inside the box, Bergwijn lays off for Hojbjerg, who had continued his run. Hojbjerg rolls the ball across the face of the six-yard box, and it’s an easy tap-in for Bergwijn, who steers into the bottom left. Satchmo with the assist. 27 min: Nothing much going on right now, so the home fans amuse themselves with a bespoke version of this. 25 min: No goals yet at the Brentford Community Stadium either. Liverpool and Leicester doing all of the heavy lifting so far. 23 min: Reguilon takes. It’s not very good. “Well this has nothing to do with the game right now, but I saw on the website an article about how England players were made to watch their wickets falling like snowflakes,” begins Yash Gupta. “Fair to say cricket is a bit behind. Dear old Jose wasn’t afraid to do this when he was the manager. If he was to be in England’s dressing room, some of them would be crying right now.” 22 min: Masuaku stands on Doherty’s boot, and this is a free kick for Spurs just to the right of the West Ham box. Load it up, everyone. 21 min: Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain has reduced Liverpool’s arrears against Leicester, driving home from the edge of the box after being teed up by Roberto Firmino. Liverpool 1-2 Leicester City. 20 min: Soucek clips Hojbjerg’s heel, and should probably go in the book. He doesn’t, though, causing Conte to tell him what’s what in the economical style. 19 min: Vlasic shakes and shimmies down the inside-left channel and has a dig from just inside the box. The ball deflects out for another corner, which Lanzini hoicks into the mixer again. Lloris punches clear once more. This is a good response from West Ham. 18 min: West Ham win a corner down the left. Lanzini whips it in, forcing Lloris to punch clear, the ball sailing dangerously close to the top-left corner. 17 min: A couple of goals already at Anfield, and both have been scored by Jamie Vardy, on nine and 13 minutes. Liverpool 0-2 Leicester City. 16 min: Bowen’s low delivery is punched clear by Lloris, and then a game of pinball breaks out. Eventually the bedlam dies down and Spurs clear their lines properly. 15 min: The young West Ham right-back Ashby dribbles down the right and is upended by Reguilon. A free kick near the corner flag, and a chance to load the box. 14 min: Rice slides in hectically on Skipp, who isn’t happy with the challenge at all. The referee’s decision: a shrug. Skipp is fuming. A few meaty challenges made already. This could be good fun. 13 min: ... but back come Spurs, Bergwijn and Reguilon combining down the left. The latter’s eventual cross is no good, but all of a sudden the hosts have picked up the tempo. 12 min: Moura spins into space, centrally, 40 yards out. He plays a first-time defence-splitting pass down the inside-left channel for Kane, who takes a touch to enter the box before launching a low drive towards the bottom right. Areola parries well, and the rebound falls to a friendly face and the danger is over. 10 min: Rice plants a rising drive into the top-right corner ... of the stand behind the goal. He allows himself a wry smile. That was ambitious even for a man of his talents. 9 min: Vlasic attempts to make good down the inside-left channel and is crudely checked by Doherty. A free kick, 30 yards out. Everyone lines up on the edge of the box. 8 min: Nothing comes of the corner. Areola gathers with ease. 7 min: Bergwijn shimmies in from the left and is allowed to reach the box. He takes a whack, the ball caroming off poor Dawson’s trouser arrangement and out for the first corner of the game. 5 min: Lanzini flies in on Doherty, who isn’t too happy at getting caught on the shin. As tackles go, it only registers 4/10 on the Kane-o-meter, so it’s just a quick ticking off. That irked the crowd, though, it’s fair to say. 4 min: Moura dribbles purposefully down the inside-left channel, and is gently clipped from behind by Soucek. Moura takes an age to go down, but does so eventually on the edge of the box, and the free kick is awarded a few yards back upfield, where contact was first made. Dier takes the free kick and blooters it witlessly into the wall. 3 min: Hojbjerg has somehow taken a whack on the beak, and he’s ordered to the touchline for the application of cotton wool, and a change of shirt. He’ll be fine to continue when patched up. 2 min: Spurs spend the first minute carefully stroking it around the back. They reprise that carry-on in the second. Spurs get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee. A gesture that’s met with warm applause. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! Both teams are able to wear their famous colours. Tottenham in lilywhite, West Ham in claret and blue. A rare atmosphere at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, as you’d expect for one of the big London derbies. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! Arsenal are already through to the last four, having trounced third-tier Sunderland last night at the Emirates. A reminder that the semi-final draw will take place after tonight’s three quarters are settled, and we’ll be covering that on this MBM too. Those good results for West Ham against Tottenham, then. The Hammers have won their last two against Spurs, 1-0 and 2-1, both wins coming at the London Stadium this year. The most invigorating result was the one before that, though: a 3-3 draw secured in N17 in October 2020, having been 3-0 down after 16 minutes and still three goals adrift with only eight left on the clock. Another six-goal thriller would certainly warm the cockles on a chilly night. Six-goal thriller, please, lads! David Moyes takes his turn. “It’s been some draws in the cup [West Ham have already played Manchester United and Manchester City] but the players have played really well in it, so let’s hope we can do it again tonight. Antonio tested positive last week, so he’s getting closer now, but obviously not for tonight. We’ve prepared like every other team, with uncertainty every day, but at the moment we’ve been pretty good with Covid. We’re a bit limited with some injuries but have tried to give other people some opportunities. Harrison Ashby is deserving of his chance and is very close to being a Premier League player. Recently we’ve had a few good results against Tottenham so hopefully we can keep it going.” Antonio Conte speaks to Sky. “This is a period when we have to try to manage the situation. We have to make changes. Don’t forget we are facing Covid problems, and we have to go game by game. We have to give people who were infected the right to recover. For us, every game is important, but Tottenham have to build again with good foundation. We have to be stronger in the future than now.” There are two other quarter-finals being played this evening. Brentford host Chelsea, while Liverpool welcome Leicester City. It’s fair to say Chelsea and Liverpool are fielding experimental teams this evening. Thomas Tuchel gives debuts to academy prospects Harvey Vale, Jude Soonsup-Bell and Xavier Simons, while Jurgen Klopp hands a shirt to 19-year-old central defender Billy Koumetio for the first time, and plays nominal right-back Neco Williams as part of his front three. We’ll keep you posted as and when events unfold. Tottenham boss Antonio Conte makes six changes to the XI that started the 2-2 draw with Liverpool. Matt Doherty, Sergio Reguilon, Oliver Skipp, Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, Lucas Moura and Steven Bergwijn are in; Emerson, Harry Winks, Dele Alli, Tanguy Ndombele, Son Heung-min and Ryan Sessegnon make way. David Moyes makes four changes to the West Ham XI named for the 2-0 loss at Arsenal last week. Lukasz Fabianski, Vladimir Coufal, Pablo Fornals and Michail Antonio are replaced by Alphonse Areola, Harrison Ashby, Ben Johnson and Nikola Vlasic. Antonio is missing after testing positive for Covid-19. Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Sanchez, Dier, Davies, Doherty, Hojbjerg, Skipp, Reguilon, Lucas Moura, Kane, Bergwijn. Subs: Son, Winks, Emerson, Rodon, Lo Celso, Alli, Gollini, Tanganga, Ndombele. West Ham United: Areola, Johnson, Dawson, Diop, Ashby, Soucek, Rice, Masuaku, Bowen, Lanzini, Vlasic. Subs: Yarmolenko, Fornals, Noble, Benrahma, Fredericks, Kral, Randolph, Alese, Baptiste. Referee: Chris Kavanagh (Lancashire). It’s been way too long for both of these teams. Tottenham Hotspur haven’t won a trophy since 2008, when they shocked Chelsea in the League Cup final; West Ham United haven’t lifted a pot since beating Arsenal to the 1980 FA Cup. The stakes tonight are high, then: win this London derby and you can really start to dream. Both teams are trending in the right direction, and both will fancy their chances of making it through to the last four. Could be an appropriately festive cracker, with no VAR, no extra time, and no quarter given. Kick off is at 7.45pm. It’s on!Jurgen Klopp will fret over squeezing a two-legged semi-final with Arsenal into Liverpool’s already demanding schedule but, for a fleeting moment at least, the Carabao Cup brought him joy at Anfield. A rousing fightback and penalty shootout victory against Leicester underlined that, while the faces may change, Liverpool’s indefatigable spirit does not waver. Liverpool came from 2-0 down and 3-1 down to take an enthralling quarter-final to penalties courtesy of a 95th‑minute equaliser from Takumi Minamino. The Japan international missed the chance for a perfect night by blazing Liverpool’s fifth and potentially decisive spot-kick over the bar. But no other teammate faltered. Liverpool’s stand-in goalkeeper Caoimhin Kelleher saved from Luke Thomas and in sudden-death from Ryan Bertrand. Diogo Jota drilled his team’s sixth penalty past Kasper Schmeichel’s right hand and Klopp’s unfamiliar team were in the unfamiliar territory of a domestic cup semi-final. For Leicester, however this was a glorious opportunity squandered. The visitors were comfortably in the ascendency at half-time after two Jamie Vardy strikes and a stunning effort from James Maddison. But injuries to Ricardo Pereira and Caglar Soyuncu, forcing their departures from a depleted defence, prompted a reshuffle from Brendan Rodgers and Liverpool eventually capitalised on Leicester’s weary retreat. Jota was instrumental in the recovery, so too Naby Keita, two of the second-half changes from Klopp that helped to transform the tie. “We had to change the structure of the team in the second half because of the injuries,” said the Leicester manager, who was unable to call on Vardy in the shootout as his goalscorer was nursing a hamstring problem. “In the first half we were excellent, scored three goals at Anfield and should have had four or five. Defensively you know you are going to suffer at times but it looked like we were just going to get through, so to concede in the 95th minute is so disappointing after everything the players put in.” Klopp handed a first senior start to the French central defender Billy Koumetio and included fellow teenagers Tyler Morton and Conor Bradley in a lineup that featured 10 changes to the starting XI at Tottenham on Sunday. All three were replaced at half‑time. Rodgers went much stronger, despite the Covid issues that had forced the postponement of Leicester’s past two Premier League games against Spurs and Everton. He was repaid with an incisive first‑half performance that should have produced a healthier lead against an uncertain Liverpool defence. Patson Daka cut through from Leicester’s first attack, forcing Kelleher to save at his near post following a careless pass from Joe Gomez. Moments later Kostas Tsimikas gave possession away cheaply and left his full-back position exposed. Boubakary Soumaré exchanged passes with Pereira before finding Maddison. The midfielder released Vardy with a delightful first-time ball and the veteran struck a clean, low finish beyond Kelleher. Vardy did not have to wait long to add to his 10th goal of the season. Leicester again attacked with speed and precision when Neco Williams lost possession to the impressive Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall. He found Daka in space on the left and, as Koumetio closed down, the striker threaded a perfect ball behind the Liverpool defence for Vardy to convert from close range. Tsimikas made amends for his error when creating Liverpool’s swift response through Oxlade-Chamberlain. The Greece international flicked the ball over the head of Pereira, who was injured by a poor early foul from Morton and eventually forced off, and crossed for Williams to head into Roberto Firmino. Liverpool’s centre-forward found the midfielder on the edge of the area and Oxlade‑Chamberlain swept a fine shot into Schmeichel’s bottom right-hand corner. Leicester claimed their third in style. Maddison got a fortunate bounce of the ball when, collecting a pass from Dewsbury-Hall, he rode a challenge from Oxlade-Chamberlain. There was nothing fortuitous about the shot that followed. Glancing up from 25 yards out, the midfielder connected superbly to find the roof of the net. It was a sweet, powerful effort but also straight down the middle of Kelleher’s goal, and the keeper’s reaction suggested he knew he should have done better. Vardy almost made it four before the break when Gomez let a routine pass from Morton slip by. The Leicester forward pounced and, despite beating Kelleher once again, his low shot cannoned off the inside of the far post before being cleared by Gomez. Klopp injected greater experience into his team with a triple half‑time substitution and the recovery gathered pace when Jota beat Schmeichel with a clinical finish from Minamino’s touch. Leicester appeared to have survived when Schmeichel tipped over a flying Jota header but, in the dying seconds, Wilfred Ndidi missed his header from James Milner’s cross and Minamino swept the equaliser into the bottom corner. Cue penalties and a place in the semi-finals.The Omicron variant of coronavirus appears to be milder, with a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight, the first UK data of its kind has showed. But as daily Covid cases topped 100,000 for the first time on Wednesday, experts warned that high transmissibility means the NHS is still at risk of being overwhelmed. In what was described by scientists as a “qualified good news story”, two studies on Wednesday pointed to a lower risk of hospitalisation with Omicron. An Imperial College outbreak modelling team led by Prof Neil Ferguson analysed hospitalisations and vaccine records among all PCR-confirmed Covid cases in England between 1 and 14 December. The dataset included 56,000 cases of Omicron and 269,000 cases of Delta. Their report found that the risk of any attendance at hospital was 20% to 25% lower with Omicron versus Delta, and 40%-45% lower when the visit resulted in admission for at least one night. For the small percentage of people who had neither been previously infected with Covid nor vaccinated, the risk of hospitalisation was about 11% lower for Omicron versus Delta. Ferguson said that while it was “good news”, the assessment did not substantially change Sage modelling pointing to 3,000 daily hospitalisations in England at the peak of the wave next month without restrictions beyond the plan B measures currently in place. While the analysis shows evidence of “a moderate reduction” in the risk of hospitalisation associated with Omicron compared with Delta, Ferguson said, “this appears to be offset by the reduced efficacy of vaccines against infection with the Omicron variant”. “Given the high transmissibility of the Omicron virus, there remains the potential for health services to face increasing demand if Omicron cases continue to grow at the rate that has been seen in recent weeks,” he added. The Imperial study found that having had a previous Covid infection reduced the risk of hospitalisation from Omicron by about half compared with a first infection, the report adds. Those hospitalised with Omicron had on average shorter stays – 0.22 days compared with 0.32 days for Delta – but more data is needed, particularly in older age groups among whom Omicron is currently less prevalent. It is too early to assess the risk of admission to intensive care and death, but the researchers say greater reductions in risk are possible. A separate, preliminary analysis of Omicron cases in Scotland pointed to an even greater reduction in the risk of hospitalisation compared with Delta. Scientists on the Eave II study, using hospital data from 23 November to 19 December, concluded that the risk of hospitalisation may be 70% lower with Omicron than Delta. Dr Jim McMenamin, the national Covid-19 incident director for Public Health Scotland, welcomed a “qualified good news story”, but said that it was “important we don’t get ahead of ourselves”. The Scottish study, which has yet to be peer reviewed, is based on small numbers and most Omicron cases were in people aged 20 to 39, meaning researchers were unable to assess the severity of the disease in elderly people who are more vulnerable. The researchers logged 15 hospitalisations with Omicron, about a third of the 47 admissions that modelling suggested they should expect given the characteristics of those infected. “The potentially serious impact of Omicron on a population cannot be underestimated. And a smaller proportion of a much greater number of cases that might ultimately require treatment can still mean a substantial number of people who may experience severe Covid infections that could lead to potential hospitalisation,” McMenamin said. It came as the number of UK daily infections hit a record high of 106,122 despite previous signs that the wave was starting to plateau. NHS England also said 301 Covid admissions were recorded by hospitals in London on 20 December, up 78% week on week and the highest number for a single day since 7 February. At Westminster no decisions have yet been taken by ministers about what restrictions, if any, should be introduced after Christmas, with many Tory backbenchers and some cabinet ministers sceptical about the need for further action. Contingency plans have been drawn up, but Downing Street sources insist these have not yet been put to ministers, and no further announcements are now expected before Christmas. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, urged the government to provide certainty. “The risk to the NHS remains. Boris Johnson needs to explain why people and businesses in England aren’t being told what the coming weeks look like, when those in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have clarity,” he said. The Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, Daisy Cooper, accused the prime minister of subjecting the public in England to “a Christmas of confusion and consternation”. “Once again Boris Johnson has crossed his fingers, closed his eyes and hoped for the best,” she said.The New South Wales government is considering mailing free rapid Covid-19 tests to people in an attempt to ease delays at the state’s overloaded testing centres but has resisted growing calls to reintroduce indoor mask mandates amid record case numbers. As the daily Covid-19 cases surged to a record 5,715 on Thursday, the government also confirmed that it would reintroduce mandatory QR check-ins at retail and hospitality venues in an attempt to assist contact tracers. The arrival of the highly contagious Omicron variant coupled with requirements in a number of states for visitors to provide a negative PCR test before crossing borders has placed significant strain on the capacity of testing centres across the country. The government is exploring the possibility of adopting a scheme similar to the UK, where rapid antigen tests have been mailed out to homes, as well as potentially being available through general practitioners and pharmacists. The state’s premier, Dominic Perrottet, has tasked health minister, Brad Hazzard, with exploring options for a massive order of the tests which would then be distributed throughout the state. “Our approach to Covid has never been ‘set and forget’ – we will always look at options and different ways doing things as we learn to navigate our way through the pandemic,” Perrottet said. “This will also help people monitor their own symptoms and go about their daily activities in a responsible manner helping protect themselves, their families and the community.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But the state government has continued to resist introducing mask mandates. This came after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said after Wednesday’s national cabinet meeting that it was not necessary to enforce mandates despite advice from the national chief medical officer, Paul Kelly. The state government confirmed on Thursday that QR codes would again become mandatory in most NSW venues after those rules were relaxed earlier this month. Brad Hazzard has also floated the idea of forcing unvaccinated people to pay for hospital stays caused by Covid-19 infections, telling Guardian Australia it was “an option under consideration by the NSW government”. After the national cabinet meeting Morrison called on the states to reopen mass vaccination hubs to speed up the rollout of booster shots. But Hazzard hit back at that suggestion, telling the Sydney Morning Herald that healthcare staff shortages meant boosters should primarily be provided by GPs and pharmacists. On Thursday Guardian Australia reported that pharmacists in the Covid-hit city of Newcastle have experienced significant shortages of booster vaccines and are having to turn away many of those looking for jabs. As Covid cases continue to surge in NSW, the state’s health department reported there were now 347 people hospitalised with the virus, up from 303 the day before, with 45 people in ICU, an increase of five.West Australians will swelter through an extremely hot festive weekend, with Perth expected to peak at 42C on Christmas Day. The blistering conditions, caused by the southward migration of dry desert heat, have sparked severe fire danger warnings for the region. The latest weather forecasts for Saturday show a proper downpour is expected in the Top End, with Darwin looking at a 95% chance of rain, and showers likely in Brisbane. Milder conditions are expected in the south-east of the country, although Canberrans should get ready for a warm 31C. One thing all states have in common is a predicted UV index of “extreme”. So if you are celebrating outdoors, remember to slip, slop, slap. Western Australia West Australians will endure the most extreme Christmas Day weather in the country, with Perth set for a 42C scorcher. Extreme heatwave conditions are expected to stretch from south of Bunbury up past the state’s capital and north of Geraldton across the festive weekend. The coast will endure temperatures above 40C, sparked by dry desert heat travelling south. And night will bring little respite, with a minimum of 27C predicted for Boxing Day. The conditions are “historic”, according to senior meteorologist with the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) Jackson Browne. “We haven’t seen extreme category heatwave conditions in the Perth region since December of 1996,” he said. The region should also be on high alert for fire danger, with a severe warning expected for Perth on Christmas Day. Elsewhere, Port Hedland is predicted to hit a high of 38C, while up in Broome and down in Kalgoorlie a hot 35C is expected. New South Wales A warm and cloudy weekend is predicted for Sydney, with Christmas Eve to bring a high of 27C and possible showers. On the big day itself, the mercury is expected to hit 29C in the city and 32C in Penrith, with a slight chance of a shower and a possible thunderstorm in the afternoon and evening. It’s a slightly grimmer forecast for Boxing Day, with cloudy skies, an 80% chance of rain and a possible morning thunderstorm bad news for those planning to hit the beach. Up north Coffs Harbour is looking at a high of 26C and showers for Christmas Day, while Newcastle will touch 30C. Wollongong is predicted to hit 27C and down in Eden it’ll be 26C and partly cloudy. It’s a hot one out west, with temperatures in the mid 30s expected across much of the state. Victoria After a sunny and 26C Christmas Eve, Melburnians are expected to wake up to clouds on Christmas morning. But it won’t stay overcast for long, with the sky likely to clear to mostly sunny by the afternoon. Christmas Day will also bring a predicted top of 21C and a very slim chance of showers. On Boxing Day, the clouds are expected to make a comeback, with the predicted high dropping one degree to 20C. A couple of hours north, Christmas Day is expected to be hot, with a predicted top of 33C in Bendigo and an uncomfortable 35C in Shepparton, Echuca and Wodonga. West of Melbourne, Port Fairy and surrounding towns will see highs of just 18C. ACT The nation’s capital is expected to top 31C on Christmas Day, up from a pleasant 26C on Christmas Eve. A partly cloudy day is predicted, with a slight chance of a shower and a thunderstorm in the afternoon and evening. Light winds are expected. The 31C will only last a day, with a top of 25C expected on Boxing Day. South Australia The Adelaide forecast has been tweaked from mostly sunny to partly cloudy, but those planning to celebrate outdoors can rest assured no rain is predicted. The city is expecting a dry Christmas Day with a top of 27C, down from 31C on Christmas Eve. Some south to south-easterly winds are expected to blow through the metropolitan area at 25km/h to 35km/h. Inland, those in Oodnadatta can expect a hot 39C on Christmas Day with 37C for Coober Pedy. Cooler temperatures are expected at Mount Gambier (22C) and west at Ceduna (24C). Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Queensland Brisbanites should prepare for a wet Christmas, with rain expected from Christmas Eve through to Boxing Day and beyond. But the chance of a festive downpour will diminish further up the coast. Rain is predicted for Rockhampton on Christmas Day, but in Mackay and Townsville, it’s more likely to be a Boxing Day shower. Brisbane is expected to hit a high of 28C on Christmas Day, with tops rising to around 32C upstate. Cairns is expected to enjoy a rain-free Christmas weekend and highs of around 33C, while towns like Weipa on the Gulf of Carpentaria could see thunderstorms. In Birdsville, it’s a neat 40C and 37C north in Mt Isa. Northern Territory It is expected to be a wet and wild Christmas in the Top End, with thunderstorms expected across the region and a very high chance of rain in Darwin. Up to 80mm may fall on Christmas Day in the Northern Territory capital, where a top of 31C on Christmas Day is also expected. South in Alice Springs, a dry, partly cloudy day of 35C is expected, and at Uluru, a mostly sunny 38C. Hobart Tasmanians will have a cooler Christmas Day than the rest of the country with an expected high of 21C in Hobart, 23C in Devonport and 22C in Burnie. All three cities are expected to have cloudy skies across the weekend, but generally fine, dry conditions. Showers are expected, though, in the west and far south of the state.Atlético Madrid lost their fourth La Liga match in a row as Granada fought back to earn a 2-1 win against the defending champions. João Félix fired Atlético ahead with a perfect low shot from the edge of the box after just two minutes, but Granada equalised 15 minutes later with a stupendous long shot from Darwin Machís. The Venezuelan winger cut in from the left and fired a shot beyond Jan Oblak from 20 yards out. Midway through the second half, the hosts went ahead after Jorge Molina beat Oblak to a cross, with the goal awarded after a VAR check. Despite the best efforts of the indefatigable Félix, Atlético could not find a second goal, falling to their worst league run since Simeone became manager 10 years ago. “There are inexplicable things happening with our team,” the Atlético captain Koke said afterwards. “We dominate the games and suddenly they come and score an amazing goal in their only chance. It’s all about the details. It is not fair.” Atléti are in fifth, 17 points behind the leaders, Real Madrid, who earned a 2-1 victory at Athletic Bilbao. Karim Benzema scored two goals in the opening seven minutes as Carlo Ancelotti’s side moved eight points clear at the top despite missing eight players due to a Covid-19 outbreak. The French forward broke the 400-goal mark in his professional career with a stunning strike in the fourth minute. Benzema added another just three minutes later, pouncing on a defensive error to score his 15th league goal of the season. Oihan Sancet hit back for the hosts with a sensational goal in the 10th minute, but Real held on for victory. In Ligue 1, Mauro Icardi’s stoppage-time header helped 10-man Paris Saint-Germain salvage a draw at lowly Lorient after Sergio Ramos was sent off. PSG looked short of inspiration without the injured Neymar or the suspended Kylian Mbappé and Thomas Monconduit fired the hosts in front five minutes before half-time. Lionel Messi forced a save from Lorient Keeper Paul Nardi in the 81st minute, but PSG appeared destined for defeat when half-time substitute Sergio Ramos was sent off five minutes later after picking up two yellow cards – the 27th red card of his career, and his first in Ligue 1. Icardi headed home from Achraf Hakimi’s cross to keep Mauricio Pochettino’s side 13 points clear at the top. Nice are in second place after Mario Lemina and Justin Kluivert scored in a 2-1 comeback home win over Lens. Dimitri Payet rescued a point for Marseille against Reims, converting a penalty eight minutes into injury time, while Kevin Volland got the winner as Monaco fought back to beat Rennes. Montpellier boosted their top-four hopes with a convincing 4-1 home win over Angers, while defending champions Lille moved up to eighth as Jonathan David’s late goal gave them a 3-2 victory at Bordeaux. Bottom club Saint-Étienne suffered a costly defeat to Nantes, Randal Muani netting seven minutes from time. The Serie A leaders Internazionale extended their winning league run to seven matches as Denzel Dumfries scored the only goal in a 1-0 victory against Torino. The Dutch international defender struck after 30 minutes, coolly finishing off a counter-attack that started on the edge of the Inter box for his second goal in two games. Mid-table Torino put up a strong challenge, with Sasa Lukic’s free-kick forcing a sharp save from Samir Handanovic, but could not find a way through at San Siro as Simone Inzaghi’s side kept a sixth consecutive league clean sheet. “It was an important win, we knew that Torino are a difficult team to face,” Inzaghi told Dazn. “We knew about their ferocious pressing and that they would try to disrupt our game. We played a great match and barely risked anything. We are very satisfied with how we have ended the year.” Milan are four points behind their rivals in second after a 4-2 win at Empoli. Franck Kessié scored twice for Stefano Pioli’s side in the first half, either side of Nedim Bajrami’s goal for the hosts. Patrick Cutrone hit the bar for Empoli before Alessandro Florenzi’s free kick and a Theo Hernandez goal put the visitors in control. Andrea Pinamonti pulled one back from the penalty spot but Milan held on, and bounced back from Sunday’s home defeat to Napoli. “Getting back to winning was what counted today,” Pioli told Sky Italia. “We needed it for the league table and for our confidence.” Napoli’s inconsistent run of results continued as they lost 1-0 at home to struggling Spezia, who won without recording a shot on target. The hosts fell behind to Juan Jesus’ own goal, saw two goals disallowed and hit the bar late on as they lost a third consecutive league game at the Stadio Diego Armando Maradona. Elsewhere, Manolo Gabbiadini’s equaliser earned Sampdoria a 1-1 draw at Roma to leave José Mourinho frustrated. “It was an ugly game, because the side that wanted to win it didn’t play well, and the side that didn’t want to win played the way they did and got rewarded,” Mourinho said after the match. Lazio are eighth and a point behind Roma after winning 3-1 at Venezia, thanks to goals from Pedro, Francesco Acerbi and substitute Luis Alberto. Gaetano Castrovilli rescued a point for Fiorentina with a late diving header at Verona, while Aaron Hickey scored a fine long-range goal for Bologna as they won 3-0 at Sassuolo.